 By [Olivier Blanchard ( The recovery continues, but it remains weak, indeed a bit weaker than we forecast in April. We have [revised our forecast for world growth in 2014 from 3.7 percent in April to 3.4 percent today. This headline number makes things look worse than they really are. To a large extent, it reflects something that has already happened, namely the large negative US growth rate in the first quarter. But it is not all due to that. It also reflects a number of small downward revisions, both in advanced and in emerging economies. The overall story remains largely the same as before: Advanced economies are still confronted with high levels of public and private debt, which act as brakes on the recovery. These brakes are coming off, but at different rates across countries. Emerging markets are slowing down from pre-crisis growth rates. They have to address some of their underlying structural problems, and take on structural reforms. At the same time, they have to deal with the implications of monetary policy normalization in the US. Let me take you on the usual tour of the world. **Advanced economies** _The United States_ First quarter growth in the US, as currently reported (I would not be surprised if the numbers were revised), was far worse than anybody had anticipated. In retrospect, it seems to be largely due to one-off factors, ranging from an inventory correction to unusually bad weather. Looking forward, US growth for the rest of the year is still forecast to be 3.25 percent and 3 percent in 2015. The main policy issue, at this juncture, is the appropriate speed of monetary policy normalization. Given the unusual behavior of labor participation, and uncertainty about the equilibrium rate of unemployment, assessing the amount of slack in the US is difficult. The current plans, namely the end of tapering later this year and increases in the policy rate from the middle of next year, are appropriate. But the timing of the increase in the policy rate may have to be adjusted, as a function of developments on the inflation and unemployment fronts. A recent report by the BIS has drawn attention to the potential for excessive risk taking in financial markets coming from an extended period of low rates. We agree that, in some financial markets, valuations appear perhaps optimistic. But, overall, we do not see a systemic threat to financial stability, mainly because of lower leverage in both banks and, to the extent we can measure it, in non banks as well. Were the risks to increase however, macro prudential tools should be the right first line of defense. Getting ready to use them should be a policy priority. _The Euro area_ The recovery in the Euro area remains weak, and inflation remains too low. Our forecasts for the Euro area remain roughly unchanged, 1.1 percent for 2014, and 1.5 percent for 2015. These numbers hide, however, differences across countries. In the core, we have revised our forecasts up for Germany, and down 