The business environment remains very difficult. Afghanistan is at the bottom decile of World Bank Doing Business 2015 index and its ranking declined to 183 (out of 189 economies), primarily owing to the increasing time and cost of starting a business, dealing with construction permits, getting credit, and paying taxes. Afghanistan faces significant challenges to improve business environment ranging from licensing procedures, protection of minority investors to contract enforcement and property registration notwithstanding the very difficult security environment. Afghanistan was also in the bottom 20 percent in the World Bank’s 2013 Country Performance Ratings, which assesses the policy and institutional framework that more strongly fosters growth and poverty reduction among 76 IDA-eligible countries. Corruption remains high, with a rank of 172 out of 175 countries in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index in 2014. To support a business-friendly environment, the authorities will strengthen anti- corruption and AML/CFT frameworks. As noted, the authorities are determined to improve the business environment. They have implemented measures to strengthen the anti-corruption and AML/CFT frameworks. The October 2014 presidential decree on Kabul Bank signaled the intentions of the new administration, which has zero tolerance for corruption and tax evasion. The authorities have These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. Page 28 made progress since May 2015 to strengthen the AML/CFT legal framework notably through the issuance of two DAB regulations on preventive measures in the financial sector and fit and proper requirements. They also are implementing an AML/CFT Action Plan. Staff welcomed the progress and noted that continued efforts and enhanced implementation are needed for Afghanistan to exit the FATF’s monitoring process, to help detect and disrupt the receipt and use of, and to confiscate the proceeds of crimes, including corruption and drug trafficking. The authorities have initiated asset declarations by senior officials and plan to broaden their scope. Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to improve asset declarations and emphasized the importance of reducing incentives and opportunities for corruption as well as improving enforcement, while noting that more is needed to facilitate audit and publication of asset declarations. Staff underscored the role of well-trained staff, capacity building and efficient use of the information technology, particularly in customs, to fight against corruption. Page 29 Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Business Environment and Governance IslamicRepublic of Afghanistan: Business Environment and Governance Indicators AfghanistanLIC 1/Oil exportersMENAP 2/EM 3/ E > 2011-2015 Improvement Ease of Doing Business (Distance to frontier) Tax Tax administrationLicense Corruption CrimeCourt Informalcompetition FinanceElectricity Customs Laborregulation Worker skill Afghanistan MENAP 2/ OECD World Firm-level Business Constraints (percentage of firms identifying constraints) Firm-level Dispersion in Business Environment (80th-20th percentile spread in days to get operating licence) AfghanistanLIC 1/EM 3/ MENAP 2/ H W G il > Higher GDP per capita ---> Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) and GDP per capita (log PPP) 4/ AfghanistanLIC 1/MENAP 2/EM 3/Oil exporters H W G il > Changes in Worldwide Governance Indicators, 2000-2013 (percentile rank) Sources: World Bank Doing BusinessDatabase; World Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators; World Bank Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Lowincome countries;2/ Middle East, North Africa, and Pakistan;3/ Emerging market economies; 4/ Worldwide Governance Indicators include government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption; trend line is based on cross-country regression. 0102030405060AfghanistanLIC 1/MENAP 2/EM 3/Oil exporters H V & il > Changes in Voice and Accountability Index, 2000-2013 (percentile rank) Page 30 G.