The current account is dominated by imports and official transfers; licit exports are low . Excluding grants, the current account deficit was 37 percent of GDP in 2014. Official transfers more than financed this deficit. Exports of goods (excluding opium and internal sales to nonresidents), after stagnating, have increased noticeably in the past two years. Afghanistan’s imports have been driven mostly by the presence of foreign troops and donor activity. The foreign troop drawdown led to a decline in imports. The authorities wish to increase and diversify exports. They see potential for development of exports of agricultural products and developing light industry to compete with some imports and recognize that measures to facilitate private sector development are needed for export growth and diversification. Further, they see scope for higher remittances from Afghans working abroad and expect to receive revenue from the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA-1000) and Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Natural Gas Pipeline (TAPI) later this decade. Staff noted that revenue from these sources would strengthen the external current account (before grants), but the timing and amount of these receipts were subject to some uncertainty depending on demand for Afghans to work abroad and speed of CASA-100 and TAPI implementation. The external accounts exclude the illicit economy. A large part of services exports were linked to foreign troops’ presence and these services exports have declined as this presence was drawn down. Imports Exports (RHS) Exports and Imports of Goods (In millions of U.S. dollars, 12-month rolling average)Sources: IMF Direction of Trade Database; and IMF staff calculations. Page 23 The exchange rate’s level appears in line with medium-term fundamentals, but data limitations make a robust assessment difficult. The de facto exchange regime is classified as floating. Compared to main developing country trading partners, Afghanistan’s currency has seen the least depreciation until recently which resulted in an appreciation of the real effective exchange rate (REER). However, the Afghani has depreciated by 11.7 percent against the US dollar between March 21 and October 21, inflation has been negative, bringing real effective exchange rate towards its equilibrium levels. A further quantitative assessment of the exchange rate’s level is hindered by inadequate balance of payments data, the multi-year civil conflict, very large aid flows, high dollarization, and a large informal sector including narcotics production. Structural impediments weigh heavily on Afghanistan’s competitiveness (see below). The authorities noted that the high level of dollarization and inadequate balance of payments data made the exchange rate assessment difficult. Afghanistan’s reserves are comfortable . Gross reserves exceed seven months of imports, exceed total debt by a large margin, and are close to the level of broad money. External stability will continue to hinge on continued donor inflows A decline in the donor footprint will need to be met with competitiveness gains, both through exchange rate adjustment and strengthening the business environment. DAB views the current reserve level as adequate and monitors closely aid, investment and remittance inflows to ensure reserves remain adequate and to be proactive in managing any shocks. C.