Confronted with the economic consequences of international troops withdrawal and rising political and security uncertainties, the authorities maintained macroeconomic stability and continued to implement structural reforms in 2013 . While growth slowed significantly, inflation remained in single digits, the overall budget deficit (including grants) was close to balance, and reserves remained above 7 months of imports. At the same time, structural reforms continued, even if the pace was slower than planned. Donor grants continued to finance the external and budget deficits (Figures 1–4). The drawdown of international troops continued, but post-2014 security arrangements have not been finalized . Of about 142,500 foreign troops in mid-2011, about 57,000 remained as of early January 2014. The post-2014 security agreement with the U.S. has not been finalized. Insurgents continued to launch attacks aimed at the government and foreign interests, and attempts to hold discussions with the Taliban have not yielded results. The presidential and provincial elections were held in April 2014 . Provincial elections and the first round of the presidential election took place on April 5. The partial official results (from 49.7 percent of legible votes counted, released on April 20) indicate that none of the candidates secured 50 percent of the vote, which is needed to win outright. If the final results of the first round (scheduled for May 14) confirm that none of the candidates secured 50 percent or more of the vote, a second round of the presidential election will take place, with a runoff between the two candidates who secure the most votes in the first round. A new government will be formed after the presidential election is completed. The run-up to the elections has coincided with a slowing of economic reform. Political and security uncertainties and the drawdown of international troops are weighing on economic activity. These uncertainties reduced confidence, discouraged private investment, and held back economic activity. Growth slowed from 14 percent in 2012 (boosted by a bumper harvest) to an estimated 3.6 percent in 2013, resulting in lower import and limited budget revenue growth. Non-agricultural growth in particular, which averaged 11 percent in 2007–11 and See http://www.iec.org.af/results/en/elections. Page 7 helped generate rising government revenue, slowed to a little over 3 percent in 2013. Uncertainties also led to intermittent pressure on the exchange rate (especially in late 2012 and early 2013) and prompted a switch out of local currency-denominated assets. The central bank managed the exchange rate flexibly (through sales of foreign exchange in the twice-weekly auctions); it depreciated by 7.5 percent against the U.S. dollar in 2013, while international reserves remained at a comfortable level of $6.9 billion (7.1 months of imports). Inflation remained in single digits (5.3 percent year-on-year in February 2014) due to a good harvest and relatively benign international commodity prices. Box 1. The Authorities’ Response to Past Fund Advice Past Fund advice has focused on the overall macroeconomic policy mix, tax policy and tax administration reform, strengthening the central bank and the financial sector, and economic governance. The authorities have been responsive to Fund advice, but in some cases with delayed or incomplete implementation. The authorities have largely sought to follow the recommended macroeconomic policy mix and have maintained macroeconomic stability, but revenue performance has fallen short of budgetary needs. The authorities have managed the exchange rate flexibly, broadly maintained disciplined fiscal policies, and strengthened monetary policy operations. They also sought to build buffers through reserve accumulation. The authorities initially improved revenue collections but later encountered some setbacks and delays. Budget revenue increased from 7 to 11 percent of GDP over 2006–11, but fell back to 9.5–10 percent of GDP in 2012–13 because of the negative impact of the international troops withdrawal and the decline in confidence linked to uncertainty about the security and political transitions, as well as lower compliance. On tax reform, the authorities have prepared a VAT law and submitted it to parliament, but implementation has been delayed relative to initial plans. The authorities have worked to strengthen the central bank and the financial sector. A new banking law was submitted to parliament in February 2013 that would strengthen banking supervision, corporate governance, prudential requirements, enforcement, and bank resolution. Supervision efforts have been strengthened. The ten weakest commercial banks have been audited and are being monitored by the central bank. Further, the staffing of the supervision department has been increased and recruitment to fill the new positions is under way. A five-year strategic plan was adopted to further strengthen financial sector supervision. The authorities are working to amend the central bank law to strengthen its governance and are ensuring that it remains adequately capitalized. In contrast, progress in moving the government salary payments from New Kabul Bank (NKB) to other banks has proceeded more slowly than planned because of delays in developing a real-time gross settlement system. Several initiatives have strengthened economic governance. The public inquiry into the Kabul Bank crisis was published, and the authorities have responded to its recommendations. To support economic governance efforts, the Economic Crimes Task Force (ECTF) has been established, although it now needs to be operationalized. Furthermore, criminal cases related to Kabul Bank have been heard and verdicts reached, although appeals are pending, while recent Kabul Bank asset recoveries have been limited and efforts to privatize NKB have progressed slower than planned initially. The authorities have moved ahead with drafting Financial Action Task Force (FATF)-consistent anti-money laundering/combating financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) legislation, but there have been significant delays. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 8 Revenue performance deteriorated significantly despite additional measures, requiring spending cuts during 2013 . Domestic revenue dropped to 9.5 percent of GDP in 2013 from 10.1 percent the previous year, far short of the initial program target of 11.3 percent. Revenue collection was affected by lower economic activity, slower dutiable import growth, a continued shift away from high-tariff imports, as well as lower compliance despite the authorities’ efforts. The authorities replaced personnel in the revenue and customs departments and increased effective tariffs and fees. Nevertheless, the revenue shortfall resulted in a tight cash position for the treasury, and required limiting non-priority discretionary expenditures. As a result—and also due to capacity constraints—expenditure as a share of GDP declined by 0.7 percentage points in 2013, despite the transfer of externally managed security spending to the budget and an increase in development spending, while wages remained under control. The operating deficit (before grants) was limited to 7.8 percent of GDP. Agricultural output, including opium production, was at historically high levels in 2012–13 due to good weather that affected virtually all crops . According to the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, the opium poppy cultivation area increased raising the total farm-gate value of opium production from $0.7 billion to $0.95 billion (about 4 percent of GDP) (Box 2). Box 2. The Drug Industry and its Impact on Economic Stability and Development Drug production and trafficking are macro-relevant in Afghanistan . Production includes opium, heroin, morphine, and cannabis. In 2013, the farm-gate value of potential opium production was estimated at 4 percent of GDP. The potential net value of opiates and the value of opiates potentially available for export were estimated at 15 percent and 14 percent of GDP, respectively. The combination of high opium prices and Afghanistan’s significant involvement in its cultivation exposes the country to risks of economic instability, as a number of factors could trigger a shock to production and prices which would transmit to the formal economy, including through farmers’ incomes. These include climate and water supply, eradication campaigns, external demand, change in policies (e.g., Taliban’s ban in 2000), border controls, and conflicts in neighboring countries. Opium Cultivation and Prices, 2009–13 Average dry opium price (US$/kilogram, RHS) Opium cultivation (thousand hectares) There could be significant distorting effect of the drug industry on the formal economy. Resources devoted to drug cultivation and trafficking are diverted from other productive opportunities, decreasing activity in others sectors of the economy. It is also possible that spillovers from the drug sector may increase activity in other sectors. Source: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan Opium Surveys. For example, imports of vehicles—a high-tariff item—declined by 45 percent in 2013. Page 9 Box 2. The Drug Industry and its Impact on Economic Stability and Development (Concluded) Strengthening Afghanistan’s statistical and analytical apparatus could enhance the understanding and forecasting of the economic impact of the drug industry . The ability to analyze available information on opium production with formal economic indicators at the regional level (e.g., agriculture, trade, employment, and finance) would assist in better understanding the impact of the drug industry on the economy, on the one hand, and mitigating potential shocks on the other. For example, this type of regional level information is available in Peru and Columbia. Detailed information on opium cultivation and prices is available but information on other economic linkages of the drug industry (e.g., trade and financial flows) remains scarce, in light of the post-conflict and development status of Afghanistan. At present, economic statistics do not currently cover regional employment rates, agricultural production, building permits, or car registrations, in part due to security issues. As a result, assessing the economic impact and linkages of the drug industry in the Afghan economy remains a challenge. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes (UNODC), www.unodc.org/documents/crop-monitoring/Afghanistan/ Afghan_Opium_survey_2013_web_small.pdf. “Potential production” is estimated from the cultivated surface and the yield of primary plant material. “Potential net value” is estimated from income generated in the country after opium leaves the farm. The “value of opiates potentially available for export” estimates the trade across Afghanistan’s borders, without further income from onward trafficking. See Pedroni and Verdugo (2011), “The Relationship Between Illicit Coca Production and Formal Economic Activity in Peru,“ IMF Working Paper No. 11/182; Buddenberg and Byrd (2006), Afghanistan’s Drug Industry, UNODC and World Bank.