The macroeconomic outlook is uncertain. The future path of the economy depends highly on the authorities delivering on their economic reform commitments, continued donor support, and improvements in security. The new government presented its Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework (SMAF) to donors in September 2015, which puts restoring fiscal sustainability through increasing revenues as one of the main priorities. Although the initial impact of the drawdown of international troops has ended, economic activity is subdued and investor confidence remains low. The medium-term macroeconomic framework projects a recovery in growth. This path, however, reflects a slower recovery in economic confidence and later implementation of mining projects than projected earlier. Growth is expected to gain steam, with mining related activity, from 2018 onwards, bringing average annual GDP growth to 5 percent during 2016–20. Delivering on commitments under the SMAF and associated donor support should help cover fiscal and external gaps. Inflation is expected to stay in single digits with stable international prices and prudent monetary policy. By virtue of Article 79 of Afghan Constitution, laws passed by Presidential Decree have to be submitted to Parliament and remain in force unless rejected. See http://www.embassyofafghanistan.org/document/afghanistans-road-to-self-reliance-report. Page 17 Nature/Source of Likelihood Expected Economic Impact if Realized Possible Mitigating Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Risk Assessment Matrix Risk Near-Term Risks Measures Deteriorating security High Strengthen fiscal and situation . Stalemate in -Increasing security concerns sap investor monetary policies to peace talks with the and consumer confidence with lower maintain macroeconomic Taliban. growth and excessive volatility of the stability. exchange rate. -Lower growth results in a decline in domestic revenue and a higher fiscal deficit. - High volatility of the exchange rate leads to further dollarization, capital flight and inflationary pressure. A long lasting Low High Adjust the policy mix to political agreement is - A peace settlement will lead to higher take into account likely confidence, investment, and growth. higher budget revenue, reached with insurgents. Weak fiscal policy High High implementation - Lower than expected yield from revenue take measures to mobilize particularly setbacks in mobilization efforts leads to spending cuts. additional revenue, foreign exchange inflows by allowing for higher spending and possible exchange rate appreciation. Increase tax compliance, revenue mobilization efforts and difficulties in expenditure and cash management. - Pressing spending needs result in prioritize spending, and depletion of the treasury cash balances and improve coordination unfunded allotments lead to arrears. between the treasury and budget departments. Continue to manage the Acceleration in outflows of migrants. High demand for foreign exchange and exchange rate flexibly, seek downward pressure on the Afghani, with a to improve security, and risk of eroding confidence in the mobilize donor financing to authorities’ ability to maintain incentivize potential macroeconomic stability and lift growth. emigrants to stay in - Pressure for budget expenditure to Afghanistan and/or to incentivize potential emigrants to stay in encourage refugees to Afghanistan and/or to encourage refugees return. to return. Page 18 Nature/Source of Likelihood Expected Economic Impact if Realized Possible Mitigating Risk Medium-Term Risks Measures Decline in donor High Strengthen policy inflows to the budget - Lack of progress in implementing reforms implementation to and to finance agreed under the Self-Reliance through maintain macro stability, development projects. Mutual Accountability Framework or donor speed up structural reform, fatigue result in decline in donor inflows, and improve economic especially to the budget. governance, including - The decline in inflows leads to lower stronger legislative, public spending, lower growth, increased institutional, and regulatory unemployment, and/or exchange rate frameworks, and law Structurally weak pressures. enforcement. Strengthen policy growth in emerging market economies, particularly in China and India which are key stakeholders in development of Afghanistan’s natural resources, results in a delay in investment plans in extractive industries. - Delays in investments to develop natural implementation to resources postpone the projected pick-up maintain macro stability in growth and result in lower exports. and improve business - Lower than expected revenues from climate, including a sound natural resources could lead to increasing fiscal regime for natural budget deficits as spending envelope resources. continues to increase. - Fiscal deficits and lower export receipts may lead to exchange rate depreciation and higher inflation. - Lack of progress in developing natural resources could result in higher narcotics production. Heightened risk of Strengthen fiscal and security dislocation in - Deteriorating security reduces confidence monetary policies to the Middle East having negative spillovers in Afghanistan, and results in lower growth and excessive maintain macroeconomic volatility of the exchange rate. stability. - Lower growth results in a decline in domestic revenue and a higher fiscal aggravating security deficit. concerns. - Excessive volatility of the exchange rate leads to further dollarization, capital flight and inflation. Page 19 Nature/Source of Likelihood Expected Economic Impact if Realized Possible Mitigating Risk Medium-Term Risks Measures Lack of progress in Ensure that prudential and banking sector and strengthening anti- money laundering and combating the financing of - Banking sector constrained in fulfilling its AML/CFT preventive intermediation role results in less credit to (including fit and proper) the economy, inefficient allocation, lower standards are strictly access to finance, and slower growth. observed and supervision - Confidence in banking sector could enforcement actions are terrorism (AML/CFT) dissipate, leading to banking sector implemented promptly. reforms, compromising financial sector’s soundness liquidity challenges. Implement the action plan - Lax or ineffective enforcement could as agreed upon with the undermine financial discipline, bank Financial Action Task Force governance, risk management, financial to exit the monitoring controls and money laundering controls process. and result in bank failure(s) and need for bailouts. - Access by Afghan banks to global financial system is impeded. Staff assessment of the likelihood of realization in the next three years. Staff discussed with the authorities interconnections and spillovers for Afghanistan. The principal connection between the Afghan economy and the rest of the world are donor inflows. These inflows finance most imports and dwarf (licit) exports, financial sector, and foreign direct investment. Regional developments affecting security and trade have a more limited impact on the Afghan economy. However, outward spillovers from Afghanistan are possible if a political impasse led to internal conflict, and a displaced population, internally and in neighboring countries, with lower trade and costs for countries receiving Afghan refugees. Recent signs of acceleration in migrant outflows are therefore of concern for the potential impact both on the stability of the local economy and on the number of refugees in the region. Looking forward, the authorities would need to assess how this recent acceleration of outflows, if unabated, could affect the fiscal position. Afghanistan’s economy faces risks; many, but not all, are on the downside . The principal near- and medium-term risks stem from security, inadequate policy implementation and lack of progress in reform, slower growth in emerging market economies, especially China and India, or donor fatigue (see the accompanying debt sustainability analysis (DSA) paper). If realized they would reduce inflows and budget revenue, causing lower growth, employment, and investment, as well as possible exchange rate pressures. An upside risk is a political agreement with insurgents that results in higher confidence, investment, and economic activity. Also, the lifting of economic sanctions on Iran could benefit the Afghan economy through a boost to exports and an increase in remittances. Page 20 POLICY DISCUSSIONS: STRENGTHENING CONFIDENCE