Reserve money continues to be the nominal anchor for monetary policy . Political and security uncertainty have taken a toll on the conduct of monetary policy too. Lack of confidence in The accompanying Debt Sustainability Analysis also presents the standard shocks generated by the Debt Sustainability Framework, which result in benign debt dynamics. However, these results using the standard shocks may not be representative as they are mostly driven by the past ten years, when Afghanistan averaged real GDP growth of 8.9 percent per year and received official transfers averaging 53.3 percent of GDP. Page 26 the Afghani and the high degree of dollarization of the economy make it harder for DAB to project money demand and to conduct its open market operations. DAB considered that the current monetary and exchange rate regime, which aims at delivering low inflation, while ensuring orderly conditions in the foreign exchange market, has served well, despite recent pressures. DAB is also considering how to increase use of the Afghani. Staff encouraged DAB to strengthen its communication strategy to clarify the monetary policy framework (objective and instruments) with a view to fostering public understanding of and confidence in DAB’s actions. DAB indicated it plans to continue regular communications including press releases after Supreme Council meetings and its quarterly bulletin. Monetary operations are also hindered by limited instruments. At present, capital notes are the only domestic currency-denominated instruments issued by the DAB to steer monetary conditions, but their absorption is limited by banks’ liquidity. The need for DAB both to provide U.S. dollar liquidity to the economy to finance current account transactions and to sell U.S. dollars at its regular auctions to mop up liquidity, in the absence of a deep market for capital notes, risks blurring monetary policy signals. Moving forward, and as confidence in the Afghani improves, the DAB should gradually increase its use of domestic currency-denominated instruments for open market operations. Staff discussed the scope for developing such instruments, including sukuk, and further TA. The authorities signaled their desire to broaden the range of monetary instruments (see below) and asked the IMF to provide TA in this area. E.