Afghanistan has made progress toward Millennium Development Goals, but more is needed. Access to primary healthcare has increased from 9 percent to 57 percent of population and over nine million students have been enrolled. Maternal health, child mortality and universal primary education indicators are at or close to 2015 targets. Pro-poor spending doubled between 2011 and 2014, reaching above 3 percent of GDP. However, poverty reduction remains a priority. Experience shows that growth has been more successful in reducing poverty when policies have been in place to deal with the risks, vulnerabilities and market failures that hold back participation, which are constraints in Afghanistan. In this regard, the authorities plan to review how fiscal policy contributes to inclusive growth and poverty reduction, and tailor policies to boosting growth well above the Total donor support is projected to stay near current levels this decade. An increasing share of donor support will be provided on-budget, as the government takes over management of donor-financed projects that were earlier donor-managed. Poverty was estimated at 35.8 percent in 2011. Page 21 population growth rate while protecting the poor by shifting the composition of expenditures towards civilian spending and making taxes more equitable and growth friendly. There was a shared vision of private sector-led, inclusive, and gender balanced growth based on a business-friendly environment. The political transition limited progress in 2014, but the authorities are determined to push ahead with reforms. They noted that policies to develop the private sector should focus on providing incentives that generate pro-poor outcomes and create jobs, which, unlike subsidies, can offer a sustainable source of income. They shared staff views that pro-poor policies should be directed to eliminate regulatory and administrative barriers for businesses, improve infrastructure, provide key business services, while strengthening governance, as signaled in the papers they prepared for the December 2014 conference and the September 2015 SOM. They flagged the initial steps taken included a younger, more professional Cabinet of Ministers, Public Financial Management Reform, and plan to reform the public administration. In addition, a policy on sub-national governance will be presented to Cabinet before the end of 2015 and the Cabinet will review concept notes on National Women’s Economic Empowerment Plan, Citizens’ Charter, Urban Development Program, and Rural Development by mid-2016. The authorities plan to reform licensing and registration, unify the system for trade and investment licenses, and establish a one-stop-shop for private businesses, and clarify the roles of the Afghanistan Investment Support Agency and Ministry of Commerce and Industry. They plan to amend the Land Management and Land Acquisition Laws to introduce orderly land markets and prepare a national infrastructure development plan to build domestic and regional connectivity. They have established a national procurement board to manage all high value contracts and conducted a review of customs and revenue staffing. Staff will continue to discuss TA needs to support implementation of the authorities’ ambitious reform agenda. Over the medium term, potential growth will depend on the authorities’ ability to develop strategic sectors. The authorities wish to increase productivity, build institutions to regulate and enable markets, use private public partnerships and development policy to ensure government activities promote inclusive economic development. They consider agriculture, extractive industries, and transport as the main pillars of their inclusive and sustainable growth strategy, which, over time, should be private sector led. Staff concurs. Raising agricultural productivity by reforming land management, developing sectoral strategies for irrigation, and removing barriers that prevent farmers from selling their products are the main priorities as agriculture is the largest source of job creation. Further, the authorities believe that investing in infrastructure to strengthen Afghanistan’s position at the centre of South and Central Asia will allow it to benefit from increased trade, investment, and connectivity. The mining sector has the potential to attract foreign investment, raise revenues, and lift the local economy. In this context, staff welcomed the authorities’ indication that they, after clarification of the legal and strategic A significant part of the agricultural production consists of opium, counting for 4 percent of GDP that results in production of opiates (such as heroin and morphine) and domestic trafficking estimated to account for another 9 percent of GDP. The magnitude of the illicit opiate sector and the volatility of prices and production make it a source of shocks to the economy. Page 22 framework, wish to proceed with the appropriate exploitation of Afghanistan’s mineral resources, to ensure that these resources benefit all Afghans. Staff agreed that sustained, inclusive, and gender-balanced growth will require improved competitiveness and productivity. Afghanistan’s exports need to be raised significantly and diversified; the discipline imposed by having to export will provide the necessary stimulus for innovation and good management practices. At the same time, unrelenting progress in structural reforms to strengthen governance and foster private sector development and investment remains crucial. This should contribute to investment and job creation to allow Afghanistan to absorb new labor market entrants over the medium term and support stronger domestic demand. To complement these efforts, the authorities also plan to support Afghans, who wish to explore employment opportunities abroad. B.