Political and security uncertainties have been a drag on economic activity . The security situation has become increasingly difficult. At the same time, there were delays in the formation of a full administration. These developments made policy making harder, slowed the economic recovery, and contributed to increased emigration in recent months. Apart from agriculture, economic activity has been subdued. In 2014, real GDP growth declined to 1.3 percent and end-period inflation fell to 1.4 percent y-o-y. Inflation declined further to -1.9 percent y-o-y in September 2015, reflecting soft economic activity and lower global fuel and food prices. This SOM was held on September 5, 2015 in Kabul. The meeting was a continuation of the high-level meetings held every year to follow up on the Tokyo Conference (July 2012). This was the first high level meeting since the December 2014 London Conference on Afghanistan. The purpose of the meeting was to review progress since the presentation of the Self-Reliance reform program, discuss key policy issues, and to jointly decide the way forward. Page 13 Significant fiscal vulnerabilities emerged in 2014. Domestic revenue collection fell below its 2013 level because of lower growth, declining imports, and lower compliance. Operating expenditure increased, as off-budget security-related spending was moved on budget (with donor grant financing), and because of new benefits for families of martyrs and disabled people. The government had to reduce discretionary development and operating and maintenance (O&M) spending. The treasury cash balance fell to dangerously low levels in the second half of 2014 and domestic payment arrears and unfunded allotments emerged. Donor support and policy actions under the SMP helped address these vulnerabilities in 2015 . Despite weak economic activity and limited revenue from new measures, domestic revenues increased by 15 percent (to Af 81 billion) in the first 9 months of 2015 because of improved domestic tax and customs compliance. Tariff increases introduced in April, however, yielded less than projected as traders cut back their import orders. While the operating budget execution underperformed, owing to delays in budget approval and centralization of procurement, development expenditure was as programmed, with 2014 arrears repaid. As a result, the operating deficit, before grants, was lower than projected, but with lower-than-projected grant financing, the overall balance recorded a smaller than projected surplus at end-September. The treasury’s cash balance was boosted above Af 10bn by grants from the U.S. and U.K. After accommodative monetary policy in 2014, monetary growth declined in 2015 . In 2014, the Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) did not sterilize the substantial drawdown of government deposits. In 2015, the accumulation of government deposits at DAB, lower confidence (and associated capital outflows), and seasonal factors reduced reserve money growth. Broad money growth was also low, due to weak confidence and the impact of bank restructuring measures. DAB maintained a comfortable reserve buffer, at 7½ months of imports. In July and August, downward pressure on F un O N F un Cumulative Treasury Cash Balances (In billions of Afghanis) Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff calculations. -50-30-101030507090110Feb-08Mar-09Apr-10May-11May-12Jun-13Jul-14Aug-15 NFA NDA Reserve money Composition of Reserve Money Growth (Y-o-y change; in percent) Source: Afghan Authorities and IMF Staff calculations. q1h1q3 Domestic Revenue, 2015 (In billions of Afghanis) Programmed ActualSources: Afghan Authorities and IMF Staff calculations. 180q1h1q3 Operating Expenditure, 2015 (In billions of Afghanis) Programmed Actual 100q1h1q3 Operating Deficit, 2015 (In billions of Afghanis) Programmed Actual Page 14 the Afghani increased and reserves were lost, as higher emigration boosted foreign exchange demand. Box 1. The Impact of Accelerating Emigration Background. According to the 2014 UNHCR Regional Overview, after more than three decades of displacement, Afghan refugees still constituted over 21 per cent of the global refugee population and 40 percent of the world’s protracted caseload. In addition, there are a large number of undocumented Afghans residing abroad, of which at least 2 million in Iran and Pakistan. Since 2002, over 5.8 million Afghan refugees have returned home voluntarily, but, in recent years, voluntary return has decreased significantly, hitting a historical low in 2013–14. Recent developments. The difficult economic and security conditions and uncertainties continue to affect the decision to return by Afghan refugees and, in some cases, induce reverse movements. Whereas attacks by insurgents have been ongoing during past years, they have recently escalated, especially in the north of the country. Moreover, there are reports of criminal activity (particularly kidnapping). Anecdotal evidence indicates the number of emigrants to countries in the region and beyond has risen in 2015, accelerating over the past few months. There are reports of a sharp increase in the number of passport applications from the start of the year, of coaches reaching the Iranian borders, and of asylum requests in EU countries. Policy challenges. The most visible short-term challenge results from emigrants’ attempts to liquidate their assets before leaving Afghanistan, which has increased substantially the demand for foreign currency; DAB has met this increased demand partly through sale of foreign exchange and partly vented through depreciation of the exchange rate. While data on the level of extra demand for hard currency cash are not available, it is likely that each migrant nucleus would seek to gather between $5,000 and $10,000 on average. This higher demand for foreign exchange, if sustained, will likely put downward pressure on DAB’s international reserves position, with the risk of eroding confidence in macroeconomic stability. Further, it may give rise to pressure for additional budget expenditure to incentivize potential migrants to stay in Afghanistan. In addition, departures of emigrants, especially if well educated, will affect Afghanistan’s human capital base and labor force skills. In the context of inelastic public expenditure due to large security and development spending needs, budget revenue losses related to emigrants may also create fiscal pressures. IMF’s role. By assisting the authorities to maintain economic stability, reduce vulnerabilities, improve the business climate, and promote inclusive growth, the IMF is working with the Afghan authorities to create conditions for a sustainable and voluntary reintegration of those who have left and an incentive to stay for those who have not. In this context, the Fund will continue to be flexible with program design to reflect unanticipated shocks and speed of policy implementation, and partner with the donor community with a view to supporting the authorities’ efforts to build a resilient, vibrant, and successful economy and, if needed, to mobilize donor financing to the budget to help deal with fiscal costs of emigrants. Banking sector vulnerabilities emerged in 2014 . Weak governance and regulatory forbearance in 2014 led to a deterioration in the financial positions of some banks. Seven of the 15 banks were classified as weak (rated 4 or 5 according to CAMEL methodology) and hold 50 percent of bank assets. Two important banks were in hazardous conditions. In late 2014, corrective measures started to be implemented and in 2015, enforcement actions against all weak banks were in place and decisive actions were taken to strengthen the two vulnerable banks. Page 15 Box 2. The Authorities’ Response to Past IMF Advice Past IMF advice has focused on the overall macroeconomic policy mix, tax policy and tax administration, strengthening banking supervision, exchange rate flexibility, and improving economic governance by enacting anti-money laundering (AML), countering financing of terrorism (CFT), banking and central bank legislation. While the main economic strategy has not changed, Fund staff has been willing to delay meeting some of the structural benchmarks because of capacity constraints. The authorities have been broadly responsive to Fund advice, but the prolonged political transition resulted in delayed or incomplete implementation of some macroeconomic policies and reforms. The authorities have maintained macroeconomic stability but fiscal and monetary policy advice was not fully followed. As a result, fiscal performance deteriorated and reserve money targets were missed in Operating expenditures increased despite the deterioration in domestic revenue collection, and the treasury cash balance dropped to dangerously low levels while domestic budgetary arrears emerged. The authorities have increased their reserve buffers in 2014 and the exchange rate against the U.S. dollar was broadly stable. The authorities allowed for more exchange rate flexibility in 2015. Domestic revenue collection fell short of targets in 2014 but recovered in the first half of 2015. Domestic revenue collection slipped to 8.5 percent of GDP in 2014 from 11 percent in 2011. Budget revenue has started to recover in the 2015, as compliance efforts were stepped up. On tax reform, the authorities have implemented revenue measures under the SMP, but the introduction of some measures was delayed. VAT introduction was postponed in response to the authorities’ concerns and staff’s assessment that the tax administration needed time to prepare for a successful VAT introduction. The authorities have taken action to strengthen the financial sector. DAB stepped up its supervision efforts in the second half of 2014 and took action against weak banks including enforcement actions against two vulnerable banks. DAB also approved a strategy of dealing with weak banks with a view to improve banking sector’s CAMEL ratings by February 2016. The authorities have cut losses in New Kabul Bank and initiated its resale. The new banking law has been enacted. Further, DAB continues to implement Financial Supervision Department’s (FSD) five-year strategic plan, launched in July 2013. FSD is also revising banking regulations to implement the new banking law. Amendments to the DAB law are being reviewed by the Ministry of Justice. The authorities have strengthened the AML/CFT legal framework and reopened Kabul Bank investigation. Amendments to the AML and CFT laws were introduced by presidential decree to improve compliance with Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards and regulations on AML/CFT measures and fit and proper requirements for the financial sector were issued by DAB. The authorities have also taken measures to improve the regulatory regime to monitor the cross border transportation of currency. A presidential decree was issued to reinvigorate asset recovery efforts and initiated a review of criminal cases in October 2014 that resulted in increased jail terms and fines for two large Kabul Bank shareholders. Kabul Bank asset recovery has continued . A presidential decree was issued in October 2014 to expedite asset recovery and review criminal cases. Between January 31 and August 31, 2015, cash recoveries amounted to $16.9 million bringing total cash recoveries to $191 million. The authorities continue to follow up on the requests for mutual legal assistance that were sent to a number of foreign jurisdictions to facilitate asset recovery. Other recoveries have also been made, totaling $114 million from sale of assets to the government and noncash recoveries. Page 16 Important legal reforms for the financial sector were enacted . Amendments to the anti- money laundering (AML) and countering the financing of terrorism (CFT) laws were approved by the President in April 2015. The banking law was enacted in August 2015. Further, DAB issued two regulations on AML/CFT measures and fit and proper requirements for the financial sector.