as donors transfer spending on budget as part of the security transition . The increase (4.4 percentage points of GDP) will be largely financed by grants, as well as by higher expected domestic revenue (by 0.8 percent of GDP) on account of past tax policy measures, better administration, and revenue measures being introduced in 2014; nonetheless, revenue collection is expected to continue to be affected by low activity and investment, and a shift away from high tariff imports and additional revenue measures will likely be needed to achieve the 2014 revenue target, which are under consideration by the authorities. Pro-poor spending is projected to increase as a Page 23 share of GDP, as the new law on pensions for martyrs and the disabled is implemented. Management of spending brought on-budget (previously externally managed) will be improved by implementing IMF technical assistance recommendations on public financial management. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Public Finances (Central Government), 2013–14 Jan–Dec Prel. Domestic revenue and grants Domestic revenues Grants Expenditures Operating balance (excluding grants) Overall balance (including grants) Jan–Mar Apr–Jun Jul–Sep Oct–Dec Jan–Dec (In billions of Afghanis) Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Defined as domestic revenues minus operating expenditures. The authorities plan to manage money growth, safeguard international reserves, and continue with exchange rate flexibility . A modest pick-up in money demand is anticipated after the April 2014 elections. Reserve money growth of 12.7 percent is projected, above the projected growth of nominal GDP, with a commensurate increase in NIR as credit growth is projected to be low. Reserve cover will remain above seven months of imports. The exchange rate will be allowed to move along with market trends, with interventions limited to avoiding excessive volatility. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Central Bank Monetary Indicators, 2013 – Net Foreign Assets Net Domestic Assets Reserve Money Net International Reserves (US$, millions) Est. Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 (In billions of Afghanis, end of period) Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 24 Box 4. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan’s New Consumer Price Index The introduction of a new Consumer Price Index (CPI) in 2012 was a major achievement . Along with the exchange rate, the CPI is a highly visible economic indicator. Overcoming many obstacles, the Central Statistical Organization (CSO) has been compiling and publishing price indices for the Kabul (since 2002), and five other major cities (since 2004). A national CPI was compiled by aggregating the city level indices. While broadly adequate for economic surveillance, this CPI suffered from numerous shortcomings. Because it was the most timely and reliable, the Kabul-city CPI was used to monitor the IMF-supported economic Provincial Weights Under New and Old Method Expenditure weights (new) Population weights (old) Bamyan Kandahar Helmand Herat Balkh Kunduz Badakhshan Nangarhar Khost Kabul Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Implied weights. program. Over the past few years, the CSO strengthened price statistics and launched a new CPI in June . With IMF technical assistance, the CSO has improved the index through a broader geographical coverage, updated weights, an enlarged consumer basket, and an updated compilation methodology. More specifically:  to four additional provinces —prices are now collected in 10 provinces. The CSO overcame numerous logistical challenges related to the identification and selection of outlets, training of Data collection has been extended data collectors, and establishment of communication channels.  The weight structure has been updated The old index was based on a 1992 Kabul expenditure survey. This expenditure pattern was used in all provinces and the national index was constructed based on population weights. Taking advantage of detailed household expenditure data from the 2008 National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA), the CSO updated and differentiated the weights, basing them on provincial-level household expenditure patterns. In compliance with international good practice, expenditure weights are now used to compile the national CPI. The consumer basket has been expanded and the Classification of Individual  Consumption according to Purpose (COICOP) consistently applied . 92 additional items were included in the basket, bringing the total to 290, and effort was made to clarify the specification of individual items and control for quality variations. The final index is now disseminated in the internationally-used COICOP classification. Detailed correspondence matrices had to be prepared from NRVA items to real-world basket item to COICOP categories. There is no break in the series linking the old and new CPIs The base of new CPI is March  2011 and April 2012 is the first month based on the new methodology. Between March 2011 and March 2012 the new index is chain-linked and scaled to make it comparable to the old one. The CSO plans to continue to improve the index . It plans to expand its coverage, upgrade the IT system and communication channels with remote provinces, strengthen quality control, improve field supervision over price collectors and regional data validation, and hire and train more staff. In recognition of the quality of the new CPI, the Afghan government and the IMF started using it for ECF program monitoring. Page 25 Fiscal reform in 2014 will be focused on preparing the VAT introduction by