on donor support . This will entail revenue mobilization, and better expenditure management including better prioritization and service delivery to assure security and development. Domestic revenues have stagnated due to the economic slowdown, faltering efforts, and leakages, and are expected to rise only slowly, while operating budget expenditures, which were at 15 percent of GDP in 2010 are projected to increase to over 29 percent of GDP by 2018 as part of the security transition. The combination of these factors generates large fiscal vulnerabilities. Afghanistan needs to move toward fiscal sustainability to reduce its dependence Revenue and Expenditures in the Long Run (In percent of GDP) Operating expenditures Domestic revenue To generate needed fiscal space, staff pressed for moving decisively to improve compliance, for pushing ahead with VAT introduction, and considering new tax revenue sources—excises in particular . Afghanistan has one of the lowest domestic revenue collections in the world, with an average of about 9 percent of GDP in 2006–13 compared to about 21 percent in low-income countries. Factors behind this poor performance include a very low starting point, low compliance, opposition to new taxes, and a limited set of taxes. Afghanistan relies heavily on trade- related taxes, which represented 45 percent of total tax revenues in 2006–13. VAT, which is being discussed in parliament, and excise taxes in the medium term would broaden the tax base and rebalance the composition of revenues. The authorities agreed with the need to increase revenue and noted political and institutional challenges in raising compliance and implementing new taxes. Staff also cautioned against providing tax exemptions, because of the resulting distortions and fiscal costs. The authorities explained that consideration of incentives, which had not been enacted in tax laws, was designed to stimulate investment in 2014–15 to promote a smooth transition. Staff stressed the importance of establishing a fiscal regime for mining revenues that maximizes the share of economic rents for the government while preserving investment incentives . Mining projects have been delayed and the ongoing oil project is unable to export due to the lack of a transit agreement with a neighboring country. The authorities are working to progress these projects and remove export hurdles, and noted that a legislative framework has been prepared for with IMF technical assistance to establish an effective and transparent fiscal regime for natural resources in full compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. They also requested follow-up technical assistance. Large spending needs (both development and security) are projected to continue Development outlays are needed to continue reconstruction and improve public services in order to progress towards MDGs. At the same time, high security spending (about 11 percent of GDP in Page 16 2013) accounts for just under half of budget expenditure and will rise sharply as off-budget expenditure managed by donors is transferred on-budget. Consequently, operating budget expenditures are projected to increase to over 29 percent of GDP by 2018. Security outlays are major and continued donor financing is critical . The authorities welcomed the international community’s commitment made in Chicago in 2012 to continue financing Afghanistan’s security, estimated at $4.1 billion annually. The indicative target of government contribution to security outlays discussed in Chicago is set at $500 million for 2015— already $382 million is planned in the 2014 budget. The authorities indicated that if post-2014 international troop presence were to be lower than projected in 2012, it may not be possible to reduce the size of security forces from 352,000 currently as envisaged earlier. Staff noted this issue and pointed to the possibility that a higher donor envelope may not be forthcoming and that greater efficiency of security expenditures may be needed to prevent a crowding out of development spending. Non-security and development needs are expected to increase significantly . The government plans to hire a large number of teachers and health workers to improve public service delivery—with a view to improving human development indicators in the medium term—and to continue expanding the currently scarce infrastructure. Moreover, donors plan to gradually transfer their off-budget recurrent expenditures onto the budget, to the extent that the budget can absorb them. These expenditures relate to the operation and maintenance costs of the large capital stock financed and built by donors since 2002 (and still being built), estimated at about $1 billion annually for the development sector and as high as $2 billion for the security sector—altogether close to 15 percent of GDP. The government noted its plans to improve expenditure management capacity in line ministries (with World Bank support) to improve expenditure execution and effectiveness. The key risks to the fiscal outlook are inadequate revenue mobilization, ineffective expenditure management, and donors’ disengagement . The possible responses to a shrinking resource envelope include expenditure restraint, additional tax policy and administration measures, and debt financing (see accompanying Selected Issues Paper). All these options are difficult to implement. While expenditure restraint may be easier to implement, cutting capital expenditure—in particular infrastructure investment—would negatively affect economic growth. Increases in tax rates or the broadening of tax bases could affect compliance and may be politically challenging to implement. Debt financing may jeopardize debt sustainability and may not be feasible as long as domestic capital markets remain dormant or small or if concessional external borrowing is not forthcoming. C. Policies to Strengthen the Banking Sector and Promote Credit Provision