mitigating implementation risks and preparing the private sector . By December 2014, the authorities plan to have advanced all mitigation activities to address the 20 risks rated “high” or above in the December 2011 VAT Implementation Risk Management Plan, and conducted all communication and training activities to publicize the VAT’s introduction and operation, prepare taxpayers and other stakeholders, and obtain their buy-in in line with the March 2013 VAT Stakeholder Management Plan. They also plan to execute the pre-implementation compliance program, as laid out in the May 2013 VAT Compliance Strategy Action Plan. The authorities also will continue to move ahead in implementing a fiscal regime for the natural resources sector. The authorities will continue to strengthen customs administration . They plan to improve the import valuation system and preserve its integrity by: (i) implementing the Tariff and Valuation Management Tool (TARVAL), including the identified vehicle value approach, with a view to covering 85 percent of imports; and (ii) linking it to the valuation module of ASYCUDA World to minimize interference with the valuation parameters. The valuation database has been updated successfully including the identified vehicle value approach. This has been transferred to TARVAL and the top 200 commodities that cover almost 85 percent of customs revenue. It is currently being implemented at Kabul customs and will be rolled out to all customs units in the coming weeks. To complement these changes, the authorities intend to centralize the jurisdiction over valuation issues in an appropriately resourced and trained unit. The customs department has recently recruited four local valuation specialists through a World Bank funded project to further improve the performance of the valuation unit. Several reforms are planned in budget management . These include: (i) requiring line ministries to prepare and submit financial plans to the finance ministry (a process which started in December 2013 has been completed) and linking budget allotments to these plans; (ii) rolling out, by March 2014, a Purchasing Module to 11 additional ministries to enhance the capability to manage contracts and associated budgets, following a pilot in two large ministries in 2013; and (iii) using electronic transfers for salaries and contractual payments, for which preparations are well advanced. The central bank intends to continue to strengthen the FSD . The FSD’s five-year