Afghanistan needs to mobilize domestic revenue to ensure fiscal sustainability and reduce donor dependence. Low compliance has taken a toll on domestic revenue in recent years. Domestic revenues peaked at 11 percent of GDP in 2011 and subsequently declined to 8.5 percent of GDP in 2014 (covering only about one third of spending), remain significantly lower than regional and low-income countries (LICs) averages. Donors’ grants finance the bulk of security expenditure and part of spending related to service delivery, infrastructure development, and operations and maintenance. Staff highlighted that spending to support strong and inclusive growth will need success in revenue mobilization and that the country’s development and growth-and-welfare- enhancing reforms necessitate a sustainable fiscal framework. Staff noted that the authorities’ ability to implement countercyclical fiscal policy remains contingent on strengthening debt service capacity and, while this capacity remains limited in the medium to long term, the overall budget balance needs to remain close to zero. Gross int'l reserves M0 + bank loans 3m of imports 20% of M2 100% of ST debt Reserve Adequacy, 2014 (In billions of U.S.dollars) O un F O k U E N F ff R E ff E R = Page 24 Mobilizing domestic revenue requires introducing new taxes, strengthening revenue administration, and improving the tax policy mix. Staff stressed that continued medium-term revenue mobilization efforts will be needed by introducing VAT, additional excises and property taxes, developing natural resources, reducing exemptions, and improving enforcement and compliance. Staff projects the revenue measures introduced in 2015 to mobilize revenue of around 1 percent of GDP per year in the medium term. With continued improvement in revenue administration, VAT introduction, and development of the mining sector towards the end of the decade, staff projects revenues to reach 13 percent of GDP by 2020. Enhanced anti-corruption efforts in revenue collection will be critical to minimize leakages, improve compliance, and boost public confidence. The mining sector presents a promising source of fiscal revenue. Mining projects have been delayed as contracts wait to be signed or renegotiated in light of declining international prices. The development of the sector has also been hampered by ongoing instability, and inadequate infrastructure, impeding exports. Despite the delays, the authorities are working to develop a transparent fiscal regime for extractive industries in full compliance with the EITI, including with the support of FAD TA. Staff supported the authorities’ objective to ensure a sound fiscal regime is in place while the sector develops, and underscored the need to develop the mining sector in an environmentally friendly manner and in consultation with civil society. Prioritizing growing spending needs is also essential. Operating expenditures have doubled over the past decade to reach 20 percent of GDP in 2014. Operating costs are projected to stay elevated in the medium term because of continued security needs, payments for civil servants, teachers, health workers, and maintenance of public infrastructure. In addition, development outlays are expected to increase by 1 percent of GDP in this decade to meet Afghanistan’s human development and infrastructure needs. Thus, total expenditures are projected to increase from 26 percent of GDP in 2014 to close to 35 percent in 2020. Security spending is projected to decline gradually after 2020 with a reduction in the size of security forces, while non-security spending is projected to increase gradually, and development outlays are expected to be stable as a share of GDP. The authorities are seeking to increase the efficiency of spending through reducing ghost workers by use of electronic payments (with an initial focus on four ministries that are the largest employers), improving procurement, while at the same time increasing execution of 20112012201320142015 Q1-Q3 Domestic Revenue Coverage of Operating Expenditures (In percent) Sources: Afghan Authorities and IMF Staff calculations. Most extreme shock Growth LT Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio on or before 2025. PV of Debt to GDP Ratio under Alternative Scenarios, 2015–35 BaselinePublic debt benchmarkMost extreme shock 1/ Low Grant Historical scenario Page 25 donor-financed capital spending. They noted their limited discretion over spending because a large part of donor-financed outlays were directed to specific purposes, which constrained their ability to make spending poverty reducing, growth and employment generating. Staff discussed with the authorities ways to prioritize spending and make it more efficient, especially in the civil service sector, and stressed the need to reverse the declining trend in the coverage of operating expenses by domestic revenue. Debt remains modest but Afghanistan’s reliance on grants to meet its expenditure needs poses sustainability risks. The Afghan government does not have domestic debt and its external public and publicly guaranteed debt amounted to $1.3 billion, or 6.4 percent of GDP, at end-2014, most of which is owed to multilateral creditors. Under the baseline scenario, with strong reform effort and donor support, improved security and reduced uncertainty, debt is sustainable. However, there are significant vulnerabilities; should reforms stall, security deteriorate, or grant financing fall short of the projected levels, Afghanistan will need to implement significant compensatory measures or the debt burden would quickly become unsustainable. Under a scenario of low grant financing, the present value of public debt reaches over 130 percent of GDP by the end of the projection period. Afghanistan’s external debt is low, but given its heavy reliance on grant financing, according to the IMF-World Bank framework, public external debt is judged to remain at high risk of distress (See DSA). The authorities agreed with the need to mobilize revenue and prioritize spending to move towards fiscal sustainability and self-reliance. They reaffirmed their commitment to continue to mobilize revenue with revenue measures and customs and revenue administration reforms, and noted that they wished to use growth-friendly tax measures and were concerned that higher tax rates could result in a surge in evasion and, hence, lower revenues. They noted building a revenue base requires growth and revenue generating strategic sectors, such as energy and transportation. They are preparing a borrowing policy to finance high return projects, to maintain a low level of debt, and plan to seek staff views on the policy, as it is prepared. They believe public sector investment in strategic sectors can yield high economic and social returns and wish to consider use of loans, private public partnerships, and build operate transfer arrangements. Staff cautioned about contracting loans and contingent liabilities given Afghanistan’s very limited debt service capacity, the risk of crowding out grants and, poverty-reducing and development outlays. Further, staff indicated that an independent appraisal of projects, their transparent inclusion in the budget and associated liabilities, and an assessment of their impact on debt sustainability are crucial. D.