spending and donor inflows to promote growth and development . The strategy has consisted in investing in public goods to enable economic activity and in human capital to boost productivity. Large investments have been made in infrastructure; roads now connect major markets, and access to electricity, water, and communication has improved dramatically. Access to and use of education has expanded participation in a modernizing economy. While public infrastructure and social services have increased physical and human capital, there are limits to this public sector-led growth model. Sustained and inclusive growth will require continued progress on a broad structural reform agenda to foster private sector activity . The authorities were confident that promising drivers of growth included agriculture and rural development, public infrastructure and services, extractive industries, and the energy sectors. They were keen to promote private sector growth and employment outside the security sector and government through further reforms focused on revenue generation, financial sector development, and the business environment. Several MDGs were met since 2010 while others are on track for 2015 . Along with increased spending on health, education, and irrigation, noteworthy progress was made to increase school enrollment for children, raise the ratio of girls to boys in secondary education, reduce infant and child mortality rates, increase the immunization rate against measles, and lower the rate of tuberculosis. Pro-poor spending has been rising, and the authorities remain committed to protecting such spending even as they weigh priorities within a limited resource envelope The ECF arrangement included a floor on pro-poor spending, which currently stands at about 2 percent of GDP. The authorities noted that the definition of pro-poor spending in the budget was rather narrow, since it comprised only the ministries of education, health, and social affairs (about 40 percent of non-security/non-development outlays), and indicated that in reality, almost all government spending favored the poor. The new law on martyrs and disabled will further increase pro-poor spending by 0.7 percent of GDP per year starting in 2014. Page 22 Pro Poor Spending Pro poor spending (Af billion) % GDP % non-security operating spending Sources: Afghan authorities; and staff estimates and projections. FY2011/12 FY 2012 FY 2013 Data provision has shortcomings but is broadly adequate for surveillance . The