strategic plan was approved in June 2013 and FSD management is establishing institutional arrangements to start the plan implementation. In line with the plan, increasing supervisory resources will continue with the aim of filling at least 95 percent of the 145 authorized staff positions in the department in full compliance with its human resources policies. Also, steps will be taken to strengthen off-site surveillance (including automation of supervisory reporting) and to enhance the on-site examination process. The Supervisory Enforcement Committee will continue its regular reviews of banks’ compliance with FSD’s supervisory orders, and performance indicators developed Page 26 for the central bank’s operations report to parliament will help management monitor progress. Finally, in line with Afghanistan’s laws, the central bank will strengthen its policies to protect central bank staff from civil damages and indemnification of legal costs when conducting their duties in good faith. The authorities will promote financial market development . The draft sukuk law, currently reviewed by the ministry of justice, is expected to be submitted to parliament later in 2014. In the meantime, a sukuk implementation plan is to be developed, including identification of assets to back sukuks and preparation of the necessary legislation and regulations on capital market and securities issuance in line with international standards for Islamic finance. The central bank intends to promote secondary trading with existing instruments, starting with capital notes; in this regard, it plans to work with the Afghan Bankers Association to guide discussions with dealers on the protocol for agreeing and executing trades—a “code of conduct”—to be adopted by end-2014. Central bank operations will be strengthened . With the recent revaluation gains, the central bank is no longer undercapitalized and the new capitalization framework (part of the amendments to the central bank law) is being reviewed and will be submitted to parliament to ensure it remains so, thereby preventing monetary policy from being affected by capital or income considerations. Proposed amendments to the central bank law will also enhance legal underpinnings of central bank operations. Separately, consistent with its by-laws, the Financial Disputes Resolution Commission is planning to publish the findings of financial disputes on its website to increase financial sector transparency. The central bank is developing its operations report to parliament (to become part of its annual report), which will enable legislators to evaluate and monitor progress, inter alia, in hiring, promoting, training, and remunerating staff in accordance with its human resources policies and deploying them efficiently. The authorities will continue efforts to resolve Kabul Bank cases and recover related assets . Appeals against sentences against the two main persons indicted in the bank’s collapse, as well as applications for additional and longer sentences and related confiscation orders, are being pursued. The appeals, if successful, will assist in asset recovery efforts The authorities will also pursue resolution of the existing and new mutual legal assistance requests. After the authorities approve the successful bidder for NKB, the central bank will undertake fit and proper checks on the successful bidder and proceed with the privatization. Staff urged the authorities to step up Kabul Bank asset recovery efforts and privatize New Kabul Bank expeditiously or, if it cannot be sold, it should be liquidated, providing that government salary payments remain unaffected. The authorities plan to take several economic governance measures . The ECTF will