The outlook will be determined by the success of managing the economic transition from aid dependency toward a more self-sustaining economy over the “transformation decade 2015–24 ” At the July 2012 Tokyo conference, Afghanistan and the international community shared a vision to further consolidate their partnership in the areas of governance, security, peace process, economic and social development, and regional cooperation to help Afghanistan move from transition to attain sustainable economic growth and development and fiscal self-reliance through the transformation decade of 2015–24. The TMAF, which is focused on the priorities of the Afghan Government as contained in its strategy paper Towards Self-Reliance was established at that time to underpin the partnership of Afghanistan with its development partners for the Transformation Decade. Several factors will play a role. Initially, the drawdown of international troops has and will reduce aggregate demand while raising domestic spending needs for security. The resulting impact on growth has already been felt over the past two years. Security and political conditions will be important factors, as will maintaining macroeconomic stability, progressing structural reform, assuring continued donor support, and realizing improvements in See The Tokyo Declaration, http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/middle_e/afghanistan/tokyo_conference_2012/tokyo_declaration_en1.html. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 10 governance that create a better business and investment environment. These factors will be important in determining growth and future living standards over the medium and long terms. Significant improvements in security could even generate a “peace dividend” for economic activity through higher activity across sectors, foreign direct investment, better regional transportation links, and the return of expatriates. The medium-term framework assumes a modest pick-up of growth during the transformation decade led by increased private sector activity and the development of the agriculture and natural resource sectors . Although GDP growth is projected to slow to just over 3 percent in 2014 due to the impact of the international troop drawdown and political uncertainty in the first half of the year, it is expected to pick up thereafter, as activity and investment rebound. Continued reform efforts under the TMAF and donor support will ensure that fiscal and external gaps are covered. With stable international prices and prudent monetary policy, inflation should remain in single digits. In the longer term, an improved business environment and better economic governance are expected to facilitate private sector-led growth and the development of the natural resource sector (copper, iron ore, and oil). Accordingly, growth could accelerate to 6 percent as mining production comes on-stream, and converge thereafter to about 4 percent. Debt is modest, but large expenditure needs and limited domestic revenue capacity mean a high dependence on donor financing . Following extensive debt relief starting in 2006, and ending in 2010 Afghanistan’s debt burden was alleviated significantly—external public and publicly guaranteed debt amounted to $1.3 billion, or 6.1 percent of GDP, at end-2013, most of which owed to multilateral creditors. Under the baseline scenario and in light of donor pledges, debt is sustainable. However, there are significant vulnerabilities; should growth slow, reform stall, security deteriorate, or grant financing (43.4 percent of GDP in 2013) fall short of the projected levels, there will be a need for a large fiscal adjustment (higher revenues and cuts in expenditure that would negatively affect security, development, and growth) or, if debt finance replaced grants, debt could quickly move onto an unsustainable trajectory and debt sustainability would be jeopardized (see accompanying Debt Sustainability Analysis). Baseline Custom: low grants Custom: low growth Threshold Standard shock: hist. avg Standard shock: most extreme Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Present Value of Debt to GDP Ratio under Alternative Scenarios, 2014–34 Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff calculations. The accompanying Debt Sustainability Analysis also presents the standard shocks generated by the Debt Sustainability Framework, which result in benign debt dynamics. However, these results using the standard shocks may not be representative as they are mostly driven by the past ten years, when Afghanistan averaged real GDP growth of 9.3 percent per year and received official transfers averaging 50.6 percent of GDP to support needed post- conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction. Page 11 High High Medium Nature/Source of Risk Near-term risks Deteriorating political and security situation (regional and/or domestic). Disputed election results and/or the withdrawal of international troops lead to greater violence. Inadequate policy implementation particularly in the fiscal and monetary sectors, and inconsistent exchange rate policy. Medium-term risks Inadequate policy implementation deterioration in governance and in the investment and business climates lead to low growth. Lower donor inflows to the budget and to finance development projects. Medium Medium Deteriorating banking system soundness, associated with the stalling of banking supervision reforms. Delays in developing natural resources and export capacity. Medium Smooth security and political transitions. Low Likelihood Expected Economic Impact if Realized Possible Mitigating Measures Risk Assessment Matrix High - Political uncertainty is accompanied by higher violence levels leading to lower confidence and investment in the economy. - Worsening security results in lower growth and imports. - As imports account for half of government revenues, lower imports and growth lead to lower revenue and a higher fiscal deficit. Medium - Slow growth or a decline in revenue leads to spending cuts and possible wage arrears and stagnating living standards. - Inconsistent monetary policy and/or intervention in foreign exchange market (i.e., an inappropriate mix of intervention and sterilization) results in exchange rate volatility and depreciation, capital flight, loss of reserves, and higher inflation. High - Lower investment and slow growth or a decline in revenue leads to spending cuts and possible wage arrears. - Possible exchange rate volatility and depreciation, capital flight, loss of reserves, and higher inflation. - Low access to finance, ineffective resource allocation and intermediation by financial sector, and constrained access to global financial system, because of inadequate bank governance, legislative, institutional, and regulatory frameworks, and law enforcement to prevent and address economic crime. High - Lack of progress in implementing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework or donors fatigue results in lower donor inflows, especially to the budget. - The decline in inflows leads to lower employment, public investment, confidence, and growth, stagnant living standards, and/or exchange rate pressures. Medium - Slower growth of financial sector, less access to finance, or decline in banking services (payments and lending). - Worse allocation of resources via banking sector, greater risk of inadequate governance, vulnerability to fraud and money laundering, and bank failure(s) and consequent need for government funds to cover bank losses. - Negative impact on economic development and growth and possible fiscal liability. Medium - Lack of progress in developing natural resources results in lower fiscal revenue. - Fiscal pressure may ensue if these delays stymie revenue growth and the government does not cut spending. - Fiscal pressures may lead to exchange rate depreciation and higher inflation. - Lack of progress in developing natural resources could result in higher narcotics production. High - Smooth transitions result in higher confidence, investment, and growth. Continue to implement policies to maintain macroeconomic stability. If there is fiscal space, consider countercyclical policy. Improve policy implementation through greater revenue mobilization, expenditure restraint, tighter monetary policy, and possibly more exchange rate flexibility. Strengthen policy implementation to maintain macro stability and improve economic governance and the investment and business climates, including stronger legislative, institutional, and regulatory frameworks, and law enforcement. Take measures to mobilize additional revenue and reprioritize and reduce expenditure. Recruit more supervisors, step-up training of existing supervisors, and ensure prudential regulations and enforcement actions are implemented promptly. Central bank to communicate its determination to strengthen banking supervision and publicize the measures taken. Strengthen policy implementation to maintain macro stability and improve business climate, including a sound fiscal regime for natural resources. Adjust the policy mix to take into account likely higher budget revenue, foreign exchange inflows, and investment by allowing for higher spending and possible exchange rate appreciation. Staff assessment of the likelihood of realization in the next three years. Page 12 The outlook is subject to a wide range of risks; many on the downside (see Risk Assessment Matrix). Afghanistan’s links to the rest of the world are mainly linked to donor financing; private financial flows and licit trade are limited. On the upside, smooth security and political transitions could result in larger capital inflows and higher confidence, investment, and economic activity. On the downside in the near term, the principal risks are related to a potential deterioration in either domestic or regional security conditions, political instability during or following the elections, and inadequate implementation of economic policies. In the medium term, risks stem from insufficient progress in economic reforms including those in the TMAF, or donor fatigue, which would reduce inflows; a weakening of banking supervision that would fail to manage banking sector risks; or delays in developing natural resources. The large foreign exchange reserves provide a sizable buffer, at least in the short term. Potential economic spillovers to and from the rest of the world are limited . The outlook depends heavily on inflows linked to donor assistance. The sizeable donor commitments should insulate the Afghan economy from the key sources of global risks, given the limited (non- donor) linkages and exposure to the global economy and financial markets. Regional developments affecting security and trade may impact the Afghan economy, in particular an economic slowdown in India or Pakistan, with which trade has intensified. Outward spillovers from Afghanistan depend on domestic political and security conditions; a deterioration could lead to displaced population, internally and to neighboring countries, with attendant lower trade and possible costs for countries receiving Afghan refugees. POLICY DISCUSSIONS: MANAGING THE TRANSITION, REDUCING VULNERABILITIES, AND PROMOTING INCLUSIVE GROWTH Discussions focused on policies to maintain macroeconomic stability, reduce vulnerabilities, and promote inclusive, private-sector-led growth through the transformation decade and in the long term . The authorities and staff discussed the short-term macroeconomic implications of the troop withdrawal, economic risks associated with political and security uncertainty, policies to navigate successfully through these events, and how the international community can best support Afghanistan. For the medium term, the discussion revolved around policies to reduce aid dependence and foster self-sustained, private-sector-led economic growth that is inclusive and equitable, while ensuring debt sustainability. address the economic challenges and reduce vulnerabilities . The main objectives include: There was broad agreement that the authorities’ strategy remains appropriate to  Maintaining macroeconomic stability , which, along with security and an enabling political environment, is a precondition for growth and poverty reduction; Page 13  Moving toward fiscal sustainability aimed at achieving self-reliance in the long run and addressing a potential decline in donor grants, to be achieved by redoubling revenue mobilization efforts through new taxes and measures to improve tax administration and improving expenditure management and service delivery;  Pursuing financial sector stability and development , through banking sector reform and strengthened supervision (including AML/CFT supervision) to prevent banking sector troubles emerging and evolving into a macroeconomic crisis, while expanding credit for private sector development; and  Improving economic governance and the business environment to foster private sector-led growth and investment by reducing corruption, rent-seeking, and skewed economic incentives. A. Maintaining Macroeconomic Stability The macroeconomic policy mix remains appropriate, with fiscal policy supporting demand (financed by grants) and monetary policy focusing on inflation . This is predicated on donor flows continuing to finance the fiscal and external deficits:  The authorities and staff agreed that fiscal policy should continue to aim at revenue mobilization and further improving budget implementation capacity. The broadly balanced budget (including grants) and tight controls on non-priority expenditures ensure the continuation of government functions and preserve fiscal space for development spending. The operating balance excluding grants, which supports demand, remains the fiscal anchor.  There was agreement that monetary policy should continue to focus on maintaining low inflation. The monetary base remains the nominal anchor and the exchange rate should be managed flexibly. The sizable international reserves (over 7 months of imports) provide the needed buffer in times of temporary volatility (Box 3). The authorities recognized that while buffers allowed accommodating macroeconomic shocks to some extent, policies needed to be proactive and flexible International reserves—deemed adequate by all measures used by the Fund—are large enough to accommodate even sizeable capital outflows. Nevertheless, in the case of more permanent pressures, the exchange rate would be managed flexibly to accommodate shocks, deliver the necessary adjustment, and protect reserves and need to be complemented by competitiveness gains from a strengthened business environment. Further control of non-priority expenditures, while protecting social and poverty-reduction spending, and greater revenue-raising efforts would be needed in case of a decline in grants to the budget. Policy implementation capacity, needed to mitigate risks and respond to shocks, would continue to be improved. The authorities called on donors to do their part in honoring their aid commitments . They noted that fiscal space could be increased if donors intensified their efforts to further align their assistance with Afghan priorities, signed multi-year financing agreements, and channeled more funds through the budget, so they are spent more efficiently. Page 14 Box 3. External Stability and Exchange Rate Assessment The current account is dominated by imports and official transfers, while licit exports are low . Excluding grants, the current account deficit was estimated at 41 percent of GDP in 2013. Official transfers more than financed this deficit, as they are generally spent on imports. Exports (excluding opium and internal sales to non-residents), after a catch up in the first half of the 2000s, stagnated at around $500 million, or a mere 2.5 percent of GDP. However, external accounts exclude the illicit economy, which is significant. Afghanistan maintains a managed floating exchange rate regime . Monetary policy is anchored by targets on reserve money. The main instruments to implement the policy are sales of foreign exchange (previously purchased from the government, donors or other official entities) and sales of central bank marketable notes. Subject to meeting these targets, the central bank also seeks to minimize exchange rate volatility. Afghanistan has no access to international capital markets and relies on donors’ inflows to cover the current account deficit. A flexible and floating exchange rate regime, combined with a relatively prudent fiscal policy, has been serving the country well, inter alia by contributing to a stable price environment while at the same time helping to absorb external and domestic shocks. The exchange rate appears to be broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals, and foreign reserves—at 7 months of imports—comfortably exceed all traditional reserve adequacy metrics Reserves help maintain exchange rate stability and provide much-needed buffers in case of external shocks. Several factors make it difficult to assess quantitatively the long-run alignment of the exchange rate, namely (i) years of civil conflict; (ii) large aid flows (official transfers and grants ranging from 30 to 70 percent of GDP over the past decade); (iii) high dollarization; and (iv) concerns over the coverage and reliability of balance of payments data. However, both a simple measure of the CPI-based real effective exchange rate (REER) as well as the REER calculated by the IMF’s Institute for Capacity Development suggests that the rate is close to its medium-term average. Structural impediments are more binding for Afghanistan’s external competitiveness than the level of the exchange rate . Obstacles to improving competitiveness include deficiencies in the business environment, lack of investment and capacity in the tradables sectors, political and economic uncertainty, and corruption. Exchange Rate NEER REER Exchange rate, Afghani/US dollar (RHS) Aug-08 Aug-09 Sep-10 Oct-11 Nov-12 Dec-13 External Stability and Exchange Rate Assessment Trade (In billions of U.S. dollars) Exports 1/ Imports 2013 2/ Reserve adequacy (In billions of U.S. dollars) Reserves M0 plus bank loans 3 months of imports 20% of M2 100% of short-term debt Sources: Afghan authorities; IMF Direction of Trade Database; and IMF staff calculations. Exports exclude sales of goods to international military forces in Afghanistan. Value expected. Page 15 B. Moving Toward Fiscal Sustainability on donor support . This will entail revenue mobilization, and better expenditure management including better prioritization and service delivery to assure security and development. Domestic revenues have stagnated due to the economic slowdown, faltering efforts, and leakages, and are expected to rise only slowly, while operating budget expenditures, which were at 15 percent of GDP in 2010 are projected to increase to over 29 percent of GDP by 2018 as part of the security transition. The combination of these factors generates large fiscal vulnerabilities. Afghanistan needs to move toward fiscal sustainability to reduce its dependence Revenue and Expenditures in the Long Run (In percent of GDP) Operating expenditures Domestic revenue To generate needed fiscal space, staff pressed for moving decisively to improve compliance, for pushing ahead with VAT introduction, and considering new tax revenue sources—excises in particular . Afghanistan has one of the lowest domestic revenue collections in the world, with an average of about 9 percent of GDP in 2006–13 compared to about 21 percent in low-income countries. Factors behind this poor performance include a very low starting point, low compliance, opposition to new taxes, and a limited set of taxes. Afghanistan relies heavily on trade- related taxes, which represented 45 percent of total tax revenues in 2006–13. VAT, which is being discussed in parliament, and excise taxes in the medium term would broaden the tax base and rebalance the composition of revenues. The authorities agreed with the need to increase revenue and noted political and institutional challenges in raising compliance and implementing new taxes. Staff also cautioned against providing tax exemptions, because of the resulting distortions and fiscal costs. The authorities explained that consideration of incentives, which had not been enacted in tax laws, was designed to stimulate investment in 2014–15 to promote a smooth transition. Staff stressed the importance of establishing a fiscal regime for mining revenues that maximizes the share of economic rents for the government while preserving investment incentives . Mining projects have been delayed and the ongoing oil project is unable to export due to the lack of a transit agreement with a neighboring country. The authorities are working to progress these projects and remove export hurdles, and noted that a legislative framework has been prepared for with IMF technical assistance to establish an effective and transparent fiscal regime for natural resources in full compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. They also requested follow-up technical assistance. Large spending needs (both development and security) are projected to continue Development outlays are needed to continue reconstruction and improve public services in order to progress towards MDGs. At the same time, high security spending (about 11 percent of GDP in Page 16 2013) accounts for just under half of budget expenditure and will rise sharply as off-budget expenditure managed by donors is transferred on-budget. Consequently, operating budget expenditures are projected to increase to over 29 percent of GDP by 2018. Security outlays are major and continued donor financing is critical . The authorities welcomed the international community’s commitment made in Chicago in 2012 to continue financing Afghanistan’s security, estimated at $4.1 billion annually. The indicative target of government contribution to security outlays discussed in Chicago is set at $500 million for 2015— already $382 million is planned in the 2014 budget. The authorities indicated that if post-2014 international troop presence were to be lower than projected in 2012, it may not be possible to reduce the size of security forces from 352,000 currently as envisaged earlier. Staff noted this issue and pointed to the possibility that a higher donor envelope may not be forthcoming and that greater efficiency of security expenditures may be needed to prevent a crowding out of development spending. Non-security and development needs are expected to increase significantly . The government plans to hire a large number of teachers and health workers to improve public service delivery—with a view to improving human development indicators in the medium term—and to continue expanding the currently scarce infrastructure. Moreover, donors plan to gradually transfer their off-budget recurrent expenditures onto the budget, to the extent that the budget can absorb them. These expenditures relate to the operation and maintenance costs of the large capital stock financed and built by donors since 2002 (and still being built), estimated at about $1 billion annually for the development sector and as high as $2 billion for the security sector—altogether close to 15 percent of GDP. The government noted its plans to improve expenditure management capacity in line ministries (with World Bank support) to improve expenditure execution and effectiveness. The key risks to the fiscal outlook are inadequate revenue mobilization, ineffective expenditure management, and donors’ disengagement . The possible responses to a shrinking resource envelope include expenditure restraint, additional tax policy and administration measures, and debt financing (see accompanying Selected Issues Paper). All these options are difficult to implement. While expenditure restraint may be easier to implement, cutting capital expenditure—in particular infrastructure investment—would negatively affect economic growth. Increases in tax rates or the broadening of tax bases could affect compliance and may be politically challenging to implement. Debt financing may jeopardize debt sustainability and may not be feasible as long as domestic capital markets remain dormant or small or if concessional external borrowing is not forthcoming. C. Policies to Strengthen the Banking Sector and Promote Credit Provision and Access to Finance sector is needed to promote credit provision, better access to finance, economic growth and Strengthening the banking sector is needed to support growth . A stronger banking Page 17 development. The legacy of the Kabul Bank crisis and governance framework weigh on the system, stymie credit provision and access to finance, and affect public confidence in banks.  Vulnerabilities are related to weak governance and institutional challenges—mainly supervision and the regulatory and legislative framework. The absence of a comprehensive legal infrastructure, limited institutional capacity in the banking and legal systems, and inadequate corporate governance constrain financial sector development. It also leaves space for interest groups to lobby for regulatory forbearance (e.g., delaying examination reports and enforcement of supervisory actions) with attendant financial stability risks.  The banking system remains barely profitable and some banks show poor or negative capital ratios. In 2013, banks turned an aggregate profit of about $31 million for the first time in years despite large provision expenses and continued losses in state-owned banks. Despite the corrective measures the central bank has been taking with respect to weak banks, there were still seven weak banks (i.e., with a CAMEL rating of 4 or worse) out of the total of 12 banks. The assets of those weak banks represent around 51 percent of the total banking sector’s assets. The main issues that these banks face are: (i) low or negative capital; (ii) high credit risk; and (iii) inadequate management. While some of the banks have plans to increase capital and manage other financial issues, addressing management issues remains an important challenge, particularly for state-owned banks.  The banking system is highly liquid because of low lending. From a financial stability perspective, the system’s ample liquidity (liquid assets reached 62 percent of total at end 2013) and small loan portfolio (about $824 million or 19 percent of the total assets) provides some comfort. Moreover, international reserves are almost double total deposits. The authorities’ strategy is to strengthen the banking sector’s contribution to economic development . This requires developing the financial infrastructure, improving banking and AML/CFT supervision and its enforcement. In addition, the authorities are planning to develop the interbank market by preparing for trading of financial products, risk management tools, and investment vehicles to strengthen financial transmission channels and help attract investment in financial instruments. The authorities should continue developing financial system infrastructure and services to allow further financial inclusion over the medium term by adopting policies that: (i) promote further use of mobile banking services and microfinance lending; (ii) encourage bank penetration in rural areas; (iii) increase financial literacy among the public; and (iv) assure adequate financial consumer protection. In addition, addressing the factors that may be restraining bank lending would enhance financial inclusion, which is discussed below. As of end 2013, the banking system—comprising twelve fully licensed commercial banks and four branches of foreign banks with about 390 bank branches throughout the country—had assets of $4.3 billion total, deposits of $3.7 billion and an average loan-to-deposit ratio of 22.6 percent. One state-owned bank has negative capital, which is being addressed. Page 18 The authorities are determined to strengthen the central bank’s financial supervision department (FSD) . The central bank adopted a five-year strategic plan and a new organizational structure for FSD. FSD has increased its staffing significantly and is now in the process of filling the remaining vacancies, streamlining internal procedures, enhancing on-site and off-site supervision (including AML/CFT supervision), and improving information exchange with the financial intelligence unit, Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Center of Afghanistan (FinTRACA), to support improved economic governance. The central bank has also prepared policies and procedures to enhance its staff’s legal protection against liability. Staff welcomed these developments and stressed the importance of protecting FSD staff performing their duties in good faith, transparent and merit-based recruitment, training, and implementation of the five-year strategic plan. Staff also noted that there remained scope to follow up more consistently on enforcement letters and monitor progress. The authorities concurred, while noting political pressures on central bank management to hire unqualified staff and stressing the need for continued technical assistance. The authorities expressed concern about banks’ reluctance to lend . Although credit to the private sector increased in 2013 for the first time since the Kabul Bank crisis, part of the increase reflected valuation changes on foreign exchange denominated loans and credit growth over the past few years has been low. Staff noted that the low level of private credit—equivalent to only 4 percent of GDP—reflected the scarcity of profitable lending opportunities, given limited information available on potential borrowers and the difficulty in realizing collateral or collecting loans from delinquent borrowers, rather than low supply of funds. Therefore, staff recommended that policies to promote credit should address structural issues that inhibit lending rather than forcing banks to lend (see Selected Issues Paper). Moving from traditional relationship-based lending to larger scale, market-oriented lending would require: (i) strengthening the legal infrastructure and contract enforcement; (ii) enforcing prudential regulations to protect depositors’ funds from excessive risk taking and conflicts of interest by banks; (iii) promoting transparent financial reporting by banks; (iv) instituting comprehensive and efficient credit information agencies; and (v) banks establishing sound lending practices that include a robust credit assessment of borrowers. It will also support improved access to finance, connect more people to the modern economy, and help spread the benefits of growth. The central bank agreed with using market- based measures to promote efficient credit allocation and improve access to finance. The authorities wish to implement a deposit insurance program, but staff warned about risks of moral hazard given current weakness in banks and banking supervision . Staff noted that deposit insurance would only improve confidence in the banking sector if accompanied Priority areas include registration of titles to immovable property, improving security interests in collateral, securing priority interests in insolvency, and training the judiciary in banking issues. Bank penetration is low with less than 10 percent of the adult population holding an account at, or taking loans from, a formal institution. Furthermore, there were only 1.8 bank branches per 100,000 adults in Afghanistan in 2011, compared to 8.5 in Pakistan and 29.1 in Iran. Page 19 by robust banking supervision that ensured consistent adherence to prudential requirements and stronger corporate governance in the banking sector. The authorities were concerned about international correspondent banking relationships . Some Afghan banks were encountering difficulties in establishing or maintaining international correspondent relationships, especially U.S. dollar accounts. Staff noted that passage of FATF-compliant AML/CFT legislation and stronger financial sector governance would help Afghan banks to maintain and establish correspondent relationships. The business environment remains challenging despite recent improvements, due D. Business Environment to deficiencies in economic governance . Afghanistan improved its World Bank Doing Business 2014 ranking to 164 (out of 189 economies), from an adjusted rank of 170 the previous year, by facilitating business licensing and improving access to credit thanks to a unified collateral registry. Significant challenges remain, though, across many dimensions such as protecting investors, trading across borders, registering property, enforcing contracts, and dealing with construction permits. Corruption is reportedly high, with a rank of 175 out of 177 countries in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index in 2013. Afghanistan scored only 2.7 on the World Bank’s 2012 Country Performance Ratings —a scorecard assessing the policy and institutional development among IDA-eligible countries—about 1.5 standard deviations below the mean of 3.2. Hence, strengthening economic governance has been an important pillar of the Fund’s engagement. Staff and the authorities saw improved governance as critical to raising growth and creating jobs . A business environment conducive to private sector-led growth, a more efficient judicial system, and decisive steps to counter economic crimes would facilitate the entry of new businesses, improve access to finance, bolster investment and construction, help enforce contracts, and ease international trade. Over time, such an environment would reduce the economy’s dependence on donor support and promote regional integration. Measures to improve governance have focused on establishing and enhancing institutions, legal reform, improving transparency and accountability, and capacity building, but progress has been slow . The authorities see improved governance as critical to reduce the economy’s dependence on donor support and to promote regional integration. An economic crimes road map setting out Afghanistan’s economic governance framework was endorsed by cabinet in February 2013. Several laws seeking to improve economic governance—such as the banking, AML/CFT laws, and provisions on governance of state-owned enterprises—are advanced in the legislative process. Staff emphasized that concerted efforts to ensure effective and swift implementation of these laws, as well the economic crimes road map and other governance and transparency recommendations, including those set out in the Independent Monitoring and These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. Page 20 Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Business Environment and Governance Firm-level Business Constraints (Percentage of firms identifying constraints) tax worker skill labor regulation customs electricity tax administration license corruption crime MENAP 2/ OECD World Afghanistan finance court informal competition Changes in Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) (Percentile rank) Firm-level Dispersion in Business Environment 5/ i i s s e n s u b g n o d r o f r e s a i Ease of Doing Business (Percentile rank) 2014 ranking 2010-2014 Improvement Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) 4/ and GDP per capita (log PPP) EM 3/ LIC 1/ MENAP 2/ Afghanistan Higher GDP per capita → Voice and Accountability (Percentile rank) → e l i t n e c r e p G W r e h g H i → e l i t n e c r e p r e h g i H → e l i t n e c r e p G W r e h g i H Sources: World Bank Doing Business Report(2014); World Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators; World Bank Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Low income countries; 2/ Middle East, North Africa, and Pakistan; 3/ Emerging market economies; 4/ Worldwide Governance Indicators include government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption; trend line is based on cross-country regression. 5/ For each country, the number of days required to obtain an operating licence, the distances to the 80th and 20th percentile are calculated, and each bar shows the spread of these differences. Page 21 Evaluation Commission’s (IMEC) report on the Kabul Bank crisis, is of paramount importance. Improved governance, along with macroeconomic stability and a better business environment, would open opportunities for all to take part in economic growth, leading to higher living standards, lower poverty, and improved social outcomes. As a resource-scarce economy, Afghanistan has relied so far on public sector