The macroeconomic policy mix remains appropriate, with fiscal policy supporting demand (financed by grants) and monetary policy focusing on inflation . This is predicated on donor flows continuing to finance the fiscal and external deficits:  The authorities and staff agreed that fiscal policy should continue to aim at revenue mobilization and further improving budget implementation capacity. The broadly balanced budget (including grants) and tight controls on non-priority expenditures ensure the continuation of government functions and preserve fiscal space for development spending. The operating balance excluding grants, which supports demand, remains the fiscal anchor.  There was agreement that monetary policy should continue to focus on maintaining low inflation. The monetary base remains the nominal anchor and the exchange rate should be managed flexibly. The sizable international reserves (over 7 months of imports) provide the needed buffer in times of temporary volatility (Box 3). The authorities recognized that while buffers allowed accommodating macroeconomic shocks to some extent, policies needed to be proactive and flexible International reserves—deemed adequate by all measures used by the Fund—are large enough to accommodate even sizeable capital outflows. Nevertheless, in the case of more permanent pressures, the exchange rate would be managed flexibly to accommodate shocks, deliver the necessary adjustment, and protect reserves and need to be complemented by competitiveness gains from a strengthened business environment. Further control of non-priority expenditures, while protecting social and poverty-reduction spending, and greater revenue-raising efforts would be needed in case of a decline in grants to the budget. Policy implementation capacity, needed to mitigate risks and respond to shocks, would continue to be improved. The authorities called on donors to do their part in honoring their aid commitments . They noted that fiscal space could be increased if donors intensified their efforts to further align their assistance with Afghan priorities, signed multi-year financing agreements, and channeled more funds through the budget, so they are spent more efficiently. Page 14 Box 3. External Stability and Exchange Rate Assessment The current account is dominated by imports and official transfers, while licit exports are low . Excluding grants, the current account deficit was estimated at 41 percent of GDP in 2013. Official transfers more than financed this deficit, as they are generally spent on imports. Exports (excluding opium and internal sales to non-residents), after a catch up in the first half of the 2000s, stagnated at around $500 million, or a mere 2.5 percent of GDP. However, external accounts exclude the illicit economy, which is significant. Afghanistan maintains a managed floating exchange rate regime . Monetary policy is anchored by targets on reserve money. The main instruments to implement the policy are sales of foreign exchange (previously purchased from the government, donors or other official entities) and sales of central bank marketable notes. Subject to meeting these targets, the central bank also seeks to minimize exchange rate volatility. Afghanistan has no access to international capital markets and relies on donors’ inflows to cover the current account deficit. A flexible and floating exchange rate regime, combined with a relatively prudent fiscal policy, has been serving the country well, inter alia by contributing to a stable price environment while at the same time helping to absorb external and domestic shocks. The exchange rate appears to be broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals, and foreign reserves—at 7 months of imports—comfortably exceed all traditional reserve adequacy metrics Reserves help maintain exchange rate stability and provide much-needed buffers in case of external shocks. Several factors make it difficult to assess quantitatively the long-run alignment of the exchange rate, namely (i) years of civil conflict; (ii) large aid flows (official transfers and grants ranging from 30 to 70 percent of GDP over the past decade); (iii) high dollarization; and (iv) concerns over the coverage and reliability of balance of payments data. However, both a simple measure of the CPI-based real effective exchange rate (REER) as well as the REER calculated by the IMF’s Institute for Capacity Development suggests that the rate is close to its medium-term average. Structural impediments are more binding for Afghanistan’s external competitiveness than the level of the exchange rate . Obstacles to improving competitiveness include deficiencies in the business environment, lack of investment and capacity in the tradables sectors, political and economic uncertainty, and corruption. Exchange Rate NEER REER Exchange rate, Afghani/US dollar (RHS) Aug-08 Aug-09 Sep-10 Oct-11 Nov-12 Dec-13 External Stability and Exchange Rate Assessment Trade (In billions of U.S. dollars) Exports 1/ Imports 2013 2/ Reserve adequacy (In billions of U.S. dollars) Reserves M0 plus bank loans 3 months of imports 20% of M2 100% of short-term debt Sources: Afghan authorities; IMF Direction of Trade Database; and IMF staff calculations. Exports exclude sales of goods to international military forces in Afghanistan. Value expected. Page 15