Over the past decade, Afghanistan has made enormous progress in reconstruction and development, more than doubling its income per capita levels . Important steps have been taken to lay the foundation for macroeconomic stability and growth, reduce poverty, and raise living standards, despite difficult security conditions and the challenges of rebuilding institutions. With significant reform efforts and donor support, Afghanistan has maintained macroeconomic stability, implemented important structural reforms, and built policy buffers: a comfortable international reserves position, low debt and inflation, and balanced budget and external current account positions, after grants. Progress has also been made toward achieving social and development objectives, including the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)—Afghanistan is one of 20 fragile and conflict-affected states that have already met one or more MDG targets. Despite this progress, Afghanistan remains one of the poorest countries in the world . Security conditions, political uncertainty, and weak institutions have limited growth and weighed on social outcomes. The national poverty rate was 36 percent in 2008 and the country ranked at the bottom 7 percent of countries in the 2012 UN Human Development Index. Poor governance and corruption remain endemic, and a sizable illicit narcotics sector further distorts incentives. In 2014, Afghanistan faces challenges related to uncertainties about the security and political transitions, which are slowing economic activity . The international military presence is being drawn down and the government is gradually taking over the management of spending previously managed by donors; these outlays will be financed by donors. The outcomes of presidential and provincial elections in April are not clear and a source of uncertainty. Parliamentary elections are scheduled in 2015. The international community has delivered substantial financial support and pledged to continue it over the medium term . At the May 2012 NATO summit in Chicago, Afghanistan’s international partners provided assurances to finance security spending, estimated at $4 billion annually over the following decade, towards which the government is expected to make gradually increasing contributions. At the July 2012 conference in Tokyo, donors agreed to continue their support, pledging $16 billion to finance development through 2015, and to sustain aid at similar levels through 2017. Donors and the government adopted the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework (TMAF)—a set of principles, objectives, and reform commitments to promote aid effectiveness, reform, good governance, and inclusive, sustained growth. Donors indicated that their support would depend on Afghanistan meeting its TMAF commitments. The July 2013 Senior Officials meetings in Kabul reconfirmed donor support as did the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board Meeting held in January 2014. The IMF has been supporting Afghanistan through technical assistance and a three-year, SDR 85 million (52.5 percent of quota) Extended Credit Facility (ECF) arrangement, approved in November 2011 . The authorities’ economic reform program focuses on: INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 6 (i) maintaining macroeconomic stability; (ii) strengthening the financial sector; (iii) improving economic governance; and (iv) moving toward fiscal sustainability. The authorities’ policies have broadly maintained macroeconomic stability. However, after the first program review in June 2012, subsequent reviews were delayed due to missed quantitative targets and slow implementation of structural reforms. The shortfall in budget revenue and delays in structural reform, as well as the limited expected term of the government means a review cannot be completed currently. The ECF arrangement is scheduled to end in November 2014 (Box 1). Staff and the authorities nevertheless maintained a close dialogue on economic policy and structural reform.