to deficiencies in economic governance . Afghanistan improved its World Bank Doing Business 2014 ranking to 164 (out of 189 economies), from an adjusted rank of 170 the previous year, by facilitating business licensing and improving access to credit thanks to a unified collateral registry. Significant challenges remain, though, across many dimensions such as protecting investors, trading across borders, registering property, enforcing contracts, and dealing with construction permits. Corruption is reportedly high, with a rank of 175 out of 177 countries in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index in 2013. Afghanistan scored only 2.7 on the World Bank’s 2012 Country Performance Ratings —a scorecard assessing the policy and institutional development among IDA-eligible countries—about 1.5 standard deviations below the mean of 3.2. Hence, strengthening economic governance has been an important pillar of the Fund’s engagement. Staff and the authorities saw improved governance as critical to raising growth and creating jobs . A business environment conducive to private sector-led growth, a more efficient judicial system, and decisive steps to counter economic crimes would facilitate the entry of new businesses, improve access to finance, bolster investment and construction, help enforce contracts, and ease international trade. Over time, such an environment would reduce the economy’s dependence on donor support and promote regional integration. Measures to improve governance have focused on establishing and enhancing institutions, legal reform, improving transparency and accountability, and capacity building, but progress has been slow . The authorities see improved governance as critical to reduce the economy’s dependence on donor support and to promote regional integration. An economic crimes road map setting out Afghanistan’s economic governance framework was endorsed by cabinet in February 2013. Several laws seeking to improve economic governance—such as the banking, AML/CFT laws, and provisions on governance of state-owned enterprises—are advanced in the legislative process. Staff emphasized that concerted efforts to ensure effective and swift implementation of these laws, as well the economic crimes road map and other governance and transparency recommendations, including those set out in the Independent Monitoring and These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. Page 20 Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Business Environment and Governance Firm-level Business Constraints (Percentage of firms identifying constraints) tax worker skill labor regulation customs electricity tax administration license corruption crime MENAP 2/ OECD World Afghanistan finance court informal competition Changes in Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) (Percentile rank) Firm-level Dispersion in Business Environment 5/ i i s s e n s u b g n o d r o f r e s a i Ease of Doing Business (Percentile rank) 2014 ranking 2010-2014 Improvement Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) 4/ and GDP per capita (log PPP) EM 3/ LIC 1/ MENAP 2/ Afghanistan Higher GDP per capita → Voice and Accountability (Percentile rank) → e l i t n e c r e p G W r e h g H i → e l i t n e c r e p r e h g i H → e l i t n e c r e p G W r e h g i H Sources: World Bank Doing Business Report(2014); World Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators; World Bank Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Low income countries; 2/ Middle East, North Africa, and Pakistan; 3/ Emerging market economies; 4/ Worldwide Governance Indicators include government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption; trend line is based on cross-country regression. 5/ For each country, the number of days required to obtain an operating licence, the distances to the 80th and 20th percentile are calculated, and each bar shows the spread of these differences. Page 21 Evaluation Commission’s (IMEC) report on the Kabul Bank crisis, is of paramount importance. Improved governance, along with macroeconomic stability and a better business environment, would open opportunities for all to take part in economic growth, leading to higher living standards, lower poverty, and improved social outcomes. As a resource-scarce economy, Afghanistan has relied so far on public sector