Financial intermediation needs to become more efficient and broad-based . The authorities wish to build a strong financial sector to increase access to finance, assure safety for depositors, enhance trade finance, and improve intermediation. They are cognizant of the need to improve banking sector profitability. As banking system weaknesses are addressed, the authorities expect that credit availability should increase from its low base, though they recognize that the low private credit reflects the scarcity of profitable and appropriately collateralized lending opportunities and structural challenges. Staff recommended that policies to promote credit should address structural issues rather than interventions aimed at forcing banks to lend. The authorities wish to promote lending to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and agriculture while developing microfinance to support growth and job creation. They wish to increase the types of financial instruments available, including Islamic ones for which they see considerable scope, to promote development of capital markets and the trading of financial products, for use as risk management tools, and to attract investment. To this end, the authorities are finalizing some Islamic banking regulations. Further, DAB is preparing a registry of immovable property collateral and the Supreme Court has recently approved simplified procedures to auction collateral. DAB is also promoting use For the year to July 2015, banks turned in an aggregate loss ($13.6 million) due to large provision expenses and continuing losses of state-owned banks. At end-July 2015, the banking system—comprised twelve licensed commercial banks and three licensed branches of foreign banks, with 197 full-service and 213 limited-service bank branches throughout the country—had total assets of $4.3 billion and deposits of $3.7 billion. Net loans constituted 16.8 percent of total assets and the loan-to-deposit ratio was 19.9 percent. The broad liquidity ratio was at 69.2 percent of total assets (against a minimum requirement of 15 percent). Page 27 of mobile banking to increase financial inclusion and noted that consumer protection is available and consumers have recourse to DAB, the Financial Disputes Resolution Commission, and the courts. Staff welcomed these initiatives, and encouraged greater financial inclusion over the medium term by continuing to promote mobile banking and microfinance lending, bank penetration in rural areas, and financial literacy. The banking sector is undergoing an important restructuring process that is intended to signal a break with the past. Much has been done to strengthen the supervision, regulatory and legislative frameworks, including enhancing on- and off-site supervision, improving information exchange, assertive enforcement, and passage of the banking law that will strengthen bank governance. Also, the restructuring of weak banks continues, in accordance with agreed action plans. Further, the newly-established Bad Debt Commission is facilitating recovery of non- performing loans: participation is mandatory for public banks and voluntary for private banks. Staff praised DAB for this important progress and underscored the need to continue with the reform agenda, that bank restructuring should occur within a sound governance framework, and that ad hoc institutions should have clear sunset clauses to avoid undermining institutions formally mandated for such purposes. Staff and authorities agreed on the need to push ahead with the planned strengthening of vulnerable and weak banks and privatization of New Kabul Bank, implementing vigorously the new banking, AML, and CFT laws, their regulations, and guidelines, and continuing to enhance DAB’s supervision. DAB noted the need to strengthen the performance of some of the state banks. F.