Background The banking system remains stable, well capitalized and liquid. The system-wide capital adequacy ratio is around 16 percent and the liquidity ratio is around 33 percent, well above statutory requirements. Although the Albanian banking system is dominated by foreign banks (with a market share of 86 percent), it is mostly funded by domestic deposits, mitigating the effects of deleveraging compared to regional peers. The level of bank intermediation remains low, with private sector credit at around 35 percent of GDP, compared to 45 percent of GDP in the Western Balkans region. Profitability has been low, but has been recovering since the crisis. Key vulnerabilities stem from high euroization, large exposure to illiquid central government securities, and persistently high NPLs. Credit growth to the private sector is subdued, as banks remain risk-averse given the significant NPL overhang (Figure 5, and Tables 4a and 5). The 2.9 percent decline in private sector credit in 2015 is explained by a 2015 regulation mandating write-offs of loans that have spent more than three years in the “loss” category. However, even after removing the effects of NPL foreign currency lending to unhedged borrowers, would be more significant—a 30 percent depreciation of the lek would lead to an increase in the NPL ratio of the banking system of over 5 percentage points. Page 26 Figure 5. Albania: Financial Sector Developments Banks are well capitalized… Capital Adequacy Ratio (Percent) BoA minimum requirement Source: Bank of Albania. NPLs are elevated but have started falling… CESEE: Non-Performing Loans (Percent of total loans) 2015Q4¹ Post-crisis peak 2008² …and capital buffers are close to their pre-crisis levels. CESEE: Regulatory Capital to Risk Weighted Assets (Percent) 2015Q4¹ 2008² G Z C P 1/ Except for Bulgaria (2014), Czech Republic (2015Q3), Moldova (2015Q3), Romania (2015Q3), and Turkey (2015Q3). 2/ Except for Belarus (2010Q4) and Moldova (2009Q1). Sources: National authorities; IMF Financial Soundness Indicators; and IMF staff estimates. …and they are adequately provisioned. CESEE: Provisions to Gross NPLs (Percent) 2015Q4¹ 2008² G Z C P 1/ Except for Bulgaria (2014), Czech Republic (2015Q3), Moldova (2015Q3), Romania (2015Q3), and Turkey (2015Q3). 2/ Except for Belarus (2010Q4) and Moldova (2009Q1). Sources: National authorities; IMF Financial Soundness Indicators; and IMF staff estimates. P G Z C 1/ Except for Bulgaria (2014), Czech Republic (2015Q3), Moldova (2015Q3), Romania (2015Q3), and Turkey (2015Q3). 2/ Except for Belarus (2010Q4) and Moldova (2009Q1). Sources: National authorities; IMF Financial Soundness Indicators; and IMF staff estimates. However, bank lending remains cautious… …as banks have increased overseas placements. Western Balkans: Credit to Domestic Private Sector (Percent; December 2015) Contribution: Households Contribution: Businesses Total: Year-on-year change Total excl. write-offs: Year-on-year change Private Credit and Foreign Assets and Liabilities (Percent of GDP) (Percent) Credit to the private sector: 12-month moving average (LHS) Foreign assets as share of total assets (RHS) Foreign liabilities as share of total assets (RHS) UVK MKD ALB Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff estimates. MNE BIH SRB Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Page 27 write-offs, credit to the private sector grew by only 2.3 percent in 2015. While demand for credit is weak, difficulties with contract enforcement and collateral execution in the court system also deter new lending. NPLs have declined substantially from their peak of 25 percent in September 2014 but still remain high at 18 percent of all loans in December 2015. Provisions cover 71 percent of gross NPLs. The authorities are implementing a comprehensive strategy to reduce NPLs. The plan integrates and sequences reforms in the areas of supervision, regulatory enforcement, debt restructuring, and insolvency. The authorities have already submitted legal changes to Parliament to better protect financial collateral and to strengthen property rights over real estate, amended regulations to facilitate write-offs and collateral management, and formulated an action plan for handling the 35 largest holders of NPLs (that account for around 50 percent of the NPLs). Going forward, the NPL strategy envisions simplifying and clarifying the bankruptcy law, as well as amending several other pieces of legislation such as the Civil Procedure Code and the Private Bailiff’s Law in order to increase the efficiency of the NPL resolution process (SBs). The BoA has made significant strides in improving its supervisory vigilance. Although Greek banks account for around 13 percent of total assets, the banking system weathered the financial turmoil in Greece last summer with minimal spillovers. The authorities adopted the Basel II framework in 2015 strengthening the banks’ risk management practices. With about 70 percent of assets concentrated in the four largest banks, the authorities have been monitoring closely systemic institutions. The crisis management framework has been improved, including by preparing a new bank resolution law. The BoA also joined the European Banking Authority College in 2015, which will enable better coordination with foreign supervisors. Nonbank supervision has been substantially strengthened. The non-banking sector in Albania is relatively small at around 10 percent of GDP, but has seen rapid growth over the past few years. Investment funds in particular have expanded rapidly, currently accounting for about half of this sector. The low interest rate environment is leading to increased appetite for savings instruments in the non-banking sector. In June 2015, the authorities approved new regulations on liquidity requirements and asset valuation for investment funds. All vacancies on the executive board of the Albanian Financial Supervisory Authority (AFSA) have now been filled, after substantial delays. The presence of only a single investment fund custodian, a small bank, is raising concerns about systemic vulnerabilities, especially given plans to start new investment funds. The non-banking sector consists of investment funds, insurance companies, savings and credit associations, pension funds, and other non-bank financial institutions. Page 28 Policy advice The key to reviving credit is to strengthen banks’ balance sheets and restore their confidence by improving NPL resolution. Speedy and forceful implementation of the authorities’ comprehensive NPL strategy would be critical, in particular in simplifying the legal framework for insolvency and facilitating collateral execution and out-of-court restructuring. The authorities need to continue efforts to strengthen financial supervision and regulation . BoA’s microprudential tools should continue to focus on the fastest-growing and systemically important segments of the banking system, and seek to reduce euroization and the share of unhedged borrowers in foreign currency in the banking system. It should also maintain consistency with international standards and ensure healthy capitalization levels in the banking system by unwinding reduced risk weights designed to encourage moderate credit growth. The central bank has also committed to gradually unwind the recently introduced lower risk weights on Albanian government securities issued in foreign currency to contain euroization risks and align its framework with Basel II. Given the growing presence of investment funds and non-bank financial institutions, there is an urgent need to strengthen AFSA’s capacity and its ability to attract and retain skilled staff . To protect financial stability, AFSA should assess carefully all license applications for new investment funds, and should encourage more competition among investment fund custodians. Authorities’ views The BoA is committed to maintaining its supervisory vigilance to preserve financial stability (MEFP ¶22–23). The central bank will continue to monitor closely individual banks’ resilience to risks, as well as capital and liquidity positions, and will continue to target fast-growing or systemically important banks. The authorities noted the adverse domestic impact of international regulatory reform initiatives which have led to very tight credit standards. They agreed that the changes to capital requirements designed to encourage moderate credit growth are temporary and explained that they plan to repeal them by end-2016. Similarly, the central bank will gradually roll back the lower risk weights on Albanian government securities issued in foreign currency by 2021. The authorities agree on the importance of a speedy implementation of their action plan to reduce NPLs (MEFP ¶24–25). The BoA will continue to actively facilitate out-of-court restructuring of NPLs. The authorities are also committed to strengthening AFSA’s capacity and its ability to attract and retain skilled staff. AFSA will also conduct stress tests and a crisis preparedness exercise for investment fund custodians. Page 29