Background The Bank of Albania (BoA) has been maintaining an accommodative monetary policy stance in line with its inflation-targeting framework (Figure 4). Headline inflation has, however, been running below the 3 percent target against the backdrop of declining food and fuel prices, imported disinflation, and a negative output gap. The exchange rate against the euro has been stable. Core inflation has hovered around zero since 2013 and has turned negative in recent months, partly reflecting the recent pass-through of imported inflation and a decline in retail fuel prices. The BoA has lowered its policy rate by a cumulative 400 basis points since mid-2011 to the current historic low of 1¼ percent. With increased reliance of public borrowing on external sources since late 2015, market liquidity has also increased significantly, creating further downward pressures on domestic T-bill yields. Structural constraints in the financial sector continue to hinder monetary policy. The monetary transmission mechanism is limited by heavy euroization, with foreign currency loans accounting for two thirds of all loans, of which around half remain unhedged. While deposit rates continue to decline steadily, lending rates are falling at a slower pace, reflecting continued risk- aversion by banks still plagued by high NPLs (18 percent of total loans at end-December 2015). Credit growth remains very weak (¶31), although this also reflects weak demand (especially for corporate loans), deleveraging pressures on foreign subsidiaries, and continued difficulties with collateral execution. The BoA plans to maintain its easing bias, and at some stage could consider the use of unconventional policy tools for monetary easing. The authorities are implementing an ambitious agenda to improve governance at the central bank, rebuild its credibility, and strengthen its safeguards and independence. Over the last 18 months, the authorities have taken steps to fill all vacancies in BoA’s top management lineup, resumed normal operations at the Internal Audit Department, and constituted an Audit Committee. The BoA has also prepared its 2015 financial statements in accordance with IFRS, and discussions are underway to align the BoA Law with modern central banking legislation. Page 22 Figure 4. Albania: Inflation and Monetary Developments Inflation has underperformed since 2014… …with core inflation falling below zero in recent months. Inflation (Percent; year-on-year) Headline inflation Core inflation¹ b F 1/ BoA's permanent exclusion measure. Sources: Bank of Albania; Haver Analytics; and INSTAT. …reflecting increased liquidity in the system. Commercial Banks: Reserves at the Central Bank (Billion lek) Lek required FX required Lek excess FX excess Sources: Bank of Albania and IMF staff estimates. …but the exchange rate with the euro has been very stable since late 2009. Nominal Exchange Rate and Foreign Reserves (Billion of Euros) (Lek per Euro) Average Inflation (Percent) Inflation consultation clause: outer band Inflation consultation clause: inner band CPI (average) b F Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff calculations. Treasury bill rates have declined significantly, particularly in recent months… Reference Interest Rates (Percent) Monetary policy rate 3-month T-bill 6-month T-bill 12-month T-bill Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff estimates. Central bank interventions in the FX market were minimal… Official Interventions in the Foreign Exchange Rate Market (Lek per Euro) (Percent) BoA interventions (% of the total market volume; RHS) MoF purchases (% of the total market volume; RHS) Lek-Euro exchange rate (LHS) b F p g b F p g b F Note: BoA auctions for foreign exchange are based on a pre-announced schedule. Sources: Bank of Albania; and Haver Analytics. Swaps with the gov. (LHS) Gross Reserves (LHS) 2% band (RHS) Net Reserves (LHS) Lek-Euro exchange rate (RHS) b F Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff calculations. Page 23 Figure 4. Albania: Inflation and Monetary Developments (concluded) Monetary policy has been accommodative. Monetary Policy Rates (Percent) While interbank rates have closely tracked the policy rate in recent years… Monetary Policy Rate and Interbank Rates (In percent) Spread BoA: Monetary policy rate ECB: Refinancing operation Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff estimates. …lending rates have declined less than deposit rates… New Lending and New Deposit Rates (Percent) Monetary policy rate Lek lending 6-12 months (12-month moving average) Lek deposits 12 months (12-month moving average) Lek lending-deposit spread Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff estimates. Monetary policy transmission is hindered by high euroization. Commercial Banks: Loans (Billion lek) BoA overnight credit rate One-week repo rate Overnight repo rate Monetary policy rate (target) BoA overnight deposit rate v y v y v y v y p Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff estimates. … reflecting the high risk aversion of banks, even compared to the region. Western Balkans: Changes in Lending and Deposit Rates (Percentage points; 2015Q4 relative to 2013Q1) Lending rate Deposit rate MNE ALB MKD BIH UVK SRB Sources: IMF, Internation Financial Statistics; and IMF Staff estimates. There is an increasing tendency towards short-term funding. Deposits by Maturity and Currency (Percent) Contribution of current FX Contribution of current Lek Total (y/y growth) Contribution of time FX Contribution of time Lek FX businesses FX households FX others Lek businesses Lek households Lek others b F p g b F p g b F Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff estimates. Sources: Bank of Albania; and IMF staff estimates. Page 24 Staff assesses the external position as moderately weaker than implied by fundamentals (Annex III). The lek-euro exchange rate has remained very stable over the past six years, despite limited interventions by the central bank. The REER has been broadly stable, appreciating by 3.7 percent in 2015 compared to 2013. International reserves, which rose in 2015 owing to strong donor flows and Eurobond issuance, are deemed adequate based on metrics for floating regimes. Nevertheless, the current account deficit is sizable and the net international investment position (-47 percent of GDP in 2015) has declined rapidly reflecting the high FDI and increasing external public borrowing. The new EBA-Lite and external sustainability models that take into account Albania’s high remittances and FDI suggest a moderate exchange rate overvaluation of around 10 percent. External Sector Assessment Summary Table (in percent, except for elasticity) CA Norm Adjusted Actual CA CA Gap REER Gap EBA-Lite (CA Approach) External Sustainability Approach REER Approach REER elasticity n.a. n.a. n.a. Exchange restrictions. Albania maintained an unapproved exchange restriction under Article XIV of the IMF Articles of Agreement in the form of outstanding balances under inoperative bilateral payment agreements, which were in place before Albania became a Fund member in 1991. These balances relate primarily to debt in nonconvertible and formerly nonconvertible currencies. On February 21, 2015, the Republic of Albania removed two other exchange restrictions and accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 of the Articles of Agreement. The authorities continue their efforts to resolve inoperative balances on bilateral payment agreements, maintained subject to Article VIII, Section 2(a), through regular attempts to contact their counterparts. Policy advice Given the continued disinflationary pressures, persisting with further monetary easing is appropriate. There still remains space under the conventional monetary policy framework for further loosening. Strengthening the credit channel will require structural reforms to improve collateral recovery and lower commercial banks’ risk aversion (MEFP ¶24) such as through amendments in the Bankruptcy Law and Bailiff’s Law as well as improvements in the credit registry. Greater exchange rate flexibility would support the inflation-targeting monetary policy framework, but should be weighed against financial stability risks emanating from unhedged exposures. The The 2014 FSAP estimated that the direct impact of exchange rate devaluation on bank balance sheets would be limited as banks hold a net long position in foreign currency. However, the indirect impact on credit quality, due to (continued) Page 25 BoA should take further steps to rebuild its credibility, safeguard its independence, and improve its operations and governance, including through amendments to the central bank law to strengthen protections for staff and increase operational autonomy. Authorities’ views With inflation significantly below the BoA’s target of 3 percent, monetary easing is expected to continue in the near term (MEFP ¶18-19 and 26). The authorities agree that there is still space for conventional monetary easing through lowering the policy rate, and underscored that any decisions on additional measures will be taken in consultation with Fund staff. The authorities remain concerned that lowering the lek-euro interest rate differential below a certain level could lead to heightened exchange rate volatility, thereby aggravating financial stability risks given the significant unhedged exposures. They agree on the importance of amending the central bank law and have already launched the process, but cautioned that more time might be needed to consult stakeholders and build support. The authorities agreed that there may be some overvaluation in the exchange rate, but stressed that the exchange rate is floating freely and is driven entirely by market forces (MEFP ¶20). They emphasized that interventions in the FX market are small, infrequent, and typically announced months in advance. They consider structural factors and balanced financial flows and entrenched expectations to be the driving factors behind exchange rate stability.