Further modest monetary easing could be employed to support the weak economy, provided inflation and exchange market pressures stay muted. The key to reviving credit is restoring banks’ confidence in lending by reducing NPLs. Page 18 Background The inflation-targeting framework has yielded low and stable inflation, anchoring macroeconomic stability. It has contributed to overcoming various shocks and keeping inflation within the 3±1 percent annual target range, one of the lowest and least volatile in the region. However, inflation in December amounted to 1.9 percent, slightly below the authorities’ target range, and core inflation was 0.3 percent. Monetary easing has not prevented a slowdown in credit to date. With continued economic weakness, the Bank of Albania (BoA) has lowered its policy rate—the one-week reverse repo rate was cut by a cumulative 225 basis points since mid-2011 to 3.0 percent. While lek lending and deposit rates have declined somewhat, credit to the private sector has continued to slow, declining by 2.6 percent (yoy) in November (rates on euro loans have not changed much). The weakness in credit is largely the result of tightened lending standards because of banks’ perception of risks (which has increased with the rise in troubled loans). Financial stability considerations constrain monetary policy. The monetary transmission mechanism is restricted by heavy euroization, with foreign currency loans amounting to two-thirds of all loans. Aggressive monetary easing runs the risk of exerting exchange market pressures, with a fallout on unhedged foreign currency borrowers. Policy advice Further moderate monetary policy easing could help with credit, though currency exposure and loan quality risks should be considered . With inflationary and exchange market pressures remaining muted, additional easing could help borrowers as interest rates on existing loans reset. If that contributes to improving loan servicing, then banks’ risk aversion could also diminish, thereby easing credit supply constraints. However, further monetary easing should be carefully weighed against the risks posed by unhedged foreign currency exposure and high NPLs. The key to accelerating credit is tackling the large stock of NPLs. Further monetary easing, in the context of weak demand (i.e., profitable projects may be scarce) and supply constraints, is unlikely to have a strong impact. A comprehensive approach is therefore needed to reduce NPLs over the medium term (see below). The exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 4) The standard exchange rate assessment points to a slight overvaluation, but the relatively stable FDI, and the imports associated with it, imply that Albania’s current account deficit norm should be higher than that suggested by the standard approaches. Staff believes that the inflation targeting framework and a relatively flexible wage setting process—as indicated by one of the smallest increases in unit labor The BoA uses a mid-corridor approach to implement monetary policy, and holds weekly repo operations for which treasury bills and bonds with remaining maturity of one year or less are eligible. It has a clearly articulated policy on foreign exchange market interventions, and has not transacted to affect the value of the exchange rate since 2009. Page 19 costs (ULC) in the region since 2008 (Figure 6)—should help avoid currency misalignment, in the future. Advancing structural reforms to improve the business environment and expand the export base would improve competitiveness. Exchange restrictions. In addition to the existing exchange restriction arising from balances under inoperative bilateral payment arrangements and maintained under Article XIV of the IMF Articles of Agreement, which remains in place, staff has identified two further exchange restrictions inconsistent with Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3 under the IMF’s Articles. These are as follows: (i) an exchange restriction arising from the requirement for residents and nonresidents to submit a tax certificate that they do not owe any outstanding taxes prior to transferring foreign exchange for certain current transactions including the payment of moderate amounts for amortization of loans, the payment of certain insurance premium, and the transfer of profits and dividends from investments in Albania; and (ii) an exchange restriction arising from the requirement to provide customs clearance documents in respect of advance import payments prior to making payments for unrelated foreign exchange transactions. Since these exchange restrictions are not BoP-relevant, staff does not recommend approval of the temporary retention of these measures. Authorities’ views Low inflation and weak domestic demand provide scope for some further modest easing . The authorities agree, however, that the impact is likely to be constrained by impaired corporate balance sheets, and increased risk aversion by banks. They are also aware of the risks of aggressive monetary easing, particularly on the exchange rate. NPL reduction is critical for credit growth. They concur with staff that credit supply rather than demand is currently the binding constraint. They expressed concern that some banks may choose not to re-lend the improved loan repayments associated with arrears clearance, and instead opt to repatriate funds to parent banks. The authorities agreed that macroprudential measures to boost credit have been largely ineffective. Staff exchange rate assessment is broadly appropriate . In the authorities’ view, the observed exchange rate stability in recent years reflects a lack of strong market forces to bring a major adjustment of the currency. They are firmly committed to a free floating exchange rate regime, and their intention is to continue to refrain from market interventions. They expect Albania’s FDI potential (as underlined by recent gas pipeline and hydropower projects) and ongoing import substitution to improve external balances over the medium run. They believe Albania’s current international reserves cover level appropriately reflects the elevated external risks the country faces. The authorities have been notified of the new findings on exchange restrictions; they are committed to removing one (item (i) above), and are discussing removal of the other. The reduction in NPLs following the commencement of arrears clearance could take time as banks typically require clients to maintain an improved repayment record before the associated loan is re-classified as performing. According to the BoA, the NPL ratio could eventually decline by 5–6 percentage points. Page 20