Vulnerabilities stem from profitability pressures and potential deleveraging in a system dominated by subsidiaries of foreign banks. High euroization and strong financial links between banks and the government further complicate financial management. A comprehensive long term approach to the NPL problem and steadfast implementation of FSAP mission recommendations are essential. Background The risk of direct inward financial spillovers is contained. Despite a large share of foreign banks (from Austria, Greece, Italy, and Turkey), the banking system has been resilient to eurozone stress so far, largely because it relies almost exclusively on domestic deposits—the loan-to-deposit ratio is merely 50 percent. Banks’ strong solvency ratios and stringent provisioning rules have also contributed to banking system stability. High financial euroization is a risk Although net open positions in euro are small, risks arise because: (i) half of loans in foreign currency are unhedged; (ii) there are large maturity mismatches; and (iii) credit risk for euro loans may be underpriced. The BoA has a limited capacity to act as lender of last resort in foreign currency. Profitability pressures from high NPLs highlight deleveraging risks. The NPL increase is driven by both cyclical and structural factors, notably government arrears, the adverse tax treatment of write-offs, and a long and unpredictable legal collateral execution process. High NPL-related provisioning is hurting bank profits and puts pressure on capitalization. With parent banks facing their own problems, deleveraging risks (e.g., through loan shedding and shrinking balance sheets) are likely to remain elevated as long as NPLs remain high. Strong link between banks and the sovereign is a concern . Financial interdependence represents systemic risks for banks, which are vulnerable to changes in the value of longer-term debt securities, and for the government, which depends on regular rollover of debt by banks. The recent emergence of investment funds is a sign of financial deepening, but also points to gaps in supervisory infrastructure. The lack of a functioning secondary market for government securities constrains investment funds’ ability to manage liquidity risks, given their holdings of mostly illiquid government bonds, thereby increasing systemic liquidity risks. While most lending is secured by collateral, the BoA does not allow its value to be subtracted from loan-loss provisions for prudential purposes. Until recently, tax write-offs of loans were not recognized until a final court decision indicated that all legal recovery efforts were exhausted. Recent directives have asked the tax authorities to recognize write-offs 360 days after legal collection efforts are initiated, though this directive does not grandfather the 2008–10 write-offs. Page 21 Policy advice Strengthen financial stability by implementing recent FSAP mission recommendations The authorities should prepare an action plan to guide reforms in financial market supervision, financial market deepening, contingency planning, and the AML/CFT enforcement framework. Box 5 summarizes the findings and recommendations of the recent FSAP mission. A comprehensive and forceful approach is needed to address NPLs . Resolving the tax treatment for loan write-offs and improving collateral execution have been on the reform agenda for a while and require forceful action, particularly as the NPL problem has worsened. Review and reforms of competition policy and bankruptcy laws would help. The clearance of government arrears may also contribute to NPL reduction. Ensure that risks associated with euroization are internalized . The authorities could increase the liquidity requirement on foreign currency deposits, and ensure that banks require higher loan-to-value ratios, if appropriate. New unhedged foreign currency lending could be disallowed. Robust consumer education and protection of borrowers is important. Continue efforts to lengthen maturities and diversify government debt holders . The best way to reduce rollover risks is to bring down public debt. Nevertheless, debt management also has a role to play in minimizing risks from systemic links between banks and the sovereign. Take steps to strengthen nonbank supervision . The Albanian Financial Regulatory Authority (AFSA) should be reformed to ensure its financial and operational independence. Regulation and supervision of investment funds should be beefed up by introducing liquidity and capital adequacy requirements, as well as mark-to-market accounting in calculating unit values. In addition, investment funds should ensure that they have adequate liquidity contingency arrangements with banks, and transparently disclose to clients that they are not covered by deposit insurance. Authorities’ views FSAP recommendations would be implemented . The authorities agree that doing so will further solidify financial sector stability and boost confidence in the banking system. They plan to proceed with a strategy to implement FSAP recommendations in the coming months. Tangible actions will attempt to address the NPL problem. The authorities are cognizant of the risks associated with high NPLs and weak profitability, and how they adversely affect perceptions among parent banks and regulators, and encourage deleveraging. Immediate actions would include, resolving the adverse tax treatment of loan write-offs and ensuring legal collateral The accompanying Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) report provides additional details on systemic risks and recommendations on enhancing the system’s resilience to shocks and contagion. Page 22 execution is facilitated (MEFP ¶32–33 and MEFP Table 2). The authorities will also undertake: i) corporate restructuring, including a review of competition policy and modifications in bankruptcy laws, ii) a monitoring system for corporate and household indebtedness, and iii) a revamped framework of loan restructuring and collateral repossession. They are aware that arrears clearance would help lower outstanding contractor obligations to banks and hence improve credit risk. Financial euroization is structural . Euroization is a reflection of Albania’s strong links to the euro area, and in this regard, significant foreign currency deposits provide a cushion. At the same time, monetary policy decisions are planned carefully to avoid exchange market pressures which could adversely impact bank balance sheets, given unhedged foreign currency lending. Systemic risks posed by the recent emergence of investment funds will be addressed. The law governing the AFSA operations will be amended and investment fund regulatory framework would be revised to introduce liquidity, capital and valuation aspects (MEFP ¶37, and MEFP Table 2). Strengthening regulation and supervision of the nonbanking system will require time.