Growth is expected to rebound in 2014 (Table 1). Real growth could be around 2 percent, spurred by dissipation of uncertainties related to elections, change of government and bureaucracy and future policies, and a confidence boost from reducing underlying risks notably in the fiscal area, tackling of high NPLs, monetary easing, and arrears clearance. However, external demand would remain sluggish and remittances continue to weaken (given close links to Greece and Italy). The current account deficit will increase to 10 percent of GDP (compared to 9 in 2013) on account of release of import compression, but the gross reserves cover is expected to remain near 4½ months of imports. The medium–term outlook is generally favorable . Economic growth is expected to gradually reach about 4½ percent over the medium term, though still remaining below the more than 5½ percent achieved in the 4 years prior to the crisis, because of weak partner growth. Output will remain below its potential by 2.1 percent in 2014, but the gap will narrow thereafter to close in 2019. The recovery will be driven by improved confidence stemming from implementation of policies to correct domestic imbalances and ambitious structural reforms to boost total factor productivity. EU accession-related reforms would improve Albania’s prospects as an investment destination. Investment and growth will also be aided by significant energy-related investments— the recently–agreed Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP), and foreign investment in new hydropower production, amounting in total to about 15 percent of 2013 GDP (the fiscal impact of these projects has not been factored in because of lack of data). Underlying external imbalances would improve modestly, and the reserves cover would remain comfortable at about 4 months of imports. There are significant downside risks to the outlook. A protracted period of slower European growth could spill over through trade and remittances channels, hurting growth and external and financial sector stability. Insufficient fiscal consolidation effort could undermine fragile investor confidence and increase rollover risks, while lack of progress on structural reforms could lead to a protracted period of slower growth (see RAM, Annex I).