Albania is gradually recovering from a protracted growth slowdown. The country weathered the global financial crisis well, but economic difficulties in key Euro Area trading partners (Italy and Greece) and stagnant bank lending have weighed on economic activity in the post-crisis period. A gradual recovery is now underway, supported by prudent policies and a gradual restoration of confidence. CESEE: Real GDP Growth (Percent) Min/Max CESEE Median CESEE Albania 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database. Reforms are progressing, backed by the ruling coalition’s strong legislative majority. Since the approval of the Extended Arrangement in early 2014, the authorities have implemented ambitious and difficult structural reforms, including in pensions and the electricity sector. A substantial stock of central government arrears was cleared. An ambitious fiscal consolidation is underway and public debt is projected to have peaked at 72 percent of GDP in 2015. These achievements have allowed a successful Eurobond issuance and a recent credit rating upgrade. However, other reforms critical for improving the business environment—including those related to property rights, NPL resolution, the judiciary, and governance—are lagging (text table and Box 1). Implementation of the Recommendations from the 2014 Article IV Consultation Recommendation Fiscal sustainability Implement sizable fiscal adjustment in order to reduce public debt. Clear large stock of arrears and prevent the accumulation of new ones. Strengthen tax administration. Implement pension reform. Reform the disability benefit system. Implement local government reform. Improve public debt management. Monetary policy and financial stability Gradually ease monetary policy. Remove exchange restrictions and accept the obligations of Article VIII. Implement FSAP recommendations to strengthen financial stability. Tackle comprehensively and forcefully the large stock of NPLs. Ensure that risks associated with euroization are internalized. Take steps to strengthen nonbank supervision. Structural reform Improve the investment climate. Implement comprehensive electricity sector reform. Implement public administration reform. Improve quality of statistics and strengthen INSTAT’s independence. Progress Moderate Good Moderate Good Moderate Moderate Good Good Good Good Insufficient Moderate Moderate Insufficient Good Moderate Moderate Page 10 The main policy priority is to continue lowering fiscal vulnerabilities while advancing structural reforms to achieve sustainable growth. Given prospects of lower commodity prices for the foreseeable future and a slow recovery in Europe, Albania will need to reorient towards a more diversified and open growth model. Faster implementation of structural reforms will be critical to strengthen competitiveness, improve the investment climate, and catalyze stronger growth. The ongoing Extended Arrangement and prospective negotiations for EU accession provide a strong impetus to advance these reforms.