Fiscal consolidation should aim at reducing the public debt ratio. This will require tackling the root causes of high deficits through significant tax and expenditure policy measures and extensive PFM and revenue reforms. Background High indebtedness is a risk to macroeconomic stability. Albania’s public debt, which has reached unprecedented levels, partly because of the accumulation of unpaid bills and arrears, is prone to risks (Annex II). Short-term financing needs are high and budget financing rollover relies on Page 14 banks with already sizable holdings of public debt. High debt could be a significant drag on medium-term growth. Fiscal deficits have been driven up by structural factors and policy slippages. The 2007–08 tax reform—which substantially lowered corporate income tax rates, ostensibly to enhance competitiveness—reduced revenue intake from the corporate income tax (CIT). Excise and property tax rates and other fees have been unchanged for years and, an increase in the personal income tax (PIT) exemption threshold earlier in 2013—now close to the average private sector wage—has further exacerbated the problem. Optimistic revenue assumptions—which in the event forced the government to postpone capital spending—and spending units’ use of multi-year commitments without due regard to budget appropriations, have resulted in arrears in excess of 5 percent of GDP. Overall public spending-GDP ratio is still relatively low (Figure 3), and sizeable spending rigidities— wages, transfers, and interest claim more than ¾ of revenues—limit the scope for spending cuts. Pensions are a heavy fiscal burden . The social insurance system deficit has risen to 5 percent of GDP in 2013, because of contribution rate cuts (in 2006 and 2009), and recent unfunded increases in benefits. There is an incentive for high-middle income workers to underreport earnings, or to avoid the system altogether. While worker contributions vary with income, and the highest can be as much as five times the lowest contribution, the highest benefits are at most twice the minimum benefit; this discourages high and middle income earners to contribute and report full earnings. The system also subsidizes the rural self-employed at the expense of the rest (the minimum pension is about 50 percent of average rural income, compared to 35 percent in urban areas). Without reforms the pension system will come under increasing pressure as Albania’s young population ages in coming decades. Policy advice Commit to appropriate medium and long–term public debt targets to anchor expectations. The authorities should aim to reduce public debt to about 60 percent of GDP over the medium term and 40 percent of GDP over the longer term to mitigate risks and strengthen the economy’s resilience to shocks. Staff recommends that the debt target be adopted by Parliament inscribed in the organic budget law and announced publicly. The authorities should also improve the credibility of the debt target by adopting a binding medium-term budget framework in the near future. Sizable fiscal adjustment is needed to achieve the medium term debt target. However, excessive fiscal consolidation, in the context of current weak cyclical conditions, could damage growth and adversely impact debt sustainability and social outcomes. Therefore, staff recommends The PIT and CIT rates were lowered to 10 percent (flat) from five income dependent PIT rates (5, 10, 15, 25, and 30 percent), and a 20 percent flat tax on profits. Intake from these taxes fell from 3.7 percent of GDP in 2007 to 3.4 in Fiscal multiplier estimates for Albania are in the range of 0.4–0.7, with a multiplier of 0.5 used in the DSA (Annex II). Given the large balance sheet improvement expected from arrears clearance, staff estimates the arrears clearance (continued) Page 15 that government policies should aim to begin lowering the debt-GDP ratio in 2015. Doing so in 2014, or even maintaining it at the 2013 level, would necessitate an excessively large adjustment (3 percent of GDP in the structural primary balance) that would be quite harmful for growth. Over the medium term, further improvement in the structural balance of about 3.8 percent will be needed to reduce debt to near 60 percent of GDP by 2019. Even with this adjustment, the medium-term debt profile is subject to risks, including adverse growth shocks. Implement tax and spending policy reforms to tackle the root causes of high fiscal deficits. The relatively low level of spending and limits on the extent to which expenditures can be trimmed suggest the burden of adjustment should fall largely on revenues. Revenue measures, some spending restraint and pension reform should form a feasible and credible basis for the needed adjustment (Box 3). To soften the impact of the adjustment on vulnerable groups, staff support targeted relief measures. Clear arrears in a comprehensive and transparent fashion. The government needs to reestablish credibility by acknowledging outstanding arrears through a diligent process, and undertaking clearance impartially and transparently. Arrears clearance should be based on a strategy approved and endorsed by the highest level and made publically available. Amounts cleared should be made public on a regular basis and an external auditor should be employed to ensure the transparency and integrity of the arrears verification and clearance process. The process of documenting and vetting arrears, if implemented appropriately, could take time. Credible measures should underpin the prevention of arrears in future. Tangible and transparent steps are needed to stem the recurrence of unpaid bills and arrears. While rationalizing revenue projections at budget time would help, clear actions to improve reporting of procurement multiplier to be in the range of 0.1–0.2, about one quarter to one third of the regular multiplier. With credit constraints and the negative output gap, risks are weighted towards multipliers being higher than estimated, which argues against an excessively rapid adjustment. As the package of fiscal measures beyond 2014 have yet to be specified, Table 2 lists them under “unidentified measures.” They will be chosen in due course from the menu listed in Box 3. Risks to the Baseline: Public Debt and Growth Shocks (Percent of GDP) 5th-25th 25th-50th 50th-75th 75th-95th Baseline 2013201420152016201720182019New measures …1.11.21.31.10.90.6Overall balance-6.2-6.7-4.8-3.4-1.3-0.50.0Primary balance-2.9-3.4-0.70.82.83.43.2Structural primary balance-2.4-0.50.81.92.63.13.2Change in SPB-1.91.91.21.10.70.50.1Public debt70.571.771.268.865.461.457.1 Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections. The change in the structural primary balance exceeds the size of new measures primarily because of the weak cyclical position of the economy and tax administration improvements. Fiscal consolidation, 2013-19 Page 16 and introduction of multiyear commitment limits would be key. Key ministries should regularly report if current obligations are being met as they fall due. Spending discipline will also ensure capital projects do not suffer from funding problems. Implement extensive spending reforms . The approvals of investment projects should be consistent with budget space. The financial planning of local governments should be enhanced to prevent fiscal risks. Making budgetary transfers contingent upon implementation of revenue and PFM reforms at the local level should reduce fiscal risks while improving accountability and the quality of services. External borrowing by local governments should be discouraged, given weak institutional capacity. The existing disability benefit system is also in need of reform. Strengthening tax administration is critical. The authorities should ensure compliance discipline is maintained and steps are taken to build capacity at the General Directorate. Developing a corporate strategy to guide the medium and long term reforms would help. More immediately care should be taken to ensure proper adoption the new IT system. The system of VAT refunds should be streamlined by making the Treasury responsible for making payments. Prepare a pension reform strategy in consultation with the World Bank and IMF. Pension Reform commission should be established as a first step to devise the reform strategy. Key reform priorities should include: i) raising the retirement age for men and women; ii) upgrading the social transfers system and divorcing it from social insurance (which should be available to only those who contribute); iii) aligning benefit and contribution ceilings; and iv) limiting the size of pension benefits, by keeping increases in public sector wages and pension bills in line with inflation. Staff underscores the importance of up-front announcements to anchor expectations. Manage debt rollover risks. Although bank demand for government paper has been strong in recent months—largely a reflection of their aversion to the high perceived risk of lending to the private sector—this could change in the future. Efforts to lengthen the maturity structure of debt and deepen public debt market by diversifying securities holders and steps to help develop the secondary market should therefore continue. Authorities’ views The authorities commit to achieving medium term fiscal and debt sustainability. They view a medium-term debt-GDP target of 60 percent as feasible, but are cautious about adopting an explicit target of 40 percent by 2024 because such commitment would be difficult to maintain over two electoral cycles. Similarly, a comprehensive medium-term fiscal framework or fiscal rule, while highly desirable, would require time to prepare. The authorities agree with the path of medium term fiscal adjustment recommended by staff and the level of adjustment in 2014. But they underscore the need for flexibility in adhering to the deficit targets in case economic conditions worsen. Tax policy reform will underpin the adjustment effort. Under the approved 2014 budget, there is an increase in the rates of CIT, fuel circulation tax and property tax and imposition of various excise duties and road tolls (Box 3). The personal income tax has been made progressive. While Page 17 cognizant of the need for tangible measures, the authorities caution that sizable tax rate increases have limits, given the country’s narrow tax base and large informal sector. Paying arrears in a transparent and equitable manner is a priority. The authorities agree that re-establishing the credibility of government is critical and will adopt a strategy that includes: i) stocktaking and verification of claims; ii) clear and transparent criteria for the order of settling claims; and iii) scheduling and monitoring of the payment process (MEFP ¶22). An external auditor will conduct risk-based audits of payments made. To release the liquidity drag on business activity, the authorities prefer an accelerated pace of arrears payment, but are also cognizant of the need for due diligence and ensuring the process is properly managed—they expect the amount of arrears cleared to not exceed 0.9 percent of GDP by June and 2.6 percent by December (MEFP ¶23). Credible measures will be taken to prevent future arrears. The authorities will introduce processes to control future commitments, enhance the reporting and approval procedures for procurement orders, and ensure that central government does not accumulate new arrears (MEFP ¶23–27 and MEFP Tables 1 and 2). A quarterly survey of the main ministries will monitor if new obligations are being met. The authorities request continued IMF technical assistance to strengthen PFM capacity in general and arrears prevention in particular. Clear steps will be taken to strengthen tax administration. The authorities will develop a new corporate strategy for medium and long term capacity building in tax administration. They will take tangible steps to improve compliance and reduce fraud, including in tax refunds, and expect to complete the introduction of new IT system by year end (MEFP ¶14–15). IMF technical assistance is expected to continue to play a key role. Pension reform is a key medium term priority. The authorities are working closely with the World Bank on design and implementation of pension reform, though they also caution about potential political and social difficulties. They will establish a pension reform commission soon, and after undertaking extensive stakeholder consultation, will complete a reform strategy by end-2014. Rollover risks will remain manageable. While the authorities acknowledge that the current strong demand for government paper could be temporary, they are of the view that the decline in public debt under the program will help keep yields under control and rollover manageable.