An ambitious reform effort is needed to unlock structural constraints and boost investment and medium term growth. Reforms that aid in progress towards EU accession would help. Background Lack of reforms has affected the country’s growth potential. While macroeconomic imbalances and recent policy slippages have affected confidence in the economy, a sustained deceleration of structural reforms has coincided with declining potential growth in recent years. It has also prevented a broadening of the productive base, reduction in economic informality, and diversification of exports. Albania’s business environment is weak. Attracting investment is key to boosting growth, with FDI leading to the transfer of technology, greater innovation, higher productivity, and opportunities for high-wage employment. Despite the relatively flexible labor market and low statutory tax rates, the investment climate has suffered from poor property rights, corruption, weak contract enforcement, an inefficient judicial system and weak access to finance, particularly for SMEs (Figure 6). Structural problems in the electricity sector are a source of fiscal and growth risks. Albania’s hydroelectric endowment should enable it to be self-sufficient. However, poor collection, electricity theft, and low quality grid affect the sector’s viability. As a result, the state producer has either run down the reservoir in dry years or imported electricity, either by issuing state guarantees Focusing efforts on bank balance sheet clean up (e.g., sale of troubled assets to asset management companies) without corporate balance sheet restructuring may address supply but not demand factors. Page 23 (that are often called), or direct budget support. The lack of payment discipline by consumers has also discouraged investment in new generation capacity. Public administration is inefficient and overly politicized . Many civil service appointments, even for mid-level positions, are based on political affiliation. Political transitions often undermine civil administration because of high turnover—the recent experience with the deterioration in tax administration during the change of government is telling. The EU has made public administration efficiency improvements a critical measure for progress on accession. Weak local government structures pose fiscal risks. Local government revenues have been on a declining trend (down to 0.7 percent of GDP in 2013, from 1.4 in 2005), and PFM is weak, lacks transparency and suffers from corruption. Smaller local governments face capacity constraints. Coordination weakness between local and central government adds to fiscal risks. National statistics are problematic. Annual national accounts data are based on limited information and data on an expenditure basis have not been published since 2007, while quarterly GDP statistics are subject to significant revisions. Fund TA has focused on developing capacity in national accounts statistics compilation. Policy advice Move ahead forcefully with targeted reforms to improve the investment climate. Improving the legal framework and judicial effectiveness related to land titling and property rights should be a priority. Less arbitrary tax enforcement would also improve investor confidence. Expanding access to finance would help ease liquidity constraints, including for SMEs. Initiate energy reform to address both liquidity risks and long term sustainability. The authorities should develop a comprehensive reform plan for the electricity sector, in consultation with the World Bank, to reduce current fiscal risk as well as improve sustainability over the medium term, including through attracting investment. Measures to mitigate near-term fiscal risks—such as limiting subsidized prices to low-income consumers and opening price setting for commercial users to market competition—should be adopted quickly. Actions should also be taken to lower power losses (including through preventing electricity thefts), reform market structure for electricity supply, restructure main participants’ balance sheets, and attract private capital into distribution to expand capacity. Public administration reform should proceed promptly, underpinned by a new civil service reform law . While public sector employment in Albania is not excessive by international standards, reforms have to focus on making it efficient and professional, and improving the delivery of services to the public. A civil service law should provide the legal context to undertaking any future reforms, which would also benefit from close cooperation with the EU and the World Bank. Page 24 Develop a local government reform agenda to address fiscal risks. Improved transparency and accountability and enhancing capacity should reduce fiscal risks while improving governance and the quality of services at the local level. More immediately, fuller reporting of local governments’ new procurement orders would be helpful. The EU and bilateral donors’ current support to create larger and more efficient local government units should continue. Improve quality of statistics. Continued improvements in national accounts and balance of payments statistics, as well as strengthening the independence of the statistical agency, are essential for improved surveillance and policymaking. Staff urged the authorities to set up an inter- government data-exchange scheme for macroeconomic statistics to improve data quality. Authorities’ views Prompt implementation of ambitious reforms is a high priority. The government plans to address not only the obvious business environment constraints, but also the more politically difficult problems of property rights and judicial enforcement. Progress in these areas is critical for achieving sustained growth and signaling commitment to EU accession (MEFP ¶40–42). Energy sector problems are complex and multifaceted, but require prompt attention. A newly established task force working directly under the Prime Minister is expected to take the lead in sorting out inter-company debts and short-term investment needs to curb network losses, and handling negotiations with the energy distribution parent company. The authorities will finalize a reform action plan by early 2014, in collaboration with the World Bank. They are also committed to taking near term measures to address the sector’s liquidity risks, including through enforcement of bill payments and tariff reforms (MEFP section D). The efficiency of public administration will be enhanced . Reducing the size of public administration is a priority. The authorities also believe that employment flexibility and ability to offer higher salaries to attract key staff will also contribute to improving the quality of public w G G K Compensation to employees / total government expenditure Compensation to employess / GDP General Government Wage Bills (in percent; 2013)Sources: WEO and staff calculation w G General Government Employment (as percent of labor force)Sources: ILO, WEO, and staff calculation Page 25 administration. They commit to hiring new staff in compliance with a forthcoming civil service law (MEFP ¶17). Addressing local government problems is important for lowering fiscal risks, and ensuring good governance. In the near term they will issue instructions to local governments to report all new procurement orders to the ministry of finance (MEFP Table 2). The authorities are also committed to addressing local government weakness in a comprehensive manner over the medium term. Administrative and territorial reform, which would be completed before the 2015 local elections, should help tackle concerns about collection of revenues, human resource management, financial control, and transparency. A fractious political climate could constrain progress. Existing statistics weaknesses will be addressed. While insufficient resources have played a role, the politicization of the statistical agency has also been detrimental. The authorities underscored their determination to create a statistical agency that is professional and transparent. In this regard, they are committed to using IMF TA to further improve statistics.