Economic growth is gradually strengthening while inflationary pressures are subdued (Figure 1) . GDP growth accelerated to 2.6 percent in 2015, from 2.0 percent in 2014, driven by higher electricity production due to exceptional rainfall, a pickup in tourism, and a recovery in construction. Nevertheless, growth remains below potential. Headline inflation is very low (0.3 percent in March 2016), reflecting low food and fuel prices as well as fading base effects from the impact of the floods last year, while core inflation remains negative reflecting imported disinflation and domestic slack. The current account deficit narrowed temporarily in 2015 but remains large (Figure 2). Despite reduced oil exports, a one-off reduction in electricity imports (due to improved hydropower conditions) and strong tourism receipts helped narrow the trade deficit. Remittances, accounting for 5.7 percent of GDP, have remained broadly stable despite weak growth in the main source countries (Greece and Italy). Consequently, the current account deficit declined from 12.9 percent of GDP in 2014 to 11.1 percent of GDP in 2015. However, risks from the large external deficit are limited, as more than three quarters of the current account deficit are financed by foreign direct investment. External financing remains ample, primarily due to FDI inflows but also increased external borrowing by the public sector. FDI is mainly concentrated in the oil sector and has slowed down recently with falling crude prices. However, FDI remains strong at around 8–9 percent of GDP on the back of large energy projects, such as the Trans Adriatic Pipeline and the Statkraft/Devoll hydropower project. With a Eurobond issuance in November 2015, gross FX reserves climbed to over six months of imports at end-2015. Fiscal performance is broadly on track. The 2015 fiscal deficit target was met with a comfortable margin (Tables 2a–2b and Figure 3), despite persistent tax revenue shortfalls. Fiscal revenues underperformed by 0.6 percentage point of GDP, due to lower-than-projected imports of fuel and tobacco products in Q4. However, an across-the-board underexecution of recurrent expenditure (0.8 percent of GDP), including further savings on public support to the electricity sector, allowed the authorities to meet their overall budget target comfortably. In the first two months of 2016, the fiscal deficit has been lower than projected: fiscal revenues came in as expected, but the authorities underexecuted their budget, by nearly 0.5 percent of GDP. Page 11 Figure 1. Albania: Background and Outlook The economic recovery continues… Real GDP: Expenditures (Percent) Consumption private Gross capital formation Imports GDP growth Consumption public Exports Stat. discr. & inventories …led by electricity, construction, and services, whose strength offset the contraction in the oil sector. Albania: Contributions to Growth (Percent) Mining Industry (excl. electricity) Construction Real GDP growth Agriculture Electricity Services Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff estimates. External growth drivers have been weak in the past few years… …while domestic demand is picking up, albeit gradually. CESEE: Trading Partners' Growth (Percent) 2011-15 average 2016-20 average projections Z C P G g v C 1/ Weighted by imports. Albania's main trading partners are: Italy (55%), Kosovo (7%), Greece (6%), Turkey (5%), China (4%), Spain (3%), and Germany (3%). Source: IMF staff estimates. Albania: Retail Sales Volume and Economic Sentiment Economic sentiment index (RHS; historical average=100) Retail sales (LHS; index, 2010=100; seasonally adjusted) Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff calculations. The output gap is still negative… …adding to deflationary pressures from overseas. Albania: Inflation (Percent; year-on-year) Albania: CPI (LHS) World: Nonfuel commodity price index (RHS) Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15 Jan-16 Feb-16 Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, Direction of Trade Database; and INSTAT. Page 12 Figure 2. Albania: External Sector Developments The current account deficit narrowed in 2015 but remains high. The improvement reflected strong tourism receipts and a lower energy import bill… External Balance (Percent of GDP) Albania: Current account balance Regional avg. of CA balances 1/ Albania: Trade balance Regional avg. of trade balances 1/ The regional average covers Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia. Sources: Albanian authorities; WEO database; and IMF staff calculations. …which offset the decline in exports, mainly in the oil sector. Export Growth (Percent) Food, beverages, and tobacco Minerals, fuels, and electricity Textiles Machinery and vehicles Metals and related products Others Total exports Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff calculations. Greece and Italy remain the major source countries for remittances. Decomposition of Remittances by Source Country (Percent; 2014) DEU GRC ITA CHE Other EU Others Import Growth (Percent) Food, beverages, and tobacco Textiles Metals and related products Minerals, fuels, and electricity Machinery and vehicles Others Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff calculations. International reserves are ample. Reserve Adequacy (Percent of GDP) Reserves 3 months of imports 20 percent of M2 New reserve adequacy metric (EUR) 1/ 1/ Composed of 30% of short-term external debt, 10% of other portfolio liabilities, 5% of M2, and 5% of exports. Short-term debt excludes deposits due to data limitations. Sources: Albanian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Despite the turmoil in Greece, remittances remained stable, while FDI inflows have surged since late 2013. FDI and Remittances (Percent of GDP; 4-quarter moving average) FDI Remittances ALB BIH HRV UVK MKD MNE SRB Sources: World Bank, Migration and Remittances data; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. Page 13