Reforms Background The high level of public debt poses a key macroeconomic risk (Figure 3 and Annex II). Public debt stood at around 72 percent of GDP in 2015, among the highest in the region. Although the recent issuance of a five-year Eurobond and the increase in donor financing have alleviated somewhat rollover risks in the near term, financing needs of 23 percent of GDP are still sizable, with an average maturity of the public debt stock below two years and substantial reliance on domestic banks with significant sovereign exposure. Moreover, high debt constrains fiscal policy and is a potential drag on medium-term growth. To address this risk, a sizable fiscal consolidation is underway (text table). Under the program, the structural primary balance is expected to improve by 2.4 percent of potential GDP in 2014– 16. The overall deficit (excluding arrears clearance) is expected to improve from 5.2 percent of GDP in 2013 to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2016, bringing the primary balance into a small surplus (0.3 percent of GDP). The authorities are firmly committed to lowering public debt. However, a fiscal framework to anchor the fiscal target and operationalize the fiscal consolidation path is yet to be finalized. Change in Overall Balance (Percent of GDP) Change in 2014 Change in 2015 Change in 2016 Cumulative change over 2014-16 Level in 2016 ALB¹ HRV SRB POL UVK HUN MKD BIH BGR ROM TUR 1/ Arrears clearance in 2014-2015. Sources: IMF, WEO database; and IMF staff projections for Albania. Page 16 Figure 3. Albania: Fiscal Developments Fiscal imbalances have stopped deteriorating… …but debt levels are still high relative to other CESEE countries. Fiscal Outcomes (Percent of GDP) Primary balance (LHS) Primary balance excl. arrears payments (LHS) Overall balance (LHS) Overall balance excl. arrears payments (LHS) Public debt (RHS) 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Source: Albanian Ministr y of Finance. High gross financing needs are a key vulnerability. Gross Financing Needs (Percent of GDP) Average CESEE y g C b d k d P m y k v g v g z b Source: IMF staff estimates. CESEE Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Average 2008 Average 2015 P Z C G Source: IMF, WEO database. The public sector is relatively small. CESEE: Total Revenue and Primary Spending (Percent of GDP; average 2008-15) Total revenue Primary spending ALB MKD BGR ROM SVK POL CZE SRB SVN HRV HUN MNE BIH Sources: IMF, WEO database; and IMF staff calculations. Tax efficiency is low due to numerous exemptions and problems with tax compliance… …which, together with lower than expected oil prices and nominal growth, led to revenue shortfalls in 2015. Western Balkans: Tax Rate and Efficiency Ratios (Percent; 2014) Tax rate (RHS) Efficiency ratio (LHS) VAT CIT 1/ Tax efficiency is the ratio of tax revenue (in percent of GDP) over the tax rate. Source: IMF staff estimates. Performance of Revenues During 2015 (Percent) Share of total revenue (excl. grants) Annual change (y-o-y) Deviation from initial budget x C x P h m C v G x Source: Albanian Ministry of Finance. Page 17 Fiscal Consolidation, 2013-2019 (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified) Act. Act. EBS/ Act. EBS/ Proj. EBS/ Proj. EBS/ Proj. EBS/ Proj. Revenues Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Grants Expenditures Current expenditure (incl. net lending) of which : Energy sector spending 1/ Capital expenditure Other spending Unidentified measures Unidentified measures (cumulative) Overall balance Overall balance excl. arrears clearance Primary balance Primary balance excl. arrears clearance Change in the structural primary balance Public debt Domestic debt Foreign debt Memo items: Nominal GDP (in billions of leks) Public debt (in billions of leks) 1,530 1,532 1,080 1,079 1,637 1,632 1,098 1,105 1,760 1,749 1,102 1,121 1,891 1,879 1,084 1,122 Sources: Albanian authorities; IMF staff estimates and projections. 1/ Energy spending includes energy sector subsidies, compensation for the poor, and policy net lending. Prior to 2014, energy subsidies were not recorded in the fiscal accounts, but handled through extra-budgetary guarantees and debt-financed policy net lending. The revenue-based fiscal consolidation is made difficult by poor tax design and weaknesses in revenue administration and compliance. While tax rates are in line with neighboring countries, fiscal revenues are low in Albania relative to the region, reflecting low efficiency of the country’s tax system. Policies such as the 2014 switch to a progressive personal income tax with a high exemption and the 2016 exemption of all small businesses from income tax are eroding tax efficiency. Furthermore, tax compliance is costly and burdensome (Figure 7) contributing to low tax yields and a difficult business environment. For example, a preliminary estimate of the compliance gap for VAT suggests that Albania loses between 34 and 39 percent of potential VAT revenues on account of low compliance, compared to an average estimate of 15 percent of potential VAT revenues for the EU countries. Recognizing these challenges, the government launched a large-scale effort to tackle tax evasion, non-compliance, and informality which has yielded substantial increases in the number of registered employees and small businesses. More recently, the campaign has changed focus to target high-risk, high-value segments and harness modern compliance risk management tools. See Selected Issues Paper , “Tax Policy, Evasion, and Informality in Albania.” Page 18 Policy advice Continued fiscal consolidation is crucial to reduce the risks to debt sustainability and foster Albania’s growth potential. Staff projections show that lowering public debt below 60 percent of GDP by 2019 would require measures of around 1 percent of GDP each year. To provide a fiscal anchor, the authorities need to adopt a quantitative fiscal rule with an embedded automatic correction mechanism. The credibility of the medium-term budget would be strengthened by using independent macroeconomic forecasts and assessments, which could be provided by an independent fiscal council. In addition, debt management should further lengthen the maturity of public debt and diversify the investor base, thereby lowering the risks arising from elevated financing needs. The fiscal adjustment should continue to target mainly the revenue side to make room for more productive spending . The level of public spending is low by regional standards (30.5 percent of GDP in 2015), and areas such as health, education, and infrastructure demand more resources. In addition, the authorities are already implementing ambitious reforms of the pension and social assistance systems. The consolidation strategy therefore has to focus on broadening the tax base and on strengthening compliance and revenue administration. Furthermore, to address compliance and evasion issues, policies need to focus on strengthening the cooperation between the tax and customs departments, enhancing performance monitoring of tax administration, and improving policy design to boost tax compliance. Revenue measures to broaden the tax base and strengthen efficiency are crucial. The main headline tax rates in Albania are above the Balkan average, but the tax thresholds are also comparatively higher. There is scope to lower the zero-tax threshold for personal income tax. The authorities should accelerate work on a fiscal cadastre (SB), in order to support the goal of introducing a valuation-based property tax by end-2017. Towards this end, they will start developing a valuation formula and methodology (SB). Eliminating import tax exemptions would also reduce the risks of misreporting and facilitate proper monitoring of the VAT supply chain. The authorities need to refrain from granting any further tax exemptions or preferential tax treatments, and should strive to remove existing ones. To support this effort, an annual survey of tax expenditures is being prepared (SB). Budgetary discipline and persistence with structural fiscal reforms is needed to reduce fiscal risks. 2016 budget (MEFP ¶8-9): To protect the 2016 primary surplus target from a renewed slide in global oil prices, the authorities are committed to maintaining strict budgetary discipline, ensuring savings in current expenditure, and strengthening the revenue base and tax compliance. They have also committed to taking additional measures, if needed, to meet the target. The authorities remain prudent in projecting the revenue gains from the campaign against tax evasion, non-compliance, and informality. Large unbudgeted windfalls due to disputed tax payments will not be counted as revenue under the program until the tax dispute is Page 19 resolved. On the expenditure side, the authorities intend to restrain the central government’s wage bill and reap further dividends from the electricity sector reform. Electricity sector (MEFP ¶10): Fiscal support to the power sector (in the form of public guarantees, policy net lending, and targeted transfers to the poor) continues to weigh on public finances, while weather-related risks remain high. The authorities are committed to gradually unwind public support for the sector by 2020, while addressing its infrastructure gap. To cement the gains from the power sector reform (see ¶45 and ¶47 below), further steadfast implementation would be critical, as will be strict monitoring of the investment plans of the electricity SOEs. Revenue administration (MEFP ¶12–15): Timely implementation of the tax administration’s corporate strategy is needed. The plan includes a function-based restructuring of the General Directorate of Taxes (GDT) headquarters as well as the adoption of modern compliance risk management tools (SBs). The tax and customs administrations have to improve information- sharing, coordinate more closely on risk assessment, and maintain the momentum of the campaign against informality. Public financial management (MEFP ¶11 and 16–17): Strengthening public investment management and boosting the credibility of the authorities’ Medium-Term Budget Framework (MTBF) are crucial in order to reduce the risk of unfunded commitments and arrears. Unbudgeted commitments on existing infrastructure projects continue to exceed the MTBF envelope. The appraisal, selection, management, and evaluation of public investment projects have been fragmented across the government, although efforts are underway to streamline them under the MoF. In line with the recommendations from the recent Public Investment Management Assessment, the public investment management process needs to be further strengthened. This includes operationalizing the public investment unit at the MOF to strengthen the appraisal process for large projects, integrating various public investment projects into the budget cycle, and reviewing and streamlining project classification to reduce fragmentation. Specifically, the authorities should develop transparent criteria based on which they should review all outstanding unbudgeted investment projects and identify low-priority projects that will be cancelled. Public Private Partnerships (MEFP ¶11): The authorities are keen to pursue new PPP projects which pose quasi-fiscal risks. All PPP proposals would need to be subject to a detailed feasibility study and cost-benefit analysis and be evaluated by the Ministry of Finance before approval. The impact of any new PPPs on the fiscal accounts and debt statistics should be reflected transparently and in line with international norms. Efforts are underway to launch a public register of all active PPP projects and to publish summaries of all PPP contracts. Fiscal decentralization and arrears clearance and prevention (MEFP ¶11): Fiscal decentralization has been relatively limited in Albania, with local government spending currently accounting for only 11 percent of total general government spending. Tight controls on local government borrowing have limited debt to 0.1 percent of GDP. However, the authorities are Page 20 pursuing a fiscal decentralization strategy which involves devolution of certain functions and new financing sources for local governments. In this context, the review of the local public finance law should be expedited to improve reporting and monitoring and mitigate fiscal risks. A recent survey of local government finances uncovered potential arrears of around 0.6 percent of GDP as of mid-2015. Once audited and verified, these claims should be promptly resolved, with external auditors ensuring the integrity of the process. To prevent recurrence of new central government arrears, multi-year commitment limits and the rollout of the new treasury IT system (to 15 budget institutions accounting for 84 percent of the budget and one local government) should be implemented urgently (SB) and subsequently expanded to cover other local government units as well. The authorities will also continue to publish the regular survey of new central government arrears (SB), and gradually expand its coverage. Authorities’ views The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to gradually reduce the public debt (MEFP ¶7). While cognizant of the risks that excessive consolidation may have on the nascent recovery and the political difficulties of maintaining the pace of consolidation, the authorities remain committed to lowering the public debt-to-GDP ratio below 60 percent by 2019, in line with the program. They support a consolidation strategy based on broadening the tax base, improving revenue compliance and administration, and implementing structural reforms that yield fiscal savings over time. There is a strong political consensus on maintaining a small government with a low tax burden. The authorities are thus wary of raising tax rates which they believe would be counterproductive and further undermine compliance. They are cautious about adopting a stringent fiscal rule that limits flexibility to respond to shocks and are also skeptical about the value added of a fiscal council given a limited pool of available expertise. The authorities are addressing potential risks by strengthening the fiscal framework and institutional capacity . The authorities have recently submitted to Parliament amendments to the Organic Budget Law in order to strengthen the MTBF and allow for multi-year commitment limits. The amendments also seek to strengthen the MoF’s role in the assessment of PPP proposals and to better integrate PPPs into the budgetary process. The authorities nevertheless noted that the key challenge arises from implementation risks. They highlighted that clearance of central government arrears has been completed ahead of schedule. Regarding the emerging legacy stock of local government arrears, the authorities argued that early estimates of the stock are unverified. To mitigate moral hazard risks, they emphasized that they will ensure that local governments deal with arrears using their own resources. The local government unit at MoF will also start preparing quarterly surveys of local government arrears (SB). Page 21