Background Structural reforms to improve the business environment are critical for strengthening Albania’s competitiveness (Figures 6–7). Albania’s rankings in the Doing Business survey are lagging behind regional peers. As key challenges to competitiveness, cross-country surveys point to (i) critical infrastructure gaps that constrain trade and raise the cost of business, (ii) widespread informality that leads to low investment and productivity, (iii) complex tax procedures that increase the burden on businesses, (iv) financial underdevelopment with extremely limited access to equity financing constraining growth, and (v) an inefficient judiciary system that does not protect property rights adequately and hampers the rule of law. More broadly, weak institutions and poor governance are significant constraints to improving the investment climate. Despite relatively favorable demographics, skills shortages remain a key structural challenge (Figure 8). Albania’s population is relatively young compared to European peers. Furthermore, labor supply has been increasing with decelerating emigration, increased migration from rural to urban areas, and a gradual increase in labor force participation rates. However, youth unemployment has been climbing up reaching 33 percent at end-2014, with the difference between the youth and the headline unemployment rate increasing from 6 percentage points in 2007 to 15 percentage points in 2014. This reflects gaps in the education system which have contributed to shortages of skilled labor. The lack of skilled workers is more severe in the tradable sectors ― manufacturing and tourism ― than in nontradable sectors, such as construction and retail trade. Indicators of external competitiveness also suggest underlying weaknesses (Figure 9). Flexible labor markets have helped maintain low unit labor costs. However, labor productivity gains have virtually stalled as investment remains constrained by shortages of skilled labor and a weak business environment. The export base remains very narrow and commodity exports (mostly oil) are exposed to volatile global prices. The market share of non-oil exports has seen little growth. These are concentrated in low value-added sectors (such as textiles and footwear), which are exposed to competition from textile hubs in low-income countries with cheaper labor. The exchange rate is estimated to be moderately overvalued, thus undermining competitiveness (¶25). Persistence with electricity sector reform has started to yield impressive results. These include sustained increases in bill collections, reductions in distribution losses, and stronger finances of the state-owned electricity companies. Arrears to the private sector by electricity SOEs have been cleared. Despite these achievements, service interruptions are still a frequent occurrence. See Selected Issues Paper , “External Competitiveness.” Page 30 Figure 6. Albania: Business Environment Business environment indicators lag behind the region… …particularly in enforcing contracts, registering property, getting electricity, and paying taxes. Doing Business Indicator (Higher score means improvement) ALB Western Balkans (excl. ALB) NMS Baltics Sources: Doing Business (2016); and IMF staff calculations. Infrastructure gaps increase the cost of business… Infrastructure Quality (2015, 1=worst and 7=best) Median for new EU member states Z C Source: Global Competitiveness Report (2015-16). G P Business Environment, Ranking ALB 1/ Western Balkans (excl. ALB) Starting a Business Resolving Insolvency Enforcing Contracts NMS Baltics Dealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity Trading Across Borders Registering Property Paying Taxes Getting Credit Protecting Minority Investors 1/ 2016 data for "Dealing with Construction Permits" for Albania are not available. 2015 data are used instead. Sources: Doing Business (2016); and IMF staff calculations. …and informality is also a challenge. Informality: Firms Competing Against Unregistered Firms (Percent; average 2007-2013) Median for new EU member states G Sources: World Bank, Business Enterprise Survey; and IMF staff calculations. P Z C Financial underdevelopment constrains growth. Financial Market Development Indicators (Higher number = better) Availability of financial services Albania Western Balkans EM Affordability of financial services Financial market development The authorities are pursuing an ambitious reform in the electricity sector, but service interruptions remain high. Electricty Blackouts, 2014 System average interruption duration index (hours; LHS) System average interruption frequency index (number; RHS) Ease of access to loans Financing through local equity market G P Z C ) ( ) ( Sources: Global Competitiveness Report (2015-16); and IMF staff calculations. Sources: OShEE; and World Bank, Doing Business Indicators. Page 31 Figure 7. Albania: Governance and Public Financial Management Institutional quality remains low… …with the rule of law and control of corruption being the two areas where the governance gap is the widest. Institutional Quality Scores (1=worst, 7=best) Albania CESEE median Source: Global Competitiveness Report (2015-16). The judicial system lacks independence and efficiency, and does not protect property rights adequately. Judicial System and Property Rights Protection (1=worst, 7=best) Judicial independence Efficiency of legal framework in settling disputes Property rights POL ROM MNE MKD HRV BIH ALB SRB Source: Global Competitiveness Report (2015-16). …as are other areas of public fiscal management, including the budgetary framework… Governance Indicators (Percentile rank; 2014) ALB LIC EM OECD Government effectiveness Regulatory quality Rule of law Control of corruption Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators; and IMF staff calculations. Tax administration is in need of major improvement… Administrative Efficiency in Paying Taxes Albania Central Europe and Central Asia OECD Total tax rate (percent of Hours spent paying Tax payments per year profit) taxes per year 1/ 1/ Each unit in the chart corresponds to 10 hours. Sources: Doing Business (2016); and IMF staff calculations. for corporates …and public investment management. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (Corresponding PEFA scores: A=3; B+=2.5; B=2; C+=1.5; C=1; D+=0.5; D=0) Albania Ukraine Macedonia Belarus Moldova Serbia Montenegro f y b d C g d b h v h p m C y p d p f f v f f x f m y p m f m f g p g d b d y f m y p g d b Public Investment Efficiency Index (Higher score = more efficient) Appraisal Selection Managing Evaluation Overall index MDA BLR SRB UKR MKD TUR UVK ALB MNE Sources: PEFA program reports and staff calculations. Source: IMF Working Paper WP/11/37. m f p Page 32 Figure 8. Demography and the Labor Market The population has been shrinking due to emigration, but the pace has decelerated in recent years. As in the rest of CESEE, the population is aging, while still being younger than in most other CESEE countries. Population and Net Migration (Millions of inhabitants) (Percent of population) Albania net migration (RHS) Albania population (LHS) Median CESEE net migration (RHS) Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators; and IMF staff estimates. The labor force participation rate is low, partly due to high remittances, but has been gradually rising. Labor Force Participation Rate (Percent) 2015¹ Z C G P 1/ 2015 or latest available. Sources: INSTAT; International Labour Organization database; and IMF staff estimates. Dependency Ratios (Percent of working age population) Old: Albania Young: Albania Old: EU new member states Young: EU new member states 1/ Old dependency ratio = population 65+ years / population 15-65 years. 2/ Young dependency ratio = population 0-15 years / population 15-65 years. Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators. Unemployment remains high and has risen rapidly since 2011, especially among the young… Unemployment Rate (Percent) Youth (age 15-29 years) Total (age 15-64 years) Source: INSTAT. …which reflects gaps in the educational system contributing to skill shortages. The minimum wage is relatively high and likely to be binding for a significant share of young workers. How Much of an Obstacle is an Inadequately Educated Wokforce? (Percent of firms, weighed by number of employees; 2007-2013) Minor Moderate Major Very severe b W ¹ k b v 1/ Excludes Albania. Sources: World Bank, Enterprise Surveys; and IMF staff estimates. v g z d g Minimum Wage (Percent of GDP per capita; 2014) Sources: Haver Analytics; OECD; IMF, WEO database; and IMF staff estimates. X Z C P G P P F C G G Page 33 Figure 9. Albania: Export Competitiveness The real exchange rate has been appreciating recently, mostly due to higher inflation relative to trading partners. Despite a slowdown in labor productivity growth, real unit labor costs have fallen, as wages have declined… Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Macedonia Serbia Average for selected CESEE countries 1/ REER (2010=100) Jul-06 Jan-08 Jul-09 Jan-05 1/ Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Romania. Source: IMF, Information Notice System. Jan-11 Jan-14 Jul-12 Jan-16 Jul-15 …particularly in the private sector, while minimum wages have grown steadily. Real Wages (Thousands of 2010 Lek per month) Minimum wage Public sector average Public and private formal sector average Real Unit Labor Cost, Real Wages, and Productivity (2010=100) Real unit labor cost Real average wage Productivity 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Sources: Haver Analytics; OECD; IMF, WEO database; and IMF staff estimates. Albania has thus maintained its cost competitiveness, with unit labor costs among the lowest in CESEE. Unit Labor Cost (Percent of the CESEE median; 2014 ) Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff estimates. Z C P G Sources: Haver Analytics; INSTAT; OECD; and IMF staff estimates. Exports are mainly concentrated in oil, metals, and textiles and footwear. The world market share of oil exports has been growing, while that of non-oil exports has been more stable. Albania: Exports of Goods (Percent of GDP) Textiles and footware Base metals and related articles Others Mineral products Leather and related articles Machinery Food, beverages, and tobacco 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Sources: INSTAT; and IMF staff estimates. Albania's Share in the World Market (Percent) Textiles and footwear Oil exports Others Sources: INSTAT; World Bank, WITS; and IMF staff estimates. Page 34 Policy advice Further structural reforms to improve the business environment would be critical for strengthening Albania’s competitiveness and catalyzing stronger growth. The focus needs to be on reforms crucial for improving the business climate, including property rights and the judiciary. Efforts to establish the legal cadastre for property registration should be expedited, in order to strengthen property rights, a key impediment to investment. Progress in judicial reform should be guided by the recommendations of the Venice Commission. Albania also needs to sustain the fight against informality, simplify tax collection procedures, and improve governance. Finally, diversification of exports beyond commodities and low value-added textiles will be important for sustainable growth, and would require additional investment in education and infrastructure. Electricity sector reforms focusing on further deregulation and improved corporate governance would improve energy supply and lower the cost of doing business. In advancing reforms, the focus should be on further liberalizing the electricity market, investing prudently in meters and grid infrastructure, and strengthening corporate governance in the sector, including through greater financial transparency. Authorities’ views While the authorities acknowledge the importance of further structural reforms, they also pointed to the accomplishments of the past few years. Reforms in higher education and vocational training have started tackling the education gap. The new Strategic Investment Law is introducing fast-track procedures for businesses, including a one-stop shop to help attract FDI by streamlining the entry process. VAT refunds have been simplified and accelerated, and the ongoing campaign against tax evasion, non-compliance, and informality is trying to level the playing field for law-abiding businesses. The authorities are determined to sustain the momentum of the electricity sector reform (MEFP ¶27-28). The 2015 power sector law sets in place a schedule for moving all medium-voltage customers out of the regulated tariff structure by end-2017, beginning with 35kV customers by July 2016 and 20 kV customers by end-2016 (SBs). On completion, the share of deregulated consumption would increase from 13 to 33 percent of the total energy consumed. The authorities are also developing a power exchange and pursuing integration with the electricity markets of neighboring countries. The authorities will continue to prepare a quarterly survey of the arrears of the electricity sector to the private sector (SB), and will monitor the SOEs’ operations on a monthly basis to ensure financial discipline. Finally, they will target improvements in corporate governance in the sector, including by moving forward with an advisory services contract for the distribution company and by publishing quarterly financial statements for the generation, transmission, and distribution SOEs (SB). The Venice Commission is an advisory body of the Council of Europe composed of independent experts in the field of constitutional law. Page 35