The near-term outlook remains broadly unchanged from the combined 5 th and 6 th reviews under the Extended Arrangement: 2016 GDP growth is projected at 3.4 percent, up from 2.6 percent in 2015. A reduction in oil production due to the declining global price will be mostly offset by a recovery in construction as the moratorium on construction permits was recently removed. Furthermore, favorable weather conditions are projected to boost electricity generation, while increased disposable incomes from the drop in fuel retail prices will shore up consumption. Inflation will remain subdued due to a persistent negative output gap and supply shocks to food and fuel prices. The headline inflation projection in 2016 has been downgraded from 2.5 percent in the last staff report to 2.2 percent. Nevertheless inflation is projected to gradually rise, based on strengthening domestic demand. Page 14 The current account deficit is projected to increase to around 13 percent of GDP in both 2016 and 2017 (Tables 3a – 3b). Imports are expected to pick up with increased foreign direct investment in large energy-related projects. Export growth will continue to decline given the terms of trade shock and slowing global demand. The medium-term outlook remains favorable, supported by ongoing FDI, a recovery in the euro area, and continued reforms towards EU accession: Growth is expected to rise to around 4 percent over the medium term, down by about half a Labor contribution TFP contribution Growth Accounting (Percent) Human capital contribution Capital contribution Total growth percentage point from the medium term growth projected in the 2014 Article IV Consultation, but in line with peers in the region and the projected recovery in major trading partners. The revision also reflects lower investment in the oil sector and slower-than-expected implementation of some growth-enhancing reforms, including those related to governance, property rights, and the judiciary. The main growth drivers would be physical capital accumulation and productivity improvements, due to continued high FDI and structural reforms to improve the investment climate as Albania advances through the EU accession process (text chart). Ongoing FDI in the hydropower sector will boost energy supply, a major bottleneck for business growth. Relatively favorable demographics, a flexible labor market, and declining emigration will also support an increased growth contribution from labor (Figure 8). Source: IMF Staff estimates. Inflation will pick up gradually as domestic demand recovers and the output gap narrows, reaching Bank of Albania’s inflation target of 3 percent in 2018. The current account deficit will narrow over the medium term, as FDI in large import-intensive energy-related projects tails off, and exports in the energy and services sectors pick up and offset gradually declining remittances. External financing will continue to be dominated by FDI and official financing. Reserve cover is expected to stabilize at around 4-4½ months of imports. The balance of risks to the outlook is on the downside (Annex I). Political tensions ahead of the 2017 general election could hinder the implementation of structural reforms. A further drop in oil prices could damage fiscal revenues and growth, by forcing a scale-back in investment and production in the domestic oil sector. While direct spillover channels from emerging economies The recorded current account deficit overstates external imbalances because of sizable errors and omissions (around 2–3 percent of GDP). Most of these are probably unrecorded private remittances. See Selected Issues Paper , “Potential Growth and Output In Albania.” Page 15 are limited, renewed turbulence in Greece or weak growth in Italy could spill over to Albania and test the banking sector or the authorities’ perseverance with fiscal adjustment and structural reforms. Erratic rainfall could affect electricity generation as in the past, with power shortages damaging growth and expensive electricity imports posing quasi-fiscal risks. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s outlook and assessment of risks (MEFP ¶3 – 4). However, they emphasized that the governing coalition remains stable and is fully determined to continue implementing reforms. While acknowledging the negative impact of lower energy prices, they noted that risks may be mitigated by the recent acquisition of the main domestic oil producer by a larger foreign company which would allow it to expand operations. Regarding risks to the financial sector, they noted that significant contingency planning has already taken place and banks are insulated from shocks by their substantial capital and liquidity buffers.