Growth was sustained in 2015 while inflation picked up. After a decade of contraction, hydrocarbon production increased slightly last year (0.4 percent), while nonhydrocarbon growth was steady. Overall growth edged higher from 3.8 percent to 3.9 percent. Average inflation exceeded the central objective of the Bank of Algeria (BA), likely driven by supply effects and the depreciation of the dinar (Box 1). The unemployment rate increased from 10.6 percent in September 2014 to 11.2 percent in September 2015. It remains particularly high among the youth (29.9 percent) and women (16.6 percent). The budget deficit reached a record high in 2015 due to the collapse in hydrocarbon revenues and a significant fiscal expansion. The overall budget deficit reached an all-time high of 16.4 percent of GDP. Lower oil prices translated into a 30 percent decline in hydrocarbon revenues, while spending grew by 10.2 percent, driven by a surge in capital spending. The deficit was mainly financed by drawings from the Fonds de Régulation des Recettes (FRR), Algeria’s oil saving fund, which declined to 12.3 percent of GDP from 25.6 percent in 2014. The current account deficit also widened significantly, but foreign reserves remained at comfortable levels. The current account deficit widened to 16.2 percent of GDP in 2015 from 4.4 percent in 2014, as hydrocarbon exports fell almost by half. Gross inflows of foreign direct investment remained weak at 1 percent of GDP. Foreign exchange reserves declined by nearly US$35 billion but remain substantial, equal to 2½ years of imports or 833 percent of the Fund’s Page 10 metric to assess reserve adequacy (ARA metric). External debt stood at 1.8 percent of GDP at end- The real effective exchange rate depreciated but remains significantly overvalued. Despite a 25 percent depreciation of the dinar against the dollar, the nominal effective exchange rate depreciated by only 6.7 percent in 2015, owing to the depreciation of other trading partners' currencies. The real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciated by 4.3 percent, as the nominal depreciation was partly offset by an increase in Algeria's prices relative to those in its trading partners. The REER remains significantly overvalued, hurting Algeria's competitiveness (Annex III). Broad money growth slowed, driven by a decline in net foreign assets. Credit to the economy expanded by 16.1 percent in 2015. However, broad money growth slowed sharply to 0.5 percent from 14.4 percent in 2014, largely due to the decline in net foreign assets, and despite liquidity injections resulting from the government’s drawdown of the FRR to finance the fiscal deficit. Bank deposits declined, partly due to the government’s purchase of a majority stake in a major telecom company. On aggregate, the banking sector remained well capitalized and profitable, but liquidity tightened. According to preliminary figures, the overall capital-adequacy ratio was 17 percent at end-2015 compared to 16 percent in 2014. Bank profitability improved in 2015, with an aggregate return on assets of 2.2 percent. The ratio of gross non-performing loans (NPL) to total loans, which had been on a declining trend thanks in part to growth in credit, edged higher to around 9.5 percent at end-2015. However, the net NPL ratio was 3.6 percent owing to high provisioning levels (around 61 percent on aggregate). Liquidity in the banking system contracted sharply due to the impact of lower oil prices on bank deposits and to rapid growth in credit to the public sector (partly used to finance imports). On aggregate, 27 percent of bank assets were liquid at end-2015 (compared to 38 percent at end-2014), sufficient to cover almost two-thirds of their short- term liabilities. A new constitution includes provisions to foster greater transparency, better governance, and a more market-based economy . The new constitution, adopted in February 2016, makes a number of changes aimed at strengthening democracy and promoting a more market-based economy. Achieving a diversified economy and fighting corruption become explicit objectives. Freedom of trade and investment is recognized, and the government is to “strive to improve the business climate.” Monopolies and unfair competition are prohibited. On the political side, the constitution re-introduces two-term limits on the presidency (lifted in 2008). Page 11 Box 1. Algeria: Inflation Developments in 2015 Headline inflation stood at 4.8 percent on average at end-2015. Year-on-year inflation accelerated in the second quarter, largely driven by higher food prices (including regulated food prices) and products with high import content. However, during the second half of the year, year-on-year food inflation was more volatile and slowed sharply toward the end of the year, while year-on-year imported goods inflation accelerated. Overall, the effects of the depreciation of the dinar on imported prices, likely combined with some market failure effects (related to inadequate market infrastructure and the presence of oligopolies), kept average headline inflation above the central bank’s 4 percent central target. Headline Inflation (Seasonally adjusted) Food Price Index (Seasonally adjusted, weight: 43.1 percent) Import Price Index (Seasonally adjusted, weight: 26.1 percent) Administered Food Price Index (Seasonally adjusted, weight: 12.5 percent) Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 12 Figure 1. Algeria: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators The hydrocarbon sector rebounded as new fields came on stream, while nonhydrocarbon growth was steady. Inflation picked up in 2015, mainly driven by non-food items during the second half of the year. The current account balance continued to deteriorate as hydrocarbon exports fell. Stronger growth in the agricultural sector helped offset weaker activity in the construction and services sectors. Both the nominal and real effective exchange rates weakened for most of 2015. Domestic hydrocarbon consumption continued to grow rapidly, weighing on exports. Production Exports Consumption (RHS) Hydrocarbon Production, Consumption, and Exports (Millions of barrels) Source: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. -4-2024681012Jan-12Jul-12Jan-13Jul-13Jan-14Jul-14Jan-15Jul-15Jan-16 Fresh food OtherSources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. CPI Inflation (Contribution to year-on-year growth rate) One-year rolling average rate Nonhydrocarbon Hydrocarbon GDPSources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Hydrocarbon and Nonhydrocarbon Growth (Percent) Agriculture Industry Construction and public works Non government services Government services Other Sources of Nonhydrocarbon Growth (In percent)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Exports (US$ bn) Imports (US$ bn) Current account (RHS, % of GDP) Current Account Nominal Real Effective Exchange Rate (Jan 2012=100) Source: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 13 Despite large spending cuts, the fiscal deficit is projected to The nonhydrocarbon deficit, however, is projected to narrow improve only marginally in 2016 as hydrocarbon revenues fall. significantly in 2016. Figure 2. Algeria: Fiscal Indicators Current spending as percent of GDP is expected to decline… … financed increasingly by nonhydrocarbon revenues. The oil savings fund is expected to reach its statutory floor this The breakeven oil price is expected to decline in 2016, driven year. by a narrowing of the nonhydrocarbon deficit. Hydrocarbon revenue Nonhydrocarbon revenue Current spending Capital spending Overall fiscal balance (RHS) Overall Fiscal Balance (In percent of GDP, 2011–16)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. NH revenue Expenditure Nonhydrocarbon balance (RHS) Nonhydrocarbon Fiscal Balance (In percent of NHGDP)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Other Subsidies and transfers Wages and salariesSources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Current Spending (Percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP) Share of Nonhydrocarbon Revenue to Current Spending (Percent)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. NH deficit Share of government revenue Export volume Other Breakeven price Change in the Fiscal Breakeven Price (Contribution in percent) DA billion Percent of GDP (RHS) Oil Fund (Stock) Page 14 Figure 3. Algeria: Monetary Indicators The BA continued to mop up excess liquidity in 2015 but at Government bond yields entered into the BA’s interest rate a slower pace, reflecting tighter liquidity conditions. corridor amid tighter liquidity conditions. A decline in net foreign assets contributed to a sharp Bank deposits declined, partly due to the government’s deceleration in broad money growth. purchase of a majority stake in a telecom company. The collapse in oil prices led to a decline in excess liquidity. Financial services remain underdeveloped. Deposit auctions Marginal deposit facility Required reserves Total (percent of M2, RHS) Liquidity Management (Liquidity management in DZD bn and in percent of M2) Currency in circulation Transferable deposits Other deposits M2 M2 Growth and Determinants (In percent)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 800100012001400Jan-12Jul-12Jan-13Jul-13Jan-14Jul-14Jan-15Jul-15 Excess Liquidity (Billions of dinars)Sources: Algerian authorities. Deposit auctions (reprise de liquidité) Deposit facility (facilité marginale de dépôt) Discount rate (lending up to 6 months, renewable up to 3 years) Average t-bill rate Interest Rates (In percent) NFA NCG Credit to the public sector Credit to the private sector Other credit OIN Money Contribution to M2 Growth (In percent) Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15