Algeria’s external position has weakened in recent years, exposing risks to external sustainability under a no-policy-change scenario. Simulations show that, under current policies, long-term external sustainability is compromised, as the net international investment position is projected to turn negative when oil production ends and would later exceed 100 percent of GDP. While fiscal consolidation and an appropriate exchange rate policy would help, staff and the authorities agreed on the need to accelerate export growth through a two-pronged approach of diversifying the export base and preserving hydrocarbon exports. Wide-ranging reforms are needed to spur export diversification, which is critical to ensuring external sustainability and reducing vulnerability to oil price shocks. Available information suggests that oil resources will be depleted by the early 2030s, and gas by the mid- 2050. Yet with a nonhydrocarbon export-to-import cover ratio below 2 percent, Algeria’s dependence on hydrocarbon exports is among the highest in oil-exporting countries. Nonhydrocarbon export capacities therefore urgently need to be expanded to cover the country’s future imports. Policies should focus on maintaining economic stability and improving competitiveness Macroeconomic policy should avoid real exchange rate overvaluation, strengthen the profitability of domestic production, and support exports. Public spending should be directed toward productivity-enhancing sectors, such as education and infrastructure, while salary increases should be kept in line with productivity gains. Diversification requires trade and FDI opennes s. Trade openness supports diversification through the lower cost of inputs, the incorporation of technical progress through imports, and competition. Staff welcomed the authorities’ announced resolve to accelerate WTO accession, and advised increasing the number of free trade agreements to improve the country’s access to foreign markets. In the meantime, staff underscored that trade restriction measures, such as import or export licenses, should be avoided because they introduce distortions in the economy. Staff reiterated its recommendation that the requirement of a minimum 51 percent Algerian ownership in foreign investments should be eliminated or at least limited to strategic sectors. The ongoing reform of the investment code is an opportunity to repeal this provision and give the government more flexibility in defining limits on foreign shareholding. While the authorities broadly agreed with staff recommendations, they prefer a gradual approach to liberalizing trade and easing FDI restrictions. Reforms are needed to create a more export-friendly business climate. In addition to the constraints faced by entrepreneurs in launching and operating a business, exporters face high trade costs, pervasive foreign exchange controls, and limits to their ability to invest overseas in support of exports. Staff recommended eliminating or relaxing these constraints and implementing an export promotion strategy aimed at developing capacities in areas where Algeria has significant development potential. Page 18 Energy policy needs to support growth of hydrocarbon exports. This entails implementing reforms aimed at reversing the decline in production and containing domestic consumption. A more attractive environment for investment in the hydrocarbon sector is needed to achieve faster, sustained growth in production. Staff expects the downward trend that has marked hydrocarbon production for the past eight years to start reversing in 2014. Production should increase moderately over the medium term as new projects come on line and gas production fully recovers from the 2013 attack on the In Amenas gas plant. However, a more robust recovery would require a significant contribution from foreign investment, particularly because Algeria plans to explore and develop its offshore and unconventional assets. More investment in the hydrocarbon sector will also help extend the time horizon for hydrocarbon resources and boost production and exports. Against the background of yet another disappointing round of exploration tenders, staff encouraged the authorities to continue implementing reforms to improve Algeria’s attractiveness to FDI in the energy sector and to promote exploration, especially in the currently challenging context of lower oil prices. The authorities plan to assess the results of the recent bid round and launch a new bid round soon, with the hope of attracting more investors. The rapid growth in domestic consumption, which weighs on the country’s export capacity, needs to be contained. A gradual phasing-out of implicit subsidies for hydrocarbon products and electricity is needed to slow down the growth of domestic consumption, including smuggling- related leaks. Staff also encouraged the authorities to design and implement a strategy to increase energy efficiency and develop alternative energy sources, including renewable energy, where Algeria has considerable potential.