FINANCIAL STABILITY The surge in public spending prior to 2013 weakened the fiscal position and put upward pressure on the equilibrium real effective exchange rate, raising Dutch-disease concerns. The fiscal consolidation undertaken in 2013, combined with monetary policy tightening and measures to ease supply constraints and foster competition, has helped to slow inflation. A mix of fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies should aim to pursue disinflation, put the fiscal stance on a sustainable path, and improve the economy's external competitiveness. Staff and the authorities agreed on the need for the central bank to continue to guard against inflation . Although inflation has declined substantially, the recent surge of credit to the economy could fuel domestic demand, thereby generating inflationary pressures. Staff recommended that the BA maintain a prudent monetary policy while introducing measures that will bolster its effectiveness over time (Box 4). Ongoing efforts to mop up excess liquidity would benefit from increased coordination with the Ministry of Finance. The BA raised the reserve requirement rate from 11 percent to 12 percent in May 2013, and maintained the volume of liquidity absorption. The BA should be prepared to tighten the monetary stance to avoid any further buildup of excess banking liquidity. The need to absorb liquidity would be significantly reduced if the financing need for the budget was covered by debt issuance rather than by drawings on the FRR. Such a shift would need to be accompanied by enhanced liquidity forecasting and more formal and systematic exchanges of information between the BA and the Ministry of Finance regarding both treasury cash flows and liquidity management operations, in order to ensure a smooth supply of liquidity to the economy. The authorities saw merit to this approach, and underscored that coordination between the BA and the Ministry of Finance was making progress. The Ministry of Finance remained cautious, however, about increasing the level of public debt to support monetary policy, insisting that the responsibility for price stability lay with the BA. Staff recommended a more active use of interest rates to bolster the long-term effectiveness of monetary policy. The recent decline in excess liquidity, supported by tight liquidity management, should create the conditions for interest rates to become a more effective monetary policy tool. The current monetary policy framework is marked by extremely low interest rates. The six-month liquidity absorption window introduced in January 2013 carried an interest rate of only 1.5 percent, bringing the average interest rate on repurchase facilities to 0.95 percent. The discount rate, which banks use as a reference to set loan rates, has not been adjusted since March 2004. Amid limited supply of t-bills, and given regulatory requirements for insurance companies to hold government securities, the three-month rate was only 21 basis points in late October 2013, well below the BA's deposit rate of 30 basis points. The BA should signal its policy stance more actively through interest rates (both the discount rate and deposit auction facilities), while a more active t-bill and t-bond issuance policy should bring interest rates on government Page 16 debt securities to more normal levels. Although the authorities agreed that interest rates would play a useful signaling role, they questioned the effectiveness of raising them in an environment of excess liquidity. Nevertheless, they saw scope for more active monetary policy if excess liquidity tapers as expected. Box 4. Enhancing the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy Transmission Channels in Algeria The 2012 surge in inflation highlighted the challenges faced by monetary policy in an environment of excess liquidity and limited financial sector development . The BA has three policy instruments under the current framework: liquidity management tools, the interest rate, and the exchange rate. Excess liquidity has led the BA to give up using the rediscount rate as a signaling instrument, and to adjust only marginally and infrequently the rates on deposit facilities. The exchange rate is assigned to preserving competitiveness, but has been on occasion implicitly used to contain price pressures. Consequently, required reserves and deposit facilities are the main policy instruments. An empirical analysis over 2001Q1–2013Q2 suggests that transmission channels (credit, market rates, and money) are operative, but weak. This weakness results in monetary policy impulses having only a limited impact on the BA’s final targets of growth and inflation. To improve the effectiveness of monetary policy, wide ranging structural reforms are needed to: Adapt the macroeconomic policy framework to an environment of excess liquidity : The major structural impediment to an effective monetary policy lies in the combination of excess liquidity and a lack of savings instruments. To reduce the supply of liquidity the national oil company could be allowed to hold part of its resources in foreign exchange, either domestically or internationally. A more proactive borrowing policy by the Ministry of Finance, perhaps backed by a full-fledged hydrocarbon savings rule, would also help absorb excess liquidity, support the development of financial markets, bring liquid resources back to the financial sector, and unclog the interest rate transmission channel. Provide the right signals to the markets: The interest rate needs to be used more proactively. Changes in the auction facilities rate should be accompanied by changes in the discount rate to ensure the pass- through of monetary policy through bank lending and borrowing rates. To improve the role of the exchange rate as a transmission channel, measures should be taken to diversify the supply of foreign exchange, notably by easing repatriation and surrender requirements and by lifting the tight de facto required reserve ratio on banks’ foreign exchange deposits. Create the conditions for financial sector deepening : Government intervention through interest subsidies has increased significantly since 2009. This discourages capital market deepening by removing incentives for enterprises to finance themselves outside of the banking sector. Subsidies should be reviewed, the performance of subsidized credits carefully monitored, and provisions made for existing schemes to lapse. The ban on consumer credit needs to be lifted, the development of credit registries stepped up, and measures to facilitate access to credit by SMEs (such as an efficient guarantee system) adopted. To curb the use of cash in the economy, the use of checks and electronic means of payments in transactions with administration and public services and large payments should be mandatory. To develop capital markets, the capital of large SOEs and state-owned banks should be opened. Corporate bond issuance by large SOEs could also be encouraged, as a complement to banking credit, to finance large investments. A larger supply of savings instruments is needed to curb inflationary pressures and breathe life into the financial market . In 2012, the lack of savings instruments (aside from time and current deposits), in the context of rapidly increasing household income following expansionary fiscal policy, led to higher consumption and inflationary pressures. It is therefore important to increase and diversify the supply of savings instruments, notably by developing housing savings— Page 17 through the development of mortgage finance instruments and a retrenchment of State intervention—and capital markets. The ongoing fiscal consolidation should be pursued beyond 2013 . The draft 2014 budget law appropriately limits increases in current spending, while providing for higher capital spending; however, the main shortcomings are the new increases in the wage bill and the broadening of tax exemptions. The fiscal position remains vulnerable to a lasting decline in oil prices and requires further consolidation that should be friendly to inclusive growth and more progressive in terms of tax and spending. Tax revenues need to be bolstered , including by eliminating or reducing the most costly tax exemptions—particularly VAT exemptions. Staff commended the authorities for publishing, in the context of the 2014 budget law, the cost of tax exemptions, although the methodology needs to be improved. Staff also recommended that efforts to improve tax administration continue. The ongoing computerization of the tax administration should also remain a priority. The restructuring of tax control and collection offices into a smaller number of tax centers centres des impôts , CDI) and local tax offices ( centres de proximité des impôts , CPI) is moving forward, but must be accompanied by a strengthening of tax inspection capacities to expand the tax base and improve collection efforts. The growth in current spending needs to be contained . Staff recommended controlling wage bill growth by stabilizing the size of the civil service and anchoring wage growth to productivity improvements. Current transfers should be stabilized in real terms through subsidy reform (see below) and improvements in the efficiency of public services. In this regard, the recent move to set up contractual arrangements with public entities, particularly hospitals, is a step in the right direction and should support this objective. Subsidies represent a large share of GDP and should be reviewed , to improve their equity and effectiveness and reduce their cost to the economy. International experience shows that subsidies are often costly, inequitable, and a source of economic distortions. The cost of implicit subsidies for hydrocarbon products amounted to an estimated US$22.2 billion in 2012, or 10.9 percent of GDP. Explicit subsidies cost an additional 5 percent of GDP in 2012. These subsidies are highly inequitable, as they mostly benefit upper-income groups. Staff recommended that the prices of subsidized items—particularly those that do not figure prominently in the consumption basket of poor households—be progressively brought to market levels. Similarly, the price of those services whose quality has improved through public investment (such as water and electricity) should be adjusted to reflect these quality upgrades, while efforts should be made to improve efficiency where needed. The authorities commendably published the cost of implicit subsidies in the 2014 budget law. The cost of subsidies borne by SOEs should also be recognized and included in the budget, particularly in light of the recent increase in credit to SOEs and the history of episodic bailouts. Over time, subsidies should be eliminated and replaced with a targeted cash-transfer system, which will require a fundamental reform of the safety net system. The authorities felt the time was not ripe yet for an overhaul of subsidies. Page 18 Staff and the authorities agreed that the exchange rate policy should continue to aim to keep the dinar in line with its equilibrium level. The fiscal consolidation undertaken this year implies that the equilibrium REER level has depreciated compared to last year. Maintaining the dinar in line with its equilibrium value therefore serves to enhance the external competitiveness of the economy. Over the medium term, the deepening of the foreign exchange market would create the conditions for a more flexible exchange rate. International reserves remain well above standard adequacy levels , but the authorities should be mindful of emerging vulnerabilities over the long run, as the current account surplus is declining, hydrocarbon resources are by nature finite, and the current policy framework for managing hydrocarbon wealth does not ensure long-term sustainability. Indeed, the ratio of reserve imports coverage is expected to decline over the medium term, though it will remain at a comfortable level. The foreign exchange market should be developed . To diversify the supply of foreign exchange on the interbank market, where the BA is currently the main supplier, repatriation and surrender obligations of export receipts should be relaxed, and the de facto high reserve requirement rate on foreign currency deposits (100 percent for individuals and 30 percent for firms) should be lowered. Similarly, the requirement that banks surrender to the BA foreign exchange associated with inward foreign investment should be relaxed. These measures, combined with the development of money and capital markets, would also help to establish a forward exchange market. Finally, the authorities should examine the possibility of boosting competition on the interbank market by allowing operators engaged in international trade to purchase foreign currency outside of their paying bank. Staff and the authorities concurred on the need to eliminate the parallel foreign exchange market premium , which is a source of distortions in the economy. The dinar is fully convertible for current transactions, but the existence of a premium for foreign exchange on the illegal parallel market—which reached 40 percent in November 2013—indicates that a portion of demand is met on the parallel market. To limit pressures on the parallel market, staff urged the authorities to significantly raise the indicative forex ceilings for travelers to more realistic levels. In the longer term, a gradual lifting of capital account restrictions should be envisaged. The financial sector appears healthy, but the authorities should be mindful of the risks. The recent FSAP indicates that the financial sector is stable, with the main vulnerability lying in the concentration of credit risk. The authorities should maintain their efforts to monitor financial stability, particularly by improving the institutional framework and the quality of the annual report issued by the BA, and to expand the framework of macro-prudential surveillance. Accelerating the CAMELS rating exercise and completing it before the end of 2014 will foster the shift to risk-based 201120122013Adequacy thresholdReserves in US$ billion182 191 196 …Months of imports34.934.935.63Percent of short-term debt336 167 211 1Percent of broad money133.7134.3131.120 Algeria: Reserve Adequacy Measures Page 19 banking supervision. The authorities should also enhance financial sector safety nets and establish a dedicated bank resolution regime. Finally, it is important to introduce a mechanism for cleaning up old and fully provisioned NPLs.