FINANCIAL STABILITY The current fiscal stance is unsustainable, and calls for the adoption of a full-fledged fiscal rule. Fiscal policy is procyclical, vulnerable to oil price volatility, and on an unsustainable path. Staff advised that a fiscal rule would help reduce vulnerability to oil price shocks, impose spending discipline, and ensure long-term fiscal sustainability. An appropriate fiscal rule would entail a realistic reference price (for instance, a 5- or 10-year backward-looking moving average), a floor on the structural primary balance, and a cap on drawings from the FRR. Staff also recommended converting the FRR into a sovereign wealth fund invested abroad and targeting a range of objectives, including macroeconomic stabilization and the accumulation of savings for future generations. It could be managed by the Bank of Algeria (BA), following an investment policy defined by the Minister of Finance and adhering to international best practices. The authorities expressed some interest in a fiscal rule, but remained reluctant to convert the FRR into a sovereign wealth fund. Given their lack of expertise in financial markets, the authorities prefer to maintain the existing arrangement, whereby the counterpart of the FRR is a subset of international reserves, which are managed prudently by the central bank. The fiscal rule suggests that Algeria needs determined and consistent fiscal consolidation beyond the limited fiscal adjustment achieved in 2013. Restoring sustainability according to the fiscal rule would require significant and sustained fiscal consolidation. The magnitude of the required consolidation is ambitious and should be undertaken immediately; to delay would necessitate even more ambitious consolidation in the future. Reforms are needed to: Increase nonhydrocarbon revenues. Staff estimates that Algeria’s tax potential in 2013 was 3.3 percentage points of nonhydrocarbon GDP higher than actual collected tax revenues. Closing this gap will require broadening the tax base and strengthening tax administration. Tax exemptions should be eliminated or reduced, the distortive turnover tax should be replaced with PIH Price rule (5/0/0) with 5% of GDP SB target Price rule (10/0/0) with 0% of GDP SB target Current projection Additional consolidation Nonhydrocarbon Primary Balance (Percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. PIH Price rule (5/0/0) with 5% of GDP SB target Price rule (10/0/0) with 0% of GDP SB target FRR net of debt (current projection) Additional consolidation Cumulative Financial Savings (Percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 14 well-targeted excise, and the property tax should be overhauled. Staff welcomed an increase in the ceiling for the corporate flat rate tax, which was announced in the 2015 budget law; it should lead to higher returns and free resources within the General Tax Directorate for expanding the tax base. While the authorities broadly agreed that nonhydrocarbon revenues need to increase, they saw merit in continuing to grant tax exemptions, notably to promote investment, and were cautious about introducing new taxes before first developing a broader domestic consensus, including with local governments, around a revenue strategy. Limit current spending while preserving growth-enhancing capital spending. Current spending has increased significantly since 2010 and is projected to reach 36.2 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP in 2014, a level that constrains fiscal space. Staff advised the authorities to contain the wage bill by stabilizing the size of the civil service and limiting wage increases to productivity gains. Staff also cautioned against modifications to the labor code (Article 87 bis) that could lead to a significant increase in the wage bill. Current transfers are high, and their growth should be capped in real terms while the efficiency of public service provision should be improved. Capital spending should be preserved in real terms. The authorities stressed that any future wage increases linked to the modification of Article 87bis would be modest and phased in gradually. Gradually phase out explicit and implicit subsidies and develop a targeted cash transfer system. Total subsidies amounted to 18 percent of GDP in 2012, of which implicit hydrocarbon subsidies accounted for 10.9 percent of GDP. Staff recommended phasing out implicit subsidies—which are inequitable (Appendix 2), costly in terms of foregone revenue, and lead to episodic bailout of state-owned enterprises—and adjusting long-unchanged tariffs on public services. Furthermore, any remaining implicit subsidy should be accounted for in the budget. A subsidy reform should be accompanied by targeted cash transfers to shield vulnerable populations. While the authorities disclosed the cost of subsidies in the 2014 and 2015 budget laws, they underscored the difficulties of undertaking such a major reform and highlighted the need for careful preparation. Full implementation of staff’s recommendations is necessary to place fiscal policy on a sustainable path. In the baseline scenario discussed with the authorities, the government is assumed to achieve fiscal consolidation equal to 10.3 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP over the medium term, based on a partial implementation of staff’s recommendations. A consolidation of this size, while significant, is nevertheless insufficient to restore fiscal sustainability. Full implementation of staff’s recommendations would Baseline scenarioAdditional consolidationIncrease nonhydrocarbon revenues1.02.3Limit current spending and preserve capital spending8.7-Gradually phase out subsidies0.65.6Total10.37.9 Source: IMF staff estimates. Recommended Fiscal Reforms: Estimated Yield over the Medium Term (Percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP) Page 15 lead to an additional consolidation of nearly 8 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP, which would place fiscal policy on a sustainable path and help contain the deterioration of the current account by constraining domestic demand. Public financial management needs to be modernized. The MTBF and performance- based budgeting is scheduled for introduction on a trial basis with the 2016 budget law. A revised organic budget law, adopted, ideally, in the first quarter of 2015, would help support this reform. Staff and the authorities agreed that progress in the implementation of an integrated public financial management system would be critical to the effective operation of the new framework. Finally, staff advised the detailed publication of hydrocarbon revenues, in a format similar to the EITI. Monetary policy should remain prudent. Although inflation fell to 1.5 percent on average in August, year-on-year inflation has been on an upward trend since October 2013, reaching 2.7 percent in August. Strong credit growth, a surge in capital spending in the first half of 2014, the possibility of further wage increases, and an upturn in excess liquidity suggest that inflationary pressures could reemerge. In this context, the authorities and staff agreed on the need to maintain a prudent stance. Efforts to absorb excess liquidity should continue. The BA should increase liquidity absorption by auctioning central bank bills, thereby adding another instrument to a monetary policy toolkit that relies largely on the auctioning of deposit facilities. Enhanced coordination with the Ministry of Finance would help improve the liquidity management framework. The government’s more ambitious program of Treasury bills issuance is a welcome development that has helped to partially normalize yields on short-term securities. Given the low level of domestic debt and excess demand on the financial markets, there is scope for more sovereign issuance. This would limit liquidity injections resulting from drawings on the FRR; help develop monetary and capital markets; and strengthen monetary policy transmission mechanisms. A more active use of interest rates is warranted. The interest rate corridor is wide and unresponsive to changes in monetary conditions, blurring the signaling of the policy stance. The authorities should take advantage of the current low-inflation environment to upgrade their monetary framework to allow for a more active use of interest rates, which would improve the central bank’s ability to react to inflation shocks. Some easing in the discount rate could be implemented if inflation stays low, while a hike in the overnight and repo rates would be needed to signal a tighter stance if inflation picks up. D Discount rate Overnight deposit rate Excess inflation 1/ Average repo rate Interest Corridor (In percent, 2007-2014)Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Gap between the 4 percent central bank inflation target and actual inflation. Page 16 Exchange rate policy should aim to avoid a deviation of the dinar from its equilibrium level. International reserves are well above standard adequacy levels (Appendix I), but external stability is a growing concern, given a rapidly deteriorating current account and a relatively short time horizon for hydrocarbon resources. In this context, the authorities should keep the exchange rate in line with its fundamental equilibrium value. Staff estimates that the real effective exchange rate was overvalued by about 3.4 percent in 2014 (Appendix I), and by over 10 percent compared to its medium-term equilibrium value, given the projected fiscal consolidation and declining hydrocarbon prices. While they reiterated their commitment to avoid any misalignment, the authorities felt that staff’s estimates overstated the degree of overvaluation. The supply of foreign exchange needs to be diversified in order to create a deeper, more competitive foreign exchange market . The BA is currently the main supplier of foreign exchange and ensures full coverage of current transactions. A more diversified supply of foreign exchange could be achieved by relaxing surrender requirements—including those for the hydrocarbon sector companies—and by lowering the de facto reserve requirement ratio on foreign currency deposits of companies and individuals. Competition in the interbank market could be strengthened by allowing private agents to place foreign exchange orders outside of the banks that handle their international trade transactions. The authorities agreed with staff’s recommendations and have requested IMF technical assistance to develop the foreign exchange interbank market. Decisive action is needed to remove the premium for foreign exchange on the parallel market. Although foreign currency needs for current transactions are entirely covered by the BA, and the parallel market is illegal, the premium on the parallel market remains high, at about 40 percent. The premium is a source of distortion that impedes private sector development. The mission reiterated its recommendation that the authorities significantly raise the indicative foreign exchange allocation ceilings to more realistic levels. The authorities should also prepare to move toward a gradual and properly sequenced liberalization of the capital account, taking into account Algeria’s financial and institutional infrastructure, and starting with FDI followed by portfolio flows. The authorities should pursue further reforms to preserve the stability of the financial sector. The financial sector is solvent, well-capitalized, and stable. Its major vulnerability is the concentration of credit risk. Staff welcomed the adoption of three regulations related to capital adequacy, lending classification and provisioning, and concentration risk, which follow the 2013 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) recommendations related to Basel II/III. The authorities are also planning to introduce macro-prudential policies, strengthen the deposit guarantee system, and set up a crisis management framework. A dedicated bank resolution regime needs to be established, and the shift to risk-based supervision needs to take place by completing the CAMELS rating exercise by 2015, as currently envisioned. Finally, reforms are needed to encourage banks to write off old and fully provisioned NPLs. Such reforms include easing the obligation of banks to recover these NPLs and facilitating their transfer to an asset management company. Page 17