An ambitious structural reform agenda is needed to diversify the economy, increase potential growth, and create jobs. Algeria’s state-led economic model is characterized by a large share of economic activity conducted by the public sector and based directly or indirectly on hydrocarbons. Pervasive bureaucracy and cumbersome administrative procedures hinder private sector activity. To adapt to a world of lower oil prices, the state will need to retrench and allow the private sector to take the lead. A critical mass of structural reforms is needed to unleash the potential of the private sector and should be implemented urgently, as reforms will take time to bear fruit. The authorities agreed with the need to change Algeria’s economic model, but they continue to see a large role for the state in directing the economy. Algeria should continue its efforts to improve the business environment. Recent efforts in this area—for instance to facilitate the creation of enterprises and the granting of building permits—go in the right direction. However, they have yet to translate into improved rankings in international surveys. Indeed, Algeria's 2016 Doing Business ranking slipped two places to 163 rd out of 189 economies. Staff urged the authorities to continue streamlining administrative procedures related to starting a business, trading across borders, and registering property. The authorities stressed that improving the business environment required considerable coordination among agencies and therefore would take time. They nevertheless reiterated their commitment to pursue reforms, noting that a provision in the new constitution explicitly commits the government to improving the business environment. For more on diversification, see 2014 Selected Issues Paper: “Fostering Export Diversification in Algeria.” Starting a BusinessDealing withConstructionPermitsGetting ElectricityRegisteringPropertyGetting CreditProtectingMinority InvestorsPaying TaxesTrading AcrossBorders Enforcing ContractsResolvingInsolvency MENAP - Oil Exporters Firm-Level Business Constraints (distance to frontier) AlgeriaLICMENAP -OilImportersMENAP -OilExportersEM E f b ss → 2010-2015 Improvement Ease of Doing Business (percentile rank) Sources: World Bank Doing Business (2016), and IMF staff calculations. EM = Emerging Market Countries. LIC = Low Income Countries. Page 22 Figure 4. Algeria: Structural Issues Algeria’s labor and financial markets are particularly weak The economy is characterized by a dominant public sector, compared to other economies. heavy regulations, and barriers to trade and investment. Businesses lack sophistication. Capital markets are nascent. The overall unemployment rate has started to edge higher… …and the share of youth that are neither employed, nor in school, nor in vocational training is high. 202530354045MenWomenTotal Youth Not in Education, Employment or Training (In percent of 15-24 year old population) Source: Algerian authorities. Overall Youth Female Unemployment Rate (Percent) Source: Algerian authorities. m K w B h S b U E Business Sophistication (all countries, 7 = best) Sources: WorldEconomic Forum 2015 Global Competitiveness Index; and IMF staff estimates. Page 23 To promote greater economic diversification, the government should open the economy to more trade and foreign investment. Trade openness would support diversification through lower costs of inputs, technological transfers, and increased competition. Staff stressed that import restrictions, which the authorities have tightened in an effort to contain imports, should not be the response to the terms-of-trade shock, as they introduce distortions and rent-seeking opportunities, are likely to drive more activity underground, and may create inflationary pressures. The authorities are currently overhauling the investment code. As a priority, staff urged them to seize the opportunity offered by this revision to eliminate or relax the requirement of a minimum 51 percent Algerian ownership in foreign investments (“51/49 rule”), which remains a major obstacle to foreign investment. Staff also reiterated its call for Algeria to pursue WTO accession, which has languished for decades. Improving governance, transparency, and competition are also needed. According to the World Bank, Algeria ranks behind regional peers and emerging market countries in terms of governance. Other surveys find that poor governance and corruption are significant obstacles to doing business in Algeria, with negative implications for growth and job creation. Another feature of the economy is a lack of competition in certain sectors. More competition would lead to better functioning markets, where prices ensure the most efficient allocation of resources. Strengthening anti-corruption efforts, including by mobilizing the AML/CFT framework, would also assist in improving the business environment and social inclusion. In an effort to reduce imports, the authorities have begun requiring importers to apply for licenses to import certain products (e.g., vehicles and cement). Poor work ethic in national labor force Restrictive labor regulationsInadequately educated workforce Inadequate supply of infrastructure Complexity of tax regulationsTax rates Corruption Inefficient government bureaucracyAccess to financing Share of Responses Algeria: Executive Opinion Survey, 2015 Source: World Economic Forum Executive Opinion Survey. From a list of 16factors, respondents are asked to select the five most problematic and rank them from 1 (most problematic) to 5. AlgeriaCCA LIC EMMENAP H h W G I il → Higher GDP per capita (log) → WGI-4 and GDP per capita (log PPP) Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators 2014 (government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption); the line is the trend for all countries. Page 24 Further progress in reducing unemployment will require not only more labor-intensive economic growth, but also better functioning labor markets. The unemployment rate has been edging higher, while the labor force participation rate—at 42 percent—is low by international standards. The labor market is marked by rigidities in hiring and firing, high payroll taxes, jobs-skills mismatches, and excessive growth in wages with respect to productivity. Staff supported the ongoing revision of the labor code—undertaken in consultation with representatives from trade unions and employers—as an opportunity to enhance labor market flexibility while ensuring adequate protection for workers. The mission also stressed the need to develop closer ties between the educational system and the private sector, and to thoroughly assess the effectiveness of active labor market policies. Reforms are needed to improve access to finance and develop capital markets. Doing Business ranks Algeria ranks 174 th out of 189 countries on the ease of getting credit. The mission recommended strengthening competition in the banking sector, enhancing creditor rights, modernizing the bankruptcy framework, and improving debt enforcement procedures. Lending to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) is impeded by high collateral requirements and difficulties dealing with NPLs. The guarantee system has so far failed to spur credit to SMEs and needs to be reformed. Opening the capital of large SOEs and state-owned banks to private participation would help increase competition and develop capital markets.