Growth and inflation. Real GDP grew by 2.8 percent in 2013, down from 3.3 percent in 2012, affected by a 5.5 percent contraction in hydrocarbon production—the eighth consecutive year of decline—and lower public spending. Nonhydrocarbon sector growth remained stable at 7.1 percent, supported by continued rapid growth in the agricultural and services sectors. Inflation declined from 8.9 percent in 2012 to 3.3 percent, reflecting the impact of fiscal consolidation, monetary policy tightening, softer international food prices, and high base effects. Average inflation continued to decline in 2014, reaching 1.5 percent in August, but was somewhat on the rise at 2.7 percent on a year-on-year basis. External position. The current account surplus narrowed to 0.4 percent of GDP in 2013 from 5.9 percent in 2012. Hydrocarbon exports fell more than 10 percent because of softer prices and lower volumes. Imports expanded by nearly 7 percent, partly owing to the one-off effect of increased imports of petroleum products following the temporary shutdown of three refineries. Inflows of foreign direct investment remained weak, at less than 1 percent of GDP, and the level of foreign exchange reserves increased slightly, from US$191 billion to US$194 billion, mainly because of valuation effects. External debt stood at 1.6 percent of GDP at end-2013. Real effective exchange rate. After depreciating by 1.7 percent in 2013, the real effective exchange rate (REER) weakened further in 2014, by 0.9 percent over the first seven months of the year. This was partly driven by a 0.3 percent nominal effective depreciation. However, the REER remains on the strong side, hurting Algeria’s competitiveness (Appendix I). Fiscal. After two years of significant fiscal stimulus, the government undertook some fiscal consolidation in 2013. Current spending declined as back-payments of civil service wage increases tapered, and limited absorptive capacity held back the execution of capital spending. As a result, the Page 7 budget deficit fell to 1.5 percent of GDP from 5.0 percent in 2012, despite lower revenues linked to weak hydrocarbon exports. Savings in the oil stabilization fund decreased slightly for the first time since the fund was created, though it is still standing at a comfortable 31.6 percent of GDP at end- 2013. The consolidation trend was not continued into 2014, however: during the first half of 2014, capital expenditure increased by nearly 50 percent and current expenditure by 10.4 percent, while revenues grew by only 4.4 percent, slowed by a 2.4 percent decline in hydrocarbon revenues. Monetary. Credit to the economy expanded by nearly 20 percent in 2013. Nevertheless, broad money growth slowed to 8.4 percent from 10.9 percent in 2012, largely because of slower accumulation of net foreign assets. Increases in the required reserve ratio and greater liquidity absorption helped reduce excess liquidity in 2013. Excess liquidity rebounded in 2014, increasing by 18 percent in the second quarter compared to the same quarter in 2013. Broad money grew by 7.7 percent in the first half of 2014, driven by credit growth and by a 10 percent decrease in government deposits at central bank. Financial sector. The banking sector remained solvent and liquid. The overall capital adequacy ratio was 21.5 percent in 2013, down slightly from 23.4 percent in 2012. The ratio of nonperforming loans (NPLs) improved from 11.5 percent to 10.6 percent, helped by the growth in credit. Nearly 70 percent of NPLs are fully provisioned. Liquidity remains at a comfortable level. Credit to the economy reached 45.2 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP in 2013, up from 41.3 percent in 2012, remaining weak compared to the region or other middle-income countries. Financial markets are underdeveloped, and little progress has been made in this area. One private company was listed on the stock exchange in 2013. Capitalization remained low at 0.1 percent of GDP, and the stock of outstanding bonds issued by the private sector continued to decline. Employment. Following a slight uptick in 2012, the overall unemployment rate declined to 9.8 percent in 2013. It remained stable in the first quarter of 2014, as the decline in the participation rate offset the 2.1 percent fall in the volume of employment. Youth unemployment stood at 24.8 percent. The unemployment rate among women continued to fall, reaching 14.2 percent in the first quarter of 2014. Outlook. Real GDP growth is expected to increase to 4.0 percent. The hydrocarbon sector should record slightly positive growth (0.4 percent) for the first time in nine years, driven by growth in domestic consumption and a less acute contraction in net hydrocarbon export volumes. Nonhydrocarbon growth is expected to slow modestly to 5.5 percent owing to a poor wheat harvest and a slowdown in industrial activity. Inflation should stabilize close to the 4 percent target of the central bank, but bears watching closely, given the potential for new inflation pressures to emerge. The current account is projected to record a deficit (-4.0 percent of GDP) for the first time since Over the medium term, current account deficits are expected to widen as lower oil prices outweigh modest growth in hydrocarbon export volumes. Foreign exchange reserves are Page 8 projected to decrease by US$6 billion in 2014, reaching US$188 billion at the end of the year. Over the medium term, import coverage is projected to fall to 17 months, as low levels of capital inflows fail to finance current account deficits. The fiscal deficit is expected to widen to 7.0 percent of GDP, mostly because of lower hydrocarbon and custom revenue and a sharp increase in capital expenditure. With domestic bond issuance still limited, the deficit will be financed mainly by drawing from the oil savings fund (Fonds de Régulation des Recettes, FRR), which is projected to decline in absolute terms and fall from 31.6 percent to 27.1 percent of GDP. Fiscal deficits are expected to persist over the medium term as hydrocarbon revenues weaken. The nonhydrocarbon deficit is, however, expected to improve, helped by improved nonhydrocarbon revenue and contained current spending. Despite this consolidation, the fiscal path will remain unsustainable, and fiscal breakeven prices are expected to remain above projected oil prices. Monetary sector. Broad money should increase by 14.5 percent in 2014, largely because of rapid growth of credit to the economy (+21.7 percent) and a decline in government savings, while growth in net foreign assets should be limited to 0.5 percent. Over the medium term, slower credit growth, increased domestic issuance by the government (as opposed to drawing down deposits at the central bank), and a decline in net foreign assets should contribute to more moderate growth in the money supply. Risks are mainly tilted to the downside (Boxes 1 and 2). Slower growth in Europe and emerging markets, or a sustained decline in hydrocarbon prices, would worsen external and fiscal balances. Heightened geopolitical risks in Ukraine or the Middle East could negatively affect the country should they lead to weaker global demand or an increase in the risk premium, but could constitute upside risks if oil and gas prices or demand for Algerian gas increased. On the domestic front, social pressures complicate the task of fiscal consolidation and therefore pose a continued threat to fiscal sustainability Page 9 Box. 1. Algeria: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of RisksRelative LikelihoodExpected impactSource of impactPolicy responseI - Financial sector and capital market risks Low/HighLowSide-effects from global financial conditions Abrupt surge in global financial market volatilityFinancial imbalances from protracted period of low interest rates continue to build Bond market stress from a reassessment in sovereign risk II - Inconsistent and partial implementation of financial regulatory reforms Low/ MediumLowForeign bank subsidiaries are domestically financed with low risk of deleveraging.Strengthen the prudential framework to maintain the stability and low vulnerability of the financial sector. Enhance coordination with national supervision agencies of parent banks. III - Risks to growth Protracted period of slower growth In Europe HighHighA further slowdown in growth in the euro area (Algeria's main gas export partner) would negatively affect the balance of payments, through both lower hydrocarbon prices and lower demand, and the fiscal balance. A two-pronged diversification strategy would help contain risks. Algeria needs to diversify its hydrocarbon export markets, and has a large unmet export potential in the region and in Africa. The country also needs to develop nonhydrocarbon exports. Sound macroeconomic management, a well-aligned real exchange rate, and measures to enhance the business climate–including measures to support openness–are needed. Fiscal consolidation and a full-fledged fiscal rule would help shield the country from shocks arising from the hydrocarbon sector. In other advanced economies and China Low/HighMediumA slowdown in growth in other advanced economies, emerging markets, or China would also affect the country through lower global demand and its potential impact on oil prices. In all cases, spillovers through capital markets would be limited given Algeria's very limited exposure to international financial markets.Algeria's exposure to global financial market volatility is very limited. With a closed capital account preventing corporates and banks from borrowing internationally, risks related to both capital outflows and inflows are marginal. Algeria would mainly be affected by bond market volatility, as the country's sizeable reserves are invested in high-grade sovereign bonds--although risks are mitigated by the hold-to-maturity policy of the central bank. Protracted low international interest rates would lower interest earnings for the central bank, thereby hurting dividends paid to the government. Algeria does not borrow on international markets and would not be affected by a reassessment of its own risk profile.A prudent financial liberalization is needed to support the development of the country. Further enhancements to the reserve management framework would help strengthen resilience to bond market volatility. A full-fledged sovereign wealth fund could help increase returns from the sizeable external asset position. Page 10 Box 1. Algeria: Risk Assessment Matrix (concluded) Source of RisksRelative LikelihoodExpected impactSource of impactPolicy responseI - Financial sector and capital market risks Low/HighLow IV - Regional geopolitical risks Russia/Ukraine: sustained tensions depress business confidence and heighten risk aversion, amid disturbances in global financial, trade and commodity marketsMediumMedium / highTensions leading to a slowdown in growth (notably in European countries) would adversely impact Algeria through lower demand for hydrocarbon products. Possible upside risks would stem from (1) an increase in hydrocarbon prices; or (2) a redirection of global demand for gas away from Russia. The limited trade and financial openness of Algeria to Ukraine and Russia limits the potential for direct impacts. Disruptions to cereal markets could, however, worsen the trade balance and fuel inflation, given Algeria's heavy dependence on wheat imports. Fiscal consolidation and export diversification would help shield the country from shocks arising from the hydrocarbon sector. The possibility of increased demand from Europe is an opportunity for increased Algerian exports, which the authorities should stand ready to seize.Heightened risk of fragmentation/state failure in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices, with negative spillovers to the global economy. MediumMedium / highHigher oil prices would positively affect Algeria's external and fiscal balance, but could hurt the country if they resulted in a slower global demand, notably in European countries. Low trade and financial flows with the region limit the potential for direct impacts. Algeria's hydrocarbon infrastructure is located in the southern part of the country (close to Libya) and is vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Further security concerns, including through heightened tensions at the Mali border, may increase the risk premium of investing in the country. To increase the attractiveness of Algeria for investor, a sound business environment will be key. Lifting the minority rule on FDI at least in non-strategic sectors would help. V - Sustained decline in energy prices MediumHighLower oil and gas prices would adversely affect both the current account and the fiscal balance, given Algeria's strong dependence on hydrocarbon exports.A full-fledged fiscal rule, with a credible enforcement mechanism, would help shield the country from shocks arising from the hydrocarbon sector. Nonhydrocarbon exports need to be diversified (see III). VI - Algeria-specific risks Further demands on the hydrocarbon rentHighHighDespite large spending in 2011 and 2012, demands remain elevated in the population (lack of housing, unemployment). Additional current spending would further worsen the fiscal balance, increase Algeria's reliance on hydrocarbon rents, and possibly fuel inflation. Maintain a prudent monetary and fiscal policy to tackle the risk of further inflation. Address social demands by setting up an effective cash tranfer system to shield the most vulnerable; improve the effectiveness of the labor market; support the diversification of the economy to spur a strong, private-sector based growth. Domestic political uncertainty LowMediumDomestic political uncertainty may slow down the pace of reforms, creating a risk for longer term growth prospects. Priorize and sequence reforms that bring rapid improvements to the population and entail limited costs in terms of political capital.Algeria's exposure to global financial market volatility is very limited. With a A prudent financial liberalization is needed to support the development of the Page 11 Box 2. Algeria: Spillover Risks Algeria’s potential for external spillovers is limited. Financial flows are limited, and the share of Algeria’s imports in its partners’ exports is too small for a shock in Algeria to significantly affect its trading partners. With relatively well-supplied oil markets, a shock to Algeria’s oil production is unlikely to trigger a significant adjustment in global oil prices. A negative shock to gas production may, however, trigger a tightening of prices in gas markets, notably in Europe, as Algeria’s exports account for more than 10 percent of Europe’s imports. Hydrocarbon dependency and trade with Europe remain the principal source of internal spillovers. The capital account is almost closed, and external financing needs are covered by ample reserves. This insulates the country from the impact of shocks to global financial markets. Algeria is extremely dependent on hydrocarbon exports and is therefore highly exposed to shocks to oil prices. Europe accounts for more than 50 percent of Algeria’s trade—a share that has been growing since 2007. Slower growth in Europe would negatively affect the country through a decline in demand and, potentially, in oil and gas prices, with both effects worsening the trade and fiscal balances. Recent tensions in Eastern European gas markets could, however, create positive spillovers if they increase demand for Algeria’s gas exports and reinforce its reputation as a reliable gas partner. Algeria: External and Fiscal Vulnerability to Oil Shocks A decline in oil prices by one standard deviation from 2015 onward would lead to … … a permanently negative current account, a decline in reserves… … lingering fiscal deficits, and an erosion of the oil fund. The composition of Algeria’s export partners is changing, giving rise to both new risks and opportunities . The shale oil production boom in the United States has led to a redirection of Algeria’s light crude oil exports (for which shale oil is a substitute) away from the United States toward Asian countries (notably China). As a consequence, the profile of Algeria’s external risks is changing. The broadening of the export partner base weakens the impact of a demand shock in Europe. At the same time, it exposes the country to new risks, especially to a slowdown in China. See Algeria – 2013 Article IV consultations for a detailed analysis of the spillover effects through the external and fiscal balances. CA (oil shock) CA (Article IV mission) CA (baseline) Reserves (Article IV mission) Reserves (baseline) Reserves (oil shock) Current Account and Reserves (Current account in percent of GDP, reserves in months of imports (RHS)) Source: IMF staff calculations. Overall balance (oil shock) Overall balance (Article IV mission) Overall balance (baseline) Net savings (Article IV mission) Net savings (baseline) Net savings (oil shock) Budget Balance and Net Savings (In percent of GDP)Source: IMF staff calculations. Page 12 The main challenges for Algeria are to consolidate long-term macroeconomic stability and promote economic diversification and job creation. An integrated strategy is needed, whereby the policy mix supports both the stability and competitiveness of the economy; public investment and appropriate structural reforms foster private investment; openness and competitiveness policies prop up exports; and a well-functioning labor market, strong institutions, and a improved jobs-skills match help achieve a substantial decline in unemployment. Box 3. Algeria: Authorities’ Response to Past IMF Policy Recommendations The authorities generally agree with staff’s policy recommendations, but implementation suffers from slow decision-making processes. Progress continued to be recorded in macroeconomic management, with prudent monetary policy and fiscal consolidation bringing inflation well below the central bank target. There were also advances on technical but important measures aimed at improving macroeconomic management (such as the MTBF) and macro-financial stability (such as the recommendations of the 2013 FSAP). However, measures that require a stronger political commitment or that would weaken the State’s control of the economy remained on hold; these include the relaxation of restrictions on FDI, the opening of SOEs’ capital, and the phasing-out of implicit subsidies. RecommendationImplementation statusStrengthen macrostability The monetary and fiscal policy mix should guard against a renewed rise in inflationMonetary policy remained prudent and fiscal consolidation helped contain liquidity growth. Further efforts are needed beyond the 2013 fiscal consolidationLimited progress. The nonhydrocarbon fiscal balance is expected to worsen in 2014, following further increases in current spending and large capital outlays. Ensure external and fiscal sustainability Implement a full-fledged MTBFProgress. The authorities plan to test a medium term budget framework (MTBF) in the 2016 budget law. FAD technical assistance was supplied to the authorities to support the implementation of the MTBF, notably its integration in the organic law.Adopt a full-fledged fiscal ruleNot implemented.Phase out implicit subsidiesNot implemented, but cost of implicit subsidies was disclosed in the 2014 budget law, and will be published in the 2015 budget law. Spur a private-sector led, inclusive growth Relax FDI restrictionsNo progress. Deepen the official foreign exchange marketNo progress. An MCM TA mission was supplied to assess future TA needs.Develop the financial sectorPartial progress. The credit registry is being installed; progress was recorded on FSAP recommendations.The 2015 budget law lifts the ban on consumer lending; the listing of SOEs to be brought to the stock market was published.Improve the business environmentLimited progress. A committee has been put in place to follow performances on the Doing Business indicators.Increase labor market flexibility and improve jobs/skills matchNo progress. However, active labor market policies supported jobs creations and helped reduce unemployment in the population with higher education in 2013 and 2014. Implementation Status of the 2013 Article IV Recommendations Page 13