Growth and inflation . Real GDP growth increased to 3.3 percent in 2012 from 2.8 percent in 2011, led by strong growth in the nonhydrocarbon sector, driven by public sector spending, while the hydrocarbon sector contracted for the seventh consecutive year. Inflation rose to 8.9 percent in 2012—the highest level in 15 years—following a surge in current spending that resulted in excess liquidity. Inflation has decelerated thus far in 2013. Fiscal consolidation and monetary tightening (both increased liquidity absorption and an increase in the reserve requirement rate) brought core inflation to 3.7 percent in October from a peak of 5.9 percent in 2012. Food inflation has decelerated more rapidly, helped by the fiscal and monetary policy mix, falling international prices, and better domestic agricultural production. Overall inflation declined to 4.5 percent in October. External position . The external position, though still very strong, has started to weaken. The current account surplus narrowed to 6.0 percent of GDP in 2012 from 9.9 percent in 2011, as imports -4-202468101214Jan-10Jul-10Jan-11Jul-11Jan-12Jul-12Jan-13Jul-13 Fresh food OtherSources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. CPI Inflation Public consumption Private consumption Investment Net exports GDP Real GDP Growth: Demand Side Contributions (In percent, 2008–12) Page 7 increased sharply and hydrocarbon exports contracted slightly due to lower production levels and increasing domestic consumption. The trend of weak hydrocarbon exports and rapid import growth continued into 2013, with the current account recording a slight deficit through the first three quarters of 2013. Capital inflows remain limited, with FDI falling to just $1.5 billion (less than 1 percent of GDP) in 2012. Official reserves rose to $191 billion in 2012 from $182 billion in 2011 (equal to nearly three years of imports of goods and services), but growth in reserves has since slowed. External debt amounted to 1.9 percent of GDP at end-2012. The real effective exchange rate (REER) is on the strong side, despite a steady depreciation in recent months . For the first six months of the year, both the REER and nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) were relatively stable, appreciating by less than 1 percent. Between June and October 2013, however, the REER depreciated 6.2 percent, reaching its lowest level since mid-2011. The depreciation in the REER outpaced the depreciation in the NEER, reflecting lower inflation in Algeria relative to its trading partners. Nevertheless, staff estimates suggest that the REER remains somewhat on the strong side (Appendix 1). Public finances . The fiscal stimulus initiated in 2010 reached full steam in 2012. Current spending in 2012 increased by 23 percent in nominal terms to 30.2 percent of GDP and 45.0 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP (NHGDP), as public sector wage increases with back payments reached their full impact. Capital spending grew by 15 percent, increasing from 13.6 percent to 14.4 percent of GDP between 2011 and 2012. Fiscal revenue has been resilient, at 40.5 percent of GDP, supported by buoyant nonhydrocarbon revenue. As a result of higher spending and stable revenue, the fiscal deficit widened significantly, from 1.2 percent of GDP in 2011 to 4.0 percent in 2012 (and from 44.7 percent to 45.3 percent of NHGDP), and the breakeven price of oil (US$120.9) was significantly above the market price for Algerian oil (US$111 per barrel). Data as of end-August 2013 suggest that the fiscal consolidation provided for in the 2013 budget law is on track, with public spending contained and fiscal revenue stable. The oil fund ( Fonds de Régulation des Recettes, FRR ) continued to grow in absolute terms (to DZD 5,633 billion), but declined as a share of GDP (from 37.1 percent to 35.6 percent of GDP between 2011 and 2012). Monetary . Broad money (M2) growth slowed significantly, from 19.9 percent in 2011 to 10.9 percent in 2012 (22.1 percent to 16.6 percent excluding the deposits of the 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,000 (500) -500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 Repurchase facility Marginal deposit facility Required reserves Free reserves Free liquidity (RHS) Bank Liquidity (In DZD billion) Breakeven price (fiscal) Oil price (WEO) Oil price (Sahara blend) Fiscal Breakeven Price of Oil (In USD per barrel, 2009–14) Page 8 national oil company). This was the result of slower accumulation of NFA (7.4 percent, compared to 16.2 percent in 2011), and increased public savings that partially offset higher credit growth (credit to the economy increased by 15.1 percent compared to 13.5 percent in 2011). Excess liquidity was high at the start of 2012, but slowed as the central bank increased the reserve requirement ratio in May 2012 and then again in May 2013, and upped the volume of liquidity absorption in May 2012. Money growth has remained subdued in 2013 (7.1 percent increase through September compared to end-December 2012), largely as a result of slower growth in NFA. Credit to the economy, however, has been more dynamic than in 2012, reaching 22.3 percent through September, driven by 33.6 percent growth in credit to the public sector—an 11-year high. Credit to the private sector grew by 16.9 percent, ahead of last year’s pace of 13.5 percent. Financial sector . The banking sector remains solvent and liquid. The overall capital adequacy ratio in 2012 was 23 percent, little changed from the previous year. The ratio of nonperforming loans (NPLs) declined to 11 percent, following government repurchases of state- owned enterprise (SOE) debt and the restructuring of the debts of viable small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and reflecting the growth in credit. Seventy percent of NPLs are provisioned, bringing the net NPL ratio to 3.5 percent. Liquidity remained comfortable. Credit to the economy increased somewhat, but access to finance remains low compared to other countries in the region and to countries at a similar level of development. Financial markets remain underdeveloped, with only one new listing on the stock exchange in 2013, bringing the total number of listed companies to four, and two corporate bonds. In 2013, the Ministry of Finance announced that eight SOEs would be listed, although no timeline has been defined so far. Employment . Over the years, Algeria has made significant progress in addressing unemployment, with the overall unemployment rate falling from 30 percent in 2000 to 9.8 percent in 2013, although the participation rate remains low. Declining unemployment likely supported the reduction in inequality that occurred between 2000 and 2011 (Box 1). Nevertheless, unemployment rates among youth (24.8 percent) and women (16.3 percent) remain high, owing to weak private sector activity, skills mismatches, and labor market rigidities. Overall Male Female Youth Unemployment Rates (In percent, 2003 – 13) Page 9 Box 1. Growth and Inequality Economic growth in Algeria over the last decade has been relatively more favorable to the poor than to the rich, helping to reduce inequality. An analysis of household survey data indicates that Algeria’s Gini coefficient fell from 0.34 in 2000 to 0.31 in 2011, reflecting an increase in the share of spending by poorer households relative to total household spending in the economy (Figure 1). On average across all households, real spending increased by 6.4 percent over the period (Figure 2). The strongest growth was experienced by the 10th and 30th deciles, while the slowest growth occurred in the richest decile. Disparities remain stronger among rural households than among urban households. Although both rural and urban areas saw a narrowing in inequality over the last decade, the Gini coefficient of rural households (0.37) was twice that of urban households (0.18) in 2011. On average, rural households increased their spending by 4.5 percent in real terms, while urban households experienced a 7.3 percent increase (Figures 3 and 4). Among rural households, the lowest growth in spending occurred in the 60th and 70th deciles. Algeria’s pro-poor growth over the past decade coincided with a significant decline in unemployment and increases in social spending . Between 2000 and 2011, the unemployment rate fell steadily, from 29.5 percent to 10.0 percent. Over the same period, per capita spending on health and education doubled in real terms. Although further study is warranted before drawing definitive conclusions, these developments may have disproportionately benefited the poorer segments of society. v P f Cumulative Percent of Population (from poorest to richest) 2000 (Gini coefficient = 0.34) 2011 (Gini coefficient = 0.31) Figure 1: Annual Spending by Decile (Overall economy) Decile Figure 2: Growth Incidence Curve, 2000–11 (Overall Economy) Sources: Algerian authoritie;s and IMF staff calculations. Average growth rate Decile Figure 3: Growth Incidence Curve, 2000–11 (Rural Economy) Average growth rate Decile Figure 4: Growth Incidence Curve, 2000–11 (Urban Economy) Average growth rate Page 10 Outlook Growth and inflation . Real GDP growth is expected to slow to 2.7 percent in 2013 as fiscal consolidation takes hold and as hydrocarbon exports remain weak. Nonhydrocarbon growth is projected to decline from 7.1 percent to 5.9 percent, mainly reflecting a slowdown in construction and government services. Real GDP growth should pick up in 2014, driven by a recovery in the hydrocarbon sector, following higher investment, and by stronger external demand as Southern Europe’s outlook improves. Inflation is projected to fall to 4.5 percent this year as the government withdraws fiscal stimulus, monetary policy remains prudent, and food prices soften. External . The current account surplus is projected to narrow further in 2013, falling to 1.1 percent of GDP. Lower oil prices and rising domestic consumption are expected to weigh on exports, while imports continue to grow. Looking ahead, a small current account deficit is projected by 2015, on the assumption of lower oil prices and continued growth in domestic hydrocarbon consumption. Fiscal . The overall deficit for 2013 is expected to improve significantly to 0.2 percent of GDP (34.3 percent of NHGDP). In 2014, spending is expected to increase slightly, by 1 percent of GDP, mostly due to capital spending. On the revenue side, however, declining oil prices and broadly stable export volumes will constrain hydrocarbon revenue, while nonhydrocarbon revenue is projected to remain stable as a share of NHGDP. Consequently, the fiscal deficit is expected to reach 2.1 percent in 2014. The deficit is projected to worsen in 2015 before improving somewhat at the end of the projection period as current spending is contained and nonhydrocarbon revenue improves. The nonhydrocarbon overall deficit is expected to improve slowly, from 34.3 percent of NHGDP in 2013 to 27.4 percent of NHGDP by 2018, but fall short of placing fiscal policy on a sustainable path. In addition, the breakeven price of oil is expected to remain above the market price over the medium term. Gross fiscal savings are expected to increase further in DZD terms, stabilizing at 36.6 percent of GDP by the end of the projection period. Gross public debt will remain low (Appendix II). Monetary . Money supply is expected to grow by 8.6 percent in 2013, as higher fiscal savings somewhat offset the fast growth in credit to the public sector. Credit to the private sector is expected to increase by 1 percentage point of GDP but remain low at 22.6 percent of NHGDP in 2013. Absent structural reforms to support private sector growth and develop the financial sector, private sector credit is only expected to increase slowly over the medium term. Risks . Risks are mainly tilted to the downside and are largely related to the oil dependency of the country, while outward spillovers are likely to be limited (Box 2). A prolonged decline in oil prices . Although still sizable, the accumulation of fiscal savings in the FRR has been slowed by the financing needs created by consecutive fiscal deficits. The fiscal breakeven oil price in 2014 is projected to be higher than medium-term oil prices, underscoring the risks to fiscal sustainability should oil prices experience a sustained decline. Page 11 A worsening global environment . A deeper slowdown in emerging markets, or a protracted period of slower growth in Europe, would negatively affect the balance of payments (through lower hydrocarbon demand and prices) and the fiscal balance (through lower hydrocarbon revenue), ultimately affecting growth. Risks to the financial sector are small, given the country’s limited exposure to international financial markets. Further pressure to use the hydrocarbon rent . Despite high levels of spending in 2011 and 2012, and additional wage increases in 2013, social demands remain elevated and could further increase ahead of the presidential election in 2014. Additional current spending to placate the population would worsen the fiscal balance, increase reliance on the hydrocarbon rent, and fuel inflation. Intensification of regional tensions . Instability in neighboring countries and tensions in Egypt and Syria create risks to security that could weigh on investments, notably FDI. On the other hand, instability elsewhere in the region may lead to significantly higher oil prices, which could have a positive net impact on the economy. Page 12 Likelihood of SevereOverall Level of ConcernRealization of Threat in the Next 1-3 Years Expected Impact if Threat is Realized (high, medium or low) (high, medium or low) Risks to growth Euro zone Short term: Financial stress in the euro area re-emerges Medium-term: Protracted period of slower European growth High US Short term : Fiscal policy shock in the United States Low Emerging markets Short term: Protracted economic and financial volatility, especially for emerging markets High : Lower than anticipated emerging markets growth potential China Medium term: Sharp slowdown in growth in China : Advanced bond market stress Medium/Low : Risks to financial stability from incomplete regulatory reforms Other risks Short term : Global oil shock LowHigh. Algeria's fiscal and external sectors are heavily reliant on oil revenues. A lasting decline in oil prices would worsen the fiscal balance absent significant efforts to curb current spending and increase nonhydrocarbon revenues. Conversely, an increase in oil prices would support both the current account and fiscal balances. : Distortions from unconventional monetary policy HighLow. Large swings in Algeria's main partners' currency values could complicate the management of the exchange rate. Given Algeria's very limited exposure to financial markets, the impact of market repricing or the side effects from exit modalities is not expected to affect the country. : Sustained decline in commodity prices LowLow. Algeria is a net importer of nonhydrocarbon commodities and would benefit from lower prices through an improved current account balance and lower inflation. Algeria-specific risks : Shocks to food prices (notably wheat) LowLow. Food price increases would put further pressure on the fiscal balance through subsidies, and may feed inflation. : Further demands on the hydrocarbon rent HighHigh. Despite large spending in 2011 and 2012, frustration remains elevated in the population (inflation, lack of housing, unemployment) and the next presidential election is looming (2014). Additional current spending would further worsen the fiscal balance and increase Algeria's reliance on hydrocarbon rents, and could fuel inflation. : Intensification of regional tensions (notably in Mali and Libya) MediumHigh. Algeria's hydrocarbon infrastructure is located in the Southern part of the country and is vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Further security concerns may increase the risk premium of investing in the country. : Domestic political instability LowHigh. Increased political instability could deter foreign investment and lead to a deterioration of the fiscal position and a depletion of the oil stabilization fund. Algeria: Risk Assessment Matrix Nature/Source of Main Threats High. A further slowdown in growth in the euro area (Algeria's main gas export partner) would negatively affect the balance of payments, through both lower hydrocarbon prices and lower demand, and the fiscal balance. A slowdown in growth in the United States or emerging markets/China would also affect the country through lower global demand and its potential impact on oil prices. In all cases, spillovers through capital markets would be limited, given Algeria's very limited exposure to international financial markets. Risks to capital markets Low. Algeria's capital account is not open, and risks related to both capital outflows and inflows are marginal. Algeria is a net creditor, and its large international reserves are mainly invested in high-grade sovereign bonds. A stress on the international bond market would complicate the reserve investment strategy.The financial sector is little exposed to the international environment, and risks to financial stabiilty are unlikely to affect the country, though second-round effects on the real sector would be possible. Page 13 Box 2. Algeria’s Inward and Outward Macroeconomic Spillovers The limited openness of the Algerian economy significantly constrains the potential outward spillover effects of a shock in the country to both the region and the rest of the world . With financial flows restricted by the closed capital account, the current account is the main potential channel of shock contagion. A domestic shock that would affect demand and imports from Algeria is unlikely to have any significant outward spillover: Algeria’s imports from the Maghreb, at less than US$2 billion in 2012, represent only 3.5 percent of the combined exports of Morocco and Tunisia. Imports from the EU, at about US$25 billion in 2012, are less than 2 percent of this region’s non-EU exports. However, in the current tight oil market conditions, a shock to Algeria’s oil production could affect global prices, and generate external spillovers. A decline in growth in Europe would have negative spillover effects in Algeria , reflecting the large dependence of the country on gas exports to the EU. Nonhydrocarbon exports would also be negatively affected, as Europe is also the main client for these. Lower hydrocarbon prices would also harm Algeria’s fiscal balance and balance of payment , as reflected by the simulation of a permanent US$ 25 decline in oil prices under a no-policy-change scenario. Algeria: External and Fiscal Vulnerability to Oil Shocks Note: The oil shock scenario assumes a permanent US$ 25 negative shock starting in 2015. _________________________________ The simulation assumes a 0.5 points decline in European GDP growth compared to the baseline. Growth simulations are based on the calibration of a GVAR model. See Cashin, P., K. Mohaddes and M. Raissi (2012), The Global Impact of the Systemic Economies and MENA Business Cycles, IMF Working Paper 12/255. Nonpetroleum export results are simulated using Behar, A. and J. Espinosa Bowen (forthcoming), Export Spillover Implications of Global Shocks for the Middle East and Central Asia, IMF Working Paper. First year2 years cumulativeFirst year2 years cumulative GDP lossNonhydrocarbon exports loss Maghreb MENA Oil Exporters Europe Impact of a Slower Growth in Europe (Percent change relative to baseline) Sources: IMF staff calculations, using Cashin,P., K. Mohaddes and M. Raissi (2012) and Behar, A. and J. Espinosa-Bowen (forthcoming). Current account balance Reserves (RHS) Current Account and Reserves (Current account balance in percent of GDP; reserves in US$ billions) Fiscal balance FRR (RHS) Fiscal Balance and FRR (In percent of GDP) Page 14 Discussions focused on the three main policy challenges facing the country. In the short term, macroeconomic and financial stability will need to be consolidated. To ensure long-term fiscal sustainability, the management of hydrocarbon wealth needs to be improved. Finally, Algeria needs to raise the rate of economic growth and create more jobs. Box 3. Authorities’ Response to Past IMF Policy Recommendations The authorities generally agree with staff’s policy recommendations, but overall implementation is sometimes held back by slow decision-making processes . Since the last Article IV consultation, progress has been recorded in tightening monetary policy, implementing fiscal consolidation, and improving the business environment. However, measures that would have implied a relaxation of the State’s control over the economy—such as setting higher indicative FX ceilings for travelers, lifting the ban on consumer credit, or revising the FDI ownership rules—have not been implemented. RecommendationImplementation status Strengthen macroeconomic policy Partial progress. Tighten monetary policy.A new deposit auction window (6 months) was created in January 2013, bearing a slightly higher interest rate. The other policy rates were not increased. The reserve requirement was increased from 11 to 12 percent in May 2013. Enhance coordination between the Ministry of Finance and Banque d’Algerie. Updated Treasury cash flows could be discussed at regular intervals.BA and the Ministry of Finance have initiated coordination meetings.Set higher and realistic indicative FX ceilings for travelers.Not implemented. Fiscal sustainability Limited progress. Cost and disclose the main implicit subsidies—such as energy subsidies—in an appendix to the 2014 budget law.Implemented.Review and rationalize VAT exemptions. The authorities requested and received IMF technical assistance to help them achieve this recommendation. Set medium-term sector envelopes early in the process for the 2014 budget.The authorities have started the preparation of the MTBF and program budgets, which are scheduled to be implemented in the 2015 budget law. Improve the business environment and spur growth Partial progress. Further simplify the procedures for creating and operating a business.Administrative requirements to start a business were simplified, a custom green line was established, with more than 100 agreed operators; online tax filings and payments have been made possible. However, these efforts were not sufficient to improve Algeria's Doing Business ranking.Revise the FDI ownership rules to lift existing restrictions or limit them to strategic sectors. No progress.Lift the ban on consumer credit.No progress. However, following the tripartie meetings in October 2013, a steering committee has been established to propose a way to lift the ban. Implementation Status of the 2012 Article IV Actionable Policy Recommendations Page 15