The 2016 budget is ambitious and should be followed by sustained consolidation efforts over the medium term. The 2016 budget marks an important step toward fiscal consolidation. Staff stressed that additional consolidation efforts will be needed over many years to ensure medium-term debt sustainability and help support the external rebalancing (Annex II). Since fiscal consolidation will unavoidably have a negative impact on growth, it should rely primarily on fiscal See accompanying Selected Issues Paper: “A Structural Model for Algeria.” While the consolidation assumed in the baseline scenario would ensure debt sustainability, it would not be enough to ensure intergenerational equity. The permanent income hypothesis (PIH) rule suggests that a nonhydrocarbon primary deficit equal to 5.6 percent on a permanent basis would ensure adequate savings for future generations. Wage Non-wage Capital Real oil price (RHS) Expenditures Baseline Scenario 2016 budget Algerian civil war Start of Arab Spring Page 18 levers that have the smallest multipliers and be accompanied by ambitious structural reforms. It should also be implemented as part of a clear medium-term strategy that establishes the appropriate pace of consolidation toward a well-defined medium-term objective taking into consideration the time necessary to implement various reforms. The more-wide ranging the structural reforms are, the more ambitious the fiscal objective can be (as illustrated in staff’s ambitious scenario). At a minimum, to ensure medium-term stability, the authorities should consider a fiscal consolidation path in line with staff’s baseline scenario. The authorities agreed that further fiscal consolidation was necessary beyond 2016 while stressing the importance of mitigating the impact on growth and employment. The wage bill needs to be contained. Spending on wages and salaries has nearly doubled since 2006 (as a percent of GDP), as the government hired more workers, increased salaries, and granted back payments to maintain social stability. Staff supported the authorities’ decision to maintain the freeze in public sector hiring announced last year (with some limited exceptions). Staff argued that fiscal consolidation should entail over the medium term a gradual reduction in the wage bill, as a percent of GDP, to levels that prevailed before 2011. This can be achieved by reducing the size of the civil service (a civil service review could help identify nonessential positions) and by anchoring wage growth to productivity improvements. The latter would contribute not only to reducing the budget deficit but also to improving the quality of public services. The authorities agreed that current expenditure should be curtailed, including by containing growth in the wage bill. Implicit and explicit subsidies should be gradually phased out and a well-targeted cash transfer system should be introduced to protect vulnerable consumers. Subsidies cost an estimated 13.6 percent of GDP in 2015, with energy subsidies accounting for over half this amount. In addition to their fiscal cost, subsidies are mostly regressive. For example, households in the richest quintile spend, on average, six times Algeria has the highest ratio of employees working in the public sector of any country in the region for which data is available. See 2014 Selected Issues Paper: “Meeting Algeria’s Fiscal Challenges.” See accompanying Selected Issues Paper: “Subsidy Reform in Algeria.” 60708090100Algeria(2012)BahrainKuwaitOmanQatarSaudiArabiaUAE(2009) Public Sector Employment (Share of total, 2014 or latest data available) Public sector share of total employment Public sector share of employment of nationals EM Average (13.3 percent of total employment) DA billionsPercent of GDP Explicit9265.5Housing3572.1Education1090.7Food2251.3Electricity, natural gas, water740.4Interest rates1601.0Implicit1,3678.1Housing (2013 estimate)670.4Energy (fuel, natural gas, electricity)1,3007.7Total2,29313.6 Subsidies, 2015 Sources: Algerian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 19 more on subsidized fuel products than households in the poorest quintile. Subsidies have also led to increased domestic energy consumption, squeezing exports. The increase in fuel and electricity taxes contained in the 2016 budget is an important first step toward subsidy reform, but much more needs to be done. Staff urged the authorities to pursue comprehensive subsidy reform over time, starting with the most regressive and expensive subsidies. Subsidy reform should entail raising energy prices further, adopting a rule-based mechanism for setting energy prices, and gradually removing other subsidies. Concurrently, the government should put in place a well-targeted cash transfer program for the poor, building on existing infrastructure. The authorities agreed with the need to deepen subsidy reform and are considering options to both phase out subsidies and introduce a cash transfer system. Box 3. Algeria: Main Recommendations on Subsidy Reform Carefully prepare the reform and implement it gradually. Both explicit and implicit subsidies should be gradually phased out. Price increases should be spread over time. A well-prepared reform increases the chances of success. Put in place a targeted cash transfer program. The government should gradually move from the current system of subsidies on goods and services to a program of targeted cash transfers to low-income households. Explain the reform. Well-designed communication is essential to generate broad support for the reform. It should explain the cost of subsidies (including the distortions they create), who benefits from them, and how the public stands to gain from subsidy reform. Start with the costliest and most regressive subsidies. In light of their large fiscal cost, regressive nature, and negative externalities, energy subsidies should be first in line for reform (with the exception of butane, which is important in the consumption basket of poor households). Adopt a depoliticized and rules-based mechanism for setting prices. An automatic pricing mechanism, especially when communicated clearly to the public, can reduce the chances of reform reversal by distancing the government from pricing decisions, and would also help cap the cost of the subsidy. With hydrocarbon revenues significantly reduced, Algeria needs to mobilize more nonhydrocarbon revenues. To raise more nonhydrocarbon revenues, tax exemptions (e.g., on VAT) should be significantly reduced, excise taxes increased, and property taxes overhauled. These measures would also help level the playing field among enterprises. It is also critical to improve tax administration, in particular tax enforcement. To bring the informal sector into the formal economy, the authorities should avoid offering tax amnesties and instead pursue other well-established measures in this area. The authorities indicated that they are focused on improving tax enforcement, including with respect to arrears. They have also launched a welcome cost-benefit analysis of tax expenditures. The increase in fuel taxes has resulted in retail price increases in the range of 34 to 37 percent, but prices remain very low (e.g., unleaded gasoline went from US$0.21 to US$0.29 per liter). See “Revenue Administration: Managing the Shadow Economy” (IMF, 2014) and “Current Challenges in Revenue Mobilization: Improving Tax Compliance” (IMF, 2015). Page 20 Public investment spending should be strategically curtailed and its efficiency substantially improved. Capital spending averaged 15 percent of GDP over the last decade— higher than the averages in the region and in emerging market and developing countries. At the same time, Algeria’s investment efficiency is weak compared to other oil exporters in the region and well below the global average, implying that the adverse impact of investment cuts on growth could be modest initially if implemented strategically. Given that the multiplier effect will increase over time as the least productive projects are eliminated, the government should strengthen investment efficiency by improving the selection, implementation, and ex-post assessment of investment projects. Better governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) would also improve investment efficiency while reducing the need for episodic fiscal bailouts. The authorities acknowledged that public investment spending had grown beyond Algeria’s absorptive capacity and needed to be rationalized. To meet large financing needs over the medium term, Algeria will need to borrow more. Fiscal savings in the oil savings fund will likely be depleted this year, requiring more government borrowing to finance budget deficits over the medium term. An increase in government domestic debt issuance is also needed to help develop nascent monetary and capital markets. In a context of tightening liquidity conditions, interest rates on government debt will likely increase. Given very low external debt, the authorities could also consider borrowing externally (on international capital markets or from bilateral or multilateral creditors) to mitigate crowding out effects of domestic borrowing and reduce pressure on international reserves. Furthermore, the mission encouraged the authorities to open the capital of some SOEs to private participation, in a transparent way, not only to help meet financing needs but also to improve their governance. The authorities indicated a willingness to consider borrowing externally from bilateral or multilateral sources, but they are not considering borrowing on international capital markets at this time. In April 2016, they issued a domestic bond aimed at mobilizing savings in the informal sector. They consider partial or total privatization of some SOEs to be an option but not a short-term priority. Broad public financial management (PFM) reforms are needed to support fiscal consolidation and improve governance. The mission supports the authorities’ efforts to adopt a medium-term budget framework and performance-based budgeting. The ongoing revision of the organic budget law could support these efforts, notably by including a fiscal rule that would help insulate fiscal policy from oil price volatility. The mission also recommended improving expenditure and revenue forecasting and the capacity to control spending, including by putting in place an integrated financial management information system. The authorities agreed with the need for PFM reforms and welcomed further technical assistance in this area. They are considering introducing a rule in the organic budget law that would tie current spending to nonhydrocarbon revenues. See the staff report for the 2014 Article IV consultation, IMF Country Report No. 14/341. Page 21