HYDROCARBON WEALTH Under current economic policies and trends, Algeria will deplete its financial savings in the long term, leaving future generations worse off . Like other resource-rich countries, Algeria faces the challenge of transforming finite resource wealth into other assets to support sustainable development and preserve intergenerational equity. Although the country has accumulated substantial fiscal and external buffers to date, the time horizon for hydrocarbon production is relatively short, fiscal policy is on an unsustainable path, and the current account surplus is shrinking. Under baseline assumptions, without policy adjustments, the country could become a net borrower within 20 years (with a debt-to-GDP ratio above 100 percent by 2050)—or even sooner if hydrocarbon prices experience a sustained fall. Staff advised adopting a rule-based fiscal framework to manage hydrocarbon wealth. International experience suggests that a well-designed fiscal framework can make a significant contribution to economic growth and stability in resource-rich countries. It can also help preserve fiscal and external buffers, and protect against political pressure to increase public spending. It could be particularly useful in Algeria, where fiscal policy has typically been pro-cyclical, reflecting pressures to spend hydrocarbon wealth when oil prices are high. Under current projections, the nonhydrocarbon primary deficit (NHPB) is projected to decline as a share of NHGDP, but further consolidation is necessary to ensure fiscal sustainability and long-term savings for future generations. Staff recommended the adoption of a full-fledged fiscal rule. The current framework, whereby fiscal savings accumulate in the oil savings fund (FRR) based on a budgeted oil price of US$ 37 per barrel, is incomplete, since there is no limit to the withdrawal of funds from the FRR to finance spending, and no limit on the fiscal balance. To protect fiscal savings, an appropriate fiscal rule should target a primary balance consistent with long-term sustainability and establish a limit on drawings from the FRR. Staff applied different models to determine possible paths to fiscal sustainability. Under the permanent income hypothesis (PIH), fiscal sustainability is ensured when a country sustains a Fiscal sustainability implies targeting a nonresource fiscal balance that can be maintained after resource revenue runs out. IMF staff has developed a toolkit for designing fiscal rules that aim to smooth revenue volatility and assess long- term fiscal sustainability in resource-rich countries. The toolkit includes intergenerational equity and price-based rule (continued) Page 20 constant nonhydrocarbon deficit equal to the implicit return on the present value of future national resource revenue. When applied to Algeria, the PIH rule suggests that a NHPB deficit equal to 11 percent of NHGDP on a permanent basis would ensure long-term sustainability and adequate savings for future generations. The consolidation undertaken in 2013 leaves Algeria far from the PIH benchmark. Indeed, the consolidation required under the PIH approach is substantial and difficult to implement; therefore, while the PIH would be the first-best rule to ensure intergenerational equity, a more practical approach is needed. Another approach is to combine a backward-looking, five-year oil price formula with a 5 percent floor on the “structural” primary balance and a cap on drawings from the oil savings fund. Such an approach would help Algeria manage revenue volatility stemming from fluctuating commodity prices, secure comfortable financial savings for the long term, and preserve real wealth per capita. Moreover, it would provide space to increase government debt issuance, thereby supporting the development of capital markets. Under this rule, placing the NHPB on a path that converges with the PIH benchmark in 2026 would require (1) an additional consolidation of 3 percent per year over the medium term and (2) continued fiscal consolidation in compliance with the fiscal rule over the long term. A consolidation of this magnitude is ambitious but feasible. models. See IMF, 2012, “Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries,” (Washington DC: International Monetary Fund). A structural primary balance is defined as the primary balance excluding the cyclical component of resource revenue. The choice of a price formula implies a trade-off between smoothing expenditures and adjusting to changes in price trends. Budgets that rely on price formulas with a short backward-looking horizon will better track changes in prices, but the formulas may result in more volatile spending. In contrast, budgets that rely on price rules with long backward looking formulas will have smoother expenditure paths but might under- or overshoot actual revenues if the price trend changes. Staff considered several combinations of price-based rules and structural primary balance targets (see accompanying selected issues paper). The combination presented here is one possible approach for achieving fiscal sustainability and long-term savings. The results should be interpreted with caution, however, given uncertainties regarding Algeria’s resource horizon, future oil prices, long-term GDP growth rates, and other variables. Setting a primary balance floor greater than 5 percent would safeguard against these uncertainties, and help maintain the real wealth per capita over the long term. It would also smooth spending at the end of oil production (assumed to be in 2032), after which the floor would need to be adjusted to -1 percent of NHGDP. Page 21 Staff recommended that the upcoming organic budget law include provisions for the new fiscal rule. An automatic correction mechanism could be built into the rule to adjust for ex-post deviations. An explicit set of escape clauses should also be included to allow for deviations from the rule under exceptional economic circumstances and avoid amplifying the pro-cyclical macroeconomic impact of severe shocks. The triggers for escape clauses should be strict, and a process for reactivating the rule should also be provided for. The authorities agreed in principle on the relevance of protecting fiscal savings, but they felt that the current price saving rule served them well. Staff argued that the current rule could be useful, but only if coupled with a structural primary balance target consistent with long-term sustainability. A better management of fiscal savings appears possible. The FRR—currently a government deposit in local currency at the BA—generates low effective average returns by international standards. During 2008–11, the implicit average annual return, based on dividend payments from the central bank to the government, was less than 2 percent. Staff suggested that the FRR could be converted into a sovereign wealth fund, possibly managed by the BA, adhering to best international practices, and targeting a range of objectives, including macro-fiscal management and savings for future generations. The sovereign wealth fund resources should not be used for off-budget and guarantee operations. The authorities, however, cautioned that Algeria lacks the political buy-in and specific technical skills necessary to establish a sovereign wealth fund at this time. Staff welcomed the progress in strengthening the fiscal framework to leverage the hydrocarbon windfall. The medium-term budget framework (MTBF) and performance-based budgeting are expected to come into effect in 2016, with a transition period beginning in 2015. Staff encouraged the authorities to set up medium-term budget envelopes for line ministries and identify performance-based programs as soon as the 2015 budget law, and agreed with the authorities that it will be important to ensure consistency between the upcoming five-year public investment program and the MTBF. Staff also welcomed the ongoing rationalization—and scheduled regular updates—of program authorizations, which should improve the management of capital spending. Proposed fiscal rule Price rule (5/0/0) with 0% of GDP SB target PIH Current projection NonresourcePrimary Balance (Percent nonresource GDP) Proposed fiscal rule Price rule (5/0/0) with 0% of GDP SB target PIH FRR Cumulative Financial Savings (Percent nonresource GDP) Page 22 Similarly, consistent issuance of budget review laws within two years following the end of the fiscal year is good practice that could be bolstered by shortening the complementary period. In support of what has been achieved so far, the introduction of an integrated financial management information system should be a priority for the budget office. Staff recommended that Algeria apply principles of transparency and accountability on natural resource revenue similar to EITI principles. The authorities were open to publishing a detailed account of hydrocarbon revenues in the draft budget law report and listing them as executed in the budget review law. Structural reforms in the hydrocarbon sector would support a sound fiscal framework. Extending the time horizon for hydrocarbon production and increasing exports will require more foreign investment in the oil and gas industry. The last three oil and gas licensing rounds drew limited interest from foreign investors. Since then, the authorities have adopted a new hydrocarbon law with more favorable terms, but security concerns have increased following the terrorist attack in January 2013, and the requirement that the state-owned oil company retain a minimum 51 percent stake in any hydrocarbon project remains in place. To attract more investment, reforms to improve the business environment are necessary, and careful preparation is needed to ensure the success of the planned 2014 licensing rounds. To support hydrocarbon exports growth, domestic consumption needs to be contained. Energy subsidies should be progressively eliminated and energy efficiency strengthened. The use of renewable energy sources would also help achieve this objective. Finally, the authorities should develop a strategy for diversifying export markets, especially for gas.