Hydrocarbon growth is expected to increase in 2016, but fiscal consolidation will weigh on nonhydrocarbon growth. Hydrocarbon growth is expected to accelerate to close to 2 percent as new fields come on stream and a key gas facility that closed after a terrorist attack in 2013 resumes full production. However, fiscal consolidation should weigh on nonhydrocarbon growth, which is expected to slow to 3.7 percent. Headline inflation will likely remain higher than 4 percent, driven by further dinar depreciation and increases in administered energy prices. The spending cut envisaged in the 2016 budget, combined with higher tax revenues, is projected to reduce the nonhydrocarbon deficit to 29.9 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP from 37.8 percent in 2015. The current account deficit should widen further as oil prices continue to fall, and reserves are projected to fall to 712 percent of the ARA metric. Broad money growth should remain low due to a continued decline in net foreign assets compensated in part by increased domestic debt issuance by the government. Beyond 2016, the outlook hinges on the strength of the policy response to the oil price shock. Over the medium term, Algeria's macroeconomic prospects will depend on the size and pace of fiscal consolidation, the extent of structural reforms, and the appropriateness of other policies. Staff developed three scenarios to illustrate the possible outcomes under different policy responses and highlight the policy trade-offs at play (Annex I). All scenarios factor the fiscal adjustment embedded in the 2016 budget. The baseline scenario represents the minimum effort necessary to preserve macroeconomic stability over the medium term (Tables 1-4). It assumes a gradual fiscal adjustment beyond 2016, some structural reforms, and some further real exchange rate depreciation. Under this scenario, the nonhydrocarbon deficit is projected to decline to 22.3 percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP in 2021. Nonhydrocarbon growth initially slows under the effects of fiscal consolidation but eventually accelerates as structural reforms start bearing fruit. Debt increases rapidly given large financing needs and limited remaining savings in the FRR. The current account deficit narrows as oil prices recover (as in all scenarios) and fiscal consolidation dampens import demand. Foreign exchange reserves continue to fall but remain at comfortable levels. A more ambitious reform scenario would further reduce fiscal and external vulnerabilities and increase growth potential . This scenario assumes greater fiscal consolidation through greater efforts to contain the wage bill, more efficient public investment and deeper subsidy reform, a more significant mass of structural reforms, and larger real exchange rate depreciation. This stronger policy package leads to lower debt accumulation, higher reserves, and, ultimately, faster growth. By contrast, under an illustrative no-policy-change scenario, the fiscal and external positions would quickly deteriorate. Significant government borrowing would lead to rapidly increasing debt levels and crowd out private investment, contributing to slower nonhydrocarbon growth and continued high unemployment. Page 16 Text Table 1. Key Macroeconomic Indicators under Alternative Scenarios Overall growth Nonhydrocarbon growth (percent) International reserves (months of imports) Net fiscal saving (percent of GDP) Baseline No policy Ambitious change reforms Risks are tilted to the downside (Box 2). A further prolonged decline in oil prices (which could result from lower-than-expected global growth) would worsen economic imbalances and increase financial strains. Algeria, however, is insulated from world financial market turbulence given existing capital account restrictions. Domestically, difficulties garnering a political and social consensus, particularly in a volatile regional context, could complicate the implementation of necessary reforms and ultimately lead to a more abrupt adjustment. Box 2. Algeria: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of RisksRelative LikelihoodExpected ImpactSource of impactPolicy responsePersistently lower energy prices, triggered by supply factors reversing only gradually. High High Lower oil and gas prices would worsen the current account and fiscal deficits, given Algeria's strong dependence on hydrocarbon exports.Wide-ranging structural reforms are needed to diversify the economy away from hydrocarbons. A fiscal rule, with a credible enforcement mechanism, would help shield the country from shocks arising from the hydrocarbon sector. Sharper-than-expected global growth slowdown (cid:9)Significant slowdown in other large EMs/frontier economies. MediumHighWide-ranging structural reforms are needed to diversify the economy away from hydrocarbons. A fiscal rule, with a credible enforcement mechanism, would help shield the country from shocks arising from the hydrocarbon sector.(cid:9)Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies. High/MediumHigh Dislocation in capital and labor flows (cid:9)Heightened risk of fragmentation/security dislocation in part of the Middle East, Africa, and Europe, leading to a sharp rise in migrant flows, with negative global spillovers. HighMedium/ High Heightened security concerns may benefit Algeria to the extent that they lead to higher oil prices. However, regional instability would increase pressure on the government to maintain security and social spending, thus delaying fiscal consolidation. Low trade and financial flows with the region limit the potential for direct impacts. The authorities should mount an effective communications campaign that raises awareness about the benefits of reforms and the cost of inaction. A targeted cash-transfer system would mitigate the impact of subsidy reform on the poor. Algeria-specific risks Difficulties garnering a political and social consensus around necessary reforms, particularly in a volatile regional context MediumHighA slower pace of structural reforms and fiscal consolidation could jeopardize the needed fiscal and external rebalancing and could ultimately lead to a more abrupt adjustment.The authorities should mount an effective communications campaign that raises awareness about the benefits of reforms and the cost of inaction. A targeted cash-transfer system would mitigate the impact of subsidy reform on the poor. A sharper-than-expected slowdown in global growth would negatively affect Algeria through lower oil prices. Slower growth in Europe in particular could negatively affect demand for Algeria's gas exports. Weaker demand for nonhydrocarbon exports would have little impact on the balance of payments, as nonhydrocarbon exports represent a small fraction of total exports. Financial market spillovers would be limited given Algeria's very limited financial integration with the rest of the world. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Page 17