10 to 25 percent . While the estimated magnitude of the overvaluation depends on the specific approach employed and confidence intervals are generally large and in one case undervaluation cannot be ruled out, point estimates of the three approaches show overvaluation. The current level of international reserves at the BNA appears adequate . The results of the Assessment of Reserve Adequacy (ARA) show that Angola’s level of international reserves is adequate for precautionary purposes. The assessment incorporates the stability of the exchange rate in recent years, but does not consider the high level of dollarization of the financial system, which provides an additional function for reserves. Source: IMF staff calculation, based on International Monetary Fund (2011). Page 18 Non-price competitiveness indicators support the finding of overvaluation . Angola ranked 179 out of 189 economies in 2014 in the World Bank’s "Ease of Doing Business" Index. Other indicators of competitiveness, such as the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index, show broadly the same result. Within the various dimensions of the World Bank’s index, Angola does particularly poorly in four indicators: (i) Resolving Controversies (188/189); (ii) Enforcing Contracts (188/189); (iii) Starting a Business (178/189); and (iv) Trading across Borders (169/189). Programs led by the Economy Ministry are addressing some these high costs of doing business. Restoring competitiveness requires addressing a broad range of structural impediments . Due to Angola’s high import content and consequent high pass-through to inflation, any significant depreciation of the nominal exchange rate would result in higher inflation and thus not lead to a significant effect on the real exchange rate. While staff favors gradually allowing more exchange rate flexibility, the most effective policies to address the currency overvaluation are those that improve the country’s infrastructure and address its structural competitiveness problems, such as the weak rule of law, poor contract enforcement, and difficulty in setting up a business. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the need to accelerate and deepen reforms to improve the business climate to enhance competitiveness . There were some differences in views regarding the adequacy of international reserves, which some considered to be more than adequate and thus could also be a source of budget financing. While staff agreed that this made sense from an asset-liability management perspective, it recommended clearly defining and separating the functions of international reserves between those allocated to revenue stabilization and those serving other purposes.