past decade, poverty remains high and has declined slowly relative to comparator countries The oil sector contributes substantially to output but employs a relatively small share of the working-age population and the income elasticity of poverty reduction is low. A more diversified economy, for example, driven by agriculture or services, could have a greater impact on poverty reduction, especially if supported by strengthened social safety net programs. Achieving economic diversification, however, is challenging . Angola’s exports, fiscal revenue and, to a lesser extent, output continue to be dominated by the oil sector. At the current high international oil prices, Angola’s average cost of production implies that every oil barrel has a rent in excess of US$60. While much of this rent is captured by the government through taxes and Page 15 royalties, the oil sector remains very profitable, allowing it to attract the most qualified Angolan workers. Therefore, there is a need to continue improving the business climate and developing the nonoil private sector by, inter alia, reforming the institutional and legal framework and promoting economic diversification through enhanced access to credit for entrepreneurs and to training for workers in the nonoil sector. Import tariff protection, however, should play a limited and temporary role in developing nonoil production given the risks of entrenching vested interests and perpetuating inefficiencies and high prices for consumers. Authorities’ views The authorities are confident that the measures being implemented to upgrade the country’s infrastructure and improve the business climate will allow the Angolan economy to diversify, making growth more inclusive . While they agreed that gradually removing fuel subsidies and using part of the proceeds to strengthen the country’s social safety net was appropriate to make growth more inclusive, they had doubts about the usefulness of CCT schemes for Angola at this stage. They noted that the government still needed to invest heavily in infrastructure to remove bottlenecks and support economic diversification, and expressed a preference for exploring social safety net options that would not risk discouraging workers from joining the labor force. The authorities agreed with the need to periodically review the country’s import tariff structure to ensure that vested interests do not become entrenched.