Transitioning over time to an inflation targeting (IT) framework requires advances in three key areas . First, the process of de-dollarization of the economy needs to continue its course. This will help to eliminate the currency mismatch in banks’ balance sheets and permit, over time, greater exchange rate flexibility, which will in turn reinforce de-dollarization. Second, interest rates on government securities must be determined through competitive bidding in the primary auctions. Continued de-dollarization and market-based determination of interest rates will jointly lead to greater financial deepening and an increase in the share of kwanza denominated assets, and thus to the strengthening the interest rate channel of monetary policy. Third, the BNA and the National Institute of Statistics (INE) will need to continue developing high-frequency economic indicators to provide policy makers with better and timely data to inform their decisions. Angola’s financial system has significant potential for increasing its contribution to financial intermediation and thus to economic growth, but supervision should be reinforced The increase in the number of banks has led to more competition and to lower interest rate margins. The BNA must remain vigilant of excessive risk taking by banks, limit the extent to which banks will make up lost revenue by unduly increasing fees and commissions, and avoid regulatory Skilled labor is one of the main bottlenecks for economic diversification in Angola. The country’s prolonged civil war has led to severe human capital constraints with, for example, the population from whom potential middle and upper-level managers are usually drawn among the lowest with tertiary school education in the sub-Saharan Africa. Page 16 forbearance—including the uniform enforcement of the forthcoming regulations tightening the classification of NPLs. In this context, and to contain the potential fiscal cost of the public guarantee to BESA, the authorities should closely monitor compliance with the agreed actions by BESA’s management, including lending and NPL classification practices, strictly enforce the agreed monthly provisioning plan, reduce the bank’s high reliance on short-term wholesale funding by seeking, in due course, additional capital to BESA. The insurance and pension fund sectors and the domestic capital market have the potential to increase their contribution by providing longer-term savings and financing. In order to ensure financial stability, it is important that the BNA, the Capital Markets Commission, CMC, and the Insurance Regulatory and Supervisory Agency, ARSEG, have adequate human and financial resources to perform well their regulation and supervision function. Box 4. Banco Espírito Santo Angola (BESA) Banco Espírito Santo Angola (BESA) is a commercial bank—established under Angolan law—jointly owned by Portugal’s BES (55 percent) and Angolan investors (45 percent) . At end-2012, BESA was the second largest bank in Angola by assets, accounting for 17 percent of the banking system’s total assets, but accounting for only 8¾ percent of total deposits. As a result of this balance sheet structure, the bank was more dependent on the wholesale funding market than other Angolan banks. BESA has come under pressure as the difficulties at its majority owner, Banco Espírito Santo (BES) of Portugal, mounted . The BNA acknowledged on July 17, 2014, that BESA faced difficulties with its loan portfolio and indicated that the BNA would ask BESA’s shareholders to increase their equity capital contributions. In the absence of new capital, the BNA announced on August 4, 2014, extraordinary measures to address BESA’s situation . These include the appointment of provisional administrators to carry out an overhaul of BESA. The BNA also stressed that BESA’s depositors would be protected and that business relations with existing clients would continue, and noted that the sovereign guarantee of US$5.7 billion extended in December 2013 would eventually be revoked. BESA’s financial difficulties are not expected to destabilize Angola’s banking system . The exposure of other banks to BESA in the interbank market is limited, as lending is backed by guarantees in the form of government securities. Moreover, BNA’s intervention, by appointing new managers and reassuring depositors that they are protected, has ring-fenced the rest of the banking system. Up until the week ending July 31, 2014, there were no signs of stress in the interbank market. Progress continues to be made to improve Angola’s anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework . The AML/CFT law was amended in January 2014, addressing some of the most pressing outstanding issues identified by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), and Angola’s Financial Intelligence Unit has recently been endorsed as a new member of the Egmont Group. In June 2014, the FATF encouraged the authorities to make further improvements by, inter alia, addressing the remaining issues regarding criminalization of money laundering and ensuring that Angola has an adequate legal framework for the confiscation of funds related to money laundering. Page 17 Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that one of the first steps in the transition toward an IT regime is allowing for the market-determination of interest rates for treasury securities . They stressed the need to proceed cautiously in allowing greater exchange rate flexibility, noting that the current high pass-through to prices ruled out significant changes in the nominal exchange rate. On high-frequency indicators, the authorities mentioned several areas in which they were making progress, including quarterly national accounts, which are scheduled for release in 2015. The authorities noted that the forthcoming regulations on NPLs would help to strengthen bank supervision, and highlighted their commitment and ongoing actions to improve the AML/CFT framework and foster the development of the domestic capital market They see the latter as a priority to deepen the market, facilitate financing for private companies, strengthen the transmission channel for monetary policy, and further de-dollarization. The authorities also noted that in the short-term this process could entail higher financial costs for the treasury which, however, would be compensated with long-term gains in growth and competitiveness. Empirical models suggest that the real exchange rate appears overvalued by