RISKS The economy has been severely affected by lower international oil prices Growth slowed to 3 percent in 2015, driven by a very sharp slowdown in non-oil activity to 1½ percent as the industrial, construction, and services sectors adjusted to cuts in private consumption and public investment amid more limited availability of foreign exchange, and agriculture underperformed its potential due to supply shocks. High frequency economic activity indicators point to a deeper slowdown in 2016, with the business confidence reaching all-time lows in the second and third quarters of 2016. Inflation reached 41 percent in November 2016, year-on-year, reflecting a weaker kwanza, higher domestic fuel prices, and loose monetary conditions until the first half of the year. Fiscal policy was tightened. The overall fiscal deficit narrowed to 3¼ percent of GDP in 2015, with the non-oil primary fiscal balance improving by 12¼ percent of GDP given large reductions in spending on subsidies, goods and services, and investment. Budget under- execution in the first nine months of 2016 led to an additional improvement in the non-oil primary fiscal balance, but an estimated 3 percent of GDP in domestic payments arrears have accumulated. The BNA tightened monetary policy recently. Base money contracted by 3 percent in October 2016, year-on-year, from an expansion of 25 percent in May 2016, and banking The Government has been implementing a well-designed fuel subsidy reform. On December 31, 2015, domestic fuel prices were increased for the fourth time since September 2014. With this latest increase, subsidies on diesel were fully eliminated and the price of diesel liberalized, adding this product to already liberalized gasoline, asphalt, and light and heavy fuel oil prices. LPG and kerosene domestic prices were also increased on the occasion, but remain subsidized at about 40 percent and 10 percent, respectively. Page 9 sector excess liquidity declined to ⅓ percent of GDP in November 2016, from 1½ percent of GDP in May 2016. Short-term interest rates, however, remain negative in real terms. The health of the banking system deteriorated driven by slower growth. The banking system’s capital adequacy ratio declined to 18¾ percent in September 2016 compared to 19¾ percent in December 2015, while NPLs increased to 15¼ percent from 11½ percent during the same period, reflecting lower ability of corporates to meet obligations as growth slowed. Commercial banks have managed to contain a more significant deterioration of financial stability indicators (FSIs) through increased provisioning and stricter underwriting to mitigate credit risk, and some corporate loan restructuring. In September 2016, five banks, including the systemically-important state-owned BPC, were undercapitalized and needed to meet prudential requirements. The external current account deficit widened, but net international reserves (NIR) remained relatively comfortable at US$24¼ billion at end-2015. The external current account deficit reached 10 percent of GDP in 2015, compared to 3 percent of GDP in 2014, as lower exports were only partially offset by lower imports. The trade balance improved in the first ten months of 2016, as lower exports were offset by a sharper import contraction. NIR declined to US$20⅓ billion in November 2016, as the BNA increased its sales of foreign exchange (forex) amid shortages in the market, financed in part by US$2 billion (with 2-5 year terms) in Repo transactions, using some of its reserve assets (U.S. Treasury bonds) as collateral. Significant imbalances in the forex market remain . Despite a devaluation of the official exchange rate against the U.S. dollar of more than 40 percent between September 2014 and April 2016, and BNA’s increased provision of forex to the market in recent months, the parallel-official exchange rate spread has remained high and volatile (190 percent in November 2016), and the backlog of forex purchase orders in the banking system is estimated conservatively at about US$3 billion. The outlook for 2016 is adverse . Growth is projected to have come to a halt, with the non- oil sector contracting by ½ percent dragged down by the industrial, construction, and services sectors; industrial production, despite the potential for import substitution, is constrained by shortages of imported inputs due to limited forex availability. Annual inflation is expected to reach 45 percent by end-2016—the highest rate in over a decade—reflecting higher domestic fuel prices, a weaker kwanza, and the lagged effects of loose monetary conditions until the first half of 2016, despite an improvement of 5¾ percent of GDP in the non-oil primary fiscal balance in 2016. These transactions have no effect on the NIR level as the BNA’s loss of liquid assets—since securities used as collateral are not liquid during the contract period—is offset by its cash borrowing. Consistent with STA recommended methodology, however, gross reserves increase as a result of such transactions. The kwanza has been re-pegged to the U.S. dollar since April 2016. The parallel market rate should not be interpreted as the equilibrium rate as this is a very thin market with a narrow subset of transactions in banknotes. Page 10 Linkages from the real sector to the financial sector are limited. As noted above, commercial banks have been affected by the economic slowdown, leading to higher NPLs. The private credit linkages from the financial sector to the real sector have become less significant recently due in part to increased credit risk with banks in particular reducing consumer and mortgage lending as well as reducing loans to mining and construction. Historically, the level of credit to the private sector has been relatively low, with banks channeling to the private sector less than a half of their domestic assets. As economic growth slows, banks are further tightening lending standards and this may delay, at the margin, a recovery. Under the baseline scenario, the outlook for 2017 is slightly better, but subject to downside risks . Growth would pick up to 1¼ percent in 2017, with the non-oil sector expanding by the same magnitude due to higher public spending and better terms-of-trade. Inflation would decline to 20 percent by end-2017, assuming tight monetary conditions, no further domestic fuel price increases, and a stable kwanza. NIR is projected to decline further to US$17½ billion. Under the staff’s proposed adjustment scenario discussed below, growth is projected to accelerate at a faster pace and inflation to decline to single digits over the medium term While slower in the near term, non-oil growth would increase over time reflecting, in addition to improved terms-of-trade and the completion of several important projects, a more competitive real effective exchange rate (REER) and a faster pace of implementation of structural reforms, including a more forceful improvement in the business environment leading to increased private investment. Inflation is projected to decline as monetary policy is tightened upfront more aggressively, returning to the BNA’s annual inflation objective of 7-9 percent at the end of the projection period. Delaying the needed policy adjustment measures until 2018—after a new government is formed following the elections—is likely to increase the cost of adjustment and delay its future benefits. This medium-term outlook under the baseline scenario is not without risks and is not the desirable outcome . Growth is projected to remain barely positive and below population growth, inflation is expected to decline only gradually, fiscal space would be limited, and imbalances in the forex market would remain. Angola faces the challenge of balancing the pressures from lower oil revenue compared to 2010-13 levels and high demand for much needed improvements in the country’s physical infrastructure and human capital and poverty alleviation. This will require a better balance between current and capital spending rationalization, making fiscal consolidation more sustainable over the medium term. The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that Angola’s public debt remains sustainable but is highly sensitive to shocks, including to the international price of oil, real GDP growth, financial contingent liability, and the exchange rate. Risks are tilted to the downside (Risk Assessment Matrix) . They include lower oil prices, difficulties to control spending in the run-up to next year’s elections, continued imbalances in the forex market, a sustained period of low growth with limited opportunities to address social needs, This scenario assumes a depreciation of the kwanza vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar of 30 percent in 2016 and 45 percent in Page 11 global banks’ withdrawal of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs), delays in the recapitalization of weaker banks, and slippages in the implementation of structural reforms. Spillovers : Outward spillovers to the region are generally limited given Angola’s marginal trade and financial flows with countries in the region, although a few countries, such as the Democratic Republic of Congo and Namibia, which border Angola, are being more affected by the economic difficulties in Angola through cross-border trade. Although Angola is Portugal’s largest export market outside the EU and several Portuguese banks are present in the Angolan banking system through joint-ventures with local investors, the magnitude of these interests remain relatively small if compared with the size of the Portuguese economy. On the other hand, inward spillovers from China and Europe could be tangible if their economic growth significantly slows down, putting further downward pressure on oil prices. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s overall assessment of the outlook and risks But they expect growth to be stronger and headline inflation lower than staff’s baseline scenario.