RISKS Economic growth in 2015 is projected to slow to 3½ percent due to the adverse effects on the economy of the sudden and sharp decline in international oil prices . While oil production has recovered following the completion of maintenance work, non-oil GDP growth is expected to decelerate to 2 percent in 2015 (the lowest rate since the end of the civil conflict). The industrial, construction and services sectors are adjusting to cuts in private consumption and public investment amid a more limited availability of foreign exchange. Inflation is projected to reach 14 percent at end-2015, exceeding the National Bank of Angola (BNA)’s 7-9 percent objective . It already increased to 11 percent (y-o-y) in August 2015, from a historically low 6.9 percent in June 2014, reflecting the effects of a weaker kwanza (given Angola’s heavy reliance on imports), higher domestic fuel prices (due to ongoing fuel subsidy reform) and, in the first half of the year, loose monetary conditions. The National Assembly approved in March a revised budget for 2015 consistent with an overall fiscal deficit of 7 percent of GDP and an improvement of 15 percent of GDP in the non-oil primary deficit . The revised budget assumes an oil price of US$40 per bbl but projects an ambitious increase in non-oil revenue mainly due to improvements in revenue administration. On the expenditure side, goods and services, fuel subsidies, and public investment are cut by percent of GDP, but wages and salaries increase by 2 percent of GDP due to the hiring of previously selected civil servants for the education and health sectors. Page 10 While the budget posted an overall fiscal surplus of 1 percent of annual GDP in the first half of 2015, staff projects a deficit at 3½ percent of GDP for the year as a whole as spending execution is expected to increase . This projection also assumes an oil price of US$53 per bbl, implying additional oil revenue of 5 percent of GDP compared to the revised budget; staff is less optimistic about the prospects for an increase in non-oil revenue collection in 2015 as improvements in revenue administration are likely to continue being offset by lower collections at the border as imports decline. Total spending is projected to be broadly in line with the revised budget, but its composition differs as spending on subsidies and investment is higher under staff’s projections. Budget financing under staff’s fiscal projections appears achievable . The authorities have already secured or are finalizing negotiations on external loans from bilaterals (China, Japan) and international organizations (World Bank, African Development Bank, AfDB), and are planning to place a maiden US$1.5 billion Eurobond this year. They are also negotiating the terms of bilateral loans with Brazil and China to reduce payments due in 2015 and 2016. If these plans are successfully implemented, sufficient resources should be available to avoid the accumulation of new domestic payments arrears in 2015, and to clear arrears accumulated in 2014 that had not been settled by end-June 2015 (1⅓ percent of GDP). Given the projected fiscal deficit, a more depreciated exchange rate, and the expected decline in nominal GDP due to lower oil prices, Angola’s public debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase by 15 percentage points, to 57½ percent in 2015. Although the official exchange rate of the kwanza vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar has declined by almost 30 percent since September 2014, foreign exchange market imbalances remain . The BNA has used international reserves at a measured pace to smooth the devaluation, and adopted a priority list for access to foreign exchange at the official rate, with higher priority for imports of food, medicine, inputs for agriculture and industry, and the oil sector. The foreign exchange market, however, remains in disequilibrium with the spread between the parallel and official exchange rates rising from about 15 percent in September 2014 to around 65 percent in early October 2015. Angola: Key Economic Indicators, 2014 and 2015 Original and Revised Budgets 20142015H1 2015Prel.OriginalRevisedIMF StaffPrel. 34.631.023.427.411.9Oil23.418.99.014.66.0Non-oil8.910.512.510.44.7 Total expenditure 41.138.730.330.911.0Current expenditure28.828.524.924.19.9Compensation of employees10.411.612.912.25.2Use of goods and services9.810.26.05.81.5Subsidies5.32.81.32.11.0Capital expenditure12.210.15.56.81.1 Overall fiscal balance -6.4-7.6-7.0-3.50.9Angolan oil price 100.781.040.053.055.0Inflation rate (percent)7.57.09.013.99.6Average exchange rate (AOA/US$)98.399.1112.5…115.8Real GDP Growth rate (percent change)4.89.76.63.5…Oil sector-2.610.79.86.8…Non-oil sector8.29.25.32.1…Sources: Angolan authorities and IMF staff projections. Average, U.S. dollars per barrel. 2015 Budget(In percent of GDP unless otherwise noted) Page 11 The BNA has tightened monetary policy, but excess liquidity in the banking system remains relatively high . The BNA has raised its policy rate by 175 bps since September 2014, and increased reserve requirements for kwanza deposits by 12½ percentage points (to 25 percent). Despite these efforts, excess liquidity in late-September 2015 is estimated at ¾ percent of GDP, and short-term interest rates on kwanza denominated T-bills, although trending upward, remain negative in real terms. Given the economic slowdown, financial soundness indicators have been gradually deteriorating with some banks showing urgent recapitalization needs Non-performing loans (NPLs) in the banking system increased to 18 percent of total loans in July 2015, from 12 percent in December 2014. In addition, a few banks need additional capital and are facing liquidity challenges. The BNA has already requested those banks to submit recapitalization plans and has been closely monitoring their implementation, although progress has been slow. The linkages from the real sector to the financial sector are significant . As noted above, commercial banks have been affected by the economic slowdown, leading to higher NPLs. The linkages from the financial sector to the real sector are, however, more limited. Even in normal times, the level of credit to the private sector has been relatively low, with banks channeling to the private sector less than a half of their overall resources available for lending. As economic growth slows, banks are further tightening their lending standards and this may delay, at the margin, a recovery. The external environment in 2016 is likely to remain challenging as international oil prices are not expected to recover and risks are on the downside . Growth is projected to remain stable at 3½ percent in 2016, with the oil sector growing by about 4 percent. The non-oil sector is expected to show a small improvement with respect to the 2015 projection, growing by 3½ percent, driven mainly by agriculture. Inflation is projected to slow to 13 percent at end-2016, with the effect of the recent monetary tightening expected to be felt more clearly in the second half of 2016 given lags in monetary policy transmission (see below). The external accounts are weakening as a result of the sharp decline in oil exports, but imports are beginning to adjust, and international reserves, though gradually declining, are projected to remain at relatively comfortable levels. The outlook is for a recovery starting in 2017 but there is significant downside risk, including a further decline in oil prices. Assuming an oil price of US$53 per bbl, staff projects an overall fiscal deficit of 1½ percent of GDP in 2016 . Oil revenue is expected to reach 15½ percent of GDP, implying only a 1 percent of GDP increase compared to 2015 projections. Non-oil revenue is expected to remain constant as a share of non-oil GDP as improvements in revenue administration are likely to continue being offset by declining imports. Public spending is projected to decline by 2 percent of GDP in 2016, mostly due to a fall in the public wage bill as a share of GDP, reflecting a freeze in nominal The Angolan banks showed relatively solid fundamentals at an aggregate level until 2014, but their balance sheets have generally deteriorated in recent years, and some banks showed particular weaknesses ( see Selected Issues on www.imf.org Page 12 Figure 1. Angola: Selected High Frequency Indicators Sources: Angolan authorities; and IMF staffcalculations. The sharp decline in December 2014 is considered to be related to written-off credit by BESA that was removed from the series. Inflation (Percent, y-o-y) Official and Parallel Exchange Rates (Kwanzas per U.S. dollars)Official exchangerate (kwanza per U.S. dollar)Spread of parallel overofficialexchange rate (RHS, percent) Credit to the Private Sector (Percent, y-o-y) INE's Business Confidence Index (Difference between positive and negative responses to a survey of perception of economic conditions in percentage points) Imports and Exports (Percent, y-o-y, three-month moving average) ImportsExports Net International Reserves at the BNA (Billions of U.S. dollars) Page 13 Figure 2. Angola: Selected Monetary Indicators, 2005-2015 Sources: Angolan authoritiesand IMF staff calculations. Policy Rate Overnight Interbank Rate (Luibor) 3-Month T-Bill Rate Interest Rates Broad Money (M3) Money (M2) Base Money Money Supply (Percent, y-o-y, 3-month moving average) Required Reserves Excess Reserves Commercial Banks' Reserve Position at the BNA (Trillions of kwanzas) Claims on Central Bank Claims on Central Government Claims on Other Sectors Commercial Banks' Asset Allocation (Percent of gross domestic assets) Page 14 Figure 3. Angola: Fiscal Projections, International Reserves, and Exchange Rate Developments for Selected Oil Exporters, 2014-2015 For Cameroon, Chad, Republic of Congo and Equatorial Guinea the latest available data for Gross International Reserves is April 2015. SelectedWorld Oil ExportersSelectedSSA Oil Exporters Sources: National authorities, Bloomberg,and IMF staff calculations and projections. Share of oil exports was calculated as the average ratio of oil exports to total exports of goods and services during 2011- 13. Currency depreciation was calculated as the change of the exchange rate between the country's currency and the U.S. dollar between August 2014 and September 2015. Change in international reserves was calculated as the change in gross international reserves in U.S. dollars from August 2014 to the latest available data. For example, the latest available data for Cameroon, Chad, Republic of Congo and Equatorial Guinea is April 2015. Share of oil-related fiscal revenue was calculated as the average ratio of oil-related fiscal revenue and total fiscal revenue during 2011-13. Non-oil primary fiscal adjustment was calculated as the percentage change in the non-oil primary fiscal budget (in percentage points of GDP) between 2014 estimates and 2015 projections. SAURUSAREIRQNGAKWT AGOKAZVEN OMNMEX rr AGO CMR TCDCOG GNQNGA rr SAU RUS ARE IRQNGA KWTAGO KAZVEN OMNMEX I R v AGOCMRTCDCOGGNQNGA I R v SAU RUSARE IRQ NGA KWT AGOKAZ VEN OMNMEX N O il F A d j f G Share of Oil-Related Fiscal Revenue (Percent) AGO CMR TCDCOG GNQ NGA N O il F A d j f G Share of Oil-Related Fiscal Revenue (Percent) Page 15 wages and new hires. While public investment is projected to increase to 7½ percent of GDP, the early formulation of an external borrowing plan will be important to avoid delays in the implementation of the public investment program. The public debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to decline to 53 percent in 2016. Non-oil GDP growth is expected to accelerate gradually over the medium term, reaching 7 percent in 2020 . This reflects the expectation of an improved business climate, a more competitive exchange rate, and the completion of important projects, including in agriculture and infrastructure. However, oil production is expected to level off at 1.85 million bbl per day, with downside risks. Inflation is projected to decline gradually, and the external current account deficit is expected to be reduced due to improved oil prices and import substitution, particularly of agricultural and light industry products. This medium-term outlook, however, is not without risks . Angola faces the challenge of balancing the pressures from lower oil revenue compared to 2010-13 levels and high demand for much needed improvements in the country’s physical infrastructure and human capital and poverty alleviation. This will require a better balance between current and capital spending rationalization, making fiscal consolidation more sustainable over the medium term. The debt sustainability analysis shows that Angola’s public debt remains sustainable but, at the same time, it is sensitive to several shocks, including to the international price of oil, real GDP growth, and the exchange rate. Downside risks include lower oil prices, a disorderly implementation of spending cuts, continued imbalances in the foreign exchange market, delays in the recapitalization of weaker banks, and slippages in the implementation of structural reforms (Risk Assessment Matrix). In the short term, lower oil prices should be met by increased exchange rate flexibility and tighter monetary policy. Mitigating medium-term risks requires both improvements to the fiscal framework and economic diversification. Spillovers from the world economy to Angola are significant, but from Angola to the world or regional economy are relatively small . The main channel of inward spillovers, as noted above, is the international oil price given the continued heavy reliance on oil for fiscal revenue and export proceeds. The oil price shock is adversely affecting the fiscal and external accounts and leading the economy to slow. Spillovers from Angola to the world or regional economy are relatively small. Although Angola is the largest export market for Portugal outside the European Union and several Portuguese banks are present in the Angolan banking system through joint ventures with local investors, the magnitude of these interests remain relatively small if compared with the size of the Portuguese economy. Angola’s trade and financial flows within Africa are still fairly limited. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s overall assessment of the outlook and risks However, they project growth to be slightly stronger. They recognize the risk of higher headline inflation in 2015 but have been taking steps to contain the second round effects on inflation of the ongoing needed change in the relative price of tradables and non-tradables. While public spending Page 16 fell sharply in the first half of the year, the authorities expect an acceleration of the execution of public investment projects in the second half of the year. The authorities mentioned that preparations for the Eurobond placement were advanced, and they were aware of the advantages of collective action clauses. They agreed with the importance of avoiding a general wage increase in the 2016 budget but see a need for new hires in the priority sectors of education and health. In their view, this could be accommodated by the elimination of “ghost” workers following the conclusion in late 2015 of the ongoing biometric census of civil servants, and by higher non-oil taxes. The authorities agreed with the urgency to restructure and recapitalize weaker banks and noted that steps in this direction are being taken (see below). Addressing the imbalances in the foreign exchange market is a high priority for the authorities . In this connection, the BNA has tightened monetary policy and, after a brief interruption in July/August, resumed devaluing the kwanza against the U.S. dollar. The authorities stressed, however, the importance of separating legitimate from speculative demand for foreign exchange and noted that the priority list for access to foreign exchange has been helpful to maintaining food security and social peace in Angola. The authorities agreed with staff’s debt sustainability analysis . They also see the need for fiscal consolidation over the medium term to reduce public debt-to-GDP ratios. They stressed, however, the importance of distinguishing between central government debt and state-owned enterprises’ debt, in particular that of Sonangol, which is not guaranteed by the central government.