An overall fiscal deficit of the magnitude envisaged in the draft budget for 2017 would leave the economy vulnerable to lower-than-projected oil prices and heightened concerns about public debt sustainability For 2017, targeting an overall fiscal deficit of no more than 2¼ percent of GDP that is consistent with an improvement of at least 1 percent of GDP in the non-oil primary fiscal balance—in line with the gradual adjustment that would be needed over the External financing of the 2017 budget is envisaged to come from bilateral credit lines/loans. No Eurobond placement is envisaged. Page 12 medium term to put public debt on a clear downward path—could be achieved through additional spending rationalization. The following measures could be considered to achieve this objective: (i) granting no wage increase (⅔ percent of GDP vis-à-vis the baseline scenario); (ii) using for deficit reduction the wage bill savings from the ongoing biometric census of civil servants (up to ½ percent of GDP); (iii) further rationalizing spending on goods and services (up to 1 percent of GDP); and (iv) maintaining the execution of public investment in line with recent (lower) execution rates (¾ percent of GDP). Over the medium term, permanently lower oil revenue needs to be offset by expenditure rationalization and higher non-oil revenue; and fiscal institutions need to be strengthened to properly manage oil revenue volatility . Important steps have been already taken in this direction, including the comprehensive program to gradually eliminate fuel subsidies and reforms to strengthen non-oil revenue, including by enlarging the tax base; creating a single revenue administration agency; strengthening tax inspections; and better enforcing real estate taxation. The following additional policies and structural fiscal reforms would be needed to cement medium-term fiscal sustainability: Targeting a non-oil primary fiscal consolidation path of 1 percent of GDP annually over the medium term which, under current assumptions regarding international oil prices, would be consistent with eliminating the overall fiscal deficit by 2018 and placing debt on a clearly declining path. Strengthening the credibility of the Law on Public Debt by introducing an escape clause to the 60 percent of GDP debt ceiling when the economy is subject to a large exogenous shock, while introducing a transparent mechanism to ensure convergence over time to the 60 percent of GDP debt ceiling. Strengthening the ongoing efforts to enlarge the tax base, improve tax inspections, and better enforce real estate taxation; and introducing a VAT on January 1, 2019 (Box 1). If implemented diligently, a VAT would provide a stable revenue source for the budget, W Gross borrowing needs15.7Overall fiscal deficit6.7Amortization9.0External3.4Domestic5.6Gross financing sources15.7External7.2Domestic8.5Sources: Angolan authorities; and IMF staff projections. Angola: Gross Financing Needs and Sources, 2017 (In percent of GDP) Page 13 reducing the budget's heavy dependency on oil revenue and shielding it better from oil revenue volatility. Using part of the additional fiscal space to expand well-targeted social programs for the vulnerable and increasing infrastructure spending in line with absorptive capacity. Reducing the wage bill as a share of GDP, as the size of the public administration is streamlined and reformed by focusing on the efficient provision of public goods; aligning wage increases in the public sector with productivity gains and performance indicators. Adjusting domestic fuel prices to reflect increases (or decreases) in international gasoline and diesel prices and taking into account movements in the exchange rate. Eliminating electricity and water tariff subsidies as ongoing investments increase the supply of both products, while adopting lifeline rates to protect the poor. Improving the quality of public investment through enhancing compliance of the public investment management process with existing legislation; prioritizing and monitoring the execution of projects; conducting ex-ante and ex-post project evaluations; improving technical capacity to select and monitor projects; and developing a database of reference prices to better assess the cost of projects. Adopting an improved medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) focusing on spending rules and a well-designed fiscal stabilization fund with clear deposit and withdrawal rules would contribute to smoothing oil revenue volatility and reduce pro-cyclicality of spending in the future. In addition, the MTFF should assess spending needs associated with maintaining and running investment projects once those are completed, and investment projects should only be approved and started if there is fiscal space for their (future) current spending needs. Accelerating the process of restructuring, privatizing, and/or closing state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to reduce their burden or potential burden to the Treasury. In the case of Sonangol, it will be important to consider rationalizing its very large workforce and divest some of its non-core businesses, making the company more efficient and focused on its oil and gas core business and reducing financing needs going forward. Staff estimates that the domestic price of gasoline and diesel should be adjusted immediately by about 40 percent to restore the authorities’ commitment to eliminate explicit (or implicit) subsidies to these products. 20142015Prel. Total0.9-0.3Sonangol1.10.3Other SOEs-0.2-0.6Source: Angolan authorities. Angola. Operational Balance of SOEs, 2014-15 (In percent of GDP) Page 14 Box 1. Angola: Broadening the Tax Base Angola’s tax base remains heavily dependent on oil revenues, that even after the oil price collapse, contributed 56 percent of total revenues. Key component of the non-oil revenue base is a consumption tax (IC) with a very narrow base. It excludes the activities of the primary sector of the economy; the value added by the commercial sector, in particular, the part of the value added to the manufacturing sector that corresponds to profit; and some services. Although the standard rate of the IC is 10 percent, many products are subject to a reduced rate (2 percent), most services are taxed at 5 percent, and other rates range from 15 to 80 percent. Moreover, there is a stamp duty whose main incidence is on invoices. The authorities are considering replacing the IC with a VAT. Possible reform could include: (i) the adoption of a single positive VAT rate (with the zero rate applying exclusively to exports); (ii) the introduction of an excise tax; (iii) the elimination of about 50 percent of the incidence of the stamp duty; (iv) a reform of the tax on property transfers (SISA) to avoid double taxation; and (v) a very high threshold for the VAT (the equivalent in kwanzas to an annual gross revenue of $250,000) since an existing law already excludes businesses with lower gross revenues from keeping accounting procedures that are necessary to comply with VAT regulations, and because a high threshold would facilitate the introduction and management of the VAT. Preliminary rough estimates suggest that a VAT rate of 10 percent could yield about 2.5 percent of GDP in revenue to Angola. Staff estimates that the VAT could be introduced as early as January 1, 2019 but it is important to ensure appropriate preparation prior to implementation: the Tax Authority (AGT) needs to strengthen its institutional capacity; AGT staff training and communication with taxpayers and other stakeholders will need to be improved. Moreover, the VAT should only be implemented after new IT systems for customs and domestic tax administration are put in place, tested, and prepared. Authorities’ views The authorities did not dispute the need for fiscal consolidation over the medium term, but stressed the urgent need in the near term to support growth after two years of fiscal retrenchment. Consequently, a mildly expansionary budget for 2017 has been approved by the National Assembly. They noted that public debt remains manageable and the needed increase in infrastructure investment can be financed. At the same time, they are committed to scaling back public spending from budgeted levels, if external funding is not forthcoming as projected. The authorities remain interested in working closely with the Fund on fiscal structural reform, including a VAT, although they believe a VAT may take up to four years to be introduced in Angola. The authorities mentioned that they are in the process of closing 48 SOEs that are nonoperational and privatizing 53 others. In addition, a restructuring plan for Sonangol was launched in June 2016 to be implemented over 24 months. The newly appointed Board plans to refocus Sonangol on its core oil and gas businesses while making the company more transparent and efficient.