Greater exchange rate flexibility supported by tight monetary conditions remains critical to orderly address forex market imbalances and provide a nominal anchor to the economy . The large imbalances in the forex market, if unaddressed, could lead to a disorderly adjustment of the exchange rate, a sharp acceleration in inflation, and bank losses given the still somewhat high level of dollarization in the economy. The external balance assessment (EBA) shows that the REER was overvalued by 8 percent to 42 percent in 2015. The REER is projected to have Page 15 depreciated by only 2 percent in 2016 and, absent a policy change, appreciate by 20-25 percent in 2017. Measures to help enhance the monetary policy framework with the aim of supporting a smooth transition to a more flexible exchange rate regime include: Adopting a managed float from a position of strength given the still relatively comfortable level of international reserves. While the exchange rate may overshoot initially, it would stabilize at a level consistent with correcting the estimated REER overvaluation, if supporting fiscal and monetary policies are in place. Unwinding the administrative measures adopted last year, including giving priority access to forex purchases, as greater exchange rate flexibility is introduced. These restrictions have encouraged misallocation of resources and exacerbated the scarcity of necessary imported inputs, constraining growth and adding to inflationary pressures. Shifting to a base money target consistent with the inflation objective and proactively conducting monetary operations to achieve the target and anchor inflation expectations. In particular, base money growth should be kept close to zero over the next several months to break inflation expectations, bringing three-month T-bill rates to positive territory in real terms. Conducting monetary policy operations independently to bring credibility to the new monetary policy framework. Enhancing liquidity forecasting and management capacity, being more proactively engaged in open market operations, and strengthening coordination with the ministry of finance to mitigate the impact of fiscal operations on monetary conditions and facilitating the BNA to achieve the base money target. Additional efforts to strengthen monetary policy are critical to enhance policy effectiveness and contain vulnerabilities, including Narrowing the policy interest rate corridor to 500 bps to enhance traction of its monetary policy decisions and make monetary policy more effective, and adjusting the interest rate policy, as needed, to signal the policy stance to the interbank and T-bill markets. Maintaining ongoing efforts to improve inflation forecasting and liquidity management, including by lengthening the horizon of the daily liquidity forecasting exercise to a rolling monthly period. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that monetary conditions should remain tight in coming months, but considered important at the present time to preserve the exchange rate peg to help contain inflation given the high pass-through of the exchange rate to prices . The Page 16 authorities reiterated their strong commitment to bring inflation down quickly, noting that monetary conditions were significantly tightened in recent months and inflation is already subsiding.