Stability Monetary and exchange rate policies should play a central role in rebalancing the foreign exchange market . The large imbalances in the foreign exchange market, if unaddressed, could lead to a disorderly adjustment of the exchange rate, a sharp acceleration in inflation, and bank losses given the still high level of dollarization in the economy (Box 2). Addressing this issue calls for a holistic solution that includes further depreciation of the kwanza, moderate use of international reserves to smooth out the depreciation, and tighter monetary policy supported by fiscal adjustment to contain the effects of the weaker currency on inflation. Monetary policy should aim at significantly reducing excess liquidity in the banking system by restarting open market operations while pushing interest rates on kwanza-denominated T-bills to positive territory in real terms. Adoption of this holistic solution would allow the elimination of the priority list for access to foreign exchange at the official rate. The BNA should also work closely with the banks facing liquidity issues on a plan to reduce and eventually eliminate their liquidity needs. The BNA needs to adopt a clear monetary policy anchor and should increasingly base its monetary policy decisions on the evolution of monetary aggregates within a band consistent with its inflation objective . Since September 2014, when the BNA effectively abandoned the nominal exchange rate as the de facto monetary policy anchor, it has yet to adopt an alternative anchor. There is a risk that its actions appear ad-hoc, undermining the BNA’s credibility and potentially raising inflation expectations. It is thus critical, in an environment of more flexible exchange rates, for the BNA to increasingly base its monetary policy decisions on the evolution of monetary aggregates within a band consistent with its inflation objective. In this context, improving inflation forecasting and liquidity management tools are important to achieving this objective. Monetary policy transmission in Angola remains limited. Therefore, strengthening BNA’s monetary Staff estimates the negative impact of 50 percent devaluation on the capital of the banking system to be about 4 percent of GDP. Although banks are generally long in U.S. dollars and their balance sheet would thus benefit from a devaluation of the kwanza, they would also see an increase in non-performing loans in foreign-currency denominated loans. While changes in the interest policy rate are transmitted to the overnight Luibor and bank deposit rates, the speed of adjustment is slow ( see Selected Issues on www.imf.org Page 20 policy instruments, while allowing for effective control of liquidity, and developing a track record of meeting an operational reserve monetary target are essential. Box 2. Angola: Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Angola Exchange rate stability was a key feature of Angola’s disinflation strategy in 2010-14. However, the kwanza has depreciated by almost 30 percent in the last 12 months as significantly lower international oil prices sharply reduced the availability of foreign exchange in the country. Assessing the exchange rate pass-through on inflation is important to help policymakers design monetary and foreign exchange policies. Staff estimated for Angola the pass-through effects of the exchange rate to consumer price inflation with emphasis on the evolution of the pass-through over time. A Vector Error Correction model was applied to the consumer prices index (CPI), nominal effective exchange rate (NEER), and trade-weighted export prices of the top import origin countries, controlling for international food and oil prices as well as Angola’s output gap. The long-run and short-run relationships between these variables were assessed using monthly data from May 2005 through April 2015. In the long term, there is a negative impact of the NEER on CPI, with a weakening impact in more recent years probably reflecting the de-dollarization of the economy. Specifically, a 1 percent decline in the NEER leads to an increase in CPI of 0.63 percent in 2005-2010. However, the effect declined over time, to 0.49 percent in 2008- 2015 and 0.34 percent in 2011-2015 The implementation of plans to restructure and recapitalize weaker banks needs to be accelerated . Unduly delaying the resolution of problem banks could lead to disorderly bank failures with potential knock on effects on the rest of the banking system and the economy together with large costs for the Treasury. In addition, conducting rigorous stress tests with sufficiently adverse scenarios (e.g., 50 percent devaluation and zero growth) to detect potentially weak banks at an early stage would be very helpful. Financial sector deepening would help stimulate economic growth . The authorities have made good progress on implementing the 2012 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) recommendations especially on governance, supervision, and resolution mechanism. Among others, the recently approved Financial Institutions Law stipulated the creation of a Deposit Guarantee Fund, the Bank Resolution Fund, and an inter-institutional National Council of Financial Stability. However, more needs to be done on crisis prevention measures, such as the Emergency Liquidity Facilities and contingency planning. Meanwhile, Angola’s capital markets together with its insurance and pension funds are still small and their development holds a large potential to support economic growth by The BNA is preparing supporting regulations to define their details. The World Bank plans to provide technical assistance in this area. Page 21 providing alternative long-term saving options and financing sources. In this regard, an important step was taken by the launch of Angola’s Securities Exchange (BODIVA) at the end of last year. The Capital Market Commission (CMC) together with the Ministry of Finance is currently preparing a regulatory framework for the secondary market trading of government bonds. The authorities have made good progress in strengthening the country’s Anti Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework . A Law on Criminalization of Money Laundering Predicate Offences has been enacted; and a Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), which has been admitted as a member of the Egmont Group, established. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) will soon review the recently-approved Law on Mutual Legal Assistance and decide whether this law addresses the deficiencies of the previous legislation. This together with demonstrating effective implementation of the action plan agreed upon with FATF will pave the way for removal of Angola from the FATF grey list. Angola has introduced new exchange measures that could be subject to approval under Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3 . They include: (i) the priority list for access to U.S. dollars at the official exchange rate; and (ii) a special tax on transfers to non-residents under contracts for foreign technical assistance or management services. Staff is currently assessing the jurisdictional implications of these measures and of the high spread between the parallel and official exchange rates. At the same time, with the adoption of the new private investment law, the authorities have successfully eliminated one exchange restriction arising from limits on the remittances of dividends and profits from foreign investments. The authorities agreed with staff’s analysis and recommendations . They received well staff’s proposal to rebalance the foreign exchange market and, in September, the official exchange rate was devalued again and monetary policy tightened further. The authorities also acknowledged the importance of improving inflation forecasting and liquidity management to help attain monetary aggregates as a policy anchor and requested follow-up IMF technical assistance in these areas. They stressed the importance of continuing to develop their capital markets, and noted their full commitment to strengthen the AML/CFT framework and, as circumstances allow, eliminate the restrictions under Article VIII.