The need for economic diversification has become even more apparent in light of the significant drop and increased volatility in international oil prices since mid-2014 . A more diversified economy would better shield the economy from oil price fluctuations and make growth more inclusive. The Angola Invest Program initiated in January 2013 is the centerpiece of the government’s policy to support domestic production, focusing on SMEs, by reducing administrative costs and hurdles, including to setup new firms. In addition, new legislation was approved to foster the private sector, including: (i) the Simplified Companies Incorporation Process Law, which seeks to reduce bureaucracy and streamline the companies’ incorporation process; (ii) the new Private Page 22 Investment Law (Box 3); and (iii) the new Labor Law, which aims at promoting employment creation and labor market formality by increasing labor flexibility for SMEs. Moreover, the government is reviewing the Electricity Law to promote private sector participation in the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity with AfDB assistance. This is an important step as electricity supply is one of the main infrastructure bottlenecks in Angola. Moreover, greater involvement of the private sector in developing infrastructure to remove bottlenecks and support economic diversification through concessions and PPPs could be pursued while managing fiscal risks. In addition, the authorities are implementing reforms to reduce poverty and inequality . They are expanding their unconditional cash transfer program and are launching a new program to improve protection for the most vulnerable. Careful coordination and eventual merging of different social programs to avoid overlap, cut overhead costs, and increase synergies among the programs would be important. Also, social spending should be protected in the forthcoming annual budget to shield as much as possible the poor from the effects of the oil price shock. Box 3. Angola’s New Private Investment Law On August 11, 2015, Angola approved a new private investment law, which aims at reducing bureaucracy and streamlining the decision-making process of private investment. The main changes include: Reduction from US$1 million to US$500,000 in the amount required for domestic investors to benefit from fiscal incentives, while for foreigners, the minimum remains at US$1 million. Fiscal incentives are dependent on certain criteria: number of jobs created, value of investment, location, economic sector, total destined to exports, share of domestic investors, and value added. Minimum requirement of 35 percent domestic investor participation for foreigners to invest in strategic sectors, such as electricity and water, hotels and tourism, transportation and logistics, construction, telecommunications, and information technology. Approval of investment up to US$10 million is now under the respective line ministry, rather than the National Agency for Private Investment. Investments above US$10 million still need to be approved by the President of the Republic. Allowing capital repatriation for any investment value (previous limit for repatriation was US$1 million). Empirical models suggest that the real effective exchange rate appears overvalued by 10-30 percent (Appendix I). While the estimated magnitude of the overvaluation depends on the specific approach employed and confidence intervals are generally large and undervaluation cannot be ruled out, point estimates of the three approaches show overvaluation. Non-price competitiveness indicators, such as the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index, support the finding of overvaluation. Restoring competitiveness requires addressing a broad range of structural impediments. While exchange rate flexibility can contribute to improved competiveness, Angola’s Some changes include (i) using fixed-term contracts for longer periods, with the maximum duration increasing up to 10 years, compared to up to 36 months, previously; and (ii) reduction in overtime compensation as well as hiring and laying off costs for SMEs. Page 23 still high pass-through to inflation limits how much nominal depreciation can affect the real exchange rate over the long term. The most effective policies to address the currency overvaluation are those that improve the country’s physical infrastructure and human capital and address its structural competiveness problem, such as the weak rule of law and poor contract enforcement. The authorities are confident that the measures being implemented to upgrade the country’s infrastructure, improve its human capital, and strengthen the business climate will allow the economy to diversify, making growth more inclusive . They expect that the reforms recently undertaken and forthcoming will contribute to an improvement already in 2016 in Angola’s rating in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Survey. They also plan to expedite the procedures and timing of issuance of work visas. The authorities agreed that concessions and PPPs can play a more relevant role in the current environment and are exploring these options. They are also considering restructuring or privatizing loss-making state-owned enterprises to help increase their productivity and reduce fiscal costs to the Treasury. They emphasized the need to accelerate and deepen reforms to enhance productivity and address the overvaluation of the currency while maintaining international reserves at an adequate level over the long term.