RISKS Recent economic developments Economic growth is projected to slow to 3.9 percent in 2014, from 5.9 percent in 2013, mainly due to a temporary decline in oil output and a deceleration in agriculture sector growth (from last year’s unusually high growth following the end of a prolonged drought) Growth in the nonoil economy remains robust (7.3 percent), mainly driven by the agricultural sector and to a lesser extent manufacturing and services. Oil production declined by 10 percent in January-May 2014, reflecting unscheduled maintenance and repair work in some oil fields, and is expected to decline by 3.5 percent for the year as a whole as production recovers in the second semester. The National Bank of Angola (BNA)’s inflation target of 7–9 percent for 2014 is well within reach . Increased agriculture production and declining international food prices, together with a stable exchange rate, have helped to sustain a steady decline in inflation, which reached a historic low of 6.9 percent (year-on-year) in June 2014. End-year inflation is projected to increase Calculations are based on the GDP series provided by the Planning Ministry and thus do not yet reflect the revised series as calculated by the National Statistics Institute (INE). Page 6 slightly to 7½ percent, reflecting the impact on prices of the entry into effect on March 1, 2014, of new, more protectionist import tariff schedule for selected agriculture and light industry products, although there has been no evidence so far of this impact. The overall fiscal balance, in surplus in the last four years, is expected to deteriorate substantially in 2014, reaching a deficit of around 4 percent of GDP . A recovery in oil production during the second half of the year is expected to contain the decline of oil revenue to 2¾ percent of GDP. Public spending is expected to increase by one percent of GDP in 2014, mostly due to a higher payroll (reflecting both higher wages and new hirings), but also an increase in spending on goods and services. Public investment is projected to remain broadly constant as a share of GDP, with the timely approval of the 2014 budget permitting a smoother execution of the public investment program (PIP) during the year. Expenditure control remains a work in progress, although several improvements have been made . The ongoing reconciliation exercise resulted in the estimate of 2012 expenditure arrears being revised up from US$1.5 billion to US$2.3 billion, and the authorities reported that arrears accumulated in 2013 are now estimated at around US$0.7 billion. Two critical measures, developed with Fund technical assistance, were put in place with the approval of the 2014 budget: a clear definition of arrears consistent with international best practice; and a new control procedure requiring the confirmation by the Finance Ministry of all contracts above US$1.5 million. For projects to be approved, contractors need to provide, inter alia, a commitment note (assuring that the project is funded under the budget) and a quarterly payment schedule for the contract period consistent with the annual budget. The new control procedure has already been implemented in the Construction Ministry and the Energy and Water Ministry, and is expected to be gradually rolled out to the entire government by end-2015. The monetary policy stance has been consistent with a gradual reduction in inflation, while still providing space for an expansion in credit to the private sector . Credit to the private sector during the first semester of 2014 grew by about 15 percent relative to the same period of 2013, and the share of domestic currency credit increased. To foster financial intermediation, reserve requirements on domestic currency deposits were reduced from 15 to 12½ percent in February 2014, after a decrease from 20 to 15 percent in June 2013. In line with declining inflation, the short- term interbank interest rate (Luibor overnight) declined from around 6 percent at end-2013 to under 3 percent in July 2014, and the BNA’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) cut its policy rate from 9¼ to 8¾ percent on July 28, 2014 (the second 50 bps cut in eight months). Financial soundness indicators point to a stable financial system, but one of Angola’s largest commercial banks received a significant sovereign guarantee in late 2013 Non-performing loans (NPLs) as a share of credit outstanding increased from 6.1 to 9.8 percent in the last quarter of 2013, but this increase was reversed in the first half of 2014, in part reflecting a Arrears are defined as expenditures that have been incurred but not paid within 90 days. Page 7 better execution of the PIP. The BNA is in the process of issuing new regulations regarding the definition and classification of NPLs to ensure a uniform standard for classifying NPLs. Banco Espírito Santo Angola (BESA)—which accounts for close to 17 percent of banking system total assets and about 9 percent of its total deposits—received a sovereign guarantee for US$5.7 billion (4¾ percent of GDP) at end-2013, covering the equivalent to 70 percent of its loan portfolio. The exposure of the other private commercial banks to BESA through the interbank market is limited. Despite a weaker external trade surplus in the first half of 2014, the nominal exchange rate remained stable During the first five months of 2014, exports declined by 5 percent relative to the same period in 2013, mostly as a result of the lower oil exports. Import growth slowed in March and April 2014, a period which coincided with a decline in availability of foreign exchange in the market, but accelerated in May, so that over the first five months of 2014 imports increased by close to 19 percent. BNA sales of foreign exchange declined in March and April 2014 relative to the same period in 2013. Oil companies and their suppliers, which are now required to make all payments to domestic residents in kwanza, only partially offset the lower BNA sales. A backlog emerged in fulfilling foreign currency buying orders by commercial banks on behalf of their clients, and the spread between the parallel and secondary market exchange rates increased. The BNA increased foreign exchange sales significantly in May and June 2014, and the backlog has now been largely eliminated, even if the spread (currently about 15 percent) has not fully reverted to the levels registered in 2013. International reserves at the BNA have been stable, following the transfer of US$5 billion to Angola’s Sovereign Wealth Fund (FSDEA) . After reaching in September 2013 a historic maximum level of US$36.1 billion, gross international reserves declined to US$31.4 billion (7¾ months of imports) at end-June 2014, largely due to the transfer of US$5 billion from the Oil for Infrastructure Fund to FSDEA, of which US$3.5 billion were transferred in the fourth quarter of 2013. The transfer of the remaining US$1.5 billion, originally planned for the first quarter of 2014, was delayed until the second quarter in response to the decline in oil revenue. The National Assembly approved on July 4, 2014, the long-awaited nonoil tax reform. The legislative package comprises three key codes: the general tax code, the tax procedures code, and the tax collection code. The corporate income tax rate has been reduced from 35 to 30 percent, while the minimum monthly income exempted from the personal income tax has been increased from 25,000 to 34,450 kwanza. At the same time, the tax base has been expanded by closing loopholes. A partial tax amnesty for some tax debts prior to December 2012 was also approved, Angola continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under the provisions of Article XIV, Section 2 and maintains two exchange measures, two exchange restrictions, and two multiple currency practices. The spread may not have returned to end-2013 levels because of the BNA’s better enforcement of verification requirements for certain cash transfer operations, leading illegal transactions to go through the parallel market. The tax amnesty comprises mainly income tax debts and does not include debts from consumption taxes and social contributions. Page 8 although both parliamentarians and Finance Ministry officials explained that, to protect tax compliance in the future, no further tax amnesties were envisaged. The authorities are taking measures to improve the business climate and promote economic diversification (Appendix I). The so-called Angolanization policy seeks, inter alia, to accelerate human capital formation by giving preference to Angolan workers over expatriates. The private sector investment law, approved in 2012, aims to encourage foreign investors through fiscal incentives for investments above US$1 million. The Angola Invest program, also introduced in 2012, seeks to facilitate access to financing for small and medium-sized enterprises by offering partial loan guarantees and loan subsidies. Administrative procedures in various areas, such as establishing new enterprises and processing imports, have been streamlined. Outlook and risks Medium-term economic growth prospects remain favorable . The oil sector is expected to recover and grow by 2¼ percent on average over the next five years, as the decline in production in some oil fields is more than compensated by the commissioning of seven new fields, including a first phase of a pre-salt oil field expected to start operating in 2017. Large investments in the nonoil sector are expected to generate much needed diversification and job creation, mainly in agriculture, but also in electricity, manufacturing, and services. Growth prospects over the longer term will be significantly impacted by the results of the ongoing pre-salt prospection. However, the medium-term fiscal outlook is challenging . Oil revenues (as a share of GDP) are expected to decline while there is high demand for increased spending on infrastructure and poverty alleviation. Staff projections show persistent and relatively large fiscal deficits over the medium term, leading to increasing gross financing needs and rising public debt-to-GDP ratios. While public debt is projected to remain sustainable and there is a low risk of debt stress, it will be important to reverse the projected trend of rising public debt through a return to fiscal surpluses and build financial assets in FSDEA without recourse to debt accumulation, thus saving part of the oil wealth for future generations. Efforts to improve the fiscal position could start already in 2014, by moderating the growth of the wage bill and spending on goods and services in the second semester to achieve savings of about one percent of GDP for the year as a whole. If oil output does not recover as expected during the second half of 2014, it will be important to add exchange rate flexibility to the near-term policy mix . In staff’s view, adding The budget allocates US$1.5 billion (about 1 percent of GDP) to finance interest subsidies or guarantees for up to 70 percent of loans provided through banks in selected sectors. Angola’s public debt is sustainable under the baseline scenario, and the main risks stem from real GDP and interest rate shocks. Staff estimates an increase in the public debt-to-GDP ratio to 45 percent in 2019, from 33.5 percent of GDP in 2013. While the projected debt levels remain below sustainability thresholds, risks are rising as shown in the stress tests—a reduction in real growth has a significant adverse effect on the debt path and, due to increasing financing needs and higher cost of new financing, the debt path is also sensitive to an increase in interest rates. For details, see Debt Sustainability Analysis (SM/14/XX). Page 9 some exchange rate flexibility would protect international reserves at the BNA and would still be consistent with achieving the end-2014 inflation objective, as inflation is currently in the lower bound of the BNA inflation target range, while external conditions, characterized by declining international food prices, should help to contain inflationary pressures. The main downside risks in the near term are a protracted decline in oil production and a reversal of recent gains on expenditure arrears; in the medium and long-term, downside risks include slippages in the implementation of structural reforms, a sustained decline in oil prices, and the materialization of the sovereign guarantees, while there are upside risks from new oil discoveries . The main transmission channels for downside risks are through lower fiscal revenue, higher fiscal expenditure, and diminished budget funding, potentially triggering a disorderly fiscal adjustment. If oil production were to temporally fall below projections, staff would recommend a moderation in the implementation of the public investment program (also advisable in light of quality concerns), the use of some of the treasury’s deposits to finance the budget, and exchange rate flexibility. To mitigate medium and long-term risks, the authorities should continue to implement public financial management reforms as envisaged, preserve policy buffers to protect against lower oil revenue, and expedite efforts to diversify the economy. To contain potentially high fiscal costs from public guarantees, staff recommends a transparent management of any future guarantees in line with the recently-approved legislation. There is an upside risk of oil discoveries as Angola’s west coast shares geological similarities with Brazil's east coast, which contains pre-salt formations estimated to hold large quantities of hydrocarbon resources. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s overall assessment of the outlook and risks However, they project nonoil economic growth to be somewhat stronger, especially in agriculture. Also, the authorities believe that exchange rate flexibility is premature due to high levels of dollarization in the economy and high pass-through to inflation. The authorities recognize the risk of weakening tax compliance as a result of the recently-granted tax amnesty, but stressed that this measure was limited and necessary to create a clean slate for the revenue administration as it begins to implement the nonoil tax reform. The authorities stressed that no new tax amnesties will be granted in the future. As for public guarantees, the authorities noted that they will actively manage their exposure with a view to minimizing fiscal costs. The authorities agreed with staff’s debt sustainability analysis . They see rising public debt as necessary for their effort to reduce the infrastructure gap. They remain confident that the social return of investment is higher than its financial cost and, therefore, believe that these investments will not negatively impact debt sustainability. The authorities also pointed out that receiving the main fiscal inflow (oil revenue) in foreign currency shield the budget from exchange rate risk. They also stressed that almost all public companies’ debt is not guaranteed by the government (with the exception of the state-owned airline company TAAG’s debt) and, therefore, they view the central government’s gross debt to be comfortable, well below its legal limit (60 percent of GDP). Page 10 Box 1. Spillovers to and from Angola The Angolan economy’s heavy dependence on oil is its main linkage with the rest of the world . The collapse of international oil prices during the global financial crisis of 2008-09 illustrated the importance of this linkage: growth decelerated from 13.8 percent in 2008 to 2.4 percent in 2009; as fiscal revenue fell sharply and despite a significant cut in public spending, the overall fiscal balance worsened significantly, from a surplus of 8.9 percent of GDP in 2008 to a deficit of 7.4 percent in 2009; international reserves dropped by one-quarter; and the exchange rate depreciated by 18 percent leading to higher inflation. Reflecting changing global energy markets, the key markets for Angola’s oil exports have shifted from the U.S. to China and India . Currently, about half of Angola’s oil exports go to China and 10 percent to India, with only 7 percent going to the United States. Angola’s key bilateral creditors are China, Great Britain, and Brazil . Of Angola’s total external debt, China holds nearly 41 percent, Great Britain holds 27 percent, and Brazil holds 8 percent. Angola has strong economic ties with Portugal, but its exposure seems to be limited to the banking sector . Of the 24 banks operating in Angola, six banks—representing about half of the Angolan banking system in terms of assets—are majority owned by Portuguese banks. Portugal is the main source of Angola’s imports (15 percent of the total), followed by Singapore and China (13 and 11 percent, respectively). Angola, in turn, is Portugal’s main export market outside the European Union (7 percent of total exports, or 2 percent of Portugal’s GDP). Remittances from Portugal to Angola are marginal (about 0.2 percent of the GDP). Portugal’s FDI to Angola is significant in the banking sector and also in media and telecommunications, but has largely remained constant over recent years (at around 8 percent of total). Outward spillovers from Angola are limited . Trade within the sub-Saharan region remains minimal, although financial linkages—through the banking system and bilateral loans to sovereigns—are increasing.