fiscal surpluses of about 1½ percent of GDP over the medium term would be consistent with FSDEA’s inter-generational savings mandate and strike a balance with the need to continue upgrading the country’s infrastructure and reducing poverty . Options include:  Greater prioritization of public investment to ensure high economic and social returns This would be supported by development and implementation of a modern public investment selection and management system. Staff assessed the quality of public investment in Angola using different metrics, and found it to be generally poor (Box 2). In addition, with poor investment quality, maintenance and repair costs over time are likely to be higher.  Reducing fuel subsidies . Fuel subsidies, which tend to benefit disproportionally the higher income earners, should be reviewed and gradually reduced (Box 3)—introducing a well-targeted conditional cash transfer (CCT) scheme to protect the less fortunate with a subsidy amount of 50 percent of the poverty line would cost on an annual basis around ½ percent of GDP, Page 12   one-eighth of the current level of spending on fuel subsidies. Consistent with international experience, a public campaign and open consultations with key stakeholders (to explain the rationale for removing fuel subsidies) can facilitate a smooth process. Improving budget practices . Two areas for improvement are: further streamlining quasi-fiscal operations (QFOs), and improving public employment and compensation policies. Budget expenses on fuel subsidies are currently calculated based on the budget oil price, which is generally below the market price, giving rise to QFOs. These could be eliminated by using the budget reserve to pay for higher-than-programmed fuel subsidies. The budget envisages an indexation of public wages to inflation plus additional hiring. The indexation policy, although common in some countries, is not best practice as it introduces inflationary inertia and unnecessary rigidities in budget management. Aligning salary increases with productivity gains and performance indicators would avoid such rigidities and provide performance incentives. Further developing nonoil taxation . Staff welcomes the recent approval of the core decrees comprising the nonoil tax reform. The approval of this legislation should be followed by improvements in the tax and customs administrations to fully realize the potential for higher nonoil revenue collections. A value added tax (VAT) could also be introduced in due course and, if implemented diligently, would provide more stable revenue for the budget, thus reducing the dependency on oil revenue and shielding the budget better from oil revenue volatility. Authorities’ views The authorities shared staff’s recommendations to improve nonoil taxation, reform public financial management, and reduce fuel subsidies . They stressed their commitment to streamlining QFOs, which were reduced from US$9.3 billion in 2011 to US$3.5 billion in 2013, and noted that Sonangol‘s authorization for out-of-budget spending on housing programs had already been revoked. The authorities also stressed their commitment to strengthening nonoil taxation, for which Fund technical assistance will be provided in the area of revenue administration. They agreed with the need for improving the efficiency of public investment, but argued that urgent reconstruction needs following the end of the civil war could partially explain Angola’s very low efficiency score. In any event, the authorities expressed interest in implementing a better system of public investment management, for which they will need technical assistance. They also agreed on the need to gradually reduce fuel subsidies, and noted that this reform would need to be well prepared and communicated to the public. The authorities questioned whether CCT schemes would be a good option for Angola at this stage (see below). CCTs usually require a well develop network of social services with capacity to certify the achievement of the conditions required to receiving the subsidy, and thus most countries started the program with small pilot programs. Page 13 Box 2. Efficiency of Public Investment in Angola The framework for measuring the efficiency of production units has been widely used to gauge the efficiency of public spending (see Herrera and Pang, 2005). This framework is based on a production function approach, where inputs are combined to produce outputs for a given technology. A common way to operationalize this framework is by using nonparametric methods such as the data envelopment analysis, which estimates efficiency frontiers benchmarking the most efficient production units. Once the frontier is estimated, an efficiency score for each unit can be calculated by measuring its distance relative to the frontier. This method has several limitations, however, including its sensitivity to outliers (when outliers are present, inefficiency will be over-estimated). To overcome this limitation, partial frontier methods can be used. Such methods take a random sample with replacements from the dataset to calculate pseudo-efficiency scores. The process is repeated many times, and the final scores takes the average of all the partial pseudo-efficiency scores (see Felder and Tauchmann, 2013). This methodology was used to assess the efficiency of public investment spending in Angola and other 103 countries between 2000 and 2010, considering real public capital stock per capita as input and a composite index of infrastructure as output. The composite index tries to capture the multidimensionality of infrastructure by using indicators from three sectors: telecommunications, power, and road transport. Indicators of each sector are then standardized, expressed in per capita terms, and combined using a principal components procedure. According to the calculations, the efficiency of Angola’s public investment spending ranks last amongst the 104 countries in the sample. In the short-term, these results call for a prudent approach from the authorities in increasing public investment, particularly in light of the ambitious spending agenda envisaged in the NDP. They also call for improving inter-agency coordination to improve the integration of the investment and current spending budgets. In the medium-term, the authorities should develop and implement a system of public investment management. x e d n I e r u c u r s a r f n I c i e h n y S Infrastructure Index and Public Capital Stock Sub-Saharan Africa: Efficiency of Public Investment Scores GRC GBR CAN ISR ISR AUS GRC CAN AUS CAN EST CAN BEL GBR CAN GBR ISR ISR GBR CAN CAN ISL ISL CRI BGR ISR MDAISR CRI MDA MDA UKR BIH LTU CRI UKR LTU LTU BGR LTU BIH BIH MDA LTU CRI BGR BIH UKR LTU ISR MDA CRI UKR CRI ISR BIH UKR CRI UKR PHL MDA PAK SDNSEN NPL PAK SDNSDN SDN SDN MDA SEN SDN SDN LTU SDN SDN ISR GRC ISL ISL ISL ISL Per Capita Public Capital Stock (2005 US$ PPP) Senegal Kenya Cameroon Ethiopia Togo South Africa Nigeria Tanzania Mozambique Namibia Botswana Ghana Gabon Zambia Eritrea Congo, Republic of Angola Source: PWT, World Bank, and Fund staff estimations ISL Source: PWT, World Bank, Fund staff estimations Page 14 Box 3. Fuel Subsidies in Angola Angola is one of the largest fuel price subsidizers in the world. The gasoline (pump) price in Angola is currently US$0.62 per liter (US$2.35 per gallon), situating it amongst the lowest decile of the distribution of gasoline world prices. The fiscal cost of fuel subsidies in Angola has been increasing over recent years due to higher international fuel prices. Currently, spending on fuels subsidies amounts to 4 percent of GDP. This represents half of the spending in health and education, one-third of the spending in public investment, or 16 times the sum of all spending in the country’s social safety net programs. Rationalizing fuel subsidies would not only generate resources to expand the social safety net, but could also help to strengthen the fiscal position over the medium term. As in other countries, part of the resources could be used to finance a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program to reduce poverty and generate opportunities for the less favored people. For Angola, a program that would transfer income to the poor equivalent to 50 percent of the poverty line (i.e., US$40.5 per month and per family of 5 persons) would cost only ½ percent of GDP, or one- eighth of what fuel subsidies currently cost. Gasoline Prices around the World US$ dollars per liter y i s n e D Price Source: www.globalpetrolprices.com Angola: Spending in Health and Education and Oil Subsidies (Percent of GDP) Health and Education Oil subsidies Despite Angola’s significant natural resource wealth and high growth rates over the