The main economic challenge for Angola remains the need to diversify its economy and export base. Achieving this objective requires reducing costs in the non-oil sector and dealing with physical and human capital bottlenecks. These efforts should be complemented by more forcefully addressing Angola's severe impediments to doing businesses as identified by the 2017 World Bank's Ease of Doing Business Survey. For example, simplifying the procedures for and expediting the issuance of work visas is a priority for private sector development and attracting FDI. In the process of improving the economic climate and promoting diversification, it is important to aim at reducing the large state footprint in the bu tt tt W Page 20 economy while improving governance, and relying more forcefully on market-based allocation of resources. The authorities have launched a program targeting sectors considered as having high import-substitution and/or export-promotion potential. These programs are expected to be financed through external credit lines contracted by the government that would then be channeled (on-lent) to the private sector through the state-owned BDA bank. In its initial phase, this program is facilitating the access of private companies, with the above-mentioned potential, to forex needed to import intermediate and capital goods. It will be important to define well how project selection is being conducted and take proper upfront account of risks of non-repayment of the resources that will be on-lent. This program raises concerns given the potential fiscal cost that it could entail; it should be temporary; and its progress and implementation should be more transparent, with its cost disclosed in the annual budget. In addition, the authorities are implementing reforms to enhance the social protection system . With the assistance of the EU and UNICEF, the authorities launched in 2015 the APROSOC Social Protection Program, which aims to improve social assistance for the most vulnerable population. It intends to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of the national social assistance interventions in Angola and to strengthen the capacity of the leading sector Ministry (MINARS) to design and implement a social assistance agenda based on a new sectoral policy framework. The government also aims to create a Single Social Registry to help identify and target the poor. Authorities’ views The authorities are confident that the measures being implemented to upgrade the country’s infrastructure, improve its human capital, and strengthen the business climate will allow the economy to diversify, making growth more inclusive . They have been investing heavily on infrastructure. They expect two large dams to start producing energy in 2017 and have started construction of the deep-water port of Cabinda. With the assistance of the World Bank, they also plan to expand access to water supply and promote agriculture. They expected that the reforms recently undertaken to facilitate opening a business—such as reducing its cost and timing—should have been reflected in Angola’s rating in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Survey. The World Bank continues to work closely with the authorities to help improve their doing business indicators. The authorities also emphasized the need to accelerate and deepen reforms to promote diversification. In this context, they have approved 23 targeted programs in the agriculture, industry, fishing, geology, and telecommunications sectors but argued that their implementation has been slow and so far only access to forex has been provided to companies.