Rationalizing expenditure and raising non-oil revenue will be essential to bring by 2020 Angola’s public debt-to-GDP ratio back to 2013-14 levels and to achieve over time annual structural fiscal surpluses of about 1½ percent of GDP in line with the government’s objective of saving part of the oil wealth for future generations while mitigating fiscal risks Rationalizing the public wage bill . The 2015 revised budget projects the public wage bill to absorb more than half of total revenue. The public wage bill, as a share of GDP, should be reduced in 2016 to levels consistent with the new revenue reality by keeping the wage bill unchanged in nominal terms vis-à-vis 2015 levels and, over the medium term, by adopting cost-of-living wage adjustments based on projected inflation; real wage increases should be aligned with productivity gains and performance indicators. The main fiscal risks facing Angola are: (i) volatility in oil prices and, to a lesser extent, oil production; (ii) macroeconomic shocks; (iii) weak macroeconomic forecasting; (iv) weaknesses in public fiscal management systems, including expenditure payments control; (v) energy subsidies; (vi) potential delays of oil revenue transfers from SONANGOL to the Treasury; and (vii) contingent liabilities from state-owned banks and enterprises see Selected Issues on www.imf.org Page 17 Increasing non-oil tax revenue . Significant efforts have already been undertaken to strengthen non-oil taxation, including enlarging the tax base; creating a single revenue administration agency; strengthening tax inspections; and better enforcing real estate taxation. These efforts could be strengthened and a VAT introduced. If implemented diligently and in due course, a VAT could provide a more stable revenue source for the budget, reducing the budget’s dependency on oil revenue and shielding it better from oil revenue volatility. Improving public investment management (PIM) . This could be achieved through enhancing compliance of the PIM process with existing legislation; prioritizing and monitoring the execution of projects; conducting ex-ante and ex-post project evaluations; and improving technical capacity to appraise, select, and monitor projects. Reducing fuel subsidies while improving targeted social assistance to the poor . Domestic fuel prices were raised three times since September 2014, leading to the full elimination of gasoline, asphalt, and heavy and light fuel oil subsidies (Box 1). An automatic fuel pricing mechanism should be introduced following the eventual elimination of fuel subsidies to ensure that subsidies do not re-emerge once international oil prices rise. Stepping up the development of well-targeted social assistance programs to the poor in line with commitments under the World Bank’s DPF will be critical to protect the most vulnerable from the effects of lower fuel subsidies. Formulating an improved medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) and adopting fiscal rules and a fiscal stabilization fund consistently with bringing by 2020 Angola’s public debt-to-GDP ratio back to 2013-14 levels and achieving over the long term structural fiscal surpluses of 1½ percent of GDP . An improved MTFF focusing on spending rules and a well-designed fiscal stabilization fund—with more flexible deposit and withdrawal rules—would contribute to smoothing oil revenue volatility and help reduce the pro-cyclicality of spending. Further transfers to the existing oil funds ( Fundo Petrolífero and Fundo do Diferencial do Preço do Petróleo ) could be suspended in case of an overall fiscal deficit, as this adds to gross financing needs. Currently, only under strict conditions, these funds can be withdrawn and with authorization from the President of the Republic. The authorities shared staff’s recommendations to rationalize expenditure and improve non-oil revenue . They have initiated a biometric registry of civil servants which would lead to the elimination of any “ghost” workers from the payroll. They see great scope to raise non-oil taxation through improvements in revenue administration and have recently introduced fuel taxes. They agreed that adopting a VAT in the medium term would be helpful. The authorities stressed that Staff estimates that foregone revenue from the narrowness of the tax base and existence of reduced rates for certain goods and services amounts to 2.7 percent of GDP ( see Selected Issues on www.imf.org The Word Bank’s Development Policy Financing (DPF, US$450 million in funding and US$200 million in loan guarantees) for Angola—approved on June 30, 2015—envisages actions on introducing fiscal rules; improving public investment management efficiency; and developing well-targeted cash transfers to the poor. Page 18 Box 1. Angola: Fuel Subsidy Reform in Angola In the face of rising fuel subsidies, the government has embarked on a bold subsidy reform since September 2014. Fuel subsidies amounted to 5.9 percent of GDP in 2013 and are projected at 2 percent of GDP in 2015, with about 40 percent of this decline explained by higher domestic fuel prices. Lower international oil prices together with three increases in domestic fuel prices led to the elimination of subsidies on asphalt, light and heavy fuel oil, and gasoline. Diesel, LPG, and kerosene are still subsidized, although at much lower levels than in the recent past. The cumulative increases in the price at the pump of gasoline and diesel are beginning to make the use of these products more efficient. The consumption of gasoline dropped 10 percent in the second quarter of 2015 vis-à-vis the same period of last year, while the consumption of diesel dropped 1 percent. Most fuel subsidies benefit upper-income households. The richest 40 percent of households receive 77 percent of fuel subsidies while only 10 percent accrue to the bottom 40 percent. The bias was particularly acute for gasoline, as the bottom 20 percent received less than 1 percent of the subsidy. On the other hand, kerosene is widely consumed by the poor; the bottom 20 percent received 51 percent of the subsidy. In any event, while the poor consume less fuel products in absolute terms, removing subsidies will have a negative impact on their welfare as they spend a higher share of their total budget on these products. Eliminating fuel subsidies would represent a 9 percent decline in the real incomes (direct and indirect impact) of the bottom 20 percent. The authorities aim to continue reducing fuel subsidies while improving social assistance to the poor. They plan to eliminate fuel subsidies by 2020 in line with Fund technical assistance recommendations. At the same time, the government is expanding its unconditional cash transfer program ( Cartão Kikuia ) for the poor to a sixth province with World Bank technical assistance. A total of 50,000 households have already received Kikuia cards (a monthly stipend of Kw10,000, or the equivalent to US$75) to purchase food products, agricultural inputs, and other basic goods at Kikuia shops or other registered shops. The authorities expect to distribute an additional 90,000 Kikuia cards by the end of the year. The World Bank is supporting implementation of the national household budget, income and employment survey to assess the targeting outcome of the program in 2016. In addition, it will help prepare a detailed poverty map and will help the authorities centralize all social programs in a single register to facilitate monitoring and evaluation. In addition, with EU assistance, the authorities aim to improve protection for the most vulnerable, including allowances to families with children below 5 years of age, and then expanding this program to include pensions for the elderly and disabled. Angola Fuel Price Subsidy Reform: the Way Forward, IMF, 2014. Angola: Fuel Pricesand Subsidies Sources: Angolan authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Gasoline (% of price being subsidized, RHS) Diesel (% of price being subsidized, RHS) Gasoline (KZ per liter) Diesel (KZ per liter) Gasoline and Diesel Prices and Subsidies Kerosene (% price being subsidized, RHS) LPG (% price being subsidized, RHS) Kerosene (KZ per liter) LPG (KZ per Kg) Kerosene and LPG Prices and Subsidies Page 19 improving the efficiency of public investment is critical and noted that progress has already been made on this front. For example, they have finalized and published a manual for project evaluation; issued and started implementing a decree that allows for the monitoring of the physical execution of projects; and are evaluating the public investment projects in the pipeline to assess which projects are not complying with legislation. The authorities remain committed to continue reforming subsidies, including on electricity, while expanding well-targeted social assistance to the poor. They also agreed that a proper fiscal stabilization fund is needed and noted that they aim to introduce new legislation in 2016 to suspend transfers into the existing oil funds in case of an overall fiscal deficit.