Angola has also been adversely affected by the loss of U.S. dollar Correspondent Banking Relationships (CBRs). Since December 2015, global banks discontinued the supply of U.S. dollar banknotes and withdrew U.S. dollar CBRs with Angolan banks. The last remaining U.S. correspondent bank which supplied access to two Angolan respondent banks are no longer able to service their Angolan customers’ U.S. dollar cross-border payment needs. However, Angolan respondent banks are still able to conduct their own portfolio, treasury, trade finance and some credit card operations with their U.S. correspondent bank. Angolan subsidiaries of remaining global U.S. banks are also able to service their Angolan corporate customer needs. These customers are mainly Angolan operators of global oil, gas, and construction entities. Alternative payment channels through greater use of nested U.S. dollar and euro CBRs has mitigated the adverse impacts so far, but risk of losing these payment channels is high. There is an urgent need to fine-tune policy solutions to address the effects of a sizable loss of U.S. dollar CBRs (Box 2) . The impact on direct access to cross-border finance and payments for both exports and imports in U.S. dollars could be significant, especially if nested CBRs were also lost. Several measures could help address this issue: Mitigating the drivers and risks arising from the loss of CBRs by the BNA stepping up its data collection and analysis efforts (SWIFT data and BNA Questionnaire), enhancing dialogue with the private sector and home authorities of global correspondent banks, strengthening the prudential and AML/CFT framework particularly with regard to corruption-related risks, and developing contingency plans in coordination with all stakeholders. Continue to fine-tune policy solutions which may include as a last resort the BNA providing temporary access to low-risk U.S. dollar transfers but also take into account the legal constraints and risks to BNA's other key functions. Industry solutions remain the first-best option. Greater use of nested CBRs will likely prove to be a short-term solution. Page 17 Box 2. Angola: Correspondent Banking Relationships Withdrawal The decision to terminate CBRs in Angola is likely driven by a number of different factors operating concurrently. For example, retrenchment by global banks since the global financial crisis has led to a reconsideration of the geographical reach of their business models in light of changed global macroeconomic conditions, regulatory demands, banks own risk management requirements and the perception of Angola as a higher risk jurisdiction, including with regard to the proceeds of corruption, have all played a part in a withdrawal of direct U.S. dollar CBRs. Angolan respondent banks have responded to loss of direct U.S. dollar CBRs for their customers by finding alternative payment channels, which has mitigated the adverse macro-financial impacts. There has been a greater use of nested CBRs in U.S. dollars through intermediary banks in countries such as Portugal and South Africa. In addition, there has been a much greater use of Euro CBRs for payment flows out of Angola. However, these alternative payment channels while providing a short-term solution remain in danger of being withdrawn as compliance concerns of global correspondent banks may not be fully met. Continued strengthening of the Angolan supervisory and regulatory prudential and AML/CFT framework through addressing existing legal deficiencies, including with regard to preventative measures for politically exposed persons, active enforcement, including in conducting risk-based supervision of financial institutions, and better understanding between global correspondent and Angolan respondent banks on information needs as part of a risk-based approach would better tackle the perception of Angola as a higher risk jurisdiction. The authorities have been actively involved in pursuing high-level dialogue with home authorities of global correspondent banks to better understand regulatory expectations around CBRs. In that context work is underway to strengthen supervisory and regulatory prudential frameworks and enforcement in line with regional and global peers. In addition, there has been open public-private sector dialogue on addressing the withdrawal of CBRs and strengthening AML/CFT frameworks through various local roundtables, workshops including one organized by the BNA and Fund staff, and at regional groups. Work is also underway at the central bank through a regular data questionnaire and analysis of CBR payment data with technical assistance input by the Fund to better understand the nature, scale, and scope of CBR withdrawal to help fine-tune policy solutions. The banking system needs to be strengthened . While the banking system's solvency indicators have been deteriorating only gradually they may not be fully reflecting the underlying deterioration in part due to loan restructuring that is being extended also to some non-viable companies (ever-greening). In addition, five banks are undercapitalized. It would be important for the BNA to take the following measures: Conducting rigorous asset quality reviews linked to stress tests on the largest thirteen banks (covering about 90 percent of the banking system's assets) on an annual basis to help identify forward-looking capitalization needs. Requiring under-capitalized banks to implement action plans and closely monitor their implementation. In particular, the two banks with negative equity could threaten confidence on the banking system even though they are relatively small banks. Therefore, these banks should be immediately recapitalized or resolved. Bringing to conclusion as soon as possible the process of evaluating the loan portfolio, restructuring management and operations, and recapitalizing the BPC. Also, the risk management capacity of BPC needs to be upgraded to ensure that credit underwriting is strengthened to avoid a repetition of unsustainable asset quality problems. Page 18 Investigating the extent to which banks are resorting to 'ever-greening' of loans and making sure this practice is discontinued and bad loans are fully provisioned and written off early. Strengthening the crisis preparedness scheme—such as the Emergency Liquidity Facilities and other contingency planning—by completing Crisis Simulation Exercises. Attention needs to be paid to assessing for operational effectiveness and limitations the emergency liquidity facilities to support well managed, solvent banks during distress periods. The authorities have made steady progress on implementing the 2012 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) recommendations especially on governance, supervision, and resolution mechanism . Supervisory functions have been restructured with dedicated departments for banking supervision, regulation, foreign exchange supervision, and consumer protection. Regulations have been issued on consolidated supervision and on banks’ internal controls and corporate governance requirements. A financial stability committee under the BNA has been established with the publication of a Financial Stability Report. A risk oversight unit is being established with further enhancements being made for on-site supervision and developments of a new supervision and licensing manuals in line with a risk-based supervisory approach. The BNA has also progressed work on aligning banks’ accounting and reporting practices with latest International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Additional work will need to continue to build supervisory effectiveness with regard to implementation on consolidated supervision, systemic stability analysis, and operationalization of prompt corrective action procedures and regulations on emergency liquidity assistance and crisis preparedness. The authorities are making progress in strengthening the Anti Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework. Angola was removed from the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) list of countries with strategic AML/CFT deficiencies in February 2016, as a result of the progress made in addressing technical items of the action plan agreed with the FATF. The authorities are continuing to work with the regional FATF body (ESSAMLG) to address the full range of issues identified in its mutual evaluation report. They should continue efforts to strengthen the AML/CFT framework in line with the FATF 2012 standard, including with regard to preventive measures on politically exposed persons and risk-based supervision of financial institutions and designated non-financial businesses and professions, ahead of the next AML/CFT evaluation, tentatively scheduled in 2020. In addition to existing exchange measures, staff has completed its assessment of the exchange measures introduced by the authorities during 2015 The operation of the priority list for access to U.S. dollars at the official exchange rate and a special tax of 10% on transfers to non-residents under contracts for foreign technical assistance or management services both give The last Financial Stability Report was published in early 2015. Angola’s AML/CFT framework was last evaluated against the 2003 FATF standard in November 2011, with the mutual evaluation report published in October 2012. The Informational Annex includes the complete list of exchange measures. Page 19 rise to exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a). Additionally, the lack of a mechanism to ensure that the effective exchange rates for transactions that take place at the reference rate in place and the rate at which transactions take place in the foreign exchange auction on that day do not deviate by more than 2 percent gives rise to a multiple currency practice subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 3. Staff encouraged the authorities to remove these, as well as the existing, exchange measures as soon as possible. A first-time safeguards assessment of the BNA was completed in 2010. The assessment found that the BNA is subject to annual external audits by a reputable firm and has taken steps to address the audit qualifications. Recommendations focused on strengthening governance and transparency practices, internal audit, and the control framework in the reserves management area. Since then some progress has been made in addressing safeguards recommendations. In particular, the BNA has strengthened its internal audit function, and reconstituted its Audit Board. The BNA published its annual financial statements of 2011 through 2014, but the 2015 audited financial statements have yet to be published. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff’s analysis and recommendations . They are taking steps to strengthen the banking sector. For example, they have named a new board of directors of BPC bank and set aside up to 1½ percent of GDP to recapitalize it and clean its bad loan portfolio. They also agreed with the need to enhance Angola’s AML/CFT framework to help address the concerns that have contributed to the loss of all direct U.S. dollar CBRs. The authorities have requested additional Fund technical assistance in this area.