stabilization objectives with fiscal outcomes . FSDEA has been established with an initial endowment of US$5 billion, and additional annual transfers equivalent to 50,000 bbl per day are envisaged, regardless of fiscal outcomes. In addition, oil revenue stemming from the difference between actual and budgeted oil prices is deposited in a treasury reserve account managed by the BNA regardless, for example, of how nonoil tax revenue is performing. Under current policies, the government is projected to run overall fiscal deficits for the foreseeable future incurring debt obligations while, at the same time, accumulating assets at the BNA and FSDEA. Limiting additional transfers to FSDEA and the BNA to situations when overall fiscal surpluses are realized would avoid the incurrence of larger-than-needed public debt. A fiscal stabilization fund with clear deposit and withdraw rules to smooth oil revenue volatility should be created in support of the medium-term structural fiscal surplus objective While excess revenues are currently deposited in accounts managed by the BNA, there are no clear rules specifying the circumstances under which the resources from these accounts can be used by the government to cover higher-than-expected fiscal deficits. Other resource-rich economies have established fiscal stabilization funds with clearly defined rules, providing transfers to and from the budget according to economic and commodity price cycles. This framework proved successful in Page 11 allowing several commodity exporting countries to respond to the international financial crisis of 2008-09, with limited exposure of the fiscal accounts and a moderate adverse impact on growth. FSDEA has already instituted most of the accepted best international practices for SWFs, but transparency and governance could be strengthened further . Remaining steps include the issuance of frequent (quarterly) and timely reports on FSDEA activities and performance, the timely publication of audit reports, and clear rules for selecting board members and external asset managers. Formulating a medium-term debt strategy will be crucial to deepen domestic financial markets . While recent progress in debt management is encouraging, the Finance Ministry should continue to adjust its public debt management practices by, inter alia, issuing benchmark securities and increasing auction predictability. This would serve to increase the government’s domestic funding capacity, enabling a gradual increase in the share of instruments issued in local currency, in line with the objectives of de-dollarization and local capital market development. Authorities’ views The authorities acknowledged the importance of transferring resources to FSDEA only in times of fiscal surpluses and noted that the current regulation allows for such flexibility They also agreed with the need for increased transparency in the management of FSDEA, although stressed that significant progress had already been achieved. The authorities noted that work would begin soon on developing a medium-term debt strategy, with World Bank technical assistance. A gradual fiscal consolidation, starting already in 2014, to achieve annual structural