The government’s plan to lower the fiscal deficit remains a vital objective . The modest pace of fiscal consolidation for next year implied by the proposed Budget for 2017 seems appropriate given the domestic political and social constraints, and the need to support the economy at a time when the population is still digesting the implications of this year’s costly transition. However, in the event the upside risks materialize, the authorities should take the opportunity to accelerate and frontload the reduction of fiscal imbalances as this would allow for a more accommodative monetary policy stance, ease the upward pressures on the currency, improve the public debt dynamics, and provide more support to the needed rebalancing from consumption towards investment. Similarly, while the pace and composition of the shift in the fiscal position after 2017 will need to remain sensitive to the impact on growth, jobs, and the most vulnerable segments of the Argentine population, frontloading the fiscal correction to the extent allowed by economic, political, and social conditions would be desirable. The needed reduction of the fiscal deficit should be based on a rationalization of government spending . Wages, pensions, and energy subsidies have risen by 11 percent of GDP over the past 8 years. Indeed, public spending in Argentina is now the highest in Latin America and one of the highest among emerging market economies (Box 6). Much can be done to strengthen public expenditure management, improve governance, and increase the efficiency of public spending (see Chapter 2 of the Selected Issues Paper). Specifically, measures should be targeted at: Lowering wage expenditure. A structural reduction in public employment (at both federal and provincial levels) would be facilitated by strengthening payroll management to track and control public employees, undertaking a census to identify ghost workers, and putting in place an attrition-based V Z Z Z Z & ee Page 30 reduction in government employment. In addition, decisions on nominal wage increases for public employees should be based on forward-looking prospects for inflation. Box 6. Government Spending in Argentina Wage bill . Wages are the single largest component of general government expenditure in Argentina. At 12½ percent of GDP in 2015 (over two-thirds of which are paid by the provinces), the Argentine government’s wage bill exceeded not only the regional but also the advanced economy average of 10 percent. Public employment drove the increase in the wage bill over the last decade with the number of public sector employees rising from 2.3 million to 3.9 million persons from 2001–14. Over 80 percent of this expansion was at the provincial and municipal government levels. Education and health spending . About 70 percent of public expenditure in education and health is directed towards employee salaries. On education, while primary and tertiary education expenditure and indicators in Argentina are comparable to regional averages and produce relatively good outcomes, secondary school spending is high compared to peers, and does not appear to produce better education outcomes. On health, Argentina’s public health expenditure amounted to 32 percent of total government expenditure, compared to 15 percent for the LA6 and OECD, and 12 percent for EMs, and efficiency frontier analysis, drawing on the outcomes of a range of other EMs and advanced economies, suggests that there may be room for efficiency gains (although health outcomes may also depend on a series of different factors, including educational attainment and access to sanitation facilities and clean water). Energy subsidies . Energy subsidies have risen dramatically over the past decade and, at 4 percent of GDP in 2015, constitute the bulk of non-pension social transfers. These subsidies are largely regressive, with many poor segments of the population lacking access to the subsidized products (the poorest quintile of households received about 10 percent of residential natural gas subsidies and about 18 percent of residential electricity subsidies; the richest quintile received about 35 percent and 20 percent, respectively). tt PPP tt Page 31 Eliminating untargeted energy subsidies. The current system of regressive energy subsidies should be replaced with measures to protect the poor. This would free up significant fiscal resources to be used for more productive purposes while protecting the poorest part of the population. The government’s initial efforts to raise natural gas tariffs for households were reversed by the Supreme Court. This subsequently led the government to consult with the public on a plan to bring residential natural gas tariffs back to cost recovery by 2019, with a social tariff to protect the poorest 1.5 million households. For 2017, under the proposed budget, the government plans to lower gas and electricity subsidies by about ½ percent of GDP (to about 1½ percent of GDP). Staff estimates suggest that, if successful, bringing both electricity and natural gas tariffs to cost recovery while maintaining a social tariff would reduce spending by about 1 percent of GDP. Reduce pension imbalances . Serious scrutiny of the pension system is needed to restore its financial sustainability and reduce the contingent pension liabilities that will inevitably burden Argentina’s young and/or its future generations (Box 7). Spending on pensions increased rapidly over the last decade, from 4.8 percent of GDP in 2008 to 7.4 percent of GDP in 2015. This was largely a product of increases in benefits (the dependency ratio during this period was broadly unchanged). The flow imbalance in the pension system will reach 2¼ percent of GDP in 2023 and over 5 percent by 2066 (see Chapter 3 of the Selected Issues Paper). The present value of the pension deficit, net of financial asset holding of the pension fund, is around 29 percent of 2016 GDP. Restoring a sustainable pension system would require parametric reforms, including indexing benefits to inflation, reducing the replacement rate, and gradually increasing the retirement age for women. Authorities’ view . The authorities stressed that gradualism and flexibility are key to a successful process of fiscal rebalancing. They noted that reducing the wage bill at both federal and provincial levels will be a slow process, largely based on attrition, given the social cost associated with reducing public sector employment in the context of a still ailing economy. The review of public sector employment done at the federal level early this year suggests there is ample room for efficiency gains. Efforts to modernize Argentina’s public administration are expected to achieve significant cost savings and better quality of services over time, including by (i) integrating the administration of human resources and purchases of goods and services across Ministries and public agencies; (ii) digitalizing a vast number of administrative procedures; and (iii) reorganizing and improving the utilization of information technology at all levels of the public administration, including provinces and municipalities. On pensions, the authorities recognized that the current system faces important long-term challenges, and noted that they are beginning to study the impact of parametric reforms of the type suggested by staff. The government’s analysis will be a contribution to the recently established commission on the pension reform, that will articulate a comprehensive reform of Argentina’s pension system by end-2019. They noted that the effective The latter figure excludes pensions of the police and military forces (0.5 percent of GDP in 2015) and disability and other non-contributory pensions under the Ministry of Social Development (1.2 percent of GDP in 2015). Page 32 women retirement age is 63, which reduces the potential savings from increasing the minimum retirement age to 65. Box 7. Argentina’s Pension System: Options for Reform Background Pension spending has risen due to the expansion of the number of beneficiaries and the introduction of a basic noncontributory pension. The structure of benefits has, however, been steadily flattened over time. In addition to social security contributions, the system was funded by diverting to the social security fund (ANSES) 15 percent of the national tax revenue pool. The system is partially funded with around 10 percent in GDP in assets held by the Fondo de Garantia y Sustenibilidad Long-term projections . The imbalances in the system are exacerbated by: the retroactive adjustment of benefits to past inflation introduced by the Ley de Reparacion Historica (which will increase pension spending by an annual 0.7 percent of GDP over the medium term); the introduction of a universal, minimum pension for the elderly regardless of their contribution history (adding 2 percent of GDP to spending in the long run); the Supreme Court ruling that the withholding of 15 percent of the common pool of tax revenues from provinces was unconstitutional (implying a revenue loss of 1.6 percent of GDP by 2020); and population aging (the old-age dependency ratio will double by 2066). The cumulative impact of the net present value of pension liabilities over the next fifty years implies an actuarial deficit of the system of around 30 percent of 2016 GDP. Options for reform Correcting this imbalance would require some combination of: Change in the indexation formula Pension benefits are linked to wage growth and the growth of ANSES revenues per disbursed benefit. This formula causes benefits to increase at rates above CPI inflation, and to rise faster when the growth in the number of beneficiaries slows. Indexing benefits to realized inflation from 2019 onwards would reduce the actuarial deficit by about 20 percentage points of GDP. Lowering the replacement rate . The replacement rate (the ratio of the benefit to the last wage earned) is about 72 percent of the average wage, well above the OECD average (of 53 percent). Lowering the rate to 60 percent would reduce the actuarial deficit by about 10 percentage points of GDP. A gradual increase of retirement age for women. An increase in the female retirement age from 60 to 65 over the next ten years would reduce the actuarial deficit by 10 percentage points of GDP. _________________________ 1/ The actuarial deficit is defined as the present value of the increase in the difference between benefits and contributions relative to 2015. The estimate assumes a discount rate (real interest rate–growth differential) of 2.5 percent over the long run. Using a discount rate of 1 percent would yield an actuarial deficit of 45 percent of 2016 GDP (see Selected Issues Paper). Retirement age Men Life Expectancy at 60, menRetirement age women Life Expectancy at 60, women Retirement Age and Life Expectancy (Years) Argentina LAC OECD Sources: OECD “Pensions at a Glance, 2015” and OECD, IADB, and World Bank “Pensions at a Glance: Latin America and the Caribbean”. “ ” “ bb ” Page 33 Fiscal space will also be needed to overhaul Argentina’s inefficient and burdensome tax system, to make it more progressive, and to help encourage private entrepreneurship and investment . Argentina’s general government revenue as share of GDP (at 34 percent of GDP in 2015) is one of the highest in Latin America and among emerging market economies. The federal authorities have implemented a number of measures that reduced the tax burden in 2016 by about 1½ percent of GDP relative to 2015, including an increase in the threshold for income that is exempt from the personal income tax, a reduction or elimination of exports taxes, a reduction of the VAT on basic goods for low-income households, and a range of measures to reduce the tax burden on SMEs. The most immediate priorities in tax policy are to: Simplify the overall system . There are over 35 different types of taxes collected, with 15 of them contributing only 1 percent of GDP to overall tax revenues. This imposes significant compliance costs. At the same time, indirect taxes have multiple rates and special earmarking regimes, there is a complex system of cross-exemptions and crediting that vary across the type of activity, the location of that activity, or the type of tax base. Reduce the marginal tax rate on labor . Employee’s and employer’s contributions for health and social security together account for between 40 and 45 percent of wages, although with a cap on employees’ contributions. This is above the OECD average, and hampers job creation in the formal economy. A broad-based cut in contribution rates (of 2 percentage points) could be financed by eliminating the current system of exemptions and deductions across provinces (that account for 0.3 percent of GDP). Raise and preserve over time the progressivity of the personal income tax (PIT) . High inflation and lack of adjustment of income tax brackets over the past decade meant that the PIT has become less and less progressive. The authorities are about to submit to Congress a legislative proposal that increases the dispersion of income tax brackets and marginal rates (lowering the bottom rates while increasing the top marginal rate from 35 percent to 40 or 45 percent) with an estimated annual fiscal cost of around ¼ percent of GDP (half of which borne by provinces). However, increasing the highest marginal PIT rate above the corporate tax rate (currently 35 percent) could create incentives for tax arbitrage. Going forward, it will be important to ensure that the real value of tax brackets is preserved. The tax base for employee’s social security contribution is capped at an amount that is revised twice yearly according to the pension indexation formula. Currently, the cap is 56,058 pesos per month, which is a little above double the average wage of those contributing to the social security system. Page 34 Reduce the marginal tax rate on new capital. At 35 percent, the corporate income tax (CIT) statutory rate is one of the highest in the region, and the lack of provisions to adjust depreciation and capital allowances for inflation further increases the marginal tax rate on new capital formation. There are also limited provisions for carrying forward losses, limited allowances for depreciation, and low tax credits for R&D spending that raise the effective burden on incremental investments. To encourage new physical and intellectual capital formation, the CIT rate should be lowered by 5 percentage points, incentives for new R&D spending should be expanded, and new investment should be encouraged through more generous depreciation allowances, longer loss carry-forward, and inflation indexation of costs. The estimated annual cost of these measures would be 0.3 percent of GDP for provinces and 0.2 percent of GDP for the federal government. Phasing out the financial transaction tax. The high marginal rate levied on transactions in checking and saving accounts distorts the payment systems, discourages financial intermediation, and incentivizes payments in cash. Removing this tax would imply a loss for the federal government of about 1 percent of GDP. Replacing the gross turnover tax and increasing property taxes. Provinces should raise the property tax (which yields about 0.3 percent of GDP, well below international and regional levels) and replace the gross turnover tax—a multi-stage sales tax that creates distortions through cascading—with a less distortionary tax on goods and services (the rate and base of which would need to be determined by provinces so that the impact on is revenue neutral). The net effect of all these measures is estimated to imply a loss of revenues of around 1¼ percent of GDP for the federal government (and a further ¾ percent of GDP for the provinces). To minimize the impact on the budget and to support a pickup in private investment, a simplification of the tax system and changes in the PIT and CIT could be implemented first, along with the reduction in social security contribution rates, while the elimination of the financial transaction tax could be phased in gradually. Changes at the provincial level need to be coordinated with the reforms of the national tax system. Authorities’ view . Reducing the high tax burden is essential, but any substantial changes in Argentina’s tax system will need to be phased in gradually, to make sure that the fiscal costs are sustainable. The authorities noted that, together with this year’s increase in the minimum income subject to PIT (which is now one of the highest in the region), the reform proposal that will soon be Revenues from property taxes amount to 0.5 percent of GDP in Brazil, 0.6 in Chile, 0.7 in Colombia, and 0.7 in Uruguay. Page 35 discussed in Congress will significantly improve the progressivity of the PIT system. The proposal may include a gradual increase of the income tax brackets over the next three years, to preserve progressivity, which the authorities prefer to a formal indexation scheme as this could increase inertia and may not increase the progressivity of the tax during the disinflation process. The financial tax is a distortionary tax that weighs especially on SMEs, but can be eliminated only with caution and within a more general reform of the tax system, given the large amount of revenues that it raises. There is also a general agreement that the gross turnover tax is highly distortive, but replacing it with another tax (such as a VAT or a sales tax at provincial level) could be too costly. These and other tax changes will be reviewed by a special parliamentary commission that will form a proposal for a comprehensive reform of the Argentina’s tax system to be sent to Congress by early 2018. The authorities also expect significant increase in revenues from the ongoing reorganization of the tax administration. In particular, the objective is to reduce VAT tax evasion from the current 30 percent to the 20 percent that had been experienced a decade ago.