The last IMF Article IV Consultation with Argentina took place in 2006, just as the rebound from the 2002 crisis was beginning to run out of steam . The 2001–02 crisis was one of the worst economic recessions any country has ever suffered. It left scars on the social, political, and economic fabric of Argentina. About one million jobs were lost, unemployment rose to 21 percent, and poverty jumped to over 50 percent of the population. By 2003, an undervalued exchange rate, high and rising international prices for Argentina’s key exports, and the significant reduction in debt service payments that followed the default fostered a fast economic rebound. However, by the mid-2000s, the economy was showing signs of internal strains, overheating, and rising inflation. At the same time, supply-side weaknesses, including an increasingly interventionist role of the government and important relative price distortions, were eating into growth potential. Faced with declining growth prospects, the government supported the economy through expansionary macroeconomic policies . A tailwind of high commodity prices and strong demand for Argentine exports, particularly from China, helped. Despite this, macroeconomic imbalances grew as sizable primary surpluses turned to deficit, and monetary financing pushed inflation upwards (although official statistics showed unrealistically low inflation). By 2012, the terms of trade moved against Argentina revealing the full extent of the underlying imbalances that included an overvalued real exchange rate, high inflation, and a steady decline in international reserves. To hold together the inconsistent and unsustainable policy mix, the authorities progressively deepened administrative controls, including trade barriers, foreign exchange (FX) controls (which led to a parallel exchange market), price controls, and pervasive distortions in both markets and incentives. Even with these efforts, the economy moved into recession in late 2015 with inflation ending the year at 27 percent (based on the City of Buenos Aires CPI). K Page 11 The new government, which took office in December 2015, inherited an inconsistent and distorted economic model . The policies of the past decade had pushed consumption to unsustainable high levels, eroded potential growth and international competiveness, resulted in one of the lowest investment rate among emerging market economies, and left Argentina close to a balance of payment crisis with international reserves virtually exhausted. In addition, the good progress made in reducing poverty and income inequality in the years following the 2001 crisis had moved into reverse after 2011 and, by mid-2016, 32 percent of the urban population were living below the poverty line (see Box 1).