Measures need to be taken to protect the most vulnerable from the costs of the ongoing transition . The new poverty data released by INDEC in September describes a critical social condition (see Box 1). The current administration took measures to mitigate the effects of the ongoing transition through an expansion of social programs, an adjustment in pensions, lower VAT on basic goods, increasing the minimum income subject to PIT, and the introduction of a social tariff for electricity and natural gas. Going forward, eliminating the highly regressive energy subsidies and introducing a comprehensive mean-tested transfer program will help provide well-targeted support to the poorest households. While such a safety net is being designed and implemented, the government should maintain a lower tariff structure for low-income consumers. A lower tax on labor would incentivize formal employment and bring more people under the umbrella of existing social programs (including the public health and the public pension scheme). But fundamentally it will be stronger and sustained growth and lower inflation that will help reduce poverty . Sustaining job creation by removing macroeconomic imbalances and securing strong and durable growth will have an important impact on supporting the poor. Using Page 38 CEDLAS estimate of the poverty level and staff estimate of the elasticity between GDP growth and poverty, suggests that a one percent increase in per capita GDP per year would reduce poverty rate by 0.4 percentage points. This implies that, under the staff baseline, the poverty rate would decline by about 3¼ percentage points by 2021. A significant reduction of inflation will also help the protect living standards of low income households. Continued progress in fostering gender equality in the economy and addressing the remaining gender gaps would also contribute to increasing Argentina’s potential growth and economic welfare (Box 8). This could require well targeted gender budgeting initiatives, in particular with a focus on programs that facilitate or promote access of women to educational and preventative health services (IMF, 2016). Authorities’ view . The authorities emphasized that protecting the most vulnerable from the potential negative impact of the reforms is a key policy objective, and voiced a strong commitment to reduce the poverty rate. In addition to the tax and spending measures taken by the administration during the course of 2016, the authorities noted that their social policy will be based on three main areas: (i) adopting an income policy that prevents excessive labor conflicts and fosters consensus, (ii) improving the quality of public goods (including health and education), and (iii) promoting inclusiveness and social mobility through more efficient and targeted social transfers, which are better linked to active labor market policies. With between 1 and 1.5 million workers receiving less than half of the minimum wage and largely in the informal sector, measures that build job-related skills are needed to help reintroduce this segment of the labor force into Argentina’s formal economy, although only strong growth will produce quality and sustainable employment. The authorities also agreed that disinflation will reduce the inequality of the income distribution, given the disproportionate incidence of the inflation tax on low-income households. In particular, they noted that the inflation tax represents 20 percent of the income of the lowest decile of Argentina’s households but only 3 percent for the top decile. The growth elasticity of poverty is estimated as the percent change in poverty with respect to a one percent change in per capita GDP, using CEDLAS data for poverty and INDEC GDP data for the period 2004–14. Lucía Pérez Fragoso and Corina Rodríguez Enríquez, “ Western Hemisphere: A Survey of Gender Budgeting Efforts ” (2016), IMF Working Paper n. 153. Page 39 Box 8. Gender Gap Issues in Argentina Argentina’s levels of female education and political representation exceed those observed in the region. Argentina stands out in terms of female school enrollment, vis-à-vis Chile and Uruguay, and even more when compared to the average level of female education in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC). Argentina is a leader in the region in female political representation and fares well in terms of women’s labor force participation. However, when it comes to indicators of maternity mortality and adolescent fertility, Argentina is lagging behind its neighboring countries. Between 2000 and 2012, female gross tertiary school enrollment increased from 64.7 percent in 2000 to 98.5 percent, surpassing men enrollment by a ratio close to 1.6. Higher education has allowed women to increase their labor participation rate from 43 to 48 percent between 2000 and 2014 and to reduce their unemployment rate from 17 to 10 percent—measured as a proportion of female labor force—over the same period. Nevertheless, in 2010, women’s average earnings were only 77 percent of men’s. Moreover, in a sample of firms with a total of 21,000 employees, women accounted for only 37 percent of managers and directors (World Bank 2012). Female participation in politics is high, as they held 38 percent of seats in parliament, both at the national and subnational levels, in 2010, up from an average of 9 percent between 1990 to 2010, as a result a system of quotas established by the Electoral Law. Female health conditions have improved, but some recent reversals in teen births and levels of domestic violence are worrisome. Health indicators, such as birth attendance by skilled health staff and the number of pregnant women receiving prenatal care show that coverage is close to universal. The maternal mortality ratio—measured by 100,000 live births—declined from 60 percent to 52 percent between 2000 and 2015. However, the adolescent fertility rate—computed as the number of births per 1,000 women ages 15 to 19—has increased by about 4 percentage points since 2007 (while overall fertility has decreased). Women’s health is also impacted by the prevalence of domestic violence in one out of five couples as of 2008. ili tt ili ili ya Page 40