TRANSITION In the first few months of the new administration, bold steps were taken to Remove the various FX controls and let the exchange rate float, unifying the official and parallel exchange markets, and correcting the overvaluation of the peso through a 40 percent depreciation of the official rate in December 2015. Announce a plan of fiscal consolidation to reach a zero primary balance by 2019. Announce an inflation target of 20–25 percent for end-2016, falling to 5 percent by end-2019, and begin the transition towards an inflation-targeting regime. Regain access to international capital markets by reaching a settlement with creditors. This allowed the federal government, provinces and private corporations to issue about US$37.8 billion in bonds in global markets so far in 2016 (US$9.5 billion of which were used to finance the agreement with holdout creditors). Raise utility tariffs, especially in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area by an average of 250 percent for electricity and subsequently by a 100–300 range for natural gas, water and transportation. The most vulnerable were protected through a social tariff that allowed one fifth of the consumers to receive a fixed amount of free electricity and a significantly subsidized tariff for natural gas. ó Provinces Private sector Federal governmentSources: BCRA and Fund staff estimates. Debt Issuance in InternationalMarkets (Billions of U.S. dollars, first nine months) Page 12 Box 1. Poverty in Argentina The data on poverty published by the national statistics agency (INDEC) in September 2016 after 3 years of suspension show that, as of mid-2016, 32.2 percent of Argentina’s urban population (about 8.8 million people) lives below the poverty line (defined as the level of income needed to satisfy essential necessities for food, clothing, transportation, education, health). Moreover, 6.3 percent (1.7 million people) of the population lives in extreme poverty (with income below what is needed to satisfy basic food necessities). The data stand in stark contrast to the last published statistic, according to which the poverty rate in Argentina was 4.7 percent in the first half of 2013. The new data released by INDEC also show that about 23 percent of Argentine households (about 2 million) lives below the poverty line, with their income being on average about 37 percent below the poverty threshold (12,850 pesos or about US$900 per month). About 5 percent of households lives in extreme poverty, with an income that on average is 40 percent below the threshold (4,930 pesos or about US$350 per month). The geographical distribution shows that poverty is particularly high in the Northeast of the country, where the household poverty rate is about 30 percent, compared to slightly below 20 percent in the southern (Patagonica) region. The poverty picture is particularly worrisome when looking at the age distribution, with about 47½ of children living in poverty and nearly one in ten children in extreme poverty. By contrast, only 8 percent of the elderly population lives in poverty. While different national definitions and data availability make it difficult to compare poverty rates across countries, based on official indicators Argentina’s rate is among the highest in the region. Based on standardized World Bank/CEDLAS estimates of poverty rates (defined as the share of population living with less than US$4 per day) reveals that, using this definition, in 2014 poverty in Argentina was higher than in Chile and Uruguay but lower than Brazil, Mexico, Peru, and Colombia. – – – PPP Page 13 Eliminate export taxes on most agricultural products (only for soybean and soybean products there was a reduced rate of 30 and 27 percent, respectively). Overhaul the national statistical agency (INDEC) leading to the publication of a new CPI and a revised series for GDP, trade, poverty, and labor market data. Unwind in a controlled way the significant increase in foreign currency forward contracts that were entered into by the central bank in the final months of the previous administration. These measures, while necessary to lay the foundation for robust future growth, inevitably had an adverse impact on the Argentine economy which had already began to contract in the last quarter of 2015 . The peso depreciation and increase in utility prices have pushed headline inflation (based on the City of Buenos Aires CPI) to 44 percent year-on-year (y/y) by September (core inflation of 40 percent), and household real disposable incomes have fallen, weakening consumption (Figure 1). To reassert control over inflation, the central bank quickly reduced the growth in monetary aggregates which had a contractionary impact. Public capital spending fell sharply in the first half of 2016 as the new authorities reviewed the quality of the ongoing projects with the goal of eliminating waste and corruption. Further headwinds arose from weak trading partner demand, notably Brazil, and bad weather conditions. It is important to emphasize that the measures that were taken were indispensable. While the exact form of the counterfactual is difficult to predict, failing to address the unsustainable path that the Argentine economy was on would have led to even worse outcomes that have been all-too-familiar to Argentina—potentially a run on local currency assets, spiraling inflation, an abrupt fiscal adjustment as financing sources were exhausted, and/or a depletion of foreign exchange reserves and balance of payments crisis. gg Page 14 Figure 1. Argentina: Effects of the Transition Construction fell due to the brake on public works and unfavorable weather, but there are signs of stabilization. Motor vehicle production continued contracting, hurt by a protracted recession in Brazil, Argentina's main trading partner. Inflation increased as a result of peso devaluation and utility tariff adjustments. Sources: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INDEC), Asociación de Fabricantes de Cemento (ADFC), Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas Públicas, Ministerio de Argricultura, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella (UTDT), provincial statistical offices, Fundación de Investigaciones Económicas Latinoamericanas (FIEL), Confederación Argentina de la Mediana Empresa (CAME), and Fund staff calculations. Economic activity contracted in the first half of 2016. Cement domestic consumption (ADFC) Construction activity (INDEC) Indicators of Construction Activity (Percent change, y/y) Motor vehicle production (ADEFA) Brazil: Industrial production (rhs) Motor VehicleProduction (Percentchange, y/y) Retail sales (CAME) Supermarket sales, in real terms Indicators of Consumption (Percent change,y/y) National consumer confidence (UTDT) Real wages, y/y percent change (rhs) Consumer Confidence and Real Wages (50+=growth, unless otherwside indicated) ...driving down private consumption.Real wages have contracted, and consumer confidence has declined... City of Buenos Aires CPI AR$/US$ exchange rate (rhs) Inflation and ExchangeRate (Percentchange, y/y, unless otherwise indicated) FIEL - Industrial Production INDEC - Monthly Estimator of Economic Activity Indicators of Economic Activity (Percent change, y/y, 3-month m.a.) Page 15 The authorities responded proactively to the downturn with a moderate fiscal stimulus and a steady reduction in policy interest rates in the second half of 2016 . Federal primary spending fell by 8 percent in real terms in the first 7 months of 2016 as capital projects were scrutinized, the irregular hiring of about 10,000 public employees was reversed, and utility subsidies were reduced. This was despite an increase in pensions, unemployment benefits, and child benefits in the early days of the new administration. By mid-year, efforts were being taken to support the economy through public infrastructure projects, transfers to provinces to fund public works, further increases in pension benefits (including the introduction of a universal old-age pension) and unemployment subsidies, and reducing the tax burden for small- and medium- sized enterprises (Table). To further raise fiscal resources, a tax amnesty program was announced with a 10 percent one-off tax charged on resources declared under the amnesty. Finally, the central bank lowered the policy rate (on 35-day central bank paper) from 45 to 31 percent, in effective terms, as forward-looking indicators of inflation began to fall, maintaining the ex-ante real interest rate in a range between 3 and 6 percent (with ex-post rates exhibiting strong volatility but trailing on average below ex-ante rates since early 2016). As of early October, inflation expectations for December 2017 were slightly above next year’s target band (12–17 percent). In compliance with past rulings of the Supreme Court, the June 2016 “ Ley de Reparacion Historica ” recognized a debt to current retirees derived from the incorrect calculation of initial benefits and the improper application of the indexation mechanism starting from 2002. The law also introduced a universal old-age pension that extended pensions to all those 65 years and older without a contributory pension. nnu nnu – Page 16 Argentina: Fiscal Policy Measures * V V * * • ee • ½ • hu hu ga ii iii V dd ee nn ½ ee ee dg * nn Page 17 The trade balance has returned to a small surplus so far in 2016 The devaluation and the removal of trade restrictions incentivized agricultural producers to sell previously accumulated stocks but adverse weather conditions, weak external demand (notably in Brazil), and lower commodity prices meant that exports were still about 2 percent lower in the first eight months of 2016 than in the equivalent period in 2015 (despite stronger volume growth). The cross-currents from the removal of restrictions on imports, on the one hand, and the depreciation, weak demand, and lower import prices, on the other, left import growth at relatively high levels. The resolution with holdout creditors and a rebound in dividend payments to offshore parent companies (as FX restrictions were lifted) resulted in a modest worsening in the net income account (on a cash basis). Capital inflows have maintained the peso within a narrow, market-determined range versus the U.S. dollar . Residents took advantage of the removal of FX restrictions by moving assets abroad in 2016 but these outflows were more-than-offset by public sector external debt issuance. FDI inflows increased modestly (US$1.8 billion in the first nine months of the year, on a cash basis). With a stable nominal exchange rate, the high inflation has appreciated the real exchange rate by 10 percent since the unification of the exchange rate. The external position is judged by staff to be moderately weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (Box 2 and Annex I). The authorities have maintained their commitment to a floating exchange rate arrangement, while building reserves opportunistically, mostly through the proceeds of external debt issuances by the sovereign. Goods Trade (Billions of U.S. dollars, NSA) Trade balance (rhs) Exports Imports Sources: INDECandHaver Analytics. nd ay cc cc cc Page 18 Box 2. Current Accounts and Exchange Rate Exchange rate and current account developments Tight controls on balance of payments flows and high inflation caused the real effective exchange rate (calculated using the City of Buenos Aires CPI) to become overvalued by an estimated 50 percent in November 2015. While the removal of FX restrictions in mid-December 2015 resulted in an immediate 40 percent devaluation of the peso, as of August 2016 the real effective exchange rate (REER) was about 10 percent above its early 2016 level. Despite extensive trade and FX restrictions, Argentina’s current account balance deteriorated from near balance in 2012 to -2½ percent of GDP in 2015, reflecting falling commodity prices, strong domestic demand, the real appreciation of the peso, and the sharp worsening of the energy trade balance. Current account and REER assessment . Although there is considerable uncertainty about any estimated range, the real exchange rate appears modestly above the level implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. The CA-regression approach of External Balance Assessment (EBA) yields a cyclically-adjusted CA norm of about -1 percent of GDP. The desirable fiscal stance subsumed in this estimate is based on a reduction of the overall general government fiscal deficit by about 4 percent of GDP over the medium term (consistent with the authorities’ announced fiscal consolidation plans and staff’s baseline). The assessment also assumes an increase in the FX reserves over the medium term to around US$70 billion. With a 2016 cyclically-adjusted CA deficit of about 2¾ percent of GDP, the current account gap is estimated to be about -1½ percent of GDP. To a considerable extent, this CA gap is explained by the fiscal and FX reserves policy gaps. The external stability (ES) approach suggests that the current account balance needed to stabilize the net IIP position to staff’s estimated steady-state value is about -¾ percent of GDP (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 7). Using an estimated elasticity of the current account to changes in the real exchange rate of 0.13 suggests that the REER is overvalued by around 12 – 15 percent. Argentina’s financial system appears resilient to the ongoing macroeconomic transition . Argentina’s financial system is mostly transactional and has generally low exposure to credit or exchange rate risk. Banks are well capitalized (total and tier 1 capital ratios are well above regulatory minimums at 16.2 and 15.3 percent, respectively, as of June 2016), have low non-performing loans (under 2 percent), and relatively large provisions (above 140 percent of nonperforming loans). The liquidity position of the banks appears comfortable, with the liquidity coverage ratio in 2016 well exceeding the minimum set by the Basel Committee. Currency = pp EE app Page 19 mismatches are low and banks have an aggregate net long FX position which limits risks from a sudden currency depreciation. Corporate leverage is generally low since companies mostly lacked access to external funding and the domestic financial system is small. Household debt is also relatively low. The administration’s approval ratings remain high although the political climate is becoming more challenging . Despite the economic recession, the government’s approval rating remains above levels seen during the previous administration, and is one of the highest in Latin America. However, the government does not have a majority in Congress, and passage of legislation is likely to become increasingly complex in the run- up to the October 2017 congressional and gubernatorial elections. A weak economy and high poverty rates are likely to influence the congressional discussion of the 2017 Budget, and high inflation is likely to be at the forefront in the next round of collective wage negotiations (that is about to get underway).