Bringing inflation to a single-digit level is a key priority . The BCRA has managed well the transition to an inflation targeting regime under difficult circumstances, and reconfirmed in September 2016 the inflation targets that were announced early in the year. The pace at which this disinflation is achieved should remain flexible and adapt to circumstances as they unfold, remaining conscious of the economic costs and, particularly, the distributional impact. For example, if inflation inertia remains high, lowering inflation to 5 percent by 2019 could result in sizable output losses (Box 4, and Chapter 4 of the Selected Issues Paper). This is why past episodes of transition from moderately high to single-digit inflation generally occurred over a longer period of time (Box 5 and Chapter 5 of the Selected Issues Paper). To support the central bank’s disinflation efforts, building credibility in the monetary framework will be essential and will serve to lessen the economic and social costs in lowering inflation . Creating robust institutional foundations for monetary policy based on inflation forecast targeting would help build credibility over time and allow price formation to gradually become more forward-looking, lessening the cost of disinflation and lowering the inflation premium that is currently built into the domestic yield curve. The announced establishment of a six-member Monetary Policy Council led by the BCRA Governor and the planned adoption (from January 2017) of the 7-day repo rate as the policy rate are positive developments. Other steps that should be taken immediately to strengthen the institutional underpinnings for monetary policy include (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 5): Establishing a clear price stability mandate for the central bank with operational independence; The BCRA will conduct liquidity management and introduce standing facilities in connection with the 7-day policy rate. Page 27 Eliminating central bank financing of the fiscal deficit; Moving to less frequent decision points for the policy rate as macroeconomic conditions stabilize (currently rate decisions are taken on a weekly basis); and Continuing to build credibility in Argentina’s inflation statistics. Box 4. Inflation Inertia and the Cost of Disinflation Reducing inflation to a single digit is an essential step to achieve a more efficient allocation of resources, increase savings, reduce income inequality, and ultimately boost the long-term growth potential of Argentina’s economy. Disinflation processes, however, can also have short-term costs on economic activity, which in a large part depend on the credibility of the monetary authorities and the degree of nominal inertia in the economy, or the extent to which wages and prices are set in a forward-looking manner (Blanchard, 1998). Using a small macroeconomic model estimated on Argentine data (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 4) allows establishing a quantitative link between the degree of nominal inertia in wage and price determination and the output cost of disinflation. With a coefficient on past inflation in the Phillips curve of 0.7, a model simulation bringing inflation from its level in Q1:2016 (33 percent, y/y, based on the City of Buenos Aires CPI) to 5 percent would require real interest rates to peak at 12 percent during the first year, resulting in a cumulative output loss over three years of slightly above 10 percent of potential GDP. However, if a greater weight was placed on forward-looking inflation, the output losses in the same model could be significantly smaller. For example, if the coefficient on lagged inflation in the Phillips curve was 0.5, this would reduce the needed increase in real interest rates by more than 6 percentage points and would halve the 3-year output costs of bringing inflation down to about 5 percent in the model simulation. These results confirm that building credibility about the inflation targets and convincing economic agents to place greater weight on forward-looking inflation in the process of wage and price determination could significantly reduce the short-term output cost of disinflation. _____________________ 1/ Olivier Blanchard, “Optimal speed of disinflation: Hungary”, (1998), in “ Moderate Inflation: The Experience of Transition Economies ” edited by Carlo Cottarelli and Gyorgy Szapary, IMF and National Bank of Hungary. Real interest rateOutput lossReal interest rateOutput loss (Percent) Source: Fund staff estimates. Maximum annual real interest rate and 3-year cumulative output losses (expressed as percent of potential GDP) in a simulation where inflation is reduced from its level in Q1:2016 to 5 percent using the model described in Chapter 4 of the Selected Issue Papers. The inflation path in the two scenarios is forced to be the same. Inertia 0.7 Inertia 0.5 Output Cost of Disinflation and Inflation Inertia Page 28 Box 5. Lessons from Past Episodes of Disinflation Moderate inflation episodes A sample of 35 episodes of moderate inflation (between 10 and 40 percent, y/y) reveals that, for the bulk (30 cases) it took four years or more to reduce inflation to single rates. In almost half of these cases, it took more than 10 years to get inflation below 10 percent. In many of these cases, the persistence of moderate or high levels of inflation was accompanied by explicit indexation of contracts (which led to a backward- looking process for wage and price formation). As a result, the economic cost of lowering inflation was high, and most countries chose a more extended horizon to bring down inflation. In Latin America, for example, Chile and Colombia defeated inflation over a period of more than 10 years during the 1980s and 1990s, whereas in Mexico it lasted more than four years after the “Tequila crisis.” These countries also saw a significant real appreciation of their currencies during the disinflation process (of about 50 percent in Colombia, 40 percent in Chile, and about 80 percent in Mexico). A role for institutions . In many of these cases, reforming the institutional framework for monetary policy was an instrumental ingredient in reducing inflation (see Cukierman and others, 2002, or Jacome and Vazquez, 2008). This typically implied granting independence to central banks and assigning them a narrow price stability mandate. Fiscal adjustment also contributed to this effort. For example, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico ran a sizable primary surplus during their disinflation episodes. _____________ 1/ See Chapter 5 of the Selected Issues Paper for the references. Authorities’ view . The authorities stated that the announced pace of disinflation is appropriate and they expect to achieve the 5 percent per year inflation target by 2019. They noted that many countries that went from moderate to low inflation more gradually over time were facing legal backward indexation (for example, Colombia in the 1990s), which is not the case of Argentina. They also noted that staff is overestimating the output costs associated with disinflation in Argentina. In the past, lower inflation in Argentina was generally associated with stronger, not weaker, economic activity. This suggests that when starting from high and distortionary inflation – und < > Y Z ji K ee K Page 29 levels, reducing inflation actually increases economic activity. If expectations were to deviate from the targets announced in September, the authorities would not hesitate to tighten the monetary policy stance as needed to return to the announced disinflation path. Showing the resolution to meet the targets announced (for both inflation and transfers to the Treasury) is an effective way to build the credibility necessary to reduce inflation inertia. The authorities’ position is that changing the monetary policy institutional framework along the lines suggested by staff is effective once credibility has been achieved. Their reading of the experience of other countries was of more mixed results on the role played by such institutional changes. There have been cases where the central bank’s charter was changed after inflation had been reduced, in order to lock-in its benefits, rather than at the beginning of the disinflationary process (for example, the United Kingdom in the 1990s).