Introducing a simple, transparent, and credible medium-term fiscal plan that guides expectations would be valuable . Such a fiscal framework should aim to improve the overall management of fiscal policy, strengthen the credibility of fiscal objectives, and improve the identification and management of fiscal risks. Some elements of a fiscal framework are already formally in place in Argentina, under the existing Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL), but the system lacks credible enforcement. A complete revamping of the existing legislation could take time. However, pending a fuller reform, both federal and provincial governments could introduce simple and transparent medium-term fiscal objectives (for example, on fiscal deficits) in a clear and concise policy statement that would be presented alongside the annual budget. That statement would include details on the macroeconomic assumptions underlying the medium-term budget and the key policy measures to be taken to achieve the deficit objectives Over time, as uncertainty subsides and credibility increases, other measures could be adopted to strengthen the fiscal framework including: Introducing a medium-term debt target, limits on growth of spending, and/or an overall deficit ceiling, with transparent and easy-to-monitor escape clauses that allow deviating from the limits in exceptional circumstances. The new framework would restrict the ability for the Executive to exceed budget expenditure ceilings or reallocate spending beyond certain limits without the approval of Congress. It should also include credible enforcement mechanisms, including a The Law, introduced in 2004, was suspended in 2010. It states that primary spending growth in federal and provincial budgets cannot exceed the projected rate of nominal GDP growth. It also imposes limits on debt service ratios at provincial level, and it requires the federal and provincial governments to maintain primary current balances. However, enforcement mechanisms are weak: the only sanction for the federal government is the exclusion from the Federal Fiscal Responsibility Council, a committee representing the federal government and provinces that verifies the application of the law and should coordinate fiscal policy across federal and provincial governments. Sanctions for provinces mainly include suspension from the authorization to issue debt and reductions of discretionary transfers from the federal government. Page 36 “comply-or-explain” obligation for the federal government and automatic cuts to transfers for provinces in case the limits are exceeded. Develop a fiscal risk analysis framework including the publication of a fiscal scenario analysis and long-term fiscal sustainability analysis. Create a new mid-year fiscal report with updated estimates of fiscal outturns for the year and revised medium-term macroeconomic and fiscal projections. Establish a fiscal council , with legal and operational independence, that evaluates macroeconomic and budgetary forecasts, costs new policy initiatives, assesses fiscal plans, and monitors fiscal performances (including compliance with the FRL). Authorities’ view . The federal authorities agreed that it would be important to introduce a medium-term fiscal framework, and said that they are planning to announce medium-term fiscal targets before the end of the year. They pointed to a number of legislative initiatives that should strengthen the institutional fiscal framework. In the context of the discussion of the 2017 Budget, a proposal will be examined that limits the Executive’s power to increase total spending above Budget appropriations and to move spending across different items ( Ley de superpoderes ). A proposal is being considered that introduces a Congress Budget Office which would help Congress assess the fiscal impact of legislative proposals. Finally, discussions with provinces are ongoing to reinstate the Fiscal Responsibility Law over the next few months. While the exact contours of the Law are still to be determined, it would likely include caps on current spending growth and fiscal deficit targets. While the enforcement mechanisms are the same as under the old Law (and so based on the federal government’s power to deny new debt issuance to provinces not complying with the limits) the authorities are confident that the greater commitment to fiscal discipline from the federal government will be shared by provinces and lend credibility to the new framework. With about 40 percent of general government spending taking place at the sub- national level, greater efficiency in government spending will require a rethink of Argentina’s fiscal federal structure that Realigns spending authority and revenue autonomy. Provinces are responsible for a substantial share of spending but enjoy limited tax autonomy and have been depending on the federal government for financing. In 2015, one-third of total provincial resources came from by discretionary federal transfers, and around 35 percent of provincial debt is owed to the federal government. Realigning responsibilities could require returning some spending responsibility to the federal government and/or allocating more revenue sources back to the provinces. Addresses the complicated and inefficient sharing of resources across provinces . With the legislation behind the co-participation scheme unchanged since 1988, intricate layers of patches have been introduced over the years to correct for increasing socio-economic disparities across provinces and to respond to political pressures. The lack of a mechanism to adjust the distribution of revenues across provinces to reflect their changing revenue capacity and Page 37 spending needs adds uncertainty and volatility to fiscal policy at both provincial and federal levels. As such, the current horizontal distribution of shared revenue and federal transfers across provinces should be re-examined to make it more equitable, transparent, rules-based, and stable. Restricts the borrowing power of provinces . Although provinces appear to have low debt and deficits, these aggregates mask significant heterogeneity and imbalances across provinces (see Public Debt Sustainability Analysis). Debt and deficits are concentrated in a few provinces, and the large share of foreign currency denominated debt poses risks (see Annex I). Consideration should be given to strengthening prudential control mechanisms over provincial borrowing, within constitutional limitations, perhaps to allow for a more active review role for the federal government or to net debt service obligations from transfers to those provinces with weak fiscal positions. Authorities’ view . The authorities agreed that a new legal framework would be needed to strengthen the institutions and rules of fiscal federalism in Argentina. However, delivering fundamental legislative changes in this area will not be easy, as it would require a qualified majority in Congress and approval from all provinces. The gradual devolution to provinces of the 15 percent of co-participation revenues once attributed to ANSES is expected to alleviate the financial difficulties experienced by many provinces last year. Therefore, provinces are expected to reduce their external borrowing going forward. If this were not to happen, the federal authorities are ready to tighten their debt approval policy, or to link it more explicitly to the issuance of debt needed to finance an increase in capital spending. As envisaged in the 2017 Budget, the federal authorities are planning to reduce discretionary transfers to provinces in the future, partly offsetting the increase in co-participated revenues (the proportion of national revenues shared with provinces will increase from 37 percent in 2015 to 40 percent next year).