The program deficit targets were met by wide margins, but the social spending IT was missed . A deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP (program definition) was recorded through June, significantly below the 1.3 percent of GDP target, primarily due to lower capital expenditure and lower matching pension contributions. Social spending was also below target, however, mainly reflecting further targeting and a lower number of families receiving social assistance than planned. Tax revenues were just 0.2 percent of GDP below projections in the first half of the year, despite slower growth and even as the government stepped up efforts to reduce the stock of advanced tax payments and outstanding tax refunds. With a lower deficit, the government reduced the issuance of domestic debt and maintained a comfortable level of deposits at the CBA. The deficit is expected Other fiscal targets were met, including: (i) the continuous PCs on nonaccumulation of external arrears and on nonabsorption of losses, liabilities, or payments of utilities and other companies; and (ii) the indicative targets on government guarantees for external debt and the average concessionality of newly contracted external debt. Page 11 to widen in the second half, as the impact of higher wages and pensions kicks in and implementation of capital spending accelerates. The deficit is expected to close the year at around 0.8 percent of GDP below the budget target of 2.3 percent of GDP. Fiscal reforms are advancing. The new government merged the MOF and SRC, which is expected to improve synergies and reduce collection gaps. The SRC established a Risk Management Unit (RMU), which is in the process of preparing a compliance strategy for 2015 (June and December 2014 structural benchmarks), and the MOF is making progress in establishing a second RMU with support from FAD TA to look into risks related to concessions, PPPs, utilities, and SOEs (December 2014 structural benchmark). The authorities are advancing in their assessment of possible new tax measures, including on high-wealth individuals (September 2014 and June 2015 structural benchmarks). New legislative amendments to the customs code were approved to improve customs operations and trade (March 2014 structural benchmark). In the social spending area, there has been progress in the establishment of integrated social service centers and an increase in allowances under the Family Benefits Program (FBP). RMENIA —R ISK SSESSMENT M ATRIX Potential Deviations from Baseline Nature/source of risk Relative likelihood Possible impact if risk is Policy response realized Global Risks Side-effects from global financial conditions Staff assessment: Increase exchange rate - An abrupt surge in global financial market volatility, -High Low/Medium flexibility with occasional as investors reassess underlying risk Financial imbalances from protracted period of low -Medium The current account deficit intervention to prevent is a source of vulnerability, disorderly conditions, and interest rates continue to build: excess leverage, along with a reversal of where possible, to build especially for corporates; asset price bubbles; delays bank flows. Armenia’s buffers. Prepare and in fiscal and structural reforms. sound policy framework, implement contingency remaining resources from plans for potential the 2013 Eurobond, and financial spillovers. official support mitigate Enhance monitoring of risks. FX risks Protracted period of slower growth in Staff assessment: Medium Accelerate reforms to advanced/emerging economies Effects would be via increase growth and Advanced : lower-than-anticipated potential growth -High remittance, trade, finance, diversify export and persistently low inflation due to a failure to fully address the legacies of the financial crisis, leading to secular stagnation. Emerging markets: Maturing of the cycle, -High misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth. and investment channels, destinations and particularly if Russia is also products. Increase affected. exchange rate flexibility. Geopolitical fragmentation that erodes the Staff assessment: High Prepare and implement globalization process and fosters inefficiency Effects would be very contingency plans for Russia/Ukraine : sustained tensions depress - Medium strong, comprising both potential financial business confidence and heighten risk aversion, amid disturbances in global financial, trade and commodity markets. direct impacts from Russia spillovers related to and impacts from global regional geopolitical disruptions. Tough risks. Increase exchange Heightened risk of fragmentation/state failure in - Medium sanctions against Russia rate flexibility. Page 12 Nature/source of risk Relative likelihood Possible impact if risk is Policy response the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices, with negative spillovers to the global economy. realized would lead to more severe impacts, including in the banking sector. Growth slowdown and financial risks in China Staff assessment: Medium Diversify export - Continued buildup and unwinding of excess - Medium Effects would likely hit destinations and capacity, eventually resulting in a sharp growth Armenia’s mining exports, products. slowdown and large financial and fiscal losses (medium-term). an important area of growth and source of FX earnings. Country-Specific Risks Regional conflict Staff assessment: Very Prepare and implement - Risks from sharp, renewed conflict with Azerbaijan - Medium High contingency plans. over Nagorno-Karabakh - Deterioration of Russian-Georgian relations -Low -Conflict with Azerbaijan Increase exchange rate would involve severe flexibility. impacts and likely other countries (Russia, Turkey) -Deterioration of Russian- Georgian relations could lead to transport, trade, or energy supply disruptions. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. higher fiscal deficit is proposed for 2015 to support growth. With lower growth, meeting the envisaged 2.0 percent of GDP budget deficit would have led to a decline in capital spending, exacerbating the slowdown. Staff and the authorities agreed to ease the deficit target by 0.3 percent of GDP in 2015 to increase investment outlays (e.g., roads, infrastructure). The authorities will strengthen implementation of the foreign-financed capital budget by submitting monthly progress reports on externally-funded projects to the Office of the Prime Minister and preparing proposals on how to improve execution (April 2015 structural benchmark). They will also improve the procurement system for domestically-funded projects by shifting fully to e-procurement for both central and local governments in 2015. The program now foresees reaching the debt-reducing deficit target of 1.8 percent of GDP in 2017 rather than in 2016. Page 13 Box 2. Spillovers from Global and Regional Developments to Armenia Global Risks. Normalization of monetary policies in key advanced economies would likely not have a strong direct impact, given the large share of concessional financing in Armenia’s external debt and low international integration of the banking system. However, higher global interest rates would affect domestic financing conditions and demand due to high dollarization. In addition, they could affect Armenia via Russia, which is highly exposed to global financial conditions. A protracted slowdown in emerging markets could depress prices for Armenia’s mineral and metal exports, nearly 50 percent of total exports. While hydrocarbon prices would be lower, the price of gas from Russia is already low and fixed for four more years. Risks from Russia . The conflict in Ukraine and sanctions have affected Russia through a cut-off of external funding, lower investment, capital outflows, and higher policy and borrowing rates. These factors have contributed to significant depreciation of the ruble, along with the decline of oil prices and increasing concerns about medium-term growth. Armenia is closely integrated with Russia through a variety of channels: Trade . Russia accounts for around ¼ of Armenia’s exports of goods, concentrated in job-creating sectors like agriculture, light industry, and transportation. Since 2008, the correlation of Russian GDP growth and Armenian exports has strengthened. Remittances . Armenia receives 18–20 percent of GDP in remittances, 90 percent from Russia, increasing the potential adverse effects of ruble depreciation. Since 2009, remittance growth has outpaced GDP growth, with deposits building up in the domestic banking system. A deep and protracted downturn in Russia could cause migrant workers to return, putting pressure on the local job market. Bank flows . Spillovers may be direct through Russian banks active in Armenia and indirect via confidence effects. Two major Russian banks are active, although the Armenia operations of these banks are very small compared to parent bank size. The exposure of Armenian banks to Russian assets or Armenian firms operating in Russia is a source of credit risk, although this impact appears relatively small and manageable at present. Indirect confidence effects may arise if banks in North America and Europe limit their new operations in Armenia due to geopolitical developments. Investment . Russia is an important source of FDI, especially government-related firms like Gazprom, UES, Russian Railways, and mobile phone operators. FDI plans of these firms and other Russian investors (e.g., Rosneft, RusHydro, mining companies, private firms) may be affected by a major slowdown. FDI from other sources could also decline, if investors reassess economies perceived as closely linked to Russia, although there could be more interest from investors from China, the Gulf, or if geopolitical conditions change, Iran and Turkey. Policy response. Adverse spillovers would strengthen depreciation pressure, with possible balance sheet effects given high dollarization. The room for response is limited in the short term, but there may be space for a moderate fiscal stimulus and monetary easing. Increased exchange rate flexibility is needed to reflect changes in fundamentals, including the depreciation of the ruble. Accelerating reforms to increase growth and diversify export destinations and products would also increase resilience in the longer term. Some targeted revenue measures will also contribute to supporting growth in 2015 The government will begin gradually replacing the current mixed (accrual/cash) method for determining VAT liability and providing credits/refunds within a unified regime where both debits and credits are calculated on an accrual basis. This change will ease cash-flow constraints for taxpayers and will be phased over three years, with estimated costs to the budget of AMD 5 billion (0.1 percent of GDP) in the first year. Costs in the second and third years will be higher and Page 14 necessitate offsetting measures. In response to continuing weaknesses in construction, the government will allow for income tax deductibility of mortgage payments under loans for purchase of new apartments built after November 1, 2014. Tax incentives will also be provided to remote border regions adjacent to Azerbaijan. To contain the impact on revenues from these changes, the natural resource user fee for non-metallic minerals will be increased in 2015, and the government will consider raising excise rates on alcohol and tobacco, if needed. Revenue measures, including strengthening of tax compliance, will be important in the coming years to address gaps in the tax system and increase fiscal space and buffers. Revenue measures in 2016 and beyond will be necessary to reduce the stock of advance tax payments (by 0.3 percent of GDP per year in 2016–17), increase capital and social expenditures, and bring the deficit to 1.8 percent of GDP by the end of the program period and set debt on a declining path. The government is initiating the preparation of a new tax code aimed at reforming the tax system and reducing high compliance costs through a well-defined set of taxation principles and rights and obligations of taxpayers and the tax administration, in line with best practices. Preparation and enactment of the code will present an opportunity to eliminate tax expenditures, subject the approval of new tax benefits to more stringent rules, and broaden the tax base (e.g., agriculture, fuels). To support this work, the government included for the first time an annex to the 2015 budget quantifying the main tax expenditures. EEU membership could have major fiscal implications . After joining the EEU, Armenia is expected to receive 1.13 percent of the common customs pool, implying additional customs revenues of about 1½ percent of GDP annually (net of the current level). As ratification of Armenia’s membership in the EEU is still pending, these revenues are not yet incorporated in the 2015 budget or in program targets. In light of Russia’s commitments to the WTO, the revenue increases will be transitory, as EEU tariffs are expected to decline over the medium-term. Staff proposed that the revenues mainly be saved to build fiscal reserves and until high-quality capital projects and social spending can be identified (and capital underspending issues addressed). The authorities agreed, also citing concerns with the initiation and sustainability of the revenues. Staff identified potential downsides, including (i) the impact of sanctions and lower oil prices on Russia’s imports; (ii) the medium-term forecasts of Russian custom revenues in light of Russia’s commitments for WTO membership; (iii) possible delays due technical obstacles in implementing the customs pool revenue-sharing mechanism; (iv) the impact of seasonal import patterns on cash management; (v) possible legal provisions that could provide special exemptions and loopholes for member countries; and (vi) negotiations that may be needed with other WTO countries, as Armenia needs to raise tariffs above its WTO commitments. If ratification is achieved and membership commences from January, the Second Review (March 2015) will provide an early opportunity for assessment. The authorities are continuing with implementation of the flagship pension reform, although its scope has been narrowed for now . The reform targets key economic and social objectives, including addressing Armenia’s unfavorable population dynamics and old-age poverty and the lack of long-term funding in local currency. However, the reform was received with mistrust from some segments of the population, especially young high-wage workers, who led protests. Page 15 Following a decision in April by the Constitutional Court to strike down some provisions of the pension law, the government made changes to the reform (Annex II). These have necessitated adjustments to procedures, software, websites, and financial and information flows, which in turn have delayed full roll-out. As these adjustments are being made, the government’s efforts are now targeted at increasing public awareness of the reform. The temporary narrowing of coverage of the reform will likely result in fiscal savings of up to 0.3 percent of GDP per year through 2017 because of lower government payments for matching contributions.