With low growth in trading partners, activity in Armenia is expected to remain subdued in 2014–15 and to recover only gradually in the medium term. Significant downside risks exist, particularly connected with Russia, given substantial interlinkages via trade, remittances, bank flows, and FDI. Growth is expected to remain restrained in 2014–15 and to recover only gradually in the medium term . Growth is now projected at 2.6 percent in 2014—down from 3.5 percent in 2013 and 4.3 percent in previous projections—and is expected to accelerate only gradually in 2015 and over the medium term, in light of expectations of a prolonged period of slow growth in Russia. The gradual recovery will also be driven by a moderate medium-term recovery of foreign and private investment in Armenia. Fiscal expenditures are again expected to be lower than planned this year. The deficit in 2014 is expected to reach 1.5 percent of GDP, well below the budget (2.3 percent of GDP). The deficit could be lower, by a further ½ to 1 percent of GDP, if capital spending remains restrained. The external current account consolidation is likely to be weaker than expected at the time of program approval in March, by 0.8 percent of GDP, due to slower export and remittance growth. Gross international reserves will also be lower than expected, given the weaker current account and other factors, such as the loss of EU financing. The authorities broadly shared staff views on the outlook, but argued that growth could be higher in 2015 and beyond, reflecting strong performance in agriculture, services, and light industry, as well as potential increases in FDI catalyzed by EEU accession. Source: National Authorities; and IMF WEO. Armenia Current Armenia Oct 2012 Euro Partners Current Euro Partners Oct 2012 Russia Current Russia Oct 2012 Revisions to Growth Outlook:Armenia and Major Trading Partners (In Percent, Current versus Fall 2012 Vintage) Page 10 Significant downside risks exist (see Risk Assessment Matrix). A worsening of global financial conditions and protracted slow growth in advanced and emerging markets could have an adverse impact on Armenia’s outlook via lower exports and higher borrowing costs. Risks from the sharp slowdown in Russia and the depreciation of the ruble are significant, given the links between Russia and Armenia (Box 2). While EEU accession may bring benefits, the Armenian economy could become even more closely tied to Russia, and the end of negotiations on an Association Agreement with the EU could mean the loss of a long-term reform anchor and convergence to EU standards. Renewed conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh remains a significant country-specific risk. By contrast, upside developments could occur in the mining sector, where new copper and gold production could lead to an increase in exports. There is also upside potential in tourism and agriculture. Russia’s counter-sanctions against European food products could potentially benefit Armenia’s agricultural sector, although it will be difficult to scale up quickly. The authorities expressed concern regarding the impact of sanctions on Russia, including risk aversion by banks and investors to the region as a whole, and not just to Russia/Ukraine.