Armenia’s economic environment has become more complex, particularly due to adverse external developments—slow growth in Russia and the EU and uncertainty regarding the crisis in Ukraine, including sanctions and counter-measures. A challenging domestic policy environment is also playing a role, most notably setbacks in the implementation of the pension reform. In spite of these challenges, the Fund-supported program remains on track and its objectives highly relevant. Recovery from the 2009 crisis is in place, but significant challenges persist . Growth has been reestablished after a 14 percent contraction in 2009, while major reductions in the fiscal and current account have been simultaneously achieved. Nonetheless, significant challenges remain, as the economy has not yet developed a robust alternative to the pre-crisis construction-led growth model, public, private and foreign investment remains suppressed, and the economy has struggled to generate sufficient jobs to stem emigration and reduce poverty. The still-high current account deficit and financial dollarization remain sources of vulnerability. Cooperation between Armenia and the Fund has remained strong . A Fund-supported program was in place during 2010–13 and was completed with minor delays and few missed targets. More recently, a new 38-month arrangement was approved in March 2014 aimed at helping consolidate stability and buffers against possible external shocks and supporting growth through further reforms in the transition towards a dynamic emerging market economy. Beyond the program relationship, Armenia and the Fund have maintained a continuous dialog regarding policy challenges, and recent policy implementation has been consistent with past Fund advice (Box 1). There has also been close cooperation through Fund technical assistance. Armenia’s economic environment has become more complex in 2014 . Externally, growth in Armenia’s largest trading partners, Russia and the EU, has been weaker than expected, affecting exports and remittances. The slowdown in Russia—driven by both structural and geopolitical developments, including sanctions, represents a particular challenge, along with depreciation of the ruble. Domestically, the government has yet to overcome significant budget underexecution— particularly on capital expenditures—and the roll-out of the long-planned pension reform has experienced difficulties. A new government, in place since May, has stressed continuity. The new government was formed following the resignation of Prime Minister Tigran Sargsyan in April, after six years in office. Major actions to date have included: merging the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the State Revenue Committee (SRC); narrowing the scope of the pension reform after demonstrations and a ruling that some of its provisions were unconstitutional; implementation of an open skies policy in civil aviation; and concluding steps on accession to the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU). Page 6 Box 1. Policies since the 2012 Article IV Consultation Macroeconomic policies have been in line with past staff advice. The 2012 consultation called for: (i) greater tax revenue mobilization to strengthen the fiscal outlook; (ii) continuing monetary and financial sector reforms; and (iii) greater exchange rate flexibility to underpin external consolidation and sustainability. Since 2012, the authorities have increased revenue mobilization and reduced the underlying fiscal deficit, although the latter also reflected fiscal under-spending, mainly on capital projects. Monetary and exchange rate policies helped maintain price stability and supported external adjustment, as evidenced by the gradually declining external current account deficit. The authorities have implemented most of the recommendations from the 2012 FSAP Update, including: establishing minimum foreign currency liquidity ratios, introducing the use of Basel II Pillar II supervisory techniques, and preparing supporting regulations for the pension reform. The authorities also made progress in implementing structural reforms, albeit with some delays. The 2012 consultations called for improvements to the business climate and competitiveness that were supported by the 2010 and 2014 Fund arrangements. Tax administration and financial reforms to improve business conditions have generally advanced. The authorities are continuing with the implementation of the flagship pension reforms, launched in January 2014, although these faced obstacles and were modified. The “open skies” framework for civil aviation is in place and delivering increased flights at lower costs. However, competition and regulatory reforms have advanced at a slower-than-expected pace. More broadly, while progress has been registered, a decisive breakthrough on structural reforms has not been achieved, with consequences for private and foreign investment. Growth has softened, and inflation fell below the CBA’s target range of 4±1.5 percent Growth in the first half of 2014 was 2.7 percent (vis-à-vis 3.5 percent in 2013), as growth of exports and remittances slowed, and government spending was lower than budgeted. The slowdown was broad based, although construction, which has declined since the 2009 crisis, was relatively flat. Inflation through September was just 1.5 percent, primarily driven by low food inflation. Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2 Agriculture Industry Construction Services Other Sectoral Contributions to Growth (In Percent, Production Approach) Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14 Headline Inflation Food Inflation Non-Food Inflation Consumer Price Inflation (In Percentage Change) Page 7 Pressures in the foreign exchange (FX) market have been associated with pressures on regional currencies. Depreciation pressures emerged in February and March in the context of higher payments for gas imports and pressures on regional currencies, leading to CBA intervention. Subsequently, the FX market remained stable, as weaker growth translated into low growth of imports. Moderate seasonal appreciation pressures emerged over the summer, associated with tourism receipts and low gas demand, allowing the CBA to recoup part of its earlier intervention. Pressures reemerged in November, in the context of depreciation of the Russian ruble, and lower remittances and exports to Russia, leading again to CBA intervention, as well as depreciation of the dram. The banking sector remains profitable, but performance has weakened. Slower economic growth has been accompanied by an increase in NPLs, which reached 6.5 percent in September, a reduction of profitability, slower credit and deposits growth, and a small reduction in the capital adequacy ratio. In addition, competition among banks for clients in a weaker economic environment has reduced lending-deposit spreads, putting additional downward pressure on profitability. Intervention, in millions of US dollars Exchange Rate (Drams per US dollar, RHS) FX Intervention and Exchange Rate Source: NationalAuthorities. Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q320102011201220132014 NPLs to Gross Loans ROA Capital Adequacy Ratio (RHS) Financial Soundness Indicators (In Percent) Jan-09Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14 Total Credit In National Currency In FX (Exchange rate-adjusted) Credit Growth (In YoY Percentage Change) Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staffcalculations. Page 8 Monetary conditions have eased, in line with policy decisions. An easing cycle initiated by the CBA in November of 2013 has continued, with the policy rate declining by 1.75 percentage points to reach 6.75 percent in August. This was accompanied by a reduction of reserve requirements for dram deposits from 4 to 2 percent in March. With budget underexecution and funding from last year’s Eurobond, the MOF has stayed out of the T-bill market, and short-term T- bill and overnight rates have declined by a similar amount as the policy rate. The impact of the monetary policy easing has, however, not been significantly reflected in lending rates. With continued under-spending, the fiscal accounts posted small (underlying) deficits in 2013 and in the first eight months of 2014 . Under-execution affected major foreign-financed capital projects, especially the multi-donor North-South Highway and border crossing improvement projects. The headline fiscal deficit was 1.7 percent of GDP in 2013, but included 1.5 percent of GDP of capital transfers related to a December debt-equity transaction with Gazprom. Despite lower growth, revenues have been close to budget targets, including in 2014. The small fiscal deficit of 0.1 percent of (annual) GDP recorded through August reflected further capital under-spending, lower-than- budgeted matching pension contributions (due to pension reform changes), and lower outlays on goods and services. In spite of regional uncertainties, Eurobond spreads have remained stable. Overcoming underexecution has proved to be a difficult task, as the causes vary depending on the project. For the North-South Highway, issues include complex land acquisition, resettlement, and archeological work. A new on-line procurement framework that aims at arm’s-length transactions and improved transparency and governance may also be contributing to delays. Central Bank Repurchase Rate Central Bank Lombard Rate Overnight Deposit Rate Interbank Market Overnight Rate Short-Term Interest Rates (In Percent) National Currency US Dollars Treasury Bill Monetary easing begins Short-Term Lending and T-Bill Rates 1/ (In Percent per Annum, 12 Month Average) Source: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Short-termlending rates are defined as interest rates on loans with a maturity of less than one year. Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations. Aug-13Nov-13Feb-14May-14Aug-14Nov-14 ARM (7Y) GEO (10Y) POL (10Y) RUS (10Y) TUR (10Y) HUN (10Y) International Bond Spreads (In Basis Points over Comparable US Treasuries) Page 9 Uncertainty on EEU membership eased with signing of the accession treaty in October. On October 10, the presidents of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia, signed an agreement on Armenia’s membership. Armenia is expected to formally join the Union in January, once the treaty is ratified by the four national parliaments (Annex I). The Fund-supported program is on track and its objectives remain highly relevant Despite adverse external developments and policy challenges, all end-June PCs, all continuous PCs, and most ITs and SBs were met. The objectives of the program—to consolidate stability and buffers against possible external shocks and to support growth—remain particularly relevant in the current environment.