Program NIR and NDA targets were met, but the inflation indicative target was missed as inflation fell below the CBA’s target range. The June NIR target was met, as the CBA was able to partially recoup the intervention undertaken early in the year and as imports weakened in the context of lower budget execution. The NDA target was met by a comfortable margin, even though the CBA further eased monetary policy. The CBA oversaw a decline in overnight rates without a large increase in credit to banks, due to weaker economic conditions, relatively strong growth in dram deposits, and lower budget execution. Preliminary data indicate that the September NIR and NDA indicative targets were also met. On the other hand, and in spite of the monetary easing since late 2013, the inflation indicative target was missed as a decline in both food and nonfood inflation led to end-June inflation falling below the 4 ± 1.5 target range. With inflation expected to return to the target range within the next few months, staff and the authorities agreed that a continuation of the current stance appears warranted, although an adjustment may be necessitated by changes in the transmission of monetary policy to market rates, developments in key trading partners, and monetary policy changes in advanced economies. Monetary policy remains anchored on the CBA’s inflation-forecast targeting (IFT) framework . In the near term, the IFT regime will continue to be complemented by a ceiling on NDA of the CBA, as the program transitions to inflation-consultation clauses. The CBA is further strengthening modeling and communications, both with Fund TA, and the monetary operations toolkit, particularly the use of one- and seven-day instruments for interbank lending. The CBA is assessing obstacles to developing the FX derivatives market and hedging instruments and will formulate a policy agenda. Exchange rate policy will complement the IFT regime and support external adjustment Staff and the authorities agreed that exchange rate policy should continue to be guided by letting the exchange rate to be determined by market developments, with occasional intervention to mitigate disorderly conditions, and where possible, to build buffers. As a result, policies may deviate from a pure float, but interventions are expected to be targeted and infrequent. In this respect, the recent depreciation of the Russian ruble poses a challenge with a need to balance limited intervention to mitigate disorderly conditions with exchange rate movements that reflect changes in fundamentals. Clear communications will be important to support these efforts. The staff noted that exchange rate policy may become more challenging as integration with the EEU advances, Page 16 particularly if more transactions are settled in rubles, and suggested to step up monitoring of these changes in the context of future program reviews. The Fund-supported program envisages new measures to strengthen the independence and operations of the CBA, in line with the most recent IMF Safeguards Assessment completed in August . During 2014–15, the CBA will work with its external auditors to present a consolidated financial position inclusive of enterprises owned by the CBA and will publish an annex in its annual report describing these investments, their rationale, objectives, development strategy, risks, risk-mitigation efforts, and where appropriate, the CBA’s divestment strategy (June 2015 structural benchmark). The CBA will improve the charter for its board to better outline the roles and responsibilities of board members. Finally, the CBA and the government will work to advance long-pending legislation to require the government to issue marketable, interest-bearing securities to cover CBA losses.