Reducing vulnerabilities remains a priority. The external current account deficit is expected to gradually decline from 8.0 percent of GDP in 2013 to 6½ percent of GDP over the medium term. Armenia’s international reserve levels are adequate and meet international benchmark levels (Annex III). However, the trade deficit remains large, underscoring the need for enhanced competitiveness and additional exchange rate flexibility. While the public debt DSA suggests that public debt sustainability is not a major source of concern, external debt remains high at 82 percent of GDP at end-2013 and is sensitive to shocks (Annexes III and IV). In addition, the financial sector is highly dollarized. The authorities are implementing a prudent macro-policy mix that aims to reduce vulnerabilities Efforts aim at: achieving fiscal consolidation, while creating space for social and investment needs; allowing for more exchange rate flexibility and improving competitiveness through structural reforms; accumulating adequate levels of external reserves, reducing public debt, and increasing fiscal buffers; and fostering dedollarization. Page 19 Fiscal Policy Further revenue measures and improvements in spending composition are needed to strengthen medium-term fiscal sustainability and boost potential growth. The public debt DSA suggests that posting fiscal deficits below 1.8 percent of GDP over the medium term will contribute to lower debt and enhanced fiscal sustainability. Meeting this target will require measures to increase revenues and improve spending composition. While the authorities have made progress in increasing revenues by almost 3 percentage points of GDP since 2009, the reduction in the underlying fiscal balance in 2013 and 2014 was achieved by underexecuting the capital budget, which is already low by regional standards. Staff stressed that persistent underexecution of the capital budget may lower potential growth. In this respect, high capital spending multipliers provide support for fully executing a well-designed and targeted public investment program (Selected Issues Paper). In addition, there is scope to improve the tax system and increase revenues by broadening the tax base. While the authorities agreed on the need to increase capital spending in a sustainable manner, they were concerned about the impact of higher tax revenues on growth and the business environment. The authorities agreed with staff on the importance of reducing capital under-execution and will prepare an analysis of under-execution and specific proposals to accelerate capital spending. They remain committed in principle to increasing revenues starting in 2016 to create fiscal space for priority social and investment spending, but they would like to limit the impact on the business environment and growth. In this respect, they stated that government support for the agricultural sector is significantly lower than in EU countries and that recent tax expenditure measures are limited in scope. Staff noted that additional EEU custom revenues of about 1½ percent of GDP per year could make a major difference supporting the build-up of a strong fiscal buffer, particularly in advance of debt repayment in 2020. The authorities noted that these revenues should be first secured and their sustainability assessed, along with the impact of higher EEU customs tariffs. Both sides agreed that the potentially higher revenues should not reduce the urgency for fiscal reforms. Exchange Rate and International Reserves A greater commitment to exchange rate flexibility will help facilitate external adjustment and enhance resilience to shocks. The CBA has become more active in the foreign exchange market, selling dollars when the dram has faced depreciation pressures, and purchasing GeorgiaTurkeyRussiaArmenia CCA Median CEE Median Public Investment, 2013 (In Percent of GDP) Source: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Note: CCA denotes Caucasus and Central Asia and CEE denotes Central and Eastern Europe. Page 20 FX to stem the appreciation pressures. Partly as a result of these interventions, the dram has experienced less volatility since mid-2013. However, the dram appreciated in real effective terms by close to 6 percent in 2013 and by a further 2 percent from end-2013 through August 2014. With thedepreciation of the Russian ruble against the dram between end-August to end-November, the real effective exchange rate appreciated further in that period. Staff estimates suggest the need for an adjustment of the dram in real terms over the medium term to bring the external current account balance to equilibrium levels (Annex V). International reserves remain adequate based on standard import and debt metrics, as well as the IMF’s composite metric. Reserves adequacy is also favorable in comparison with peer group countries (Annex III). The authorities reiterated their commitment to exchange rate flexibility, but questioned the robustness of staff‘s estimate of the valuation of the exchange rate. They pointed to the significant narrowing of the external current account deficit since 2012 as evidence that the dram may not be overvalued. Staff underscored that the recent improvement of the current account reflects to some extent developments in partner countries (higher earnings of Armenians living abroad), while the trade balance improved only marginally. The authorities placed less emphasis on the role of exchange rate adjustment and more on structural measures to improve competitiveness. Staff agreed that structural reforms to improve competitiveness would complement additional flexibility of the dram. Financial Dollarization Armenia’s dedollarization strategy is broad and comprehensive, but progress has been slow, and there may be room for introducing additional measures. After spiking to over 70 percent in 2009 during the crisis, financial dollarization has remained at around 60 percent of total deposits and private sector credit in spite of a broad set of dedollarization measures. These have included macroeconomic stabilization (primarily fiscal consolidation) and micro-prudential and supervisory measures. The persistence of high dollarization is consistent with international experience, which suggests that dollarization is difficult to overcome. Staff noted that some dedollarization policies may have had the unintended consequence of increasing credit dollarization, at least temporarily, and argued that there is scope for deepening the dedollarization agenda, particularly through policies that help reduce external imbalances and increase FX liquidity requirements for bank borrowing and lending (Selected Issues Paper). Following a sequence of interventions in the foreign exchange market by the CBA in 2013, the de-facto exchange rate arrangement was reclassified from “floating” to “crawl-like” in March 2014. Staff estimates were calculated based on end-September data for the real effective exchange rates. Page 21 The authorities were less enthusiastic regarding the scope for additional dedollarization measures, and were concerned with impact on financial intermediation . They argued that while further reforms could reduce dollarization, the impact of measures introduced in the past few years had been modest. The current strategy relies on high reserve requirements on FX deposits, held in dram, which staff observed may hinder intermediation and growth. Staff noted that dedollarization policies involve a trade-off with disintermediation, with some tradeoff justified by reduced vulnerabilities. The authorities and staff agreed to work on modifications to the dedollarization strategy. The CBA will prepare a policy paper assessing liquidity and reserve requirement regulations, including their levels and currency of denomination, impacts on interest rates, bank liquidity and buffers, and dollarization, compliance with new Basel III recommendations, and the scope for change (new March 2015 structural benchmark).