The banking sector remains sound, but close monitoring is warranted given the weaker economic environment. Capital and liquidity ratios remain well above minimum regulatory requirements, and banks have increased provisions in response to higher NPLs, keeping the provisions-to-NPLs ratio at over 40 percent. Furthermore, while the system’s net foreign assets are negative, liabilities mainly represent financing from parent banks and IFIs, relatively stable sources of financing. Nonetheless, close monitoring is warranted given that a further weakening of economic conditions could drive NPLs higher while sanctions against Russia could affect the sector. The authorities agreed, noting that sanctions had indeed adversely impacted local affiliates of Russian banks, although the effects were so far manageable. The authorities also noted that the high level of FX liquidity in the system should help mitigate the impact of additional adverse external pressures. All financial sector structural benchmarks—covering supervision, regulation, and development—were met . The CBA has continued to make progress in adjusting its supervisory and regulatory framework to new Basel III guidance, which targets banking sector improvements in absorbing shocks, risk management and governance, and transparency and disclosures. Recent progress has focused on capital requirements, where a new regulation was passed, and on assessment of systemically important domestic institutions, where a new identification methodology was elaborated (June 2014 structural benchmark). The CBA has made progress in other financial sector reforms. Following FSAP recommendations, draft amendments to the legislation of the Deposit Guarantee Fund (DGF) were submitted to parliament to shorten the pay-out period (September 2014 structural benchmark). The authorities also submitted to parliament legislation to facilitate foreign investor participation in securities markets (September 2014 structural benchmark). Further reforms to strengthen and develop the financial sector are envisaged under the program . First, building on the findings of a policy paper on registration and execution of collateral (June 2014 structural benchmark), the program envisages preparation of legislation aimed at removing obstacles (September 2015 structural benchmark). Second, the CBA will continue to Page 17 align its regulatory and supervisory framework with Basel III guidance, particularly regarding liquidity requirements and large exposures (see program issues section below). Finally, the program will aim at strengthening the CBA’s dedollarization framework, although the exact measures are still to be specified (see Article IV discussion below).