Aruba appears to have sustained competitiveness in tourism Its Caribbean market share in stay-over tourism has continued to rise in tandem with growth in visitors’ nights (Figure 4). Aruba’s reputation as a high-end destination and the predominance of time-share participants among repeat stay-over visitors provide revenue stability. In addition, the authorities’ marketing efforts, access to new U.S. hubs, and additional airlift capacity from South America have improved the tourism sectors’ resilience. Electricity costs do not appear to be out of line with its regional competitors. The real effective exchange rate has been on a depreciating trend since mid-2011 Reflecting a narrow production base and the large need for imports that is typical to island economies, the CA norm shows a sizeable deficit of 5½ percent of GDP. While the 2014 CA deficit exceeds this norm by two percentage points, EBA-Lite estimates, which take Aruba’s very open economy into account, suggest an overvaluation of 4 percent, that is, an exchange rate that is broadly in line with fundamentals. The narrowing of the CA deficit over the medium-term is projected to prevent a further deterioration of the net IIP position (–103 percent of GDP at end- 2014). However, stabilizing the net IIP position at such high levels and maintaining sizable CA deficits, even if justified by fundamentals, poses both stability and financing risks. Page 13 Structural competiveness portrays a more nuanced picture . Aruba’s labor market is highly regulated with cumbersome lay-off procedures, including a lengthy (2-3 months) process for obtaining a termination permit, which is often associated with hefty severance pay (based on years of service and final salary) and court settlements favoring employees. Temporary workers can only be hired through an agency for up to 12 months (after which they gain permanent status). A temporary worker can only be rehired for the same position after a three-month pause. Costs of doing business are high as establishing a new enterprise could take 4-6 months and involves complicated procedures across multiple government entities. Obtaining the necessary licenses and permits seem to be especially arduous in the construction and restaurant sectors. Banks impose fees for many types of financial transactions, and it can sometimes take 2-4 months to open a bank account, making access to finance and business operations costly and burdensome. To address some of these issues, the Aruba Investment Agency (Arina), has been established to expedite the processing of permits and licenses. Improving price and structural competitiveness will strengthen the ongoing recovery While recent initiatives to diversify the tourism market are welcome, with the U.S. accounting for around 55 percent of tourists, there is scope for further diversification. Increasing labor market flexibility and reducing the costs of doing business would not only further improve Aruba’s competitiveness, but would also help its adjustment to external shocks and facilitate diversification. The authorities’ plans to set up a second windmill park will likely reduce utility costs, thereby enhancing competitiveness. While the authorities generally agreed with staff’s analysis, they did not consider structural competitiveness to be a major impediment . They highlighted many sources of strong non-price competitiveness relative to their Caribbean peers including Aruba’s location, educated population, high standards of living, safety and security, the Dutch legal system, and modern infrastructure such as port facilities for cruise lines. Aruba is also one of the few countries in the region where U.S. customs and border patrol offers clearance at the airport facilitating travel back to the U.S. (recently expanded to include private aircraft). Relatedly, the authorities are working on achieving EU/Schengen preclearance to ease travel to Europe.