Staff views Growth is projected to rise to 2¼ percent in 2015. The tourism sector—the mainstay of the Aruban economy—is expected to continue to grow, albeit at a slower pace than over the past two years. At the same time, domestic demand is poised to recover appreciably as policy uncertainty subsides and key public-private partnership (PPP) projects move forward (Green Corridor, Ring Road 3). Hedging contracts set by the utility company above the current level of global oil prices are limiting downward inflationary pressures, and along with the 11¾ percent energy tariff increase and the introduction of the health-care levy in late 2014, inflation is expected to increase to ¾ percent in 2015. While the overall CA balance is expected to remain in deficit, buoyant tourism exports would help reduce its size to –3½ percent of GDP in 2015. Under the baseline scenario, real GDP is expected to reach its pre-recession level only by 2019. Market diversification is expected to keep real growth in tourism exports steady at around 1¾ percent, but the large and lingering gaps in investment and non-tourism exports (both of which are still 40 percent below their pre-recessions peaks) due to the termination of oil refining activities will be filled only gradually. The CA deficit is expected to narrow in line with contributions from the services balance, but remain sizable due to income and transfer outflows, and continued oil trade deficits. External debt is projected to remain close to 95 percent of GDP. Risks to the outlook are broadly balanced and mainly external (see RAM). The closure of the oil refinery implies a narrower economic base and even greater dependence on tourism. This concentration risk is compounded by the fact that around 55 percent of tourism originates from the U.S. Therefore, while global economic conditions matter, Aruba is most susceptible to spillovers 0.0 0.5 1.0 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 19992002200520082011201405101520253035404550 Gross International Reserves Percent of broad money Percent of GDP Month of imports (right)Sources: CBA; and IMF staff calculations. Page 7 associated with U.S. slowdowns. In particular, notwithstanding the usual confidence bands around estimated elasticities, model-based estimates suggest that each 1 percentage point temporary decline in U.S. growth would drag Aruba’s growth lower by 2 percentage points for two years (Box 2). A deepening of Venezuela’s economic crisis is also a risk given that it is Aruba’s second most important source of tourists. However, the appreciable decline in global oil prices and faster U.S. growth represent upside risks. In the medium term, while renewable energy investments could boost growth prospects, this upside is balanced by potential implementation delays. Over the longer term, the lifting of the U.S. travel ban to Cuba could have implications for Aruban tourism. The authorities broadly agreed with the staff’s diagnosis of the economic outlook and risks. They were confident that robust tourism growth would continue to underpin a steady recovery going forward. While the authorities generally concurred with staff’s analysis quantifying the importance of U.S. spillovers, they pointed out that continued efforts to diversify tourists from within the U.S. and the ongoing success in catering to a progressively more upscale market are factors which have most likely increased Aruba’s resilience in recent years. They acknowledged the risks surrounding Venezuela, but pointed to strategies to overcome potentially adverse developments including initiatives to expand access to other Latin American markets (for example, Chile and Peru). The authorities agreed that Cuba’s entry into the tourism market is a longer-term consideration, in part because of the country’s lack of requisite infrastructure.