Following a rapid deterioration during 2008-2012, the fiscal deficit narrowed to 5¼ percent of GDP in 2014. Policies that were originally intended to be countercyclical, along with a structural decline in output growth, have led to a significant worsening of the overall balance by 11 percentage points of GDP over 2008-2012 (Figure 3). In particular, expenditures increased sharply, with wage-related costs accounting for about one-third of the cumulative increase (2¾ percent of GDP over 2008-2012), and revenue performance suffered primarily because of the reduction in the business turnover tax (BBO) rate from 3 percent to 1½ percent in 2010. In 2014, while revenue performance was largely in line with expectations, expenditure restraint in the purchase of goods and services together with the pension reforms yielded important savings. Nevertheless, public debt surpassed 80 percent of GDP in 2014. Page 8 The authorities undertook major structural reforms in 2014 to address the fiscal challenges (Box 3). First, as a result of the general (AOV) pension reform, premiums were raised and a gradual increase in the retirement age (to 65 years) was initiated. Second, the capital shortfall of the public administration (APFA) pension system was made whole, the accrual period and franchise contributions were modified and, as with the AOV, the retirement age will gradually increase. Third, a levy was introduced to partially offset the fiscal costs of the health care system (AZV). Fiscal consolidation is planned to continue this year . Guided by a cabinet-approved nominal expenditure ceiling, the authorities’ proposed budget plan aims to reduce the 2015 deficit to 3¾ percent of GDP. Savings are expected to come mostly from entitlement reforms, supported by a reduction in the number of public sector employees (for a total of 1½ percent of GDP). However, measures underpinning ¾ percent of GDP of the planned adjustment are yet to be identified. Specifically, while the authorities’ draft 2015 budget accounts for additional revenue from the health- care levy, it does not factor in the projected increase in the underlying cost of providing health services (¼ percent of GDP), nor does it fully account for higher debt service costs (½ percent of GDP). Thus, staff forecasts a deficit of 4½ percent of GDP in 2015. Over the medium term, with the current policies, deficits would remain elevated, and debt would continue to rise. Under the baseline scenario (without additional measures), the fiscal deficit narrows modestly, reflecting the savings achieved through entitlement reforms (APFA, AOV, AZV) enacted in 2014 and other past measures. However, debt is projected to exceed 90 percent of GDP by 2020, making debt dynamics vulnerable to even small shocks (Appendix I). For example, even a mild U.S. slowdown could significantly reduce Aruban growth. Under such a scenario, debt could easily soar to over 100 percent of GDP by 2020 (text chart below). Going forward, these risks may be further compounded by contingent liabilities associated with any new PPPs. Direct taxes Indirect taxes BBO revenue (right) Aruba: Composition of GovernmentRevenue, 2008–2014 Sources: Aruban authoritiesand IMF staff estimates. Expenditures Employee compensation (right) Aruba: Composition of GovernmentRevenue, 2008–2014 Page 9 The authorities’ medium-term objectives are satisfactory, but current measures are insufficient to achieve them. Aruba’s exposure to external shocks, a narrow economic base, a fixed exchange rate regime, and sizable interest burden highlight the need to rebuild fiscal space. Noting that the fiscal policy anchor is the overall balance, the entitlement reforms implemented by the authorities and their ambitious medium-term adjustment path (culminating with a small surplus in 2018) are welcome. However, fiscal efforts should be sustained at least until 2020 to attain a surplus of 1½ percent of GDP, which will help bring down public debt to slightly above 70 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, these medium-term objectives will most likely not be achieved with current measures (text table below). Without additional measures and steadfast implementation, deficits would remain elevated, and debt would continue to trend upwards over the medium term. Elections scheduled for 2017 pose an additional risk to achieving these targets. Therefore, expeditiously establishing a strong and effective medium-term fiscal framework would enhance the credibility of these plans. Achieving these fiscal targets will require additional revenue and expenditure measures, including further entitlement reform: Revenues. Additional revenue measures are needed given the size of the authorities’ planned adjustment. In particular, international comparison suggests that there is scope for increasing revenue from indirect taxes. For example, estimates suggest that each 1 percentage point increase in the BBO rate could yield about Afl. 60 million (about 1.3 percent of GDP) in additional revenues. Current efforts to improve revenue administration and to reduce tax arrears would yield tangible benefits only over the medium term. More generally, a thorough review of the tax system seems warranted given its complexity (due in part to a legacy of myriad tariff rates which can differ even for goods within the same broad category) and the disproportionate reliance on direct taxation. Staff projection based on actual measures Adjustment path aimed by the authorities Mild U.S. Slowdown Aruba: Fiscal Deficit, 2014-18 Mild U.S. Slowdown Adjustment path aimed by the authorities Staff projection based on actual measures Aruba: GrossDebt, 2014–18 Page 10 Expenditures. On the expenditure side, given the large size of the wage bill (compensation of employees corresponds to nearly 50 percent of tax revenue), a key priority is to introduce measures to permanently reduce wage-related expenses. Efforts should focus on slowing wage drift due to automatic raises and promotions for time in grade, as well as modifying public sector workers’ benefits and allowances. Steadfast adherence to the consolidation plan would also appreciably reduce interest expenses by more than ½ percentage point of GDP in 2020. Furthermore, as Aruba is a very open economy, the envisaged fiscal consolidation (underpinned by current expenditure curtailments and greater tax revenues) is not likely to be a major drag on growth. Entitlement programs. Further measures are needed to ensure that the costly universal health care system (AZV) becomes self-financing. In particular, the authorities should consider introducing modest user fees to rationalize demand for certain health care services, such as emergency room visits for non-urgent care. PPPs. Any further costs associated with newly approved PPP should be fully accounted for in a medium-term fiscal framework. Estimates for Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) countries indicate that only the public investment expenditure multiplier is statistically different from zero, while tax and consumption multipliers are not. See Gonzalez- Garcia and others, 2013 (IMF Working Paper 13/117). ABCDAdjustmentDebt20142020(C=B–A)(2020) (based on actual measures)1.Overall balance-5.2-3.61.590.62.Identified measures1.5 Staff's proposal 3.Underlying deficit-5.21.56.772.14.Additional adjustment needed (4=3–1)5.15.Proposed additional measures:Revenue1.5Expenditure3.6 Source: Aruban authorities and staff estimates. Staff's proposal coincides with the Amended 2015 Budget Plan up to 2018 (see text). Fiscal Adjustment 2014-2020 Page 11 The authorities broadly agreed with the need for fiscal consolidation . Contrary to staff, they are of the view that their medium-term fiscal adjustment plan contains sufficient measures to meet their targets and without budget support or soft loans from the Netherlands. They noted that previous decisions made as part of the tripartite social dialogue, which facilitated the entitlement reforms, somewhat limit maneuver for additional reforms in the near term. Nevertheless, the authorities see revenue measures as important to the fiscal consolidation effort, and have therefore assembled a commission to study tax reform. Proposals, including on how to streamline the complex tax system, are expected in a few months. They are also optimistic on significant one-off revenues from the accumulation of tax debt. The authorities are also focusing on increasing expenditure efficiency and are in the process of finalizing a consultant to conduct a public expenditure review. In addition, they plan to continue to rationalize the wage bill by limiting new hires, introducing flexible (including part-time) work arrangements, and providing outplacement services to some public employees. The authorities are in close consultation with the Netherlands on how to tailor to Aruba’s specific circumstance a fiscal council involving external budgetary oversight.