Background Monetary policy remained unchanged during 2013–14. Despite the pegged exchange rate regime, restrictions on capital mobility (dating back to 1986) allow for some monetary control in Aruba. The Central Bank of Aruba’s (CBA) main policy instrument is the reserve requirement (RR), which has been kept constant at 11 percent since January 2010 in light of adequate reserves, deflation, and economic slack. Credit growth declined slightly to 4¼ percent in 2014 from 5 percent in the previous year, and the banking system is awash with excess liquidity (6¾ percent of GDP in 2014), a reflection of anemic demand and lack of competition among banks. Commercial banks have weathered the double-dip recession without major strains. The banking sector’s return on equity was 18½ percent in 2014, afforded by sizeable interest rate margins which reflect, in part, an oligopolistic market structure (Box 4). The capital adequacy ratio (CAR) has been on the rise since 2011 and exceeded 24 percent as of 2014, well above the regulatory minimum of 14 percent. The non-performing loans (NPL) ratio declined to around 6 percent in 2014. The authorities’ latest stress test results show that even under the most severe credit shock, the CAR of the aggregate banking sector remained above the regulatory minimum. The CBA has widened the supervisory umbrella to include insurance brokers in 2014. After significant efforts to enhance the The CBA has three main capital account restrictions: (i) commercial banks are not allowed to hold a net negative NFA position, and any foreign exchange in excess of a time-varying threshold need to be sold to the central bank; (ii) institutional investors are obliged to invest at least 40 percent of the first Afl. 10 million of their liabilities locally, 50 percent of the second Afl. 10 million, and 60 percent of the remainder, and (iii) individuals as well as companies need foreign exchange licenses for transactions above specific thresholds. In addition, Aruba levies a foreign exchange tax (1.3 percent of the transactions value) on payments by residents to non-residents. Page 12 AML/CFT framework, Aruba was removed from the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and Caribbean FATF follow-up processes. The current accommodative monetary policy stance remains justified given projected low inflation and moderating growth rates, as well as evidence of slack in the economy. Aruba’s foreign exchange reserves are currently adequate to safeguard the pegged exchange rate regime. In case demand picks up and signs of overheating appear (such as rapid credit growth, though this is a very low risk at this point), the authorities should stand ready to mop up the excess liquidity by increasing the RR. Monetary tightening may also be warranted if gross international reserves run the risk of dipping below any of the reserve adequacy thresholds monitored by the CBA. The authorities plan no near-term change in the monetary policy stance and are contemplating moves to enhance policy transmission . Within the next year, the CBA is considering an overnight facility to help manage excess banking system liquidity by providing commercial banks with daily inter-bank rates. Relatedly, a new bank has been granted a license and expected to begin operations by the end of the year, which should increase competition within the sector. The authorities are planning on further strengthening their prudential framework by broadening the supervisory perimeter to encompass securities trade.