Stability Background During the pre-crisis boom years, Austrian banks expanded aggressively—but in CESEE, not in Austria. Incentives to expand in the two markets were very different: banking in CESEE was very profitable, while profitability in the domestic Austrian market is structurally low. Banks funded their expansion through bond issuance and other borrowing in Western European markets, rather than through deposit taking from the nonfinancial sector in Austria. This expansion created vulnerabilities that became evident in the aftermath of Lehman . As their funding dried up, and their assets suffered from the end of the credit boom in CESEE, Austrian banks came under pressure. Except for Italian-owned Unicredit Bank Austria, all Austria-based banks with major activities in CESEE received government support. Two of these banks had to be fully or partly nationalized and they have been retreating from the region. The problems of a third nationalized bank (Kommunalkredit) were rooted mainly in its considerable bond and CDS exposure to the euro area periphery (for more background on restructuring banks, see 2013 IMF Staff Report, Box 1). Page 11 Austrian banks have continued to shift to a new model, in which credit of their CESEE subsidiaries is to a much larger extent funded by local deposits rather than by parents. The shift was further encouraged by the supervisory guidance adopted by the authorities in 2012 (“sustainability package”), which aimed to limit excessive parent bank funding by introducing a benchmark of 110 percent for the “loan-to-local- stable-funding ratio” on net new lending. Large banks have strengthened their capital position, but capital gaps with peers remain (Figure 6). After a recent rights issue by RBI, all three large banks now have fully-loaded Basel III CET1 ratios of around 10 percent. Capital remains below that of peers, in a context of residual market concern about what the ECB balance sheet assessment will reveal about the asset quality and collateral valuation in CESEE. Leverage ratios are comparatively favorable, reflecting the banks’ focus on more traditional loan business. The restructuring of fully or partly nationalized banks has made progress, but challenges remain. After considering various resolution options for Hypo Alpe Adria, including a bankruptcy, the authorities have decided to sell the SEE subsidiaries and wind down the remaining assets in a For details on the supervisory guidance, see IMF 2012 Staff Report for Austria and related Selected Issues Paper. The government opted for the bad bank rather than a bankruptcy, as most of the bonds of HAA are guaranteed by the state of Carinthia. As Carinthia is not able to honor the guarantees that would be called in a bankruptcy, the (continued) Foreign Claims of Austrian Banks on CESEE (Percent of Austria GDP) Foreign Assets Foreign Liabilities MFIs Foreign Assets and Liabilities Selected Large European Banks: Tier I Ratio 2011-2013 1/ 1/ Austrian banks in red, non-Austrian banks in blue. Page 12 government-owned “bad bank” (defeasance structure without a banking license). The respective legislative package passed the Austrian Parliament in July. The restructuring includes a bail-in of €890 million in subordinated debt guaranteed by the state of Carinthia, and an effective wipe-out of the guarantee. Negotiations with potential buyers for the going-concern SEE subsidiaries are ongoing; under an EU state aid decision, they need to be re-privatized by mid-2015. Another restructuring bank, the partly nationalized apex institution of the cooperative “Volksbanken” association (Volksbanken AG), has substantially downsized its balance sheet but faces difficult further disposal challenges. This and the ongoing ECB balance sheet assessment may lead to higher capital needs, which could affect lower-tier banks and the Volksbanken association as a whole. As for Kommunalkredit and KA Finanz, the wind-down seems to be proceeding in line with the authorities’ plans, but further public capital needs cannot be excluded there either. Neither the non-financial corporate sector nor the household sector is overleveraged, but housing prices warrant monitoring (Figure 7). Non-financial corporate debt hovers around the euro area median, and increased much less in the pre-crisis years than in other countries. Household debt is lower than the euro area average, and there has been little pressure to deleverage. However, a considerable share of household borrowing consists of Swiss-franc denominated bullet loans and variable-interest housing loans. Housing price increases have been strong in recent years but purchases have been to a large extent cash-financed and the strongest growth has been predominantly limited to Vienna and some tourist hotspots. Policy Discussions federal government would have had to either bail-out Carinthia (eliminating the cost savings of a bankruptcy) or let Carinthia go bankrupt, with possibly severe contagion effects on other states and banks. Technically, the “bad bank” consists of two entities: a small one with a banking license for the Italian part, and a bigger one without for the rest. The law also bails in €800 million non-guaranteed funding from the former HAA-owner Bavarian Landesbank. Technically, the law voids the underlying debt. In the absence of this debt, the guarantee no longer exists. The household saving rate has declined since 2009. The share of foreign currency loans has been declining in recent years, as the Austrian authorities have taken steps to rein in new foreign currency loans. Change in House Price Index, 2008-13 Page 13 The mission and the authorities agreed that the strengthening of capital positions and the transition toward a new funding model have reduced vulnerabilities of internationally active banks. The ongoing shift to a new funding model for subsidiaries in CESEE has helped reduce external debt of Austrian banks, made both the parent banks and their subsidiaries less vulnerable to funding shocks, and diminished the likelihood of future boom- bust cycles in CESEE countries. Moreover, as increased local deposits have substituted for a decline in external funding, the level of credit has not declined in most CESEE countries so far. The mission cautioned that the 2012 supervisory guidance for the largest three banks should continue to be applied judiciously, in close coordination with host countries, to avoid unduly restraining credit growth in still nascent recoveries. Risks remain elevated, however, and further strengthening of the capital position of large banks would create stronger buffers to absorb them. Bank profitability suffers from the continued low interest rate environment and, specifically in CESEE, has been under pressure as a result of rising NPLs, risk costs, and write-offs. Russia, where credit growth had been strong, became a major profit contributor. Current events in Ukraine and Russia put this important source of profitability and internal capital generation increasingly at risk. Further losses can also be expected from policy actions in Hungary regarding foreign-exchange denominated loans. The mission welcomed that a decision had been made on the resolution of Hypo Alpe Adria . It appreciated the attention the authorities had given to the systemic importance of the bank for some countries in the SEE region, by avoiding Hypo´s bankruptcy. Views differed on the retroactive voidance of the state of Carinthia’s guarantee of €890 million of HAA subordinated debt. The authorities explained that the voidance was designed and intended as an isolated case. They saw the bail-in as in line with the new European resolution framework that would come into effect in 2016 and argued that bond holders should have exercised better due diligence and understood that Carinthia would never be able to honor the guarantees it had issued. While agreeing that bailing in of subordinated debt was in line with the Notable exceptions include the Baltics, Hungary, and Slovenia. In 2013, RBI and Bank Austria derived respectively around 75 and 60 percent of their profits from Russia. Hungary’s parliament recently passed a law requiring banks to compensate borrowers for unfair lending practices, referring to application of unilateral adjustments of the interest rate and the use of an exchange rate spread. The law applies to both foreign-exchange and Hungarian Forint-denominated loans. The World Bank, which holds €150 million of subordinated Hypo debt, will also be affected. Austrian Bank Bond Yield (Percent, Bond maturity in 2017) Hypo Alpe Adria Raiffeisen Erste Bank Volksbanken AG Page 14 future European frameworks, the mission argued that the voiding of the state of Carinthia’s guarantee was a separate issue, and that such a move would undermine the credibility of similar guarantees issued by other sub-national bodies, potentially damaging the Austrian "brand" in the future. The mission argued that the bank restructuring agenda should be rapidly completed and asset disposal accelerated. Governance of the Hypo “bad bank”/AMC needs to ensure efficient asset disposal over a limited timeframe. The sale of the Hypo SEE subsidiaries should be completed as rapidly as possible, while avoiding disruptive effects in host countries. For Volksbanken AG, speedy asset disposal, including of its Romanian subsidiary, remains equally essential. The restructuring of the Volksbanken association needs to take into account the structurally low profitability in the domestic banking market. The evolving European Banking Union framework is being implemented at the national level, but key decisions are still pending . According to the authorities, preparations for the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) are on track. As regards the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), no decision on the designation of the national resolution agency had yet been made; and the discussion on a revamping of the deposit insurance schemes (DGS) at the occasion of the introduction of EU-mandated DGS pre-funding had not progressed since last year’s Article IV consultation. As regards AML/CFT, in February 2014, the FATF recognized that Austria had made significant progress in addressing deficiencies identified in the June 2009 mutual evaluation report and decided that the country should be removed from the regular follow-up process. Nevertheless, given possible spillovers from events in Russia/Ukraine on the real estate sector, the authorities are encouraged to closely monitor this sector. Similarly, the creation of a workable macroprudential framework is lagging behind. While the legal basis for a Financial Market Stability Board has been created, at the time the mission discussions took place, the appointment of its members still needed to go through parliament. The envisaged macroprudential toolkit remains limited to various capital buffers and the possibility to change risk weights on exposures secured by mortgages on immovable property for financial stability considerations according to the CRR/CRD. However, the set of instruments does not comprehend sector-specific instruments, such as LTV or DTI ratios targeted to housing market developments. The authorities explained that the agenda had been dominated by the resolution of Hypo Alpe Adria bank, and that they would focus their attention to these issues next. The FATF reports noted that the number of suspicious transaction reported by real estate agents was 0 in both 2011 and 2012. The members of the macroprudential authority, the Financial Market Stability Board, were appointed in July 2014. Page 15 Box 1. Pre-Crisis Imbalances and Post-Crisis Growth Austria’s better performance during the crisis likely reflects that few private sector imbalances were built up during the pre-crisis years. Households did not go on an asset price and credit-fueled consumption boom. Many EU countries experienced housing price booms during the pre-crisis years—including in particular in Spain, Ireland, the UK and Eastern Europe—which boosted consumption, increased household debt and led to a sharp decline in the saving rate. Austria was different: housing prices remained flat, household borrowing was modest, and its saving rate increased. The corporate sector did not over-borrow and corporate profitability did not deteriorate. In many countries the corporate debt-to-GDP ratio increased sharply, with the largest increase in Ireland, Bulgaria and Spain. Profit shares declined in many countries as well, as overheating labor markets increased wage bills and reduced profit margins. On both fronts Austria was again different: the increase in corporate debt was modest, and profitability increased moderately. In countries with imbalances, their unwinding led to pro-cyclical behavior of the private sector, which contributed to an often severe downturn. Households slashed consumption as housing price booms went bust and credit dried up. As household net worth deteriorated sharply, wealth effects went into reverse, and households were forced to increase their saving rate—sometimes very steeply. Hence, households could not smooth consumption; instead the increase in their saving rate contributed to the recession. The corporate sector had to slash costs, as financing dried up and debt levels were no longer sustainable. Non-profitable production capacity was shut down, and the workforce was reduced to save costs and restore profit margins. The result was high unemployment and a sharp decline in production. The increase in profit margins was particularly large in the Baltics, Ireland, and Spain— which all had very sharp increases in unemployment. In Austria the private sector behaved counter-cyclically, which mitigated the downturn. Households reduced their saving rate, mitigating the decline in consumption. Consumption growth remained positive in 2009, and in fact was (marginally) faster than in 2007 and 2008. Firms did not need to slash costs, and employment remained relatively stable. Firms instead absorbed costs of a temporarily under-utilized workforce. The public sector made a further difference. In the pre-crisis years, in many countries the private sector boom indirectly contributed to a public spending spree, as a surge of boom-related tax revenues generated room to boost public expenditure. When the private sector boom ended, tax revenues dropped sharply, forcing the governments to retrench. Austria was different here as well, as expenditure had remained under control during the boom years, there was no need to retrench during the crisis—and in fact there was room for countercyclical policy. _____________________________________ See Bas B. Bakker and Li Zeng, “Reducing the Employment Impact and Corporate Balance Sheet Repair” in Jobs and Growth: Supporting the European Recovery, edited by Martin Schindler, Helge Berger, Bas B Bakker, and Antonio Spilimbergo (2014). Page 16 Box 2. Austria’s Banking Sector as Inter-Mediator of Western European Savings Austria’s banks have large gross foreign assets, in large part the result of the rapid expansion in Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe (CESEE) during the pre-crisis years. But net foreign assets are close to zero, as foreign liabilities are high as well. This is because much of Austrian banks’ expansion has been funded by banks and investors in Western Europe. After the banking sectors in CESEE were opened to foreign investors in the mid to late 1990s and with a view to EU accession of some CESEE countries, Austrian banks entered CESEE markets mainly through a series of mergers and acquisitions, becoming dominant players in many markets. Their exposure to CESEE became large not only relative to the size of the host countries (for example, by 2007, Austria’s claims on Croatia accounted for over 50 percent of Croatia’s GDP), but also relative to the size of Austria’s GDP. By 2007, exposure to CESEE amounted to 70 percent of GDP—more than any other Western European country. In the years leading up to the crisis credit expansion in CESEE was increasingly funded by transfers from parent banks to their subsidiaries, rather than from local deposits in the host countries. This allowed credit to grow much more rapidly, boosting profits of Austrian banks. Parent banks not only provided funding to their subsidiaries, but in many countries also provided direct cross-border loans to the nonfinancial private sector. Austrian banks funded this expansion through externally issued bonds and loans. Net issuance of international debt securities rose from US$2 billion in 1997 to US$27 billion in 2007. Additional funds were attracted in the interbank deposit market. Overall, external debt of Austrian banks stood at US$430 billion in 2007. The global crisis showed that this funding structure had made Austrian banks vulnerable to shocks— with repercussions for CESEE. After Lehman Brothers defaulted in September 2008, Austrian banks with major activities in CESEE came under pressure. Almost all of them needed government support, and two had to be fully or partially nationalized. As it became much more difficult for Austrian banks to obtain new funding, they stopped or strongly curtailed new funding to their subsidiaries. The result was that the credit expansion slowed sharply, and in many countries came to a sudden stop. Since 2008, there has been a gradual reduction in Austrian banks’ external assets and liabilities. Net issuance of debt has been negative since 2009, and the stock of outstanding bonds has fallen from US$173 billion to US$132 billion. On the asset side, Austrian banks have reduced their cross-border funding to CESEE, as their subsidiaries have gradually shifted their funding mix away from parent bank funding towards funding from local deposits. This mix has shifted as a result of both demand and supply factors, the relative importance of which has varied over time and by country. In the aftermath of Lehman Brothers and from mid 2011 (when the euro area crisis intensified), supply factors were important, notably rising funding costs and tighter credit conditions. Later on, when economic growth had weakened, demand factors became increasingly important. As credit demand in many countries was weak, while deposit growth was relatively robust, it became attractive for subsidiaries to pay back parent funding. The macro-prudential guidance issued by the Austrian supervisor in 2012 may also have played a role. In short, Austrian banks are an important intermediator of Western European savings into CESEE. This has increased the pool of funding for CESEE, and allowed capital to flow from richer to poorer countries. However, the transmission works not only in good times, but also in bad times: when financial markets in Western Europe dry up, CESEE feels the impact. __________________________________________ See chapter 1 of the book “How Emerging Europe came through the 2008/09 crisis: An Account by the IMF’s European Department” (2012), edited by Bas B. Bakker and Christoph Klingen. See IMF, CESEE Regional Economic Issues (Spring 2014). Page 17