“Monetary policy alone can't deliver everything we need and expecting too much from it can lead, in time, to much bigger problems” RBA Governor Stevens June 2015 Context The sizeable output gap and the large structural transition of the economy call for supportive aggregate demand policies. Inflation pressures are weak and the demand outlook is subdued against a backdrop of higher unemployment and lower income growth. The exchange rate also appears still on the strong side when compared with the steep fall in the terms of trade. Monetary policy is accommodative, and could become more so. While the policy rate is at an historic low at 2 percent, it remains high in real terms compared to peer countries with similar output gaps and the neutral rate may well have fallen. Further rate cuts would, however, stoke house price inflation and already high household debt levels may restrain the impact on consumption while heightening financial stability concerns. Policy rates higher than elsewhere SWE AUS KOR GBR JPN t a y c i l NOR Fiscal policy is imparting a substantial negative impulse. The combination of tightening by the States and the Commonwealth implies that the national cyclically-adjusted balance improves by some ¾ of a percent of GDP on average over the next three years. The envisaged tightening by the Commonwealth budget relies on historically strong revenue (reflecting bracket creep) and low spending growth (including on account of some as yet unlegislated budget measures). Output Gap CAN USA o P l a EUR Page 23 Staff Views Monetary policy should remain accommodative and could loosen further if the recovery falls short of expectations, provided financial stability risks remain contained. Asymmetric risks for monetary policy —inflation expectations are well anchored and core inflation and growth appear more likely to under- rather than over-shoot. A weaker exchange rate would also help the recovery and the external position. Housing market risks should be firmly addressed by prudential policy . While credit growth and the housing market overall do not appear substantially overheated, there are clearly specific areas of concern relating to the Sydney housing market, and to investor and interest-only lending. This calls for a targeted prudential rather than a blunt monetary policy response. Indeed, APRA is already taking targeted measures which could be built upon if needed (see Building Resilience). Policy tradeoffs . Cutting rates if the recovery disappoints would provide insurance against a sharper slowdown, though it may require a steeper tightening once the economy gathers steam. By contrast, keeping rates higher than warranted by output and inflation should only be considered if financial stability risks become broad based—with overheating of both credit and housing indicators—and if prudential policy is insufficient to contain risks. Then “leaning against the wind’ might be appropriate as part of a broader prudential strategy to rein in financial stability risks. The benefits would need to be weighed against the output costs and the risk of policy reversals. Similarly, prudential measures aimed at building the resilience of the financial system should be implemented in a gradual manner to minimize the effects on growth. Timely high frequency data are important for policy to be able to react quickly to changing conditions. The quality of the labor market data could be enhanced and the lack of monthly consumer price inflation data is a key gap that the Australian Bureau of Statistics should fill. Slowing the pace of fiscal consolidation. A small surplus should remain a longer-term anchor of fiscal policy and a credible, though gradual medium-term consolidation path should be maintained. But, staff assesses the planned pace of consolidation nationally (Commonwealth and states combined) as somewhat more frontloaded than desirable given the weakness of the economy, the size and uncertainty around the transition from the mining investment boom and the possible limits to the effectiveness of monetary policy. Substantial fiscal consolidation in the next 3 years Fiscal balance (% GDP) Cyclically adjusted Change (ppts) IMF staff projections Act. Boosting public investment. Raising public investment (financed by borrowing, thus reducing the pace of deficit reduction) would support aggregate demand, take pressure off Page 24 monetary policy, and insure against downside growth risks. It would employ resources released by the mining sector, catalyze private investment, boost productivity, could ease housing supply bottlenecks and would take advantage of record low interest rates. Net public investment in Australia is higher than in advanced OECD peers, but has subtracted from growth in recent years, and the public capital stock is projected to fall as a percentage of GDP over the medium term. At the same time, Australia is well positioned to benefit from public infrastructure investment—with efficient processes, an output gap, accommodative monetary policy and fiscal space allowing debt financing. These are key factors for maximizing the short- and long-run benefits with little effect on the debt to GDP ratio, as outlined in the WEO (October 2014). Careful coordination would be needed. Boosting public investment in the short term is difficult given inherent lags, and thus calls for strong governance to ensure there is no waste. As most public investment is carried out by states and territories who face borrowing constraints, this requires coordination between different levels of government and broader federal support. Greater focus in budgeting on the national fiscal stance, on strengthening the operating balance (which excludes capital spending) rather than the overall balance, and on increasing the public capital stock, could help frame the debate. A strategy could include: Small as well as large projects . Broadening the scope of investments supported by the Commonwealth, for example, to a wider range of projects, including repairs and maintenance. A pipeline. Continuing to establish a pipeline of quality larger projects with transparent cost- benefit analysis, such as that being prepared by Infrastructure Australia. Broad political support for such a pipeline would reduce uncertainty and boost confidence. Guarantees. In addition to direct funding arrangements, the Commonwealth could consider guaranteeing states’ borrowing for additional investment—this would keep the accountability with the states, but reduce their concerns about credit ratings and would not affect the Commonwealth’s deficit. Nonetheless, restoring a small budget surplus in the longer term is appropriate and should remain a fiscal anchor. Australia’s low public debt is a critical buffer against potential external and domestic shocks and helps sustain the country’s AAA rating, and the strong ratings of its banks. Indeed, additional measures may be required to ensure the envisaged consolidation of the recurrent budget stays on track. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that growth was likely to continue at a below trend pace in the near term but improve as the economy rebalances. The RBA noted that with an output gap, subdued labor costs and inflation expected to remain in line with the target of 2-3 percent on average, there was scope for further policy easing in the period ahead if required. But there was also a limit to the extent to which monetary policy could fine tune growth prospects. Exchange rate developments would also be key; a lower real effective exchange rate was likely to be needed to achieve balanced growth. An exit from Page 25 unconventional monetary policies in the U.S. could contribute to a lower Australian dollar and help facilitate adjustment. The government emphasized that a return to a budget surplus remained a priority to preserve its favorable standing with external creditors. The 2015/16 budget already planned a slower withdrawal of fiscal stimulus than the previous budget. They were also mindful that challenges were looming in light of social spending commitments over the longer term which could limit the scope for easing the pace of consolidation. They concurred that addressing infrastructure bottlenecks was a key priority and funding of high quality infrastructure projects was a key focus. They also pointed to substantial existing planned investments, including the national broadband network, with total general government investment over coming years expected to remain above levels of the 1990s and early 2000s. The authorities’ Asset Recycling Initiative and Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility provided scope for additional investment in high priority infrastructure projects as they are identified, while meeting the government’s medium- term fiscal strategy.