Austria did not experience a severe boom-bust cycle and came through the crisis relatively well. The main impact was on the banking sector and public debt. Austria came through the global economic and financial crisis relatively well, reflecting the absence of large pre-crisis domestic imbalances (Figure 1). In the run-up to the 2008–09 crisis, household and corporate debt levels had remained moderate. The household saving rate had not experienced the sharp drop of countries with a housing boom, but had in fact increased. Tax revenues did not rise rapidly, so the growth of government spending had remained modest. As a result, there were buffers to weather the crisis. Households could smooth consumption by letting the household saving rate decline. Firms were not under severe pressure to cut costs, and could absorb demand shocks through lower profit margins and keep employment relatively stable. The government could act counter-cyclically, in contrast to boom-bust countries, which were forced to consolidate strongly after sharp revenue drops. The main impact of the crisis was on the internationally active banking system and public debt. Pre-crisis, Austrian banks expanded rapidly in CESEE, channeling funds they attracted in Western Europe to finance the credit boom in the region. As their funding dried up post-Lehman, and their assets suffered from the end of the credit boom in CESEE, internationally active Austrian banks came under pressure and needed government support. Together with the downturn, this has contributed to an increase in public debt from 60 percent of GDP in 2007 to around 80 percent of GDP in this year. After a rebound in 2010/2011, a new slowdown occurred in 2012 and 2013, mainly reflecting trade and confidence spillovers from the euro area crisis. In sync with the euro area, the economy seems now on a more stable recovery path, creating an opportunity for resolving crisis legacies and long-standing structural issues. The following areas are key: Change in Employment, 2008-13 Public Debt Page 6 Banking sector: The medium-sized banks nationalized during the crisis are still restructuring, and internationally active large banks remain subject to risks from CESEE, most recently in Russia, Ukraine and Hungary. More ambitious structural public expenditure reforms to bring down debt faster and reduce the high tax burden on labor. Debt reduction under current plans leaves debt above AAA peer levels, and will not build sufficient buffers to cope with intensifying aging cost pressures, potential further bank restructuring costs, and residual risks from banks’ CESEE exposure as well as other contingent liabilities. High social security contributions and income tax rates discourage labor supply and hamper potential growth. Raising potential output and productivity growth to bring Austria closer to the technological frontier: Austria’s productivity per hour is 20 percent lower than in the US, and the gap is widening. The gap likely reflects a multitude of factors, including weaknesses in IT adaptation, education, and the availability of private venture capital. In September 2013, the governing coalition of Social Democrats and Austrian People’s Party was re-elected, albeit with a slimmer majority. In the previous legislative period, the government had taken several structural expenditure reform steps in the right direction, including on pensions and health care. These measures were confirmed in the coalition agreement. However, this new agreement and the fiscal framework 2015–18 contain no major additional structural expenditure measures, reflecting a divergence in views among coalition partners on many policy issues.