Near-term outlook. With the drop off of mining investment, growth will likely remain soft in the near term. Growth this year is projected at 2½ percent, rising to its trend rate of about 3 percent by 2016/17. While resource exports will increase, the outlook for the non-resource sector is more uncertain. An accommodative monetary stance could support housing investment, but the soft labor market, excess capacity in the non-mining sector holding back investment plans, and a strong Australian dollar could continue to act as headwinds to overall growth. The near-term risks relative to this baseline scenario are broadly balanced. On the downside the transition to broader- based growth could prove more difficult than currently expected, particularly if the exchange rate were to remain stronger than implied by fundamentals. On the other hand recent indicators suggest that business conditions are beginning to improve and the revival in the housing market could contribute to improved consumer confidence and growth. house prices have lagged income growth and construction has been weak, the recent revival in housing market activity could contribute to near-term growth and begin to help address persistent structural supply shortages but has also boosted house price inflation (Annex 2). To date house price increases have been steeper in Sydney Melbourne and Perth and lower elsewhere. Overall credit growth has remained moderate with many households continuing to prepay mortgages. Looking forward though, against the backdrop of already high house prices and high household The government’s recent grant of 8.8 billion dollars (about 0.6 percent of GDP) to the central bank to increase its capital reserve will be reflected in the fiscal deficit for the current fiscal year (2013/14). Housing sector risks After several years where Australia: House Price Inflation (Annual percentage change) Sydney Melbourne Perth Australian capitals 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics; RP Data; and ANZ. Page 7 debt, there is a risk that rapid house price growth could give rise to expectations-driven, self- reinforcing demand dynamics and price overshooting. In this context there have been some signs that banks have responded to increased demand pressures by increasing mortgage lending to the investor segment of the market (paragraph 20). A sudden house price decline—triggered perhaps by a shock to household incomes or borrowing costs—could reduce consumer confidence and impact overall economic activity. The authorities would need to be prepared to take preventative actions if household credit growth, transactions volume, and prices accelerate. External risks. Australia’s growth prospects remain exposed to external developments (Annex 1). In particular: A sharp slowdown in growth in China over the medium term and a related sustained decline in commodity prices . Over half of Australia’s exports go to emerging Asia and nearly two thirds are non-rural commodity exports. With the volume of these exports increasing sharply in future years, Australia’s economic outlook will be closely tied to developments in this region. Increases in global supply of Australian export commodities coming on stream are expected to bring about a steady decline in their prices—these projections are built into our baseline scenarios— but a sustained steep decline could have significant implications for Australia’s growth prospects (paragraph 27). Surges in global financial market volatility related to the exit from unconventional monetary policy. An orderly tightening would likely have a positive impact by weakening the exchange rate and supporting the adjustment of the Australian economy. However, a bumpy exit from unconventional monetary policies and renewed international financial market volatility would likely raise the cost of Australian banks’ wholesale borrowing. The external and domestic risks are closely interlinked. A hard landing in China could reduce demand for Australia’s mineral exports, worsen the terms of trade, reduce household income and trigger a fall in house prices. These interlinked risks could amplify any given shock as collateral effects further weaken consumer demand and growth, and could in turn lead to a market reassessment of Australia’s growth prospects, and negatively affecting banks’ balance sheets. The challenge in assessing the impact of an adverse scenario is that it is unlikely that a single risk identified would occur in isolation. Modeling tools aimed at identifying the impact of isolated shocks are not well suited for multiple simultaneous shocks. Bearing in mind these caveats, previous IMF work suggests that a one percent slowdown in China’s investment growth could lower growth in Australia by 0.2 percent (Ahuja and Nabar, IMF Working Paper 12/267). The recent work by Vitek (IMF Working Paper 13/253) estimates that the comovement of output gaps between China and Australia could be relatively weak. But these results are highly uncertain, and the effects on output would likely be bigger for joint shocks and given non-linearities. Rather than focusing on general equilibrium quantitative models, the Treasury estimates the sensitivity of their growth projections directly to terms of trade shocks (paragraph 27). Also, emphasizing forecasting challenges, a recent Treasury working paper looking at estimates of uncertainty around budget forecasts concludes that with a 70 percent confidence interval real GDP growth in 2013-14 is expected to range from 1½ to 3¼ percent. Page 8 Policy space to manage risks. The floating exchange rate provides a key cushion against such shocks. The RBA has some room to respond, and the rapid and effective monetary transmission mechanism in Australia would allow for a nimble policy response should these risks emerge. But with the policy rate currently low at 2½ percent, the scope for monetary policy to offset shocks is limited and a sharp deterioration in the economic outlook would call for additional policy responses. As discussed below, Australia’s modest public debt level gives the authorities the scope to allow automatic stabilizers to operate in full and to temper the pace of budget deficit reduction when needed. Potential Outward Spillovers . With Australia as its most important trade and financial partner, New Zealand is vulnerable to a sharp slowdown in Australia’s economic prospects. Beyond the trade linkages, Australian bank subsidiaries constitute 90 percent of New Zealand’s banking system (Figure 11). As subsidiaries rather than branches, however, New Zealand banks are financially ring-fenced, do not rely on their parents for funding, and are well-capitalized with substantial liquidity buffers, although they would likely suffer indirect reputational effects from financial stress in the parent which could affect their access to funding from global wholesale markets. Statutory obligations underpin cross-border cooperation between the two countries, improving regulatory and supervisory oversight. Authorities’ views. Recognizing the risks to the domestic economy, the authorities have recently revised down near-term growth projections (currently in line with staff’s). They argued that the sustained reduction in policy rates should continue to support growth in interest-rate sensitive sectors—indeed, recent house price developments had been a not unexpected consequence of this policy, and are providing a boost to housing investment which has been structurally weak for some time. They noted that there has been some increase in mortgage lending, although overall household leverage has not picked up, suggesting that the housing sector has not yet become a near-term risk. Nonetheless they are closely monitoring the situation and believe they have the tools for a targeted and proportionate response to any emerging risks (paragraphs 21 and 22). The strength of the Australian dollar will be a key factor for growth prospects, and in this regard an early exit from unconventional monetary policies abroad is likely to contribute to a lower value for the Australian dollar, which would help facilitate an adjustment to broader-based growth. On the other hand, Australian assets’ relatively high credit ratings make them attractive to foreign investors, and there is a risk that shifts in portfolio preferences could result in capital inflows and put upward pressure on the Australian dollar. The authorities continue to regard a slowdown in China over the There are also close trade and financial linkages with the Pacific Islands (see Global and Regional Spillovers to Pacific Island Countries Sheridan, Niamh ; Tumbarello, Patrizia ; Wu, Yiqun, IMF Working Paper 12/154, June 01, 2012) and these economies would also be affected by developments in Australia. Analysis shows that New Zealand’s banking sector would be resilient in the face of a severe economic shock. A recent stress test conducted jointly by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and APRA included a 40 percent fall in the world price of New Zealand’s commodity exports, a six-month freeze on wholesale debt markets, a cumulative output loss of 4 percent, a rise in unemployment to 11½ percent, and a fall in house, farm and commercial property prices of 30 percent. The test indicated that banks would still comply with the minimum Tier 1 capital ratio in place at the time of 4 percent (see New Zealand Article IV Consultation 2013, Country Report No. 13/177, Annex 1). Page 9 medium term and a related fall in commodity prices as the main external risk to the Australian economy. They emphasized the role the floating exchange rate provides as a cushion against such shocks.