Reduce Labor Taxes Background Austria’s public expenditure-to-GDP ratio is high (Figure 8). It is well above the EU average, and 7 percentage points higher than in Germany. More positively, it has increased less than in most other countries during the past decade, reflecting the absence of procyclical expenditure surge during the boom years and solid GDP growth (Figure 9). The counterpart of Austria’s elevated spending level is a high tax burden, especially on labor . Austria’s tax wedge on labor is one of the largest in the OECD (Figure 10). This has contributed to relatively low employment among the low-skilled and a high share of part-time workers, including among women Figure 11 And with tax brackets not indexed to inflation, the tax burden tends to drift up over time, holding back growth of real disposable incomes Austria’s structural deficit is not high, but as this deficit excludes a number of expenditures, including for bank support, debt dynamics are not as favorable (Figure 12). On current plans, the structural deficit will decline from 1 percent of GDP in 2013 to ½ percent of GDP from 2016 onwards. Due to bank restructuring costs, the debt ratio will decline only from In 2013, the employment rate of the low-skilled was 48 percent, compared with 79 percent for the higher skilled. See 2013 IMF Staff Report and related Selected Issues Paper. The low employment rate among older workers also mirrors relatively generous (early) retirement rules and benefits. In 2014, the restructuring of Hypo Alpe Adria will boost the headline deficit by 1.2 percent of GDP, and will add 4½ to 5 percent of GDP to debt directly, propelling the debt ratio to around 80 percent of GDP. Bank restructuring costs are the main driver for an increase of the headline deficit to above 2½ percent of GDP, up from 1½ percent in (continued) Structural deficit Headline Deficit Deficit AUT DEU DNK FIN LUX SWE CHE NOR Debt Ratios of AAA-rated Countries, 2007-19 AA Total government expenditure (2012, in percent of GDP) Page 18 75 percent in 2013 to around 70 percent in 2020. As a result, from 2014 on, Austria will have the highest debt ratio among European AAA countries and be relatively more exposed to changes in the currently low interest rate environment. While debt is sustainable within the medium-term horizon of the Fund’s debt sustainability analysis (DSA), in the next decade, without further reforms, aging cost will lead to upward pressures on the deficit that would reverse debt dynamics. Comparisons with other countries show several areas where spending stands out (Figures 13 and 14). Old-age social benefits are high in spite of a still relatively favorable old-age dependency ratio. Austria has a lower old-age dependency ratio than Germany, but Austria’s spending exceeds that of Germany by 3½ percentage points. Subsidies and capital transfers are about 3¾ percentage points of GDP higher than the euro area average. While this partly reflects support to banks and accounting differences, even abstracting from support to banks and hospitals, subsidies and capital transfers are 2¼ percentage points of GDP higher than in Germany. Significant savings could be made by reducing aid to railways, and by better targeting and avoiding duplication of other subsidies. Health care spending is relatively high. OECD analysis suggests that Austria could save about 2 percentage points of GDP in health care spending, without endangering outcomes. A particular problem is the inefficiently large number of hospitals. Spending levels are also boosted by complex intra-governmental financing arrangements and lack of subnational tax autonomy, which provides little incentive to contain spending at the sub-national level. 2013. The structural and even more so the headline deficit were lower than expected in 2013 at respectively 1 and 1½ percent of GDP, due to unbudgeted windfalls from the auctioning of telecom licenses that over-compensated higher-than-anticipated capital transfers to restructuring banks. The debt projections assume that the Hypo Alpe Adria defeasance structure will recover about 2 percentage points of the transferred asset in the amount of some 5½ percent of GDP until 2020. The projections do not yet take forthcoming revisions to GDP and the perimeter of general government into account, which will take place in the context of the introduction of ESA2010. See Annex I. The latest official projections foresee an increase in old-age related spending (pensions, health and long-term care) from an already high level of 23.8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 28.3 percent of GDP in 2050. Euro area-12, comprising Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. In other countries with different health care financing systems, hospital expenses may show up under health care rather than subsidies. The deficiencies of the subsidy system were comprehensively analyzed by a government working group (see Arbeitsgruppe Verwaltung Neu (2010): Arbeitspaket 5: Effizientes Foerderungswesen, Wien). Page 19 Policy Discussions The mission and the authorities agreed that the tax burden on labor was too high and should be reduced. While the current debate in Austria focuses on reducing income taxes only (the most prevalent idea is reducing the lowest income tax bracket from 36 to 25 percent), the mission argued that consideration should also be given to lowering social security contributions, which start at a level well below the threshold for income taxation. Views within Austria differed on how a tax cut should be financed . This is partly because specific proposals for the design of a tax reform were still being elaborated, and a tax reform commission chaired by the Ministry of Finance had just had its inaugural meeting. But there is also considerable disagreement between the two coalition partners. The Social Democrats advocate a revenue-neutral tax reform, with a lower income tax financed by higher net wealth and inheritance/gift taxes. In contrast, the conservative Austrian People’s Party argues that tax reductions should be funded through expenditure cuts. Current expenditure plans, however, leave no room for cutting taxes. The mission argued that a meaningful reduction of the tax burden on labor would only be possible if expenditures were addressed . It acknowledged that there was some scope for financing labor tax reductions by selectively abolishing tax exemptions and increasing real estate and environmental taxes. Real estate taxes are particularly low, reflecting both low rates and low valuations. But it cautioned that the yield of such measures should not be overestimated, and warned that revenue-neutral tax reforms tend to be rare. The mission argued that more decisive expenditure cuts and fiscal federalism reforms would not only create room for reducing taxes, but also help to bring debt down faster. More specifically, it argued that Expenditure cuts totaling about 1 percent of GDP over the next four years would help put debt on a steeper downward path. The resulting The real estate tax is levied at a basic federal rate of 0.2 percent, multiplied by a municipal coefficient (up to 500 percent), which generally means a tax rate of 1 percent on the tax values (unit values determined in 1970–80s tend to be far below the market values). AA v v Total Tax Revenue 1/ For details, please see Figure 12. No policy change Staff recommendation Austria: Illustrative Debt Dynamics 1/ Page 20 structural surplus of ½ percent of GDP should be maintained until the pre-crisis debt level of 60 percent is reached in the first years of the next decade (Figure 12). This would create sufficient buffers for absorbing aging cost, potential additional bank restructuring outlays, and other contingent liabilities (including residual risks from Austrian banks’ CESEE exposure). Additional expenditure cuts would create room for reducing social contributions and labor taxes. Such a reduction should put a major emphasis on reducing high social security contributions, which also affect income levels below the relatively high threshold at which income taxation kicks in. To reduce Austria’s overall taxation level, social security contribution and tax cuts should be financed and phased in together with well specified expenditure reductions, while ensuring that the more ambitious fiscal balance target will be met. In addition, a streamlining of the tax system through a selective abolition of tax exemptions and the increase of environmental and real estate taxes could create some additional room for lowering the burden on labor. Interlocutors agreed with the mission’s assessment that aggregate spending is too high, but referred to political obstacles when specific expenditure reductions were discussed. On an abstract level, counterparts agreed that expenditure levels for pensions, subsidies, and health care could be reduced, but when it came to discussions about specific reform options, they referred to numerous political obstacles either within the governing coalition or in the relationship between the federal and the state levels. Interlocutors did not have strong views on whether a more ambitious longer-term fiscal deficit target than currently pursued was needed. In large part this was because they were focused on the achievement of their 2016 structural deficit objective of ½ percent of GDP. Some wondered whether more fiscal consolidation would be desirable given the weak economic situation in Europe. The mission pointed out that extra consolidation would only be required after 2016, when the recovery was hopefully well established. Page 21 Box 3. The Scope for Fiscal Expenditure Rationalization in Austria In the past decade, Austria’s government expenditure growth has been very steady, thus avoiding the boom-bust pattern of some other European countries. However, expenditure levels are relatively high, and the difference with Germany has been widening. Compared with other countries, spending is particularly high for pensions, capital transfers and subsidies, including in the transport sector. Potential for efficiency gains appears to exist in health care spending. In the past decade, Austria’s expenditure to GDP ratio has increased less than in most other EU countries, although the starting level was already high (Figure 8). This is the result of relatively modest expenditure growth, and robust GDP growth. At the same time, Austria has managed to avoid the boom-bust in public expenditure that characterized some of the other European countries (Figure 9). With no expenditure surge in the pre- crisis years, the government was not forced to retrench expenditure post 2009. The absence of an expenditure boom in Austria partly reflects the absence of a revenue boom. Nevertheless, Austria’s expenditure to GDP level is high compared with other countries. The expenditure to GDP ratio was 51.7 percent in 2012, 1.6 percentage points higher than the euro area-12 (EA- 12) average. The difference with Germany—a country that has also come through the crisis relatively well—is much larger (7 percentage points in 2012) and has widened significantly over the past decade. A cross-country analysis of public spending by different type of categories shows several areas where spending stands out. Looking at main categories by economic and functional classification in Austria and its peer countries , Austria’s expenditure is particularly high for subsidies in health care (hospital services) and in economic affairs (transport sector), for capital transfers in economic affairs (transport sector and bank rescues), and for social benefits in social protection (to a large extent old-age pensions) (Figure 13). Public pension spending is high and will increase further due to aging. Current high spending reflects both a high replacement rate and low effective retirement age. While the old-age dependency ratio is still relatively favorable, this will change going forward. According to the European Commission (EC) 2012 Ageing Report, the old-age dependency ratio in Austria is projected to increase by about 23 percentage points between 2015 and 2050 (Figure 14). As a result, spending on pensions will rise further—the latest official projections foresee an increase in public pensions spending from 13.9 percent of GDP in 2015 to 16.4 percent in 2035, one of the highest in the euro area. Raising effective and statutory retirement ages would help mitigate cost pressures. The 2012 pension reform is a step in the right direction (and current official projections already assume a rise in the effective retirement age and in the labor force participation among the 55–64 years old), but, according to the OECD, further adjustments may be needed, such as raising the deduction in case of early retirement from currently 5.1 to above 6 percent to achieve full actuarial neutrality and a more rapid increase of the statutory retirement age for women, which is not currently envisaged. Developments in the effective retirement age and employment rate among older workers are intended to be closely monitored so as to take additional measures if necessary. Austria’s subsidies and capital transfers are among the highest in the region, even abstracting from support to banks and hospitals (Figure 13). Given Austria’s peculiarity in accounting for public expenditure in health, in particular for hospital services, we subtract subsidies for hospital services from the total amount of subsidies. Excluding in addition capital transfers due to bank rescues, Austria’s expenditure on subsidies in broad sense is still one of the highest in the region (3.9 percent of GDP in 2012) and by 2.3 percentage points higher than in Germany. The biggest bulk of these subsidies goes into the transport sector (mainly railways, OeBB), both in form of subsidies and capital transfers. As the “Administrative Reform Working Group” points out, the Austrian system of subsidies and transfers has many deficiencies such as insufficient targeting, unsatisfactory ex-post evaluation, and transparency gaps that allow for multiple Page 22 Box 3. The Scope for Fiscal Expenditure Rationalization in Austria (concluded) funding. While the government plans to extend the coverage of the transparency databank for public subsidies to incorporate states and municipalities and to increase efficiency of capital transfers provided to OeBB, the effectiveness of these measures in reducing subsidies in Austria is still to be assessed. Potential for efficiency gains appears to exist in health care spending. According to the OECD, health care spending in Austria could be reduced by 2 percentage points of GDP without adversely affecting outcomes, if Austria’s health care system was operating at the frontier level of efficiency. In particular spending on hospital services—the main contributor to the high health expenditure—suffers from efficiency concerns, not least due to fragmentation between spending and funding responsibilities between different levels of government. In the context of the health care reform 2013, the authorities plan to limit nominal health expenditure growth to nominal GDP growth by 2016 and keep it at the expected average nominal GDP growth (3½ percent) beyond 2016. However, the reform lacks concrete measures to reach the defined targets and could be further strengthened also by setting more ambitious goals for shifting from inpatient to outpatient care and by reinforcing preventive health care. ____________________________________________________________________ According to the economic classification, total government expenditure is divided into intermediate consumption and taxes, compensation of employees, subsidies, property income, social benefits and social transfers in kind, other current transfers, capital transfers, and gross capital formation. Functional classification splits expenditure into ten functional groups such as general public services; defense; public order and safety; economic affairs; environmental protection; housing and community amenities; health; recreation, culture, and religion; education; and social protection. In this analysis Austria’s peer countries comprise EA-12, Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom. In the EC 2012 Ageing Report, the old-age dependency ratio is defined as population aged 65 and over as a percentage of the population aged 20–64 See Bundesfinanzministerium fuer Finanzen (2013), Langfristige Bundgetprognose, April, Vienna. The 2012 pension reform that came into force on April 1, 2012, extends the number of contributory years entitling for the corridor pension and the long-term insurance pension from 37.5 to 40 years; restricts access to disability pension by tightening eligibility criteria and strengthening re-integration into work life (“fit2work”); increases the deductions in case of early retirement from currently 4.2 to 5.1 percent. Other measures include moderate adjustments of pension benefits (by 1 percentage points and 0.8 percentage points lower than CPI in 2013 and 2014, respectively). The statutory retirement age is set at 65 years for men and at 60 for women, and the retirement age for women will converge to men by 2033. See 2013 OECD Economic Survey for Austria. From the second half of 1990s to the early 2000, many state and municipal hospitals were transformed into private corporations owned by sub-national governments, but recorded outside public accounts. See ECFIN Country Focus, Vol, 11, Issue 1, January 2014. Arbeitsgruppe Verwaltung Neu (2010), Arbeitspaket 5: Effizientes Foerderungswesen, Vienna. See Oesterreichisches Stabilitaetsprogramm, Bundesministerium fuer Finanzen, April 2014, Vienna. See 2011 OECD Economic Survey for Austria. A hospital efficiency study developed in Austria suggests that up to one fifth of hospital costs could be saved. See Hofmarcher, M.M., Ch. Lietz and A. Schnabl (2005), “Inefficiency in Austrian inpatient care: An attempt to identify ailing providers based on DEA results”, Central European Journal of Operations Research, Vol. 13 (4). Page 23