After years of rapid growth, Australia’s outperformance is fading with a soft real economy, a maturing financial cycle and slowing potential growth. A strong track record… Australia has outperformed its peers for the past two decades: GDP has grown twice as fast as its peers (averaging 3¼ percent since 1998), without a technical recession for 25 years. Per capita income has grown rapidly and stood at U.S. $61,000 in 2014—among the highest in the world. The fiscal position compares well to advanced economy peers with net debt only 15 percent of GDP compared to 79 percent on average for G20 advanced economies. A boom in global demand for resources and migration have supported growth. From the early 2000s, strong growth in China led to an unprecedented rise in Australia’s terms of trade and a resources investment boom. The resources sector expanded to around 10 percent of GDP, and accounted for close to half of GDP growth in the past three years. Net migration has contributed to a rapidly growing population, at 1½ percent a year, among the highest in the OECD. The strong performance is also the product of sound policies and frameworks. The flexible exchange rate facilitated the shift in resource allocation to the resource sector and contained import price inflation during the investment boom. A flexible labor market helped accommodate the shift in employment to resource and related sectors without undue pressure on wage or price inflation. Credible monetary policy, strong institutions, sound financial sector supervision, and prudent and transparent fiscal frameworks fostered a strong business environment. Australia has outperformed Real GDP Cumulative Growth (2003=100) Australia Real GDP per capita (2003=100) Australia Range of advanced economies Range of advanced economies 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Note: Area refers to the difference of min and max of real GDP per capita for EU, UK, US, Japan, Canada, and New Zealand. Page 10 …but the real economy has hit a soft patch and is facing a large transition… Growth has been below trend for two years. GDP grew by 2½ percent in the year to 2015 Q1, with particularly weak final domestic demand, and declining public and private investment. And a recovery in non-resource investment is only gradually coming through. Capacity utilization and a soft labor market point to a sizeable output gap. The economy is facing the largest swing in the terms of trade for 150 years . The anticipated increase in the supply of resource commodities has been accompanied by sharper than expected falls in prices, in part reflecting slowing growth in China. Resource export volumes have continued to ramp up despite tumbling prices as Australian producers (especially iron ore) are very competitive with low marginal costs. Resource equity prices have fallen back, but since the mining companies have globally distributed shareholdings, the effect on profits is spread between Australia and abroad. With lower terms of trade, the economy has suffered falling incomes and unemployment has risen. Real net national disposable income per capita has been flat or falling in the past four quarters. Unemployment has settled at a decade high of 6 percent (now above major advanced economy peers such as the US and the UK). Employment though has held up better than might have been expected, resulting in weak nominal wage growth, and contributing to low A difficult transition from the mining investment boom Mining Investment (% GDP) Sources: ABS; ANZ; and IMF staff calculations. inflation. State Final Demand (Contributions to annual growth, March 2015) Projections Resource States Demand (ex investment) Public final demand Private investment Final demand NSW VIC QLD WA SA TAS Recent interest rate cuts have yet to fully feed through to the broader economy. With subdued inflation pressure and weakening outlook, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) has cut its already accommodative policy rate by a further 50bps since February. While housing investment has picked up strongly, consumer confidence indicators are around average and investment expectations remain muted. Business conditions and capacity utilization have begun to pick up in recent months. Consumption growth has been moderate, reflecting weak income growth, although the household saving rate has begun to fall back from a high level. Page 11 The exchange rate has depreciated but is still on the strong side. While iron ore prices have fallen by more than a third and Australia’s commodities prices are down 25 percent since mid- 2014, the real effective exchange rate was only 6 percent lower in June. Recent movements appear Commodity prices fall more than AUS$ to be driven by shifts in the global economy—U.S. dollar appreciation, euro/yen depreciation and market volatility due to developments in China and Greece (see Box 1), coupled with still attractive Australian yields. Although the current account deficit narrowed to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2014 as mining-related imports declined, it is expected to widen in 2015 as export prices fall, and the net international liabilities position widens (Box 2 and Annex II). (Percent change since June 2014) Iron Ore Price All commodities REER Box 1. Australian Market Reaction to China and Greece Events Market reaction to recent Greece/China developments has been relatively muted and in a direction that would help support activity. The exchange rate depreciated further against the U.S. dollar and in nominal effective terms. Long term bond spreads moved in a narrow range. Wholesale markets were unaffected. Ground lost on equities in early June (mainly resources and retail) was largely recouped by late July. The iron ore spot price has fallen back since June. It fell steeply to a low of $44 in early July partly influenced by developments in the Chinese equity market but also because of an inelastic supply response to a seasonal slowing of demand. Australian Market Reaction to Recent China/Greece Events A$/US$ July 6 RBA holds July 12 Euro group Greece agreement June 18 China equities start to slide June 26 Greece calls referendum June 17 Fed rates on hold Australia: AUS/US 10-Year spread (Basis points) Australia All Ordinaries Index relative to S&P 500 Index (Index, June 1, 2015=100) Source: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations. Australia Iron Ore Spot Price Index (USD/DMT) 6/8/2015 6/15/2015 6/22/2015 6/29/2015 7/6/2015 7/13/2015 7/20/2015 7/27/2015 Page 12 Box 2. External Sector Assessment Australia has run a current account deficit for much of its history and has a negative IIP position . Official reserves are relatively small at 4½ percent of GDP, but with a strong commitment to a floating exchange rate there is less of a need for reserves and banks’ external liability positions are either in domestic currency or hedged. Previous external sector assessments have pointed to an external sector position that is moderately weaker than warranted. Current Account Balance and IIP (% of GDP) Current account balance IIP (RHS) Since the summer of 2014 a confluence of large external shocks have affected the current account outlook — (1) sharply falling commodity export prices and terms of trade, (2) a decline in oil prices, and (3) large bilateral exchange rate movements for the U.S. dollar, euro and Yen, all with different effects on the current account: Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook. Lower commodity export prices are partly offset by the continued ramp up in export volumes resulting in a moderate decline in export values. Since the profits from Australian resource companies are globally distributed, the net income deficit stays at around 2 percent of GDP. Lower oil prices have a mild positive effect on the trade balance (net oil imports of 2 percent of GDP). But LNG prices have also declined as they are linked to the oil price with a lag. Over the medium term as Australia becomes a larger exporter of LNG, this effect will begin to dominate. Bilateral exchange rate movements . The Australian dollar has depreciated sharply against the U.S. dollar but by a smaller amount in nominal and real effective terms (down 9 percent from a recent peak). While this should help boost the competitiveness of non-resource exports—and there are signs that services exports are picking up—the real exchange rate still looks high relative to the decline in the terms of trade. Lower mining investment is contributing to a fall in capital goods imports and together with the depreciation should moderate import growth. In 2015 the current account deficit is expected to widen to 3½ percent of GDP as the fall in resource exports outweighs the other developments. Over the medium term the current account deficit should remain contained at around 3½ percent of GDP as the trade balance narrows and the income deficit widens as global interest rates normalize and mining income accruing to foreign investors rises. The main effects on the domestic economy are reflected in the increase in the net exports contribution and the positive effect on rebalancing of growth from the lower exchange rate (see Outlook). Staff assess that the external sector position remains moderately weaker and the real exchange rate moderately stronger than warranted by fundamentals . Model-based approaches in the IMF’s External Balance Assessment for 2014 together with the trends through to May 2015 suggest that the real exchange rate appears overvalued by 0-15 percent and the current account is sustainable and looks around 0-1½ percent weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies globally and domestically. The depreciation since June has narrowed the exchange rate gap a little. The strength of the Australian dollar may reflect the attractiveness of Australian assets with continued strong capital inflows, likely related to a global search for yield, and extraordinary monetary easing in the major advanced economies. Policy tightening in other advanced economies or monetary easing in Australia could result in a further depreciation, which would narrow the external imbalance and support the transition to non-resource based growth. Page 13 Actual The path to consolidation is more difficult Consolidated General Government Fiscal Balance (% GDP) Fiscal consolidation has become more difficult and public debt is rising, albeit from a low level. Lower export prices and weak wage growth are denting nominal tax revenues and unemployment is adding to expenditures. This together with a lack of political support for some measures (changes to family benefits and smaller measures amounting to 0.4 percent of GDP by 2017/18) is making consolidation targets difficult to achieve. The national deficit is estimated at around 3 percent in 2014/15, broadly unchanged from 2013/2014. The May 2015/16 Budget projects a return to surplus in 2019-20. Public debt has been rising since the global financial crisis, although it remains substantially lower than in most advanced economies (Figure 5). …and the financial cycle is maturing Sources: ABS, Commonwealth and State/Territory Treasuries, IMF staff estimates and projections. IMF staff proj. (July 2015) 2003/04 2005/06 2007/08 2009/10 2011/12 2013/14 2015/16 2017/18 2019/20 Auth. proj. (May 2015) Auth. proj. (May 2014) Auth. proj. (Dec. 2014) The financial and real sectors are at different stages of the cycle . The output gap and the financial cycle have diverged since the peak of the mining investment boom in 2012. Low interest rates have helped push up asset prices and more interest sensitive sectors whereas the real economy has softened. In line with global developments, long-term bond yields have fallen over the past eighteen months, notwithstanding some reversal since April. Equity prices have continued to rise driven by financials, and despite the fall back in the resources sector. House prices are booming in Sydney, but the picture varies greatly across the country. Overall house price inflation is close to 10 percent, but is around 16 percent in Sydney (Box 3). The commercial and property development sectors, which are highly cyclical, are now turning down. Stylized cycle: high asset prices/soft real economy Below Average Decelerating Above Average House prices Investor lending Picking up Ten year bond prices Inflation Unemployment Consumer confidence There are no signs of a generalized credit boom. Overall credit growth has continued at a moderate pace, picking up to 5.9 percent (y/y) in June. While credit to GDP is rising, this reflects weak nominal growth rather than rapid credit growth. However, housing credit is rising at a faster pace, 7.3 percent in June, led by investor credit at 10.9 percent, and accounting for almost half of all housing credit growth. Page 14 Box 3. Are Australian House Prices Overvalued? International comparisons persistently signal warnings. The level of real house prices and the house price to income ratio is high relative to the OECD average (though similar to other buoyant markets). House price inflation picked up to 7-10 percent in 2014-15—driven by rapid increases in Sydney and to a lesser extent Melbourne (prices in the resource states have fallen back in recent months). While foreign investment in real estate has increased, the main driver has been local investor lending and interest-only loans. Sydney house price to income ratios are much higher than for other cities at around 7—similar to Auckland, London, Stockholm and Vancouver. Can the increase in house prices be explained? Big country but much of it remote Supply is constrained… The housing market and financial system have changed significantly over the past two decades with a shift to low inflation, low nominal interest rates and financial liberalization which loosened credit constraints. Households’ borrowing capacity increased and they moved to a higher steady state level of indebtedness and higher house prices relative to incomes. Supply side constraints may also keep prices high. Although Australia is big, much of the country is remote and the population is concentrated in a few cities where there are geographical or other barriers to expansion. Population growth has also been much more rapid than for other OECD countries, whereas housing investment as a share of GDP is only at OECD average levels. Supply bottlenecks also reflect planning issues and transport restrictions. Are high and rising prices a problem? There has been no generalized credit boom and lending standards are generally high (and being tightened), so financial stability risks seem contained. The run-up in house prices has also not been accompanied by a construction boom (unlike Ireland and Spain). But with already high debt and house prices, rapid house price inflation raises the risk of a sharp reversal, which would damage the macroeconomy. Do models point to overvaluation? Estimating overvaluation is inherently difficult. Rather than relying on one model, staff used four different approaches. Statistical filter. Deviations from an HP filter suggest overvaluation of about 5 percent. Fundamentals. The standard model used in the Fund, estimated since the early 2000s, with fundamental explanatory variables—affordability, incomes, interest rates, and demographics ― estimates overvaluation of around 15 percent and equilibrium growth rates around 3-4 percent. Including supply factors. A model using similar long- run fundamentals, but adding credit and the housing stock to take into account supply constraints, points to an overvaluation of around 8-10 percent. Remoteness Index 2006 Based on Road distance between populated localities Major cities Inner regional Outer regional Remote Very remote Image sourced and modified based on: Families in Regional, and Remote Australia, Institute of Family Studies, Factsheet March 2011, Jennifer Baxter, Alan Hayes and Matthew Gray. Data Sources: Accessibility Remoteness Index Australia 2006 GISCA, The University of Adelaide, Australian Government Geoscience Australia and Bureau of Statistics. House price valuation: fundamentals and supply Index Actual Fitted House price valuation: user costs (%), Fox and Tulip (2014) Average real appreciation past ten years Average real appreciation since 1955 Overvalued Undervalued User costs. Estimates of user costs (whether it is more expensive to own than to rent) suggests that renting is about as costly as buying a house based on average real appreciation since 1955 (Fox and Tulip, 2014). However, this estimate is highly sensitive to interest rates and expectations of future house price appreciation. Using a plausibly lower expected appreciation term results in an overvaluation of 10-19 percent. Expected real appreciation Bottom line: House prices are moderately overvalued, probably around 10 percent. The problem is concentrated in Sydney and is fuelled by investor credit and interest only loans. Current rates of house price inflation imply rising overvaluation. Page 15 Buoyant housing investor lending has prompted regulatory action. The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) adopted a gradual and targeted approach and advised banks in December 2014 that it would focus on higher risk mortgage lending (interest only and high loan to income or value ratios), reining in growth of investor lending above 10 percent a year, and strengthening loan serviceability tests (by increasing interest rate buffers and floors). Failure by banks to take action would trigger more intense supervisory action, potentially including additional capital requirements. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) is reviewing whether mortgage lenders’ interest-only lending complies with their responsible lending obligations. Banks have responded since mid-2015 by reducing discounts on investor lending, curtailing high loan to value ratio loans and tightening interest only lending, though these are yet to be reflected in lending data given preapproval lags of 2-3 months. Separately, in response to the findings of the Financial System Inquiry, APRA announced that capital adequacy requirements for large banks using the internal risk based ratings approach would be increased (see Box 7). Political setting. The Liberal-National coalition is more than half way through its term in office with the next federal election due by January 2017. The coalition has a majority in House of Representatives but not in the Senate.