Sources: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. ESP ITA IRE NTHDNK JPN USA FRA FIN BEL UK NORGER LUX CANAUSSWE NZL CHE Australia’s recovery advanced with a pickup in activity from mid-2015, but underlying demand growth remained closer to trend. Growth (at annual rates) increased to over 3 percent from mid-2015—above current potential output growth estimates of 2¾ percent—driven by higher government spending, LNG export capacity coming on stream, strong services export growth, and buoyant residential investment. That said, private business investment outside mining has remained more subdued than expected. And with the growth rebalancing toward non-mining activity, activity in states where such activity dominates has been buoyant, and disparities in economic performance between non-mining and mining states have widened. With hindsight, some of the growth pickup in early 2016 reflected one-off level increases in demand, particularly in government spending. Consequently, real GDP unexpectedly contracted by 2 percent annualized in 2016Q3 when these level effects wore off, with temporary, weather- related weakness in residential investment spending also contributing. The strength of underlying growth in aggregate demand, however, does not appear to have changed. State Final Demand (Contributions to annual growth) Resource States 2015Q3 2016Q3 2016Q3 2015Q3 2015Q3 2015Q3 2016Q3 2015Q3 2016Q3 2015Q3 2016Q3 2016Q3 Labor market conditions have improved although the fall in the unemployment rate likely overstates the improvement in labor markets. Employment picked up with overall activity, and Demand (ex investment) Public final demand Private investment Final demand NSW VIC QLD WA SA TAS Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics; and Haver. Background work for the 2015 Article IV consultation suggests that annual potential output growth in Australia has declined from about 3¼ percent before the global financial crisis to about 2¾ percent in recent years. See Mohommad, 2015, “Sustaining Income Growth in Australia”, Australia Selected Issues , IMF Country Report No.15/275. Page 11 unemployment has decreased from its recent peak. Still, the underemployment rate—defined as the share of employed persons in the labor force seeking to work more hours—has remained almost 2 percentage points above average (7 percent of the active labor force over the past 20 years). Some 80 percent of the jobs created over the past year or so have been part-time jobs. At the same time, the share of long-term unemployment has remained above average. As of mid-2016, IMF Staff estimates the output gap at 1.7 percent and the unemployment rate gap at 0.5 percent (about 1¼ percent at the peak). Unemployment and Underemployment Rate (%) Share of Full-Time Jobs in Total Employment (%) Underemployment rate Unemployment rate Source: Haver Analytics. Source: Haver Analytics. Both headline and core inflation have been below the inflation target range of 2-3 percent in 2016, and the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) responded promptly to an unexpected downshift in the inflation path. Initially, the disinflation that began in late 2014 had been driven by the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities. Over the past 12 months, however, the declines have been due to non-tradables inflation, with the RBA pointing to the temporary inflation impact from lower margins due to increased competition in the retail and other sectors. After a noticeable, unexpected decline of core inflation in the first quarter of 2016, and a downshift in the path of expected inflation, the RBA has lowered the policy rate by another 50 basis points to 1.5 percent in 2016 in May and August. Core inflation has since stabilized at around 1.6 percent. Wage growth has remained weak, with nominal unit labor costs running at less than 0.5 percent on average, and cost pressures have been virtually absent. The current account balance has remained moderately weaker than its fundamental level and the Australian dollar has continued to be moderately overvalued. The commodity- currency adjustment mechanism that has come into play after the mining investment bust has supported the rebalancing of growth toward net exports, with investment weakness also weighing on imports. A renewed widening of the current account deficit in 2015 reflected temporary factors, including weather related export declines and exceptional imports, and the balance has since See Annex III for a summary of the forthcoming selected issues paper by Mohammad, 2016, “Labor Market Adjustment to Shocks in Australia,” discussing labor market adjustment after the global financial crisis and after the commodity price bust and mining investment decline. Page 12 narrowed again. While currency depreciation in 2014-15 has reduced much of the overvaluation that had developed over the boom, the correction has stalled in recent months (Annex IV—External Sector Assessment). The latter has likely reflected the relative attractiveness of Australian assets, given their relatively high returns. Nonetheless, yields on longer-term Australian bonds have declined, and valuation effects from the resulting bond price increases, together with exchange rate appreciation, have contributed to a marked deterioration in the net external liability position over the past year, given the economy’s sizeable net short position in that asset class (Annex II). That said, the underlying risk profile has improved further, adding to improvements since the global financial crisis, as the share of longer-term external funding of Australian banks has increased over the past year or so, while that of short-term external funding has decreased. By some metrics, housing market conditions have cooled and credit growth to households has slowed, but risks related to house price and debt levels have not yet decreased. Real house price gains have moderated. Indicators of current conditions such as sales volumes and the rate of turnover in the housing stock have moderated. The extent of cooling has varied considerably across capital cities. The strongest price increases continue to be recorded in Sydney and Melbourne, where underlying demand for housing remains strong. With house prices still rising ahead of income, standard valuation metrics suggest somewhat higher house price overvaluation relative to the assessment in 2015 Article IV consultation. The flipside has been slowing growth in bank lending to households APRA prudential guidance requiring tighter lending standards by banks, which was introduced in late 2014, has curtailed growth in riskier mortgage loans in particular and credit growth to household more broadly. At the same time, there has been some upward pressures on mortgage rates, as banks have increased capital ratios and prepared for a higher risk weight on mortgage lending. That said, household credit gaps have not yet reversed. On the supply side residential investment has risen to some 0.5 percent of GDP above its long- term average (the ratio remains comparatively low given population and labor force growth). An above-average number of new apartments is expected to come on stream in the next year or so, mostly in the downtown areas of Brisbane, Melbourne, and, to a lesser extent, Sydney. Concerns about temporary oversupply have thus risen. But leading indicators, such as approvals of new houses and other dwellings or new residential construction starts, have started to level off after brisk increases in 2014-15. In commercial real estate, property price valuations have increased but are still within the usual range of variation over the cycle (Box 1). Page 13 New Residential Term Loan Approvals by Loan-to-Valuation Ratio (LVR) (In percent of total new residential loans) Loans approved ≤ LVR 60% Loans approved 80%<LVR ≤ Loans approved 60%<LVR ≤ Loans approved LVR>90% Source: APRA New Residential Term Loans to Households Approved (In percent of total new residential loans) Low documentation loans approved Interest-only loans approved Source: APRA Household sector leverage has been stable overall despite higher debt, and debt buffers have risen but not for all households. The household debt ratio rose to 186 percent of gross disposable income over the past year, but underlying vulnerabilities have not increased to the same extent. Mortgage buffers—balances in related offset accounts and redraw facilities, which are held for tax and precautionary reasons—have also risen, to some 18 percent of outstanding mortgage loans by mid-2016—the equivalent of around 2½ years of scheduled debt payments at current interest rates. And household leverage (liabilities as a percent of net worth) has been stable and low at around 25 percent. Yet there is considerable heterogeneity across households. With house values a rising multiple of income, first-time homebuyers and other new borrowers tend to have higher debt ratios and smaller buffers. Indeed, around 25 percent of all households in each income quintile had debt to income ratios above 3 in FY2013-14—the latest available year for income and wealth data across households. These households may well be liquidity-constrained in an economic downturn. Household Leverage by Income Quantile HH with debt 3 times Median debt to asset ratio Median debt to income or higher (fraction) Source: ABS. income ratio (RHS) The household saving ratio has remained relatively high since it rebounded in 2007-08 and household net lending (saving minus gross fixed capital formation) has been positive since then, implying that households continue to acquire financial assets. A good part of household financial assets is held in so-called superannuation funds, the mandatory second pension pillar. Page 14 CET1 Ratios of Major Banks (% of RWA) Banks have further strengthened their balance sheets, responding to regulatory change and market pressure. The large Australian banks have raised the CET1 capital ratio from 8.6 of risk-weighted assets (RWA) in June 2014 to 10 percent at the end of 2015, partly through raising fresh capital, and the ratios are expected to have improved further in 2016. According to APRA studies, after adjusting for stricter requirements in capital and RWA calculations, these capital ratios have placed the banks at the low end of the top quartile internationally. Bank funding conditions have also improved, with foreign currency funding continuing to be fully hedged. Nonperforming loans (NPL) have remained largely unchanged. 4th quartile 3rd quartile 2nd quartile 1st quartile APRA 2016 update AUS (comparison ratio) APRA 2015 study AUS (Basel QIS) AUS (headline)