Australia’s economic performance has been robust in comparison to other advanced economies despite the commodity price and mining investment bust. Growth has remained above 2 percent (annual rate) and increases in unemployment have been small. The moderate impact of the large shocks since 2011 reflects prompt monetary easing, a flexible exchange rate acting as a shock absorber, export orientation to the dynamic Asia region, relatively high labor force and population growth, and flexible labor markets. Another reason is the relatively small size of the commodity sector and continued strong mining export performance (Annex I: “Four Years After the Bust …”). In this setting, Australia’s long expansion without a recession has continued uninterrupted for 25 years. Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database. B J Still, Australia has been confronted with symptoms of the “new mediocre.” The economy has experienced a slowdown since the global financial crisis (GFC), with average GDP growth about 0.8 percent lower (annual rate), which is indicative of lower potential output growth. As elsewhere, the adjustment to the shocks has been drawn out, and growth has fallen short of expectations in 2014 and early 2015, partly from weaker-than-expected partner country growth and partly from domestic demand weakness. In particular, growth in non-mining business investment has been slow despite declines in real interest rates and real exchange rate depreciation. At the same time, underemployment and long-term unemployment have been higher, while nominal wage growth has been low and inflation has fallen below target. 2000Q1 Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Counterfactual is based on pre-GFC average growth (2003-07). Australia USA Australia: counterfactual Real GDP 2000Q1=1, log scale 2009Q1 2012Q1 2015Q1 2003Q1 2006Q1 Housing-related and external macro-financial vulnerabilities are a concern. Real house prices and household debt ratios rose to high levels in tandem during the country’s economic boom of the 1990s and 2000s. While stabilizing after the global financial crisis, both house prices and household debt ratios have picked up again recently. The main concern is the large housing Page 10 exposure (over 50 percent of total assets) of Australia’s highly concentrated banking system. On the external side, Australia has had long- running current account deficits and a relatively large net external liability position. Much of the related risks focus on the funding of Australian banks because they rely heavily on international wholesale markets. Real House Prices (1995=100) 2016Q2 2007Q4