Housing and China risks loom. While Australia’s overall vulnerabilities are low, several distinct downside risks could interact and exacerbate the impact on the economy (Risk Assessment Matrix) External Shock 1 China slows more than expected (property market slows) External Sector Effects Weakens terms of trade Reduces foreign investment in property and other sectors Exchange rate does not depreciate as global bilateral movements dominate Downside risks could interact Domestic Shocks 1. Persistently Weak Demand 2. Housing market hard landing 1. Persistently Weak Demand Non-resource sector does not recover Lower actual and potential growth 2. Housing Hard Landing Leveraged investors amplify house price decline Confidence dented Income and consumption lower Negative wealth/income effects Wider Domestic Economy Effects Confidence dented Unemployment higher Growth down Financial System Negative (ratings down grade ,funding pressure, eats into capital buffers) Occurs while banks are aiming to raise capital ratios Credit conditions tighten External Shock 2 Bumpy QE exit Sharply raises risk premia External and Financial System • Rise in Australian risk premia • Wholesale funding costs rise • Dents profits Persistently weak domestic demand. Non-resource demand could be slower to pick up (for example, due to a weak transmission of monetary policy to consumer demand and business investment) and further terms of trade falls could entrench slower growth, higher unemployment and fiscal deficits, especially if there is reform inertia, and in a scenario where there are global deflationary forces and/or falling house prices. Housing market hard landing. Current efforts to rein in riskier property lending might not be sufficiently effective. Against a backdrop of already high house prices and household debt, this could give rise to price overshooting and excessive risk taking. A sharp correction in house prices, possibly driven by Sydney, could be triggered by external conditions (e.g., a sharper slowdown in China or a rise in global risk premia, Box 5) or a domestic shock to employment. This might have wider ramifications if it affects confidence. The house price cycle could be amplified by leveraged investors looking to exit the market and a turning commercial property cycle. Though currently small, investors in self managed superannuation funds that have added geared property to their fund portfolios would also be adversely affected in a downturn. In a tail scenario, APRA’s stress tests (Box 8) suggest banks would probably face ratings downgrades/higher offshore funding costs and would likely resist capital ratios falling into Page 19 capital conservation territory by sharply tightening credit conditions, thus transmitting and amplifying the shock to the rest of the economy. Box 5. Balance Sheet Risks—Housing and Foreign Borrowing The composition of an economy’s assets and liabilities can help to illustrate likely resilience to financial shocks and identify vulnerabilities. It can also highlight the main transmission channels of risk. For Australia the key issue is: Net liability position with the rest of the world. Throughout its history Australia has been a capital importer with an overall net liability position with the rest of the world. This reflects very high private investment relative to a savings rate that is already high by international standards. As a result, the net liability position has ranged from 50 to around 60 percent of GDP since 1994. This could give rise to vulnerabilities were the rest of the world to become much less willing or able to lend to Australia. However, these vulnerabilities are substantially mitigated as most liabilities are Australian dollar denominated whereas the majority of foreign assets are in foreign currency, leaving Australia with a net foreign currency asset position. The banking sector, which has a net foreign currency liability position, is fully hedged. The balance sheet would thus improve rather than worsen in the face of a sudden Australian dollar depreciation. The main transmission channels are: Banks’ use of external funding . Households could be vulnerable in the face of a foreign funding induced shock; especially given a high level of household debt, much of which is at a floating interest rate—higher funding costs would likely be passed on by banks to households which may stretch the capacity to repay though currently households have mortgage buffers (two years debt service). Other financial institutions. The growth of superannuation funds is increasing households’ exposure to changes in equity wealth, and away from other, possibly more stable, forms of saving (e.g. bank deposits). Non financial corporate sector has a net liability position with other sectors and with the external sector but has a small net foreign currency asset position. Large private non financial corporations (global resource sector conglomerates) typically finance themselves abroad and profits are globally distributed. Strong public balance sheet with a small negative net financial worth. The government is a AAA borrower, and borrows in domestic currency. The public sector, RBA and the Future Fund have net foreign currency asset positions. March 2015 (In percent of GDP) Balance Sheet Matrix Holder of Asset (vertical) Issuer of Liability (horizontal) Government Central Bank Banks Government Central Bank Banks Other Financial Institutions Of which Corporates Of which Households External Other Financial Institutions Corporates Households A External Page 20 Two key external risks could trigger or amplify these risks. China. A sharp growth slowdown accompanied by market volatility, and/or fall in property investment, could lead to a further large fall in demand for Australia’s commodity exports Over half of Australia’s exports go to emerging Asia and nearly two thirds are non-rural commodity exports. An unexpectedly sharp fall in iron ore prices could reduce prices below production costs, and further dent incomes and growth. It would also likely dent foreign investment in Australian property and other markets, adversely affecting prices. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions. An orderly QE exit in the United States would likely have a positive impact on Australia by weakening the exchange rate and fostering the recovery of the non-resource sector. However, a bumpy exit, or Euro Area turbulence could raise volatility and wholesale funding costs, and this could be amplified by low market liquidity. This could be passed on to mortgage lending costs, resulting in a real estate downturn. These are partly offset by upside risks. With supportive monetary policy, possibly accompanied by productivity-enhancing reforms, business investment and domestic demand could pick up more than in the baseline, creating virtuous feedback loops with the labor market, household confidence and spending. A sharper decline in the real exchange rate could boost export competitiveness and improve investment prospects. Growth in middle-income Asia could also turn out stronger than expected, adding to demand for Australian services exports. There is policy space to cushion downside risks. Targeted prudential actions could potentially help to engineer a soft landing of the housing market similar to in the early 2000s. Should downside risks materialize, the RBA has scope to ease policy further and low government debt allows more supportive fiscal policy, including through discretionary recurrent stimulus if needed. Foreign exchange intervention could also be employed in times of market dysfunction as it was during the global financial crisis. Significant Risks, Skewed Somewhat to the Downside Likelihood Impact Domestic demand recovers more strongly, supported by policy actions Iron ore prices recover strongly from current lows and raise the terms of trade Middle-income Asia boosts demand for services exports Persistently weak domestic demand Housing market hard landing Structurally weak growth in China – medium term A sharp slowdown in growth in China in 2015/16 – short term Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions. Low Low Low High/ High High High High High Upside Downside Page 21 Spillovers Risks could potentially spillover to neighboring economies. New Zealand is Australia’s most important trade and financial partner, and is vulnerable to a sharp slowdown in Australia’s economic prospects. Australian bank subsidiaries make up 90 percent of New Zealand’s banking system. As subsidiaries rather than branches however, New Zealand banks are ring fenced, do not rely on their parents for funding, and are well capitalized with substantial liquidity buffers, although they would likely suffer indirect reputational effects from financial stress in the parent which could affect access to offshore wholesale funding. Statutory obligations underpin cross-border cooperation between the two countries, strengthening regulatory and supervisory oversight. With a common labor market, net migration between the two countries is also important—and as Australia has slowed, net migration to New Zealand has turned positive. Trade and financial linkages would also result in spillovers to the Pacific Island Countries (PICs). Spillover channels vary across the PICs. Australia accounts, on average, for 20 percent of PICs’ trade, while tourist arrivals from Australia account for about 50 percent of total arrivals in Fiji and Vanuatu. Remittances from Australia represent around 35 percent of the total in Fiji, Samoa, and Vanuatu. Financial linkages are also important with the PICs’ banking sector dominated by Australian banks. Australia is also by far the largest aid donor—and its aid budget has been reduced—as well as the largest foreign investor. Authorities’ Views Economic conditions were in place to generate a gradual strengthening of growth supported by highly accommodative monetary policy settings . The economy was considered to have performed solidly in the context of an unprecedented fall in the terms of trade and the associated waning of the resources investment boom. The recent decline in the exchange rate would help the transition to stronger and more balanced growth although a further depreciation would assist. Weak income growth was weighing on domestic demand, although moderate wages growth was also supporting employment and the economy’s growth transition. The timing of the anticipated strengthening of growth in the non-mining economy was uncertain and the authorities viewed the possibility of a sharper than expected slowdown in China as the main external risk, while noting that the floating exchange rate plays a key role in cushioning the economy against such shocks. Housing prices were rising but the risks should not be overstated. Accommodative monetary policy had supported strong demand for housing, raising house prices and increasing dwelling construction, contributing to the economy’s transition to broader-based growth. Rapid house price growth was concentrated in Sydney and only limited market segments of Melbourne, but there was no evidence of widespread oversupply and most mortgage holders had accumulated sizeable repayment buffers. The coordinated policy actions announced by APRA in December 2014 were taking effect (see paragraph 50). There remained policy space to respond to risks that materialize—and it would be used actively if needed to contain the likelihood of an adverse event. Page 22