“We are in our 24th consecutive year of economic growth. We cannot take for granted another decade Context of economic growth, we have to earn it.” Treasurer Hockey, December 2014 The drivers of growth—1990s structural reforms and the mining investment boom— have now waned. Maintaining the same growth rate and rise in incomes will be challenging. While population growth will continue to support output growth, labor force participation is likely to decline The participation rate has fallen back from a peak in 2010 to 64.7 percent in 2014-Q4 and is expected to decline slightly over the medium term as aging pressures emerge. Labor participation has declined Labor Force Participation Rate Productivity has lost ground. Australia, like other economies, benefited in the 1990s from the global impact of technological progress in information and communications technology and the effect of Australia’s structural reforms came through. Though better than the OECD average, growth in output per hour has slowed since the mid 2000s and a productivity gap has opened up against best- performing peers. 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Source: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Australia Canada USA UK Page 26 Some lost ground on productivity Trend growth in GDP per hour worked (%) Australia USA AUS level (2000 = 100; RHS) US level (2000 = 100; RHS) Sources: OECD Productivity Database, and staff calculations. With a slowdown in TFP (Contribution to growth, pps) Mining Non-mining Aggregate Sources: ABS 16-Market Sector Gross Value Added (GVA) based MFP and GVA data; and IMF staff calculations. Contributions to GVA-based MFP growth are calculated by weighting sector MFP growth by share in gross value added. Slower productivity growth partly reflects the long investment lags for mining Since the early 2000s, mining investment, the impact of drought on agriculture and utilities, and high profits in mining which led to the mining of marginal deposits, resulted in a slowdown in total factor productivity growth. Productivity in the mining sector is rising as exports come on stream. But this is likely insufficient to maintain per capita income growth—productivity growth in other sectors will need to rise (Box 6). Box 6. Income Growth Likely to Slow Australia’s potential growth is likely to be lower than in the past. Based on a standard production function framework, potential growth is estimated to slow to 2.8 percent over 2016-17, further declining to 2.6 percent over 2018-2020, driven by moderate input and slowing TFP growth (see Selected Issues Paper “Sustaining Income Growth in Australia” for details). This is slower than the estimated historical average of around 3.2 percent over 1990-2014. As a result, income growth will be weaker. Gross domestic income growth (adjusting for terms of trade movements) is projected to slow from an average of 3.5 percent over 1990-2014 to 2.8 percent in the medium term. Raising gross domestic income growth to its historical average would require TFP growth between 1½ - 1¾ percent on average, nearly 80 percent more than the baseline projection Disposable income growth will weaken significantly (Real net national disposable income per capita growth; average) The distance from the efficiency frontier shows scope to improve efficiency and boost TFP. For example, bridging half the TFP gap between U.S. and Australian TFP levels across sectors over 10-15 years would imply potential growth in the 3-3¼ percent range. Recent IMF research also shows that improved cross-sector allocation of inputs in advanced economies could boost TFP levels on average by 7-9 percent assuming optimal adjustment over 10 years. Source: ABS data; and Staff calculations. Staff Views To sustain growth at the rates of the past, TFP growth needs to accelerate. It would need to reach about 1½ percent per year (almost double staff’s baseline projections) to maintain Page 27 GDP and per capita income growth in line with historical trends over the medium term. This requires an ambitious reform agenda. AUS AUS Scope to raise TFP in some sectors Comparative TFP Levels by Sector (Normalized; 100 - frontier) USA GBR NLD GER SWE Low hanging fruit already harvested. Raising TFP will not be easy as Australia has already benefited from sizeable productivity improvements following the 1980-early 2000s reforms. While there are no clear game changers, the distribution sector, covering both transport and domestic trade, suggests most scope for catching up to the global TFP frontier. The Competition Policy Review recommended many reforms to strengthen competition and improve efficiency, including in human services and the retail sector. Improving infrastructure investment would relieve bottlenecks, as would reducing housing supply constraints (which critically require more responsive planning and zoning). The recent trade agreements should also help. Sources: IMF SDN/15/03; from EU KLEMS, GGDC Productivity Level database. B C F C P H C V P G C F C C C V B Median AUS USA C Frontier country Though politically challenging, fiscal reforms can help raise potential growth substantially and generate revenue. A recent IMF study estimated the per capita growth impact of previous fiscal reform episodes could be around ¾ percentage points on average, though it is difficult to disentangle the effects of fiscal from other types of reform initiated at the same time. The Tax and Federation Reviews provide the opportunity to craft a package to boost labor supply and investment which should include the following interconnected elements: Shifting toward more efficient and simple taxes. Key goals would be to prevent a large share Australia has low VAT revenue of individual taxpayers from facing higher tax rates through unchecked bracket creep (which would affect those on lower and middle incomes most); reduce the corporate tax rate to international levels; and eliminate stamp duties and minor taxes. This would be paid for by broadening the base of the goods and services tax (GST)— receipts from which are low by international standards—and possibly raising the rate, while at least fully compensating those on lower incomes through lower income taxes and higher transfers, as well as increased reliance on a broad-based real- estate tax and excises. Sources: OECD, Deloitte. GST/VAT revenue (% GDP) Avg advanced OECD Avg OECD Percent AUS GBR NZL GST/VAT standard tax rate Reducing incentives for potentially excessive financial investment in housing. As the Financial System Inquiry notes, the concessional treatment of capital gains tax in real estate and the exemption of owner-occupied housing for the calculation of the Age Pension incentivizes overinvestment in housing and negative gearing, significantly pushing up demand and real estate prices. This is reinforced by the deductibility of interest payments and maintenance expenses for rental properties from taxable income from other sources (though rental income is taxed). Reducing the concessional treatment of capital gains and the deductibility of housing Page 28 investment losses from other taxable income (which facilitates negative gearing), and capping the exemption of owner-occupied housing for the calculation of the Age Pension would likely improve housing affordability and financial stability. Ensuring fairness. Australia’s system of Investor Housing Is Boosting House Prices Housing investor loans (% of total credit outstanding) superannuation savings incentivizes retirement saving where contributions and earnings are taxed, but at concessional rates, and pension payouts are tax-free. The system is complex and disproportionately benefits higher-income earners. Aligning tax rates on contributions closer to personal income tax rates would reduce concessions for higher earners and enhance revenue and could improve housing affordability and financial stability. Adjusting pension policies in particular would need careful calibration and phasing. Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 House price index (Sydney; RHS) Sources: APRA, RBA, IMF estimates. Adjusting federal-fiscal relations. Federal-state fiscal relations will likely need to be adjusted to facilitate the tax reform. There are many options—one could be for states to receive higher GST revenue and autonomy in return for greater spending responsibilities. This could also help increase spending efficiency. More generally, greater coordination of the fiscal policy stance between the Commonwealth and States could facilitate macroeconomic management. Authorities’ Views Achieving a return to strong nominal income growth would require continued focus on productivity enhancing reforms. The Treasury projected potential growth at close to 3¼ percent a year, supported by strong population growth, a rising participation rate, and an assumption that labor productivity growth in line with historical experience. Total factor productivity growth was likely to pick up now that the export phase of the mining boom had been reached. However ongoing effort to deliver productivity enhancing reforms would be required to achieve the growth rates in national income achieved in the past. The comprehensive reforms of the 1980s-early 2000s made a major contribution to Australia’s past productivity performance and, the productivity gap in some sectors relative to the global frontier offered scope for catch up. Over the longer term, external demand for goods and services from a rising middle class in Asia would help boost potential growth. Recently concluded free trade agreements with China, Japan and Korea would help as well. Unlike other economies, where multifactor productivity growth was inhibited following financial system dislocation, this was not the case for Australia. Nonetheless, declines in global productivity growth would have implications for Australia, further highlighting the importance of domestic reform efforts to sustain growth in living standards. The authorities thought that competition, tax, workplace relations and federal relations reforms could play an important role in raising economic efficiency. There were review processes currently underway examining these issues. Any changes to the tax and Page 29 superannuation system would also need to have regard to Australia’s already highly-progressive tax and welfare arrangements and ensure that they take account of investment decisions people have already made in good faith on the basis of existing policy.