Raising the economy’s potential would require sustained and coordinated efforts. Currently, staff estimates the potential growth rate at just above 1 percent, limited mainly by low TFP growth. Higher potential output––which would manifest itself in a higher potential and actual growth rate for a number of years––would help absorb the rising labor force, ensure a continuing rise in living Potential Growth Decomposition (Percent) Capital Human capital Labor TFP Potential growth Sources: Nationalauthorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 12 standards, and ease the fiscal burden of demographic change. However, with Austria near the best practice in many structural policies, there are no easy gains to be made from a single policy measure. Nonetheless, a package of structural and fiscal policies can have an appreciable impact on potential output––some 3 percent within ten years and up to 5 percent in the long run (chart). The level of potential GDP would rise permanently … … with the growth rate rising above the baseline for a Effects of Reform on Potential GDP and Growth Rate number of years. Structural reforms need to concentrate on policies to strengthen innovation and competition. Austria performs well in many structural indicators of economic governance. But there is scope to lower barriers to entrepreneurship (regulations that hinder entry and competition in professional services, as well as regulations that impose high administrative burdens on companies, including start-ups) and barriers to investment in the network sectors. Improving Austria’s product market regulation score by some 20 percent through reforms in these areas could boost potential output by about 1.5 percent in the medium term (Figure 6). In this regard, the authorities’ start-up promotion package announced earlier this year—providing administrative and financial aid—is a step in the right direction, as is the increased support for research and development (R&D) in 2016. Higher public investment can enhance productivity. While Austria’s infrastructure is of high quality, investment is low: in 2015, gross budget investment (including capital transfers) stood at only 3.7 percent of GDP, resulting in net investment below ½ percent of GDP. Moreover, Austria has fallen back in the World Economic Forum’s global ranking of infrastructure quality between 2009/10 and 2016/17. An increase in public investment, focusing on infrastructure bottlenecks, would raise the productivity See the accompanying Selected Issues Paper Structural and Fiscal Measures to Increase Potential Output in Austria However, in the World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index, Austria’s ranking in the infrastructure sub-index has improved over the same period. GDP Growth (Percent) Baseline Tax rebalancing Public investment Structural reforms Source: IMF staff estimates. OverallRoadsRailAir Quality of Infrastructure Index 2009/10 Index 2016/17 Rank 2009/10 (RHS) Rank 2016/17 (RHS) Source: World Economic Forum. Page 13 of private sector investment. Staff’s model simulation indicates that increasing public investment by ½ percent of GDP (which would bring it back to the levels of 2010–11), compensated by reform-driven cuts in government consumption, could raise GDP by about 1 percent in the medium term and up to 2 percent in the long term. Shifting the tax mix would also raise potential output and employment. Despite recent tax relief, Austria’s high labor tax wedge remains a drag on employment creation. Shifting the burden of taxation away from labor and toward property, pollution, and consumption (by improving VAT efficiency) would reduce economic distortions, improve resource allocation, and raise output. If low-income households are adversely affected by such a tax shift, they would need to be protected through the social assistance system by, e.g., raising the eligibility thresholds for means-tested social benefits and the associated amounts. A model simulation suggests that if one percent of GDP in income taxes is replaced by a combination of increased consumption and property taxes, potential GDP would rise by about ½ percent over the medium term. Austria has a high tax wedge … … though the 2016 reform has reduced it somewhat Taxation of Wages and Personal Income Higher labor force participation would raise output and ease pressures on social security funds. Overall, labor force participation (LFP) of both men and women is close to the OECD advanced economies (AE) average. However, in the age group of 55–64 it is significantly lower, and also lower than the Nordics––the leaders in LFP (Box 1). While low LFP and part-time work may very well reflect individual and societal preferences, they strain social security systems due to both lower contributions and higher demand for basic income support from pensioners with too low accumulated pension rights. LFP among the elderly is already on the rise and is likely to rise further in the long term as already legislated reforms to raise the pension age for women gradually take effect after 2024. However, bringing forward this increase, further tightening early retirement options, and indexing the pension age to life expectancy would generate further and faster savings. Measures to make full-time work more attractive for women (including through an extension of kindergarten and school hours where needed) should raise hours worked (Box 1). The planned introduction of incentives to work beyond the official pension age would help as well. Marginal Tax and Tax Wedge, 2015 1/ (Percent) AustriaOECD AE avg.Average tax wedgeMarginal income tax rateof principal earner Source: OECD. Euro Area avg. 1/ Two-earner married couple, one at 100% of average earningsand the other at 33 %, 2 children. Marginal Income Tax Rates (Percent) Pre-2016 Since 2016 Source: www.finanz-blog.at. Annual income (1,000 euros) Page 14 Authorities’ views The authorities agreed on the need to raise potential output. They outlined measures already implemented to this effect, but also pointed to economic, social, and political limitations on reforms. With regard to structural reforms , they pointed to initiatives already undertaken to reduce financial and administrative burdens on start-ups, as well as increase support for R&D. They agreed that deregulation of professional services and other heavily regulated professions could strengthen competition, but pointed out that some regulations were needed to ensure high quality standards. Staff agreed that quality and consumer protection should not be compromised and pointed to the experience of some Nordic countries and Switzerland that achieve high penetration and quality in professional services with less regulation. The authorities agreed that public investment was important to support the economy. They were generally satisfied with Austria’s quality of public infrastructure, and thought that public investment should focus on R&D, digitalization, and education. Some were skeptical about the productivity-raising effect of certain infrastructure projects. Staff agreed that infrastructure projects need to be carefully designed and prioritized to achieve maximum economic effect, With regard to the tax mix , while seeing the merit of further reduction in social security contributions, the authorities thought that finding offsetting tax measures would be politically difficult. They would prefer instead to rely on improved tax administration, where measures put in place in the course of 2016 should bear fruit in 2017, and on expenditure savings in the medium term. Staff encouraged the authorities to persevere in their efforts. On measures to raise labor force participation , the authorities agreed that improvements in provision of childcare, in particular the extension of kindergarten and school hours, would help. In this regard, they pointed to efforts underway to lengthen school hours, as well as to their recently legislated education/training guarantee for youth up to the age of 21. On pension system measures, views were split, with some satisfied with the effects of recently legislated reforms while others arguing for further measures before population ageing raised costs. Regarding integration of accepted asylum seekers, the authorities pointed to programs for language training and identification and recognition of skills, but noted that the asylum seekers’ uneven skills slowed them in finding employment. See https://www.oecd.org/eco/reform/Sector-regulation-indicators.xlsx. Page 15 Box 1. Growth and Female Labor Force Participation Raising female LFP can help cushion the impact of demographic change. Improving opportunities for full-time work for women and promoting employment for the elderly—both men and women—could have a significant effect on the labor supply. Background (Box Figure 1): The increase in employment over the past 20 years has been entirely in part-time employment, and mostly by women who have higher incidence of part-time work than in other OECD AEs. Concomitantly, the average number of hours worked has declined significantly. Causes: The relatively high incidence of part-time work by women may be due to personal or societal preferences (including caregiving for children or old people, which is cited by 38 percent of women as the main reason for working part-time). Limited availability of childcare also likely plays a role, since not all facilities (especially outside cities) offer full-time care. On the other hand, the share of children in childcare has increased significantly since 1995, and attendance is free or subsidized. The rapid increase in part-time work by men suggests that preferences in a rich society may shift toward a higher valuation of free time. With regard to low labor force participation of elderly workers, reasons include the relatively low retirement age for women (60 years, set to rise to 65 from 2024 to 2033), as well as options for early retirement for workers doing arduous work. Impact: A high incidence of part-time work leads to lower pensions in an insurance-based system such as Austria’s. However, old-age poverty in Austria is overall low, supported by a means-tested minimum income for pensioners. Nonetheless, while the impact of part-time work on individuals is mitigated by the social security system, the cost in terms of public spending (and foregone social security contributions) can be significant. Indeed, Austria’s public expenditure on pensions is among the highest in the OECD. Lastly, the level of potential output is lower than if more part-time workers worked full time. Policy measures: Reforms to the pension system have already been legislated (including an increase in the retirement age for women, and a tightening of eligibility for early retirement). Nonetheless, further reforms (though not gender-specific) will be required to contain rising pension costs. With regard to the high incidence of female part-time work, an increase in child care availability or long term care for the elderly could widen women’s choices and encourage some to work full time. Simulation: If policy measures were to lead to a decline in female part-time work to a level in line with other OECD AEs (with male part-time work unchanged) and a corresponding increase in full-time employment, full-time equivalent employment in Austria would rise by 2.9 percent, ceteris paribus An increase in overall LFP in the 55–64 age group to the OECD AE average (and employment of the additional workers) would increase employment by a further 3.5 percent. Only 11 percent of women and 16 percent of men work part-time involuntarily, well below the average of OECD AEs. However, e.g., in Vienna, childcare facilities are open 11 hours or longer a day. The risk of poverty is, though, somewhat higher for women over 65 than for men (15 percent vs. 11 percent). Assuming that two part-time employees work as much as one full-time employee. il il Page 16 Box 1. Growth and Female Labor Force Participation (concluded) Female labor supply has increased … … and LFP is overall in line with AE peers … … but low for elderly workers, both men and women. … which is disproportionately carried out by women … The rise in employment has been exclusively due to a rise in part-time work … … and has contributed to a decline in average hours worked. pp j W cc ll illi ll ll W cc Hours Worked (Avg. annual; thousands) Adv. OECD Nordics Austria Source: OECD. Page 17