Domestic deposits Equity Long-term debt Australia: Banks' Funding 1/ (Domestic books; in share of total) Background. Australia’s banking sector has strengthened in the aftermath of the global crisis. Asset quality remains good, the ratio of non-performing loans to total assets is low and continues to decline from its peak, and return- on-assets is in line with the pre-crisis average. Capital adequacy has improved and is well above the Basel III capital requirements; APRA had its framework in place in January 2013. Banks have shifted toward more stable funding sources, as strong deposit growth has outpaced moderate credit growth—reliance on offshore wholesale funding has been reduced and is of longer maturity, and deposits now meet over half of banks’ funding requirements and the share of short-term debt has fallen below 20 percent (text figure). This has reflected a post-crisis change in banks’ funding strategies and an increase in the deposit base related to the recent jump in the household savings rate. Banks’ external liabilities remain fully hedged to exchange rate and maturity risk. 1/ Adjusted for movements in foreign exchange rates. 2/ Includes deposits and intragroup funding from non-residents. Sources: APRA; RBA; and Standard & Poor's 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Securitisation Short-term debt 2/ FSAP findings. The IMF’s 2012 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) found Australia’s financial system to be sound and well managed. Stress test scenarios suggest the financial system is resilient to a range of solvency shocks, although a severe shock would make major inroads into these banks’ capital buffers requiring recapitalization efforts, and central bank support would be needed in the event of a liquidity shock. Recognizing this latter risk, APRA will be introducing Basel III liquidity standards in 2015 ahead of the Basel committee’s deadline. Progress is being made on many of the recommendations of the FSAP to further bolster financial system stability, including higher loss absorbency for systemically important banks, stress testing, and intensifying the supervision of liquidity (see Text Table, page 18). The government announced that there would be a wide-ranging Financial Sector Inquiry which is aimed at fostering an efficient, competitive and flexible financial system. It will report in November 2014 and is likely to cover some aspects of the FSAP recommendations Key macro-financial risks. The four major banks are systemic with broadly similar business models and, though reduced, reliance on wholesale funding is still high and continues to pose some rollover risks. Residential mortgages account for a large part of banks’ assets, a sector that is vulnerable to price fluctuations and household leverage is still high. These are longstanding structural issues that will remain sources of risk over the medium term. In a tail event of a sharp The FSAP stress scenario assumed a severe recession accompanied by a decline in house prices of 35 percent, a decline in commercial property prices of 40 percent, and a decline in equity prices of up to 47 percent. Cuts in interest rates to a floor of 1 percent help to mitigate the effects on activity. Page 13 increase in global financial market volatility, banks’ wholesale funding costs would rise and would likely be passed on to corporate and households. While monetary policy could still respond, its scope would be reduced. In these circumstances fiscal policy may need to provide support. Given Australia’s modest public debt, there is space to respond to a significant shock (see annex 5). Mortgage market developments Household credit growth has remained moderate, rising broadly in line with incomes, with the recent pick up in lending concentrated in investor loans (Annex 2, paragraph 7). The increasing popularity of property investment among self-managed superannuation funds, although still a small segment of the mortgage market, has further stimulated demand for investor loans which, for tax purposes, are typically interest-only loans. This helps to explain why the proportion of mortgage approvals that are interest-only increased by about 2½ percentage points over the past year to nearly 40 percent. Loans to investors are around a third of total housing mortgages, and the proportion of high loan-to-value mortgage approvals is also around one third. Overall, households are currently using the low interest environment to pay down principal and build up substantial mortgage buffers. Nonetheless, APRA and RBA recently cautioned banks about need to maintain tight lending standards. Australia: Private Sector Credit Growth (Annual percentage change) Owner-occupier housing Investor housing 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 Source: Reserve Bank of Australia. Australia: Mortgage Repayment Buffers 1/ Share of housing loans (lhs) Number of months (rhs) 1/ Data are backcast before December 2010 to adjust for a reporting change by one bank. Source: RBA. Regulatory and supervisory framework. The authorities’ framework seeks to address these financial sector vulnerabilities (Annex 2, paragraphs 11 and 12). Conservative risk weights give Australian banks higher quality capital than most of their advanced country peers. In addition there are features of the Australian regulatory, supervisory, and legal approach to property lending that differ from other advanced economies which would help to limit the impact of a sharp decline in house prices on the financial system. Higher household savings rates and an increase in principal prepayments have allowed households to build large mortgage buffers (text figure). The full recourse nature of lending provides an incentive for continued repayment and lending standards are tightly enforced with a strong regulatory focus on the borrowers’ ability to service their loans. A banking system dominated by only four banks and close cooperation between the RBA and APRA enables swift communication and enhances the effectiveness of prudential tools should risks emerge. Overall, Australia’s regulatory and supervisory framework is likely to have contributed to the low level of non-performing mortgage loans sustained over the past decade. Page 14 Authorities’ views. The authorities emphasized that should an acceleration in housing price inflation become a risk, their intensive supervisory approach gives them the tools to respond in a more targeted and less distortionary manner than through a more formal macroprudential policy framework. In particular, APRA's supervision involves continuous monitoring and oversight of regulated entities' behavior to ensure that they comply with prudential standards, are in a sound financial condition, and maintain effective governance and risk management systems. APRA follows a proactive and risk-based approach under which regulated entities that pose greater risks receive more intensive supervision. APRA generally prefers to adopt a suasion approach when it identifies weaknesses in lending standards, with communication with management and boards central to the approach. However, APRA can and does also impose prudential capital requirements beyond the minimum requirements of the Basel framework for individual authorized deposit taking institutions with higher risk profiles. The authorities also pointed to a wide range of legal powers that enable direct action where there are threats to financial stability. Coordination between authorities is conducted through the Council of Financial Regulators which includes the Treasury and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) as well as APRA and the RBA. The authorities highlighted this framework’s success in helping cool the housing market following the large run up in house prices in the early 2000s (Annex 2, paragraph 10).