Setting . The Australian economy has performed well relative to many other advanced economies since the global financial crisis. However, a transition phase has now been reached as the terms-of-trade-driven mining investment boom of the past decade has peaked and the economy is moving to the production and export phase. Mining-related investment which accounted for almost half of GDP growth in the past couple of years is expected to drop sharply in the near term (text figure and Annex 4), and a recovery in non-mining investment will be needed to underpin demand and return the economy’s growth rate to trend. Real economy developments. Annual growth has slowed to 2¼ percent in the third quarter of 2013, below the trend growth of around 3 percent. In addition to the slowdown of investment in new mining projects, non-mining investment has been weighed down by excess capacity and an overvalued exchange rate (Box 2, Figure 1). In line with relatively weak consumer sentiment, consumption growth has been modest and the household savings rate has remained above 10 percent, leaving the household debt-to-income ratio stable at around 150 percent. On the plus side mining exports, mainly to China, are growing as new capacity comes on stream and in recent months housing market activity has begun to pick up with building approvals, transactions, and prices increasing (paragraph 8 and Annex 2). Nevertheless labor market conditions have remained soft and the unemployment rate has risen gradually from a trough of 5 percent in mid- 2011, in part reflecting the mining sector moving to the less labor-intensive production phase. Australia: Mining Investment Source: ABS; ANZ; and IMF staff calculations. Australia: Wage Inflation (Annual percentage change) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Source: ABS. Inflation. Annual inflation slowed to 2¼ percent in the third quarter, close to the middle of the Reserve Bank of Australia’s (RBA) target band. With the weakening of overall labor market conditions wage inflation has slowed to 2¾ percent, the lowest rate since 2000 (text figure) Monetary policy . In response to weakening demand the RBA has eased the policy rate by 225 basis points since November 2011 to 2½ percent, with the most recent cut in August 2013 (Figures 3 and 4). This has begun to support interest-sensitive spending and asset values. Market lending rates, key indicators of the overall monetary policy stance, are now well below their historical averages. Overall credit growth however has remained relatively subdued. Projections Page 6 Fiscal policy. The budget deficit was reduced from 3 percent of GDP to 1½ percent in 2012/13. The previous government’s goal of returning the budget to surplus last year was held back by slower-than-projected output growth and weaker commodity prices. Revenue fell short of projections as the lower terms of trade together with the persistently strong Australian dollar reduced nominal GDP and dented corporate profitability, with company tax revenue coming in around ½ percent of GDP lower than expected. Capital gains and resource rent taxes were also weak. Spending was somewhat higher than anticipated, exceeding plans by 1¼ percent of GDP Recent market and financial sector developments. Aside from some welcome depreciation of the dollar, Australian markets were little affected by the market turbulence following the announcement of prospective Fed tapering in May 2013. The banking system has been performing well, with profitability remaining strong and balance sheets continuing to strengthen (paragraph 17).