The authorities emphasized that the transition to non-mining-based growth after the boom was well advanced. They acknowledged that some elements of the “new mediocre” were present, including weak private business investment. But they saw these as a reflection of the drawn out adjustment of the economy to the decline in the terms of trade and the large fall in mining investment rather than a cause. While many of the new jobs were part-time ones, this partly reflected preferences in the labor force. The rise in underemployment as well as in long-term and youth unemployment had remained small in historical comparison, and growth in output had remained close to trend. And while trend growth was lower, the decline was small, about a quarter of a percentage point, partly reflecting lower population growth, not lower capital intensity or productivity growth. Robust broad-based growth was expected to continue. The authorities noted that the unexpected decline in GDP in the September quarter of 2016 was partly a result of falling mining investment and a series of one-off factors including weather-related falls in non-residential Page 16 construction and dwelling investment. Looking forward, economic growth would be supported by household consumption; another wave of LNG capacity was expected to ramp up, in 2017 as well as in 2018; public investment growth would rise as States’ infrastructure spending was budgeted to increase further; residential dwelling investment growth, while moderating, would remain strong in the near term; and private business investment would no longer detract from growth in 2018 as the drag from mining investment would ease and non-mining investment would rise moderately. GDP growth would strengthen to around trend rates. The authorities indicated that the economy would thus return to full employment gradually, with underemployment declining and inflation moving back into the target range. While the balance of risks had improved, it remained tilted to the downside, with the possibility of a hard landing in China being a key medium-term concern. The authorities noted that risks associated with high and rising household leverage had diminished. Tighter bank lending standards, encouraged by prudential measures, had led to slower mortgage credit growth, with improved risks profiles for new loans, and a moderation in housing price growth. Risks related to short-term demand-supply mismatches in housing markets were localized. There were some risks related to lending to real estate developers but those were being closely monitored. Households across all income brackets continue to accumulate deposits in offset accounts, implying that effective household debt was lower, and did not use mortgage borrowing to finance consumption. More resilient bank balance sheets were another factor contributing to diminished housing risks.