Tax cuts generated a fiscal stimulus in 2016. With a structural surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP (and a headline deficit of 1 percent), the fiscal outturn in 2015 was better than anticipated, in part due to early dividend payments ahead of an increase in capital gains taxation in 2016. Public debt stood at 85½ percent of GDP, and financing costs have declined further on the back of the ECB’s quantitative easing policies. However, in 2016, the fiscal deficit is estimated to have widened to 1.4 percent of GDP (0.8 percent of GDP in structural terms), as income tax cuts took effect, compensating tax administration measures were implemented only gradually, capital gains tax revenue fell, and refugee-related spending increased. Nonetheless, staff estimates that public debt declined to below 84 percent of GDP. Fiscal policy is set to gradually return the structural deficit to ½ percent of GDP, Austria’s medium-term objective (MTO), by 2020 and reduce public debt. The authorities project that interest savings and restraint in public consumption would bring expenditure down by some 1¼ percentage points of GDP by 2020, more than enough to offset the ageing-driven rise in social benefits of ¼ percent of GDP (Table 2). This, as well as the positive effects of the HETA debt restructuring deal would bring gross public debt to some 71 percent of GDP by 2022, 13 percentage points down from its 2016 level (Annex III). In the longer run, however, demography-related fiscal strains are emerging. Without additional measures, strong pressures arising from an increase in the share of pensioners in the population and higher healthcare and long-term care costs would drive up spending by some 3 percentage points of GDP, widen the budget deficit accordingly, and push public debt above 100 percent of GDP by 2060 (text chart). Moreover, both the medium term and the long term projections are subject to downside risks. In the medium term, the fiscal restraint envisaged for the wage bill and spending on goods and services, while certainly feasible, may run into political or implementation constraints, as the projected 2018–22 levels (relative to GDP) are notably below the averages for the last five years. In the long run, slower growth, lower labor force participation, or higher costs of social policies could jeopardize fiscal consolidation and lead to debt levels even significantly higher than in the baseline. In the 2015 Article IV consultation, staff projected debt to exceed 130 percent of GDP by 2060 on unchanged policies. The reduction to just above 100 percent of GDP in this round reflects: (i) the authorities’ updated long-term demographic projections, reflecting recent trends in the labor force; (ii) the debt agreement with the creditors of HETA, the wind-down unit of the former Hypo Alpe Adria bank (see Annex II), (iii) updated interest rate and inflation projections, reflecting the latest WEO projections, and (iv) a downwardly revised 2015 debt outcome. These developments have also led to improved debt sustainability in 2017–22 (Annex II). j Page 18 Maintaining debt on a steady downward path is important. The authorities’ envisaged path toward a structural fiscal balance target of -0.5 percent of GDP strikes the right balance between reducing public debt and supporting the economy. Specifically, the essentially neutral fiscal stance in 2017 is appropriate in view of the still slightly negative output gap (Table 1). So is their plan to maintain this structural balance target until debt falls below 60 percent of GDP and risks to long-term sustainability of public finances are reduced, and relax it to -1 percent thereafter in line with EU rules. By rebuilding fiscal buffers, such a policy would: (i) increase the space for countercyclical fiscal response to growth shocks; (ii) allow absorbing potential materialization of contingent liabilities stemming from Austria’s large banking sector and sizable export guarantees, (iii) help Austria regain its AAA rating, and thus keep borrowing costs low in the long term, and (iv) prevent a deterioration in Austria’s external position. Efficiency-enhancing structural fiscal reforms would open up fiscal space. In the 2015 Article IV consultation report (Country Report No. 16/50), staff identified a number of areas in which significant savings in public expenditure could be realized while maintaining the quality of public service delivery. The main areas are the health and, to a lesser extent, education systems, which together comprise around one quarter of total public spending, as well as spending on subsidies. Moreover, pension system measures (see ¶13) could reduce demographic spending pressures in the long term. Combined, the expenditure savings in all these areas could amount to 2½–3 percent of GDP over the medium to long run. Realizing these potential savings would also insure against risks to the medium-term outlook as noted above. Some of these reforms would require adjustments of fiscal relations between the federal and subnational governments with the aim of improving subnational entities’ incentives to enhance the efficiency of service delivery (Box 2). The fiscal space thus created is significant. Implementation of such fiscal reforms will allow meeting the authorities’ targeted structural balance over the long term and thereby further reducing debt—rather than letting it rise again—and financing additional infrastructure investment of at least ½ percentage points of GDP as recommended in ¶10. Any remaining fiscal room for maneuver once the reforms are fully implemented could then be used for additional growth- and employment-enhancing measures, such as more infrastructure investment or labor tax cuts. This approach would re-create fiscal buffers against possible future shocks, as well as help lay the groundwork for higher growth. With this deficit path, gross public debt would fall below 60 percent of GDP by 2029 and stabilize around 43 percent of GDP in the long run. A reduction in health expenditure would also contribute to maintaining an external position broadly in line with fundamentals (¶4). Comprehensive Reform Scenario (Percent of GDP) Structural balance (LHS) Additional fiscal room for maneuver (LHS) 1/ Public debt (RHS) Source:IMF staff projections.1/ After achieving targeted structural balance and boosting public investment by 0.5% of GDP (as discussed in ¶10). Page 19 Authorities’ views The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to Austria’s MTO. They acknowledged longer-term fiscal pressures, as well as risks surrounding the projections, and agreed on the need for policy measures to maintain the MTO over the longer run. They also thought that healthcare, education, and subsidies offered opportunities for savings, but emphasized that quality standards needed to be maintained or improved, in particular in education. They also noted that, while a reform of fiscal federalism was desirable, political difficulties were significant, in part due to trade-offs between efficiency, autonomy and equity.