Context Australia’s transition to non-mining-based growth has advanced significantly with monetary policy support but the process is not completed. The lack of significant price and wage pressures suggests that some economic slack is still present, which, if prolonged in what has already been a drawn-out adjustment process, risks hurting medium-term supply potential. The RBA cut the policy rate promptly in response to the unexpected downshift in the expected inflation path in early 2016. The easing also helped to realign the policy rate with interest rates elsewhere, which had declined in some other major advanced economies through September 2016. Staff background work suggests that the equilibrium real interest rate has declined from about 3 percent in the early 1990s to close to 1 percent in the second quarter of 2016 compared to an actual real rate of 0.2 percent, although there is substantial uncertainty around such Page 17 estimates. Absent monetary easing, upward pressure on the Australian dollar would likely have been stronger, reinforcing the disinflationary impulse experienced early in the year. Australia has substantial fiscal space. Standard metrics suggest that Australia has fiscal space under both the baseline and economic stress scenarios (Annex VI—External and Fiscal Debt Sustainability Analysis). For example, sovereign spreads over U.S. bonds have been relatively moderate in the past 12 months (at most 64 basis points); gross debt is still low at 40 percent of GDP compared with other major advanced economies. The federal government has recently aimed for substantial near-term fiscal consolidation but budget targets have not been met because of weaker nominal income. Automatic stabilizers have been allowed to operate in response to weaker growth and lower inflation, and the fiscal stance in 2016 is estimated to have been broadly neutral. Against this backdrop, concerns about recent public debt increases and what they mean for Australia’s top- ranked sovereign debt rating have dominated fiscal policy discussions. In the FY2016/17 budget, the government has projected a return to fiscal balance by FY2020/21. It has also renewed its commitment to a federal government surplus of 1 percent of GDP over the business cycle as a medium-term fiscal anchor, which would imply a cumulative adjustment of up to 3.4 percent of GDP. The Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook 2016-17 (MYEFO), released on December 19, 2016 foresees a cumulative adjustment of the fiscal balance of 2.1 percent of GDP by end of FY2019/20, as revenues strengthen in line with the economy, primarily related to stronger personal income tax collection because of bracket creep. Staff Views The RBA’s monetary policy stance should remain accommodative until the return of inflation to the mid-point of the target range is highly secured. Australia has not experienced the persistent low inflation problem of other advanced economies, and medium-term inflation expectations, while lower, have generally remained within the target range. But with economic slack expected to decline only gradually and taking into account downside risks, policy decisions should remain predicated on the possibility that the return of inflation back to target may take longer, consistent with recent international experience. And in current circumstances, there are asymmetric costs to inflation risks, given policy objectives. The risk of inflation rising faster than expected is less costly than risks of inflation being lower. Monetary policy can likely respond more effectively to positive surprises for some time, given that from current policy settings, policy rates may rapidly reach the effective lower bound if negative surprises reflect large shocks to demand. The RBA could consider enhancing its policy communication given the inflation outlook and the risk of hitting the effective lower bound under a downside scenario. While increases of longer-term interest rates in advanced economies since October are suggestive of some See Annex VII for a summary of the forthcoming selected issues paper by Helbling, Kamenik, Karam, Laxton, Wang, and Yao, 2016, “Inflation Targeting in Australia: Performance, Challenges and Strategy Going Forward.” Page 18 increase in underlying equilibrium interest rates, policy rates in Australia may well stay low for some time. Under these conditions, risks of low inflation becoming entrenched could be reduced through clear guidance by the RBA on the horizon over which inflation is expected to return to the mid-point of the target range and on the likely policy measures should downside risks materialize. To lay the foundation, the RBA could consider lengthening the forecast horizon in its Statements on Monetary Policy . More clarity on the policy rate path, possibly through publication of the RBA’s projected policy rate path, could also enhance the RBA’s communication with markets and price setters. The government should use its fiscal space for a gradual fiscal consolidation and structural fiscal reform. The conditions calling for more pro-active fiscal stimulus, including policy rates at the effective lower bound and impaired monetary policy transmission, are not present. Some fiscal consolidation remains desirable—not the least in view of a sizeable structural budget deficit and impending medium-term increases in ageing-related spending. However, Australia has the fiscal space to undertake budget repair gradually. Any remaining negative demand effects could be offset by continuing accommodative monetary policy, expenditure switching, and growth- friendly structural fiscal reform. In contrast, a front-loaded fiscal consolidation based on measures would pose too much of a risk to the on-going recovery. The MYEFO 2016-17 shows a fiscal improvement based on an economic recovery, broadly consistent with staff’s views on growth in the coming years. Structural fiscal reform should focus on supporting growth through increased spending on infrastructure, innovation, labor market integration, and tax reform There is room for greater infrastructure investment While general government spending on infrastructure has increased in FY2016/17, this increase primarily reflects higher spending by States, not the Commonwealth. Indeed, capital spending is expected to increase by ½ of a percentage point of GDP in the current budget year, but these efforts are not expected to be sustained as spending is projected to level off in the next fiscal year and to decline thereafter. A more sustained, multi-year increase in spending on efficient infrastructure also at the Commonwealth level would be desirable, considering that Australia has infrastructure needs and fiscal space and the funding environment is favorable. Reforms that support innovation and productivity should be strengthened. These would include an upgrade of the R&D tax credits put in place last year and active labor market policies, to lower risks of hysteresis in labor markets and support human capital formation in an environment of rapid structural change, increased part-time employment, and higher long-term unemployment. A tax shift, lowering corporate and household income taxes while increasing the goods and services tax (GST), could boost investment and lift GDP. Background work using the IMF’s G20MOD suggests that in Australia, the long-term multipliers for a 1 percent of GDP shift from corporate income taxes to the GST is roughly 0.6 percent of GDP, while that of Page 19 labor income taxes to the GST is over 0.1 percent of GDP. A revenue-neutral tax shift should thus lead to a permanent increase in the level of real GDP. Should downside risks materialize, fiscal stimulus may be needed to boost aggregate demand, as monetary policy may rapidly be constrained by the effective lower bound. If the shock is large, an effective macroeconomic policy response may well require expansionary fiscal policy. In a China downside scenario, model-based scenario analysis in background work by staff illustrates how a combined monetary and fiscal policy response ensures a faster recovery (Box 2). With some high-impact downside risks to the near- and medium-term outlook present, contingency plans for expansionary fiscal policy should be prepared, given the implementation lags involved in undertaking fiscal stimulus. Such contingency plans should include a revolving pipeline of ready-to- implement infrastructure projects, with coordination between the Commonwealth and State governments. An IMF staff review of the fiscal anchor and framework suggests that the authorities consider changing to a long-term debt anchor. In 2010, the government raised the medium- term anchor from a zero balance to a surplus of 1 percent, with a view to reverse the recent debt accumulation. In staff’s view, it is a strength of Australia’s fiscal framework that it requires governments to report against a medium-term fiscal strategy based on “principles of sound fiscal management.” But the authorities should consider replacing the current medium-term budget balance anchor with a longer-term debt anchor. The latter would provide certainty about debt and fiscal policy in the future. Once in place, the debt anchor would encourage the government to discuss the implication of unanticipated shocks on the fiscal position and the medium-term fiscal strategy. At the same time, if implemented over a 5- to 10-year horizon, the framework would remain sufficiently flexible to allow for countercyclical fiscal policy support if needed. Authorities’ Views The RBA was concerned about the potential costs to financial stability from further monetary easing relative to the benefits of inflation returning to target faster. Against expectations of robust growth and improving labor markets, it considered risks of inflation becoming entrenched below target to be low. The undershooting of core inflation was recent. But the RBA was ready to ease further should the outlook for labor markets and inflation deteriorate materially. RBA officials saw costs and benefits to changing policy communication strategies. While RBA staff were working on extending the forecast horizon, they were concerned that conditional forecasts of the policy rate path could be misread as RBA commitment. RBA officials noted that they could use unconventional monetary policy measures should the need arise, with circumstances dictating the instruments to be used. However, they considered the risks of reaching the effective The benefits of a tax shift are discussed in Box 2 of the selected issues paper by Dizioli, Karam, Muir and Steinlein, 2016, “Australia’s Fiscal Framework: Issues and Options for Reform.” Tax reform options were discussed extensively in the 2015 Article IV Consultation and in Pitt, 2015, “Options for Tax Policy and Federal Fiscal Relations Reform”, Australia Selected Issues , IMF Country Report No.15/275. See Annex VIII for a summary of the selected issues paper by Dizioli and others (2016). Page 20 lower bound for policy rates to be low, partly because the Australian dollar usually depreciated in the case of adverse external shocks. This, in turn, could ease the burden on monetary policy in responding to a downturn. The authorities were less sanguine than staff about the extent of available fiscal space and did not think that current circumstances required its active use. They noted concerns by rating agencies about the sizeable and persistent budget deficits and emphasized that being a capital importing country, which generally runs current account deficits, requires greater fiscal prudence than otherwise. In their view, the economy could absorb the proposed path of fiscal consolidation, noting that much of the expected increase in revenue was through household income tax bracket creep, rather than measures with higher multipliers. However, they agreed that, in the face of negative economic shocks, such as a sharp slowdown in China, increased fiscal spending would need to be considered, as the effectiveness of monetary easing might be diminished. Concerns about a widening current account deficit could be mitigated if it is driven by fiscal spending that encourages stronger domestic investment instead of only weakening saving ratios. The authorities felt that the composition of fiscal adjustment was as important as the pace of consolidation. In this respect, they noted that past spending increases often focused on recurrent spending. Some of the spending had not been productive, while other spending could be reduced while maintaining or improving outcomes through increased productivity in the delivery of services. Restraining recurrent spending would help in increasing productive spending, on infrastructure investment, nurturing innovation, and on measures encouraging private investment, real wages and incomes in the private sector. This in turn would help on the revenue side as well, particularly for healthy labor income tax revenues, which depend on growth to induce bracket creep.