Context Momentum in house prices and housing credit has moderated and bank balance sheets have strengthened with prudential and regulatory steps, but vulnerabilities have not yet decreased materially. Intrinsic housing market risks have become more localized. The escalation of APRA’s supervisory intensity, including guidance on lending standards, over the past year and a half has contributed to lowering growth in new, higher risk lending (e.g., with loan-to- value ratios of more than 80 percent), while housing market conditions have cooled broadly. Nevertheless, risks of renewed price acceleration remain, as mortgage and interest rates more broadly are still low, while foreign investment interest in residential property in the major cities continues to be strong. And high household debt could still amplify the negative impact of large shocks. Regulatory steps under the Basel III framework have contributed to banks’ stronger capital positions. As of January 2016, banks had to meet a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent of RWA, and a buffer for domestic systemically important institutions of 1 percent of RWA became effective. The counter-cyclical capital buffer is currently set at zero. In addition, in July 2016, a floor for mortgage risk weights for banks using the IRB approach took effect. Tighter prudential rules do Page 21 not seem to have led to migration of credit activity to non-banks, and the shadow banking sector in Australia has remained relatively small over recent years. Staff Views With signs of a cooling housing market, the tightening of prudential measures should remain a contingency. Under the IMF staff’s macro-financial baseline outlook, tighter loan restrictions could accelerate a cooling in housing market, which would be pro-cyclical. In markets where a house price correction has already begun—in the mining states, for example—they risk delaying the recovery from the commodity bust, including by hindering labor mobility. But with continued upside risks to house prices and housing lending growth, APRA should stand ready with targeted prudential measures. Minimum amortization requirements for new loans could also be considered to rein interest-only lending further. Banks’ should further strengthen their capital position, which would increase their resilience to housing and other macro-financial shocks. This approach would focus on strengthening banks’ ability to absorb losses from a more significant housing market correction. For instance, APRA could consider adjustments to the level of required capital, dependent on banks’ exposure to risky housing market segments and lending standards in those segments (pillar 2 adjustments). Alternatively, it could consider introducing higher minimum risk weights for some lending, notably higher-risk housing-related loans. With expectations of lower profitability in the sector, it will be important for banks to remain in a position to continue to generate sufficient internal capital to finance the growth of their balance sheets and maintain unquestionably strong capital ratios. In the longer term, the macro-financial resilience of the economy to housing market shocks could be enhanced through tax reform. The Commonwealth tax system provides households with incentives for leveraged real estate investment that likely amplifies housing cycles. The incentives arise from the combination of tax concessions on capital gains and the possibility to apply losses from negative gearing to income from other sources. Reforms of capital gain tax concessions would need to be undertaken in a broader context, to avoid introducing new distortions in the taxation of different assets. Broader progress in implementing the regulatory reform agenda would also help in lowering and managing financial sector risks. APRA’s efforts to develop an operational framework to assess whether Australian banks are “unquestionable strong” in international comparison will further reduce bank-related financial stability risks. Another priority are reforms recommended in the 2014 Financial Sector Inquiry for increasing the resilience of the banking system, such as the implementation of a framework for loss absorbing and recapitalization capacity and the introduction of a leverage ratio, in the context of international regulatory developments. The authorities are taking steps to address the lack of adequate AML/CFT safeguards in the real estate sector. In 2015, the Mutual Evaluation Report of Australia’s AML/CFT regime by the Financial Action Task Force found that the real estate sector is exposed to significant money Page 22 laundering risk and should be subject to AML/CFT safeguards in line with the international standards. In response, Australia has recently completed a statutory review of its AML/CFT regime and initiated a consultation process about regulating real estate professionals under the AML/CFT Act. The cost-benefit analysis of different regulatory models is expected to be completed by July Remittance flows from Australia have remained broadly stable while regional correspondent banking relationships with Australian banks have continued. AUSTRAC’s tracking of international funds flowing through financial intermediaries registered in Australia suggests no significant change in patterns or magnitudes of remittance flows. That said, money transfer operators have been subject to structural change, given evolving financial technology, and regulatory change. While some operators have had their bank accounts closed, this has only affected a subset among them. However, money transfer operators have faced increased costs and complexities of doing business. At this stage, there is no evidence that Australian banks have stopped correspondent banking and other business with neighboring Pacific Islands. Nevertheless, recognizing the potential for negative spillovers, the authorities have formed a high-level interdepartmental committee to coordinate policies, intensified consultation with the industry, provided neighboring countries with technical assistance to deal with AML/CFT challenges, and actively engaged in the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. Authorities’ Views The authorities concurred that policies should focus on further strengthening resilience to housing market and other shocks with macro-financial implication. Regarding “unquestionably strong” capital ratio of banks, APRA stressed that a top quartile positioning relative to international peers is only one guidepost and that other benchmarks would be used as well. For example, capital positions against rating agency measures of capital strength would be assessed and the result of stress tests can also be informative. In terms of timing, APRA did not expect that final standards on unquestionably strong capital ratio would be released soon, given that 2017 will be a year of consultation. The standards would be unlikely to take effect until at least a year after that to facilitate an orderly build-up of capital. APRA indicated openness to the use of a range of prudential measures in case they are needed. The Treasury continues its efforts to introduce new legislation to deliver on the Government’s financial system agenda. In its response to the recommendations of the Financial System Inquiry (FSI), the government announced 48 measures, including on the crisis management toolkit, banks resolution, and consumer protection, which require legislation to be prepared and worked through the legislative process.