Monetary policy . Staff views the RBA’s monetary policy stance as broadly appropriate. Inflation is within the target range and inflation expectations remain well anchored. With growth currently on the soft side, the real exchange rate still strong, and efforts to reduce the budget deficit likely, monetary policy should remain accommodative and act as the primary macroeconomic tool for managing aggregate demand in the near term. Fiscal policy. Australia's fiscal position compares well to its advanced economy peers, although debt has increased in the aftermath of the global financial crisis (Annex 5). The government considers it a priority to return the budget to surplus to preserve its favorable standing with external creditors against the background of relatively high overall net foreign debt (paragraph 23). To this end, the government has announced the broad aim of returning the budget to a sustained surplus, building to a 1 percent of GDP surplus by 2023/24. A more detailed framework will be established when the government announces its fiscal strategy in May. The government has also pledged to scrap the carbon tax and the mineral resource rent tax which will reduce revenue by about ¼ percentage point of GDP compared to total budget revenues from the mining sector of around 2 percent of GDP. Staff supported the broad aim of improving the budget position over the medium term, which would help rebuild fiscal buffers and increase the policy scope to deal with adverse shocks, but cautioned that it should be done in a way that does not disrupt growth prospects in the near term. Consistency of the fiscal projections. Achieving and sustaining a surplus over the next decade will be challenging in light of current social spending commitments. Staff’s analysis shows that achieving a surplus would require either an increase in revenue or sizeable cuts in projected spending (Box 1). Early decisions on policy changes required to ensure the medium-term consistency of fiscal policy goals would help to preserve policy flexibility. Authorities’ views. While recognizing relatively weak near-term growth prospects, the authorities expected private demand outside the mining sector to increase at a faster pace, though they pointed to the considerable uncertainties around the outlook. The RBA had not ruled out further interest rate cuts, but emphasized that the effects of the reduction in policy rates already made are still being felt. They also noted that foreign exchange intervention remained part of the policy toolkit, although more recently used only at times of market dysfunction. The government is expected to soon articulate its fiscal strategy in more details. To achieve the aim of returning to and maintaining a budget surplus, sizeable cuts in projected spending would be required. Important for this would be the recommendations of the National Commission of Audit’s Review of the efficiency and effectiveness of expenditure and of spending pressures over the medium term. Page 10 Box 1. Medium-Term Fiscal Consistency The Government has committed to delivering a surplus of 1 percent within the next decade. Achieving this looks difficult on current spending plans without a large increase in budget revenue or a cut in spending or a combination of both. Identifying spending pressures Long run spending projections are discussed in the latest 2010 Intergenerational Report (published every 5 years by the Treasury). Around 40 percent of government spending is directed to health, age-related pensions and aged care, disability, and education (here referred to as “social spending”). Spending on these areas is projected to increase significantly over the Report’s 40-year horizon. Rising health costs account for around two-thirds of the overall increase. Some policy and legal changes—in education and the second round of private health insurance in particular—have been made since the Report was published which affect the composition of spending pressures, although the outlook remains broadly the same. To assess the consistency of the government’s fiscal targets over the next decade, we do a simple exercise of applying the Intergenerational Report’s expenditure growth models and projections for social spending to see how this might affect overall spending. Specifically, health and disability spending are expected to increase over the next decade by ½ percent of GDP each, and education, assistance to the aged and pensions by 0.2 percent each. These spending trends imply that if other “non-social” spending were to be held at its current level as a share of GDP, overall expenditure would reach 26½ percent in ten years. If tax revenue is held at its average level over the last decade, the resulting budget deficit in 2023/24 would reach 2 percent of GDP. Reaching the government’s budget surplus target would thus require cutting spending by around 3 percent of GDP, either by reducing net non-social spending or by putting in place policy measures to contain increases in social spending (figure). Page 11 Box 1. Medium-Term Fiscal Consistency (concluded) Expenses by Function 2023/24- Projection under current programs (Total expenses 26.6 percent of GDP) 2012/13 - Final budget outcome (Total expenses 25.1 percent of GDP) Health Pensions (aged and disability) 2023/24- Required for surplus target (Total expenses 23.5 percent of GDP) Education Aged care Other Sources: Commonwealth of Australia Budget Papers; and IMF staff estimates and projections. The National Commission of Audit The government recently established the Commission as an independent mechanism to review and report on the performance, functions and roles of the Commonwealth government. Among the main objectives are to identify areas of unnecessary duplication between the activities of the Commonwealth and other levels of government, to identify areas or programs where Commonwealth involvement is inappropriate, no longer needed, or blur lines of accountability, and to improve the overall efficiency and effectiveness with which government services and policy advice are delivered. The Commission will report to the Prime Minister, Treasurer, and the Minister for Finance with both phases of the audit due by the end of March 2014. The recommendations are expected to inform the decisions presented in next budget. The established priorities are meant to allow savings conducive to improving the medium-term fiscal position. Page 12