The baseline outlook is for the resumption of growth close to trend, a gradual return of inflation into the target range, and a slow stabilization of macro-financial vulnerabilities. Growth is expected to be close to trend, with increasing contributions from domestic demand growth as the adjustment to the commodity and mining shocks advances further. With the contraction in 2016Q3 largely due to one-off factors, growth is expected to resume in the last quarter of 2016. Residential investment growth is expected to rebound, given a strong pipeline of building approvals and housing starts. The contribution of private business investment to growth should turn positive, as the correction in mining investment should run its course and non-mining investment should start to pick up. In addition, states that have experienced rapid growth in activity are expected to ramp up infrastructure spending in 2017- 18. Private consumption should strengthen with the recovery continuing and labor markets improving further. On the export side, the rate of growth is expected to slow somewhat, as the initial boost from new mining capacity and new sources of demand (e.g., tourism from Asia) should moderate. The disinflation experienced in 2015-16 is expected to start reversing. With the rebound of oil prices in 2016, an important source of disinflation has already dissipated. Other sources are expected to weaken gradually. The output gap is projected to decline, and the inflation effects from downward pressure on producer price levels from increased competition in the retail sectors should wear off with no major new market entrants. The NPL ratio of loans to the agricultural sector from the banks’ New Zealand subsidiaries has increased modestly since the beginning of 2016, but it remains low, at around 1 percent. The overall exposure to the sector is small— some 1½ percent of banks’ consolidated assets. Page 15 The macro-financial outlook is for a stabilization of housing-related vulnerabilities. The main driver is a realignment of house price inflation with broader measures of inflation and robust growth. Recent increases in residential investment should result in higher supply over the next two years, especially in market segments that have seen higher prices increases, and lower affordability should constrain demand. Credit gaps and debt ratios should thus stabilize or decline. On the external side, the accumulation of net external liabilities should slow in the absence of valuation effects. As banks prepare to meet net stable funding ratio requirements by 2018, related vulnerabilities should improve further.