weaker medium-term prospects Growth should pick up through 2016. Net export volumes rise despite lower commodity prices. In the baseline with growth in China moderating to a safer and more sustainable rate, Australian iron ore producers continue to ratchet up export volumes, as they remain competitive even at current lower prices and can displace less competitive producers. LNG exports also come on stream, with Australia set to become the world’s largest exporter. And services exports improve with the lower exchange rate. Investment contributes to growth in the short run. Though resource investment is scaled back GDP growth RBA Treasury 2/ Consensus IMF CPI inflation 3/ RBA Treasury 2/ Consensus IMF Unemployment RBA Treasury 2/ Consensus IMF 1/ Data sources: Staff projections, RBA Monetary Policy Statement (May 2015), Treasury Budget 2015 (May 2015), and Consensus forecasts from Consensus Economics Inc. (June 2015). 2/ Fiscal year; e.g. 2015 represents FY 2014-15. 3/ Annual average for IMF, Treasury, and Consensus; end of period for RBA. Page 16 further, residential investment continues to grow and business investment gradually turns around as improvements in business confidence and rising capacity utilization feed through. The recovery is supported by strong corporate balance sheets, the weaker exchange rate, historically low interest rates and contained wages pressure . Consumption growth remains restrained in the near term with low wage growth, and more muted income expectations—as the financial cycle matures and house price inflation slows. But it improves further ahead, underpinned by rising confidence, a drawdown of the savings ratio from high levels, and a pickup in income growth following the stabilization of the terms of trade. Inflation stays in line with the RBA’s target of 2-3 percent. Inflation expectations are well anchored. Tradables inflation rises as the effects of the exchange rate depreciation pass through and oil prices stabilize. But non tradables inflation remains relatively contained, dampened by weak wages growth. But Australia’s outperformance is likely to fade in the medium term. Medium-term potential growth is likely to be around 2½ percent rather than the 3¼ percent of the past, bringing per capita GDP growth back to the advanced economy average of around 1 percent. The financial cycle is likely to decelerate. The policy rate is expected by markets to eventually begin rising, while inflation remains well anchored in line with the target of 2-3 percent. Banks are likely to raise capital ratios (Box 4). Growth of lending for housing, the bulk of total lending, is likely to slow as house price inflation moderates partly in response to higher interest rates. This, combined with high household debt, and fiscal consolidation picking up, may all slow the closing of the output gap. Growth outperformance ending (Real GDP per capita annual growth, %) Australia G-7 2016-2020 (IMF proj.) Potential output growth is slowing % change 5-year moving average Year-on-year Potential growth Actual growth Net national disposable income (RHS) Page 17 Box 4. Macro-financial Outlook With a large financial sector, high household debt, and much of household wealth in housing, assessing Australia’s economic outlook requires integrating macro-financial variables into the macroeconomic framework. House prices. The baseline projection is for a soft Rising interest rates, moderating house price growth (%) landing, with house price inflation slowing to a sustainable 3-4 percent, based on medium-term fundamentals. This implies no change in the estimated overvaluation and housing market risks thus remain heightened. Household debt. Projected increases in house prices would raise nominal household debt, but income growth should gather pace, resulting in the debt ratio initially rising before falling gradually. Credit to the private sector is assumed to grow as Projections Nominal House price growth RBA policy rate 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 a weighted average of house price increases and business investment. This results in slightly slowing growth. However, combined with deposits staying broadly constant as a share of GDP, this results in no further reduction in banks’ use of wholesale funding. Household debt ratio rises then falls (%) Bank balance sheets. Slower growth in risk- weighted assets is expected to reduce profitability somewhat. Following the increase in mortgage risk weights in 2016 (see paragraph 13), the CET1 capital dips to 9 percent but then rises to around 10 percent through profit retention. Further increases could be achieved by reducing dividend payout ratios. Projections Household debt-to-income Houshold interest payments-to-income (RHS) 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Historical relationships between house prices, credit, and activity help check the consistency of macro projections. For example: Credit and activity: Historically, credit and GDP have shown a strong positive relationship, which appears to have flattened recently. The projections are based on this flatter relationship. The projections for private consumption and household credit, as well as non-housing investment and business credit, are in line with recent historical relationships. Credit/GDP relation has shifted (% growth) t i d r c l a 2015-20 proj. Real GDP House prices and activity: The projected path of dwelling investment and house prices is somewhat higher than implied by the recent past, but it broadly reflects the current strong momentum in housing construction and record high housing approvals. The private consumption growth forecast is also somewhat stronger than suggested by recent experience and reflects a continued gradual moderation of the current high household savings rate. House prices and credit: The growth of housing credit (for owner occupied houses) is projected in line with what recent house price inflation and housing credit growth would suggest. Page 18