Austrians enjoy high quality of life. The economy has weathered the global financial crisis (GFC) relatively well, and output surpassed pre-crisis levels in 2011. While growth has been slow in recent years, inequality and poverty are low, and living standards high. The recovery has strengthened. GDP growth in 2016 reached 1.4 percent (y/y) in 2016:Q1–Q3, and is estimated at 1.4 percent for the year as a whole. Growth has been broad-based, driven by private consumption supported by income tax cuts, a recovery in investment, and higher public consumption, in part due to spending on refugees. Employment growth has picked up in 2016 (Figure 1), catching up with the rising labor supply driven by migration and higher labor force participation. As a result, unemployment has stabilized recently, at 5.8 percent in November (EU harmonized rate) although it remains elevated relative to historical levels. At 1.5 percent y/y in November, inflation is picking up from low levels, driven mainly by price hikes in tourism-related services. Refugee inflows have slowed significantly. Austria received 89,000 asylum seekers in 2015, one of the highest figures in the EU relative to the population. Arrivals of refugees have since slowed sharply and processing of asylum applications is gradually catching up. Policies to integrate accepted asylum seekers into the labor market and society are being implemented, supported by a €0.6-1 billion increase in refugee-related fiscal spending in 2016 relative to 2015. Nonetheless, significant challenges remain, such as a language barriers and low skills. The external position remains broadly in line with fundamentals and desirable policies (Annex I). The External Balance Assessment suggests that the current account balance in 2016 was somewhat below the norm, while the REER was modestly overvalued. Policy gaps explain about a third of the current account gap/REER overvaluation, with the main policy effect coming from high health expenditure relative to trading partners (see ¶20 and footnote 8). Staff expects the current The national unemployment rate, based on registered unemployment, stood at 8.9 percent in December. Inequality and Poverty (2015 or latest available) Source: OECD. AustriaOECD AE avg.Poverty rate (after taxes and transfers, at 60% of median income, %)Gini coefficient(after taxes and transfers) q – Page 10 account surplus to gradually decline from some 2½ percent of GDP in 2016 to 2.1 percent of GDP in the medium term¸ as steadily improving business and consumer sentiment nudge private investment and consumption higher (Tables 1 and 3). The international investment position, currently moderately positive, should strengthen accordingly. Political situation. The coalition government of Social Democrats and the right-of-center People’s Party holds a small parliamentary majority. The partners’ views on some economic issues, including further fiscal reforms, diverge at times. The need to build political consensus sometimes slows down the design and implementation of economic policy measures. The next parliamentary elections are due in September 2018. In a re-run of the second round of the presidential election in December 2016, Alexander van der Bellen, backed by the Green Party, defeated Norbert Hofer of the right-wing Freedom Party.