Current Account and external debt. Australia has run current account deficits for most of its history, with deficits averaging around 4 percent of GDP in the last three decades. This has reflected a structural saving-investment imbalance with very high private investment relative to a saving rate which is already high by advanced country standards, resulting in net external liabilities of around 55 percent of GDP (Annex 3). Looking forward, as imports related to mining investment decline and mining export capacity comes on stream, the trade balance should turn to surplus, offset by a widening income account deficit as global interest rates normalize and mining income accruing to foreign investors’ increases. On net the current account deficit is currently expected to remain below 4 percent of GDP over the medium term, stabilizing Australia’s net foreign liability position as a share of GDP. The stock of external debt has become more stable over the past several years—the decline in short-term offshore borrowing by banks and increased foreign holdings of long-term public debt have lengthened the maturity profile, and a major portion of resources sector investment has taken the form of less volatile foreign direct investment. Exchange rate. Despite some recent depreciation the real exchange rate, currently in the range of 89 cents to the U.S. dollar, is 5-10 percent above the level predicted by Australia-specific factors from a medium-term perspective (Box 2). There are a number of factors contributing to the current high level of the Australian dollar, including the substantial capital inflows to fund the mining sector investment, the gap between domestic and foreign interest rates, and portfolio allocation towards Australian dollar assets by foreign institutional investors. If these factors were to ease, possibly triggered by exit from unconventional monetary policies by major advanced economies, the exchange rate would likely depreciate further, supporting the transition of the economy towards more balanced growth. Budget deficit reduction should help take pressure off the Page 15 dollar over the medium term by boosting national savings, and additional steps to encourage private saving such as the planned increase in the superannuation contribution rate will also help. Box 2. External Sector Assessment Despite the recent depreciation the real effective exchange rate remains elevated and is still around 20 percent above the long run average since 1983. The current account deficit narrowed somewhat in 2013 as mining investment has begun to decline from the record levels reached this past year. Model-based approaches in the IMF’s External Balance Assessment (EBA) suggest that Australia’s real exchange rate at the end of 2013 appears overvalued by 5-10 percent and the current account looks around ½ to 1½ percent of GDP weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies domestically and globally, although the current account gap can be partly attributed to the mining investment boom. These estimates are, however, subject to considerable uncertainty. Cross-country panel regressions indicate that terms of trade gains and Australia’s positive interest rate differentials vis-à-vis other advanced countries have contributed to the high levels of the dollar in recent years. That part of the overvaluation not captured by the fundamental factors may be related to short-term factors including strong portfolio inflows, especially to the official government debt market since 2009. Household's Net Saving Rate (In percent of household's net disposable income) Staff’s assessment is also sensitive to projections of household saving behavior in the long run. The household saving ratio has remained above 10 percent after the sharp increase in 2008-2009 (figure), and growth in household consumption over the past year has been below its long run average, consistent with soft labor market conditions and relatively modest growth in household income. At the same time there has been relatively strong growth in household net worth, driven by higher equity and housing prices. In this regard much will depend on whether the post-crisis increase in household savings represents a structural break from past behavior. If the household saving ratio were to fall closer to pre-crisis levels, the current account deficit would widen which would imply a larger overvaluation of the exchange rate. 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 Source: ABS. See 2013 Pilot External Sector Report and External Balance Assessment Methodology. Authorities’ views . The authorities agreed that the current account deficit is likely to be lower in the period ahead than in the past decade, as the investment phase of the mining boom comes to an end and mining sector export volumes increase, though this outlook is subject to a degree of uncertainty. The authorities reiterated their strong commitment to a freely-floating Page 16 exchange rate, emphasizing the role it has played in maintaining macroeconomic stability and containing external vulnerabilities—in contrast to past mining booms, the floating exchange rate has helped the economy to absorb a sharp increase in terms of trade without leading to an overheating domestic economy and a spike in inflation. Like staff, they expressed some surprise during consultations that the exchange rate had remained high despite the decline in the terms of trade, although it has depreciated more recently. Going forward, a lower level of the exchange rate would help balance growth in the economy. They noted that despite the level of net foreign liabilities, the economy as a whole has a net foreign currency asset position, and so a nominal exchange rate depreciation would strengthen Australia’s overall balance sheet.