RISKS Background The recovery is taking hold and financial markets have eased further (Figures 2 and 3). GDP, which had stagnated for about a year, resumed growth in the second half of 2013. Staff currently projects growth of 1½ percent in 2014 and 1¾ percent in 2015, compared with 0.3 percent in 2013. The recovery is following the typical pattern for Austria: it is being driven by a pickup in exports, with investment and consumption expected to follow suit. Inflation has come down, but is high relative to other euro area countries, and the risk of deflation is low. Inflation has fallen from near 4 percent y/y in late 2011 to 1.5 percent in May. The decline was largely the result of lower import prices/terms of trade gains; there are few domestic See IMF 2013 Staff Report for Austria and related Selected Issues Paper. A downward revision of ¼ percentage point from the 2014 April WEO projections, reflecting a disappointing first quarter. Page 7 pressures that pull inflation down. Indeed, staff currently projects 2014 full-year inflation of 1.7 percent, well above the euro area projection of 0.7 percent for 2014 and also above the rate in Germany. Relatively high inflation is largely driven by the services sector, and reflects a tight labor market. With the lowest unemployment rate in the euro area (currently around 5 percent), wage cost increases since 2008 have been amongst the highest in the euro area. Geopolitical developments pose risks (see risk matrix). Two internationally active Austria-based banks (RBI and Italian-owned Unicredit Bank Austria) face spillovers from Ukraine and Russia. Banks also suffer idiosyncratic country risks from policy actions in Hungary. Other risk factors include the ECB’s comprehensive balance sheet assessment, which may lead to surprises on banks’ CESEE asset quality; and lower-than-expected growth in emerging markets and the euro area that would predominantly be transmitted via exports to Germany or through strong real and financial sector ties with Italy. As regards outward spillovers, funding shocks for Austrian banks would spill over to CESEE (Figure 4). Funding pressures would likely lead to a cutback in parent funding to CESEE subsidiaries, constraining credit growth in host countries. In the past two years inflation has also exceeded German inflation by ½ percentage point on average. CPI inflation TOT effects (right, inverse axis) Terms of trade effects and CPI inflation PP Harmonized Unemployment Rates in Euro Area Page 8 Austria’s current account and real effective exchange rate are broadly in line with fundamentals (Figure 5). EBA sends conflicting signals: the current account is above the norm, but so is the real exchange rate. In both cases, the results do not reflect policy gaps but an unexplained residual. Austria’s current account surplus last year (2.7 percent of GDP) was equal to its average over the past ten years—a sharp contrast with Germany and the Netherlands, which saw sharp increases. The real exchange rate has been stable as well, and Austria’s export performance has been about average—not as good as Germany’s, for example, but much better than Italy’s. Austria’s IIP is near zero, giving it an intermediate position among euro area countries. Going forward, there are no indications that the current account surplus or underlying competitiveness would change substantially. The authorities’ view Authorities’ and staff forecasts and risk assessment are broadly in line. Growth forecasts of the Austrian Central Bank (OeNB) and the two leading economic research institutes (WIFO and IHS) hover around 1½ percent in 2014 and 1¾ percent in 2015. Projection differences for unemployment and inflation between these institutions and with staff are also small. The authorities broadly agreed on the risks identified by staff. The authorities agree there are no clear signs of real exchange rate under-or overvaluation, but are somewhat more worried about the persistent inflation difference with Germany. The gap is attributable to persistently higher services and administrative price increases. According to EBA, in 2013, the difference between the cyclically adjusted current account (3.4 percent of GDP) and the cyclically adjusted current account norm (1.5 percent) was due to an unexplained residual of 2.4 percentage points—the contribution of the policy gap was negative. HICP deflator Nominal unit labour cost, total economy Nominal unit wage cost, manufacturing Price deflator GDP, market prices Austria: Real Effective Exchange Rates (Euro area indices) Page 9 Risk Assessment Matrix Potential Deviations from Baseline Source of Risk Likelihood of Risk Expected Impact Policy Response Sharp increase in geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia/Ukraine and the Middle East. Idiosyncratic country risks (e.g. Hungary). Protracted period of slower growth in advanced economies, especially euro area; CESEE; Turkey or other emerging markets (including China). Unanticipated outcomes from ECB comprehensive assessment and stress tests. Significantly more expensive or limited funding for Austrian banks. Higher-than-anticipated cost of bank restructuring; and residual fiscal risks from banks’ CESEE exposure. High Lower profits and higher NPL ratios for internationally active Austria-based banks that have subsidiaries in Ukraine, Russia, and Hungary; potential spillovers to sovereign spreads; growth effects due to lower exports and if commodity supply from Russia is disrupted, especially gas. High Lower exports and growth; higher NPLs and lower profits of internationally active banks, especially if there is a further concentration of banks’ risk exposures in individual CESEE countries. Higher bank capital needs could elevate bank and sovereign spreads. Low Cutback in parent funding to CESEE subsidiaries, constraining credit growth in CESEE. Unfavorable debt dynamics and higher sovereign spreads. Encourage banks to increase capital buffers and follow adequate risk provisioning policies; explore alternatives to commodity supply from Russia. Potential growth- enhancing structural reforms and diversification of export markets; increased capital buffers and adequate risk provisioning of Austrian banks. Encourage banks to increase capital buffers; proper communication about process and results. Encourage banks to increase capital buffers to mitigate risk perceptions by market participants; strengthen stability of local funding of subsidiaries. Accelerated public debt reduction and more ambitious fiscal balance target. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non- mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 10 Potential Deviations from Baseline (concluded) Source of Risk Likelihood of Risk Expected Impact Policy Response Unsustainable rise in real estate prices. Higher domestic NPLs to the extent that unsustainable mortgage lending emerges. Monitoring of risk indicators; make new macroprudential instruments available (LTV, DTI, etc.). n/a Surges in global financial market volatility. Bond market stress from re-assessment of sovereign risk in the euro area. High Low Potential safe-haven inflows and lower spreads. Low Low Potential safe-haven inflows and lower spreads. n/a