Pursuing the planned fiscal consolidation should not significantly dampen growth and will help address fiscal vulnerabilities. While welcoming the approved 2014 consolidated budget, staff noted that sustained further efforts would be needed to bring the non-oil fiscal position to the sustainable level implied by the permanent income rule. Staff noted that with energy revenues set to sharply fall off, leading to a rising overall deficit and depletion of oil fund balances over the medium-term, it would be important not to delay the adjustment. To this end, staff advocated a cumulative reduction of about 5 percentage points in the non-oil primary deficit over 2014–15 and a further adjustment of at least 8 percentage points over 2016–19. Cutting investment projects with small growth returns as a main component of the adjustment should not hurt growth markedly as the public investment rate is well above the optimal path suggested by a precautionary saving and investment model (Box 3). Making the fiscal position sustainable could also entail rationalizing tax exemptions, better enforcing tax procedures, and to revamp non-oil tax revenue collection. Efforts are also needed to streamline current spending while providing resources to expand the Targeted Social Assistance (TSA) program to help reduce the impact of shocks, including recent fuel price increases, on the most vulnerable groups. Such measures should be complemented by reforms in the business environment (as discussed in section D) so that the private sector could use the freed- up financing from fiscal consolidation for growth-enhancing private investment. The authorities stressed their commitment to consolidating the non-oil fiscal position. They noted their plans to further reduce the transfers from the oil fund in the context of the 2015 budget, as announced in the medium-term indicative targets presented to parliament in the context of the 2014 budget process. They also indicated that the recent agreement achieved with the World Bank and the European Commission to complete a public expenditure and financial accountability assessment (PEFA) by October 2014 will contribute to strengthen control over public spending and will help guide efforts in prioritizing and improving the efficiency of public investment. In this latter context, staff noted that along with a strong public investment management system, the selection of investments could place more emphasis on the impact of spending on the long-term growth of the non-oil export sector and fiscal revenue. Staff highlighted the risks stemming from the absence of a fiscal rule given the oil revenue volatility and the unsustainable level of public investment . Additional fiscal risks are associated with the heavy oil dependence of the consolidated budget, the pension system, and For detailed discussion on options to strengthen the non-oil tax revenue see IMF Country Report 12/06 (chapter 2). The only non-contributory, means-tested safety net program is the Targeted Social Assistance (TSA) channeling about 10 percent of social transfer spending. According to the World Bank, the TSA is well targeted with about half the benefits flowing to the bottom decile of the population and less than one percent leaking to the top decile. Benefits, however, reach only about 4 percent of the population. Page 13 government activities outside the budget (Box 4). A rules-based fiscal framework (e.g., a structural primary balance rule with price smoothing) could help entrench fiscal discipline and mitigate the volatility of oil revenue while promoting intergenerational equity. A statement of fiscal risks as part of the budget process could highlight the threats to macro stability and the government’s resilient net asset position, and foster fiscal risk-reducing actions. Box 3. Azerbaijan: In Pursuit of Optimal Fiscal Policy Average Consumption, SWF, and “Cash on Hand,” 2014–60 SWF Consumption Cash on hand Consumption 80% C.I. (Wealth before consumption; expected values) The application of, the “Silo” model of Cherif and Hasanov (2012), a finite horizon precautionary saving- investment model under uncertainty, suggests that the current government consumption and investment in Azerbaijan are well above the optimal levels. The results are consistent with the application of the IMF’s Sustainable Investing Tool underpinning the 2013 Article IV Consultation. The analysis stressed the need for a more moderate investment path to increase investment efficiency and sustain the growth benefits. The Silo model suggests that in the face of highly volatile revenues, the optimal investment rate is 15 percent of total revenues while saving in safe assets is 37.3 percent initially . Given the expected decline in oil prices and production in the baseline, the projected current and capital spending exceed the optimal amount over the period 2014–18. The model also indicates that the Azeri government is saving less than optimal through its sovereign wealth fund. The gap between projected and optimal investment is very large in 2014 —around 20.5 percent of non-oil GDP—but it will start to shrink in 2015 to reach around 4.3 percent of non-oil GDP in 2018. The model also shows that government consumption is higher than the optimal level, and the gap is expected to widen over the period 2014–18, to reach around 7 percent of non-oil GDP) in 2018. The results call for a rules-based fiscal policy framework that promotes fiscal discipline Source: IMF staff calculations. Optimal vs. Projected Investment Spending, 2013–18 Optimal vs. Projected Current Spending, 2013–18 (In millions of Azeri manats) (In millions of Azeri manats) Optimal investment Actual investment Source: IMF staff calculations. Optimal consumption Actual consumption Source: IMF staff calculations. Cherif, R. and F. Hasanov (2012), The Volatility Trap: Precautionary Saving, Investment, and Aggregate Risk , IMF Working Paper 12/134 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). For detailed discussion on options for fiscal policy rules in Azerbaijan see IMF Country Report 13/165 (chapter 1). Page 14 Box 4. Azerbaijan: A Framework for Managing Fiscal Risks Sound management of fiscal risks could supplement the rules-based fiscal framework recommended to the authorities in the context of the 2013 Article IV Consultation by enforcing fiscal discipline and bringing attention to threats to macro stability and to the state’s resilient net asset position. Managing fiscal risks in Azerbaijan in line with best practices entails: Identifying and quantifying key sources of fiscal risk : there are four key sources of fiscal risks to the consolidated budget in Azerbaijan: Exposure to adverse oil sector developments: A US$20 decline in the oil price assumption for 2014 could worsen the fiscal balance in percent of GDP by 5 percent and entail a withdrawal of $4 billion from the oil fund. A similar impact on the budget would arise with a 12 percent decline in the assumption for oil production in 2014 (about 100,000 barrels per day). Implicit liabilities associated with pension obligations: Despite successive reform efforts, the funding gap of liabilities inherited from the Soviet regime is projected to increase to 2 percent of GDP by 2024. The NPV of these liabilities through 2050 was estimated by an IMF technical assistance mission in the order of 54 percent of 2012 GDP. Activities of the State Oil Company (SOCAR) : Since 2008, SOCAR’s net liabilities (including trade credits and excluding tax payments) have doubled, reaching about 12 percent of GDP in 2013. SOCAR successfully issued international bonds in 2012 and 2013. Activities of the systemic and largely state-owned bank: IBA holds about a third of the assets and loans of the banking system. IBA’s financial situation remains fragile despite receiving government support. The new capitalization plan approved by the shareholders will bring an additional burden of about $300 million (about 0.5 percent of GDP) to the government over the next four years. Disseminating a “Statement of Fiscal Risks” as part of the budget to inform the fiscal policy decisions with sensitivity analysis to oil-related shocks and quantifying contingent liabilities arising from public entities. Integrating fiscal risks in the fiscal analysis, and in the medium-term fiscal framework and the public debt sustainability analysis (DSA) to prepare for the Azerbaijan Public DSA - Alternative Scenarios possibility that the risks may materialize. Under the assumption of a moderate level of government investment, the DSA points to an increase in the gross debt to GDP ratio from 13 percent in 2013 to 20 percent in 2018. The simulation of a contingent liability shock entailing a one-time increase in non-interest expenditures equivalent to 20 percent of banking sector assets (about half of the assets held by IBA) could add 4 percentage points of GDP to the stock of debt by 2018. The net asset position, while deteriorating, is projected to remain strong to about 20 percent of GDP by 2018. Baseline $20 dollar decline in oil price Gross Nominal Public Debt Contingent liability shock (In percent of GDP) Net debt (in percent of projection GDP) Adopting a legal framework to support the Source: IMF staff. management of fiscal risks by requiring sensitivity analysis to key assumptions and an annual statement of fiscal risk as part of the budget process. See Aliona Cebotari et. al. (2009), Fiscal Risks: Sources, Disclosure, and Management , Fiscal Affairs Department (Washington: International Monetary Fund). This box reflects helpful comments from A. Mineshima (FAD). Page 15 The authorities agreed on the need to entrench fiscal discipline. They noted that an informal fiscal rule aimed at keeping the oil fund balance broadly unchanged will help gradually reduce the reliance of the state budget on oil revenue. Ongoing actions to develop a debt management strategy for the national oil company in line with international best practice will also help contain associated risks from major investment projects. Plans are also advanced to approve a reform of the pension system this year —consistent with recent IMF Technical Assistance (TA)—that would ensure a sustainable pension system that provides a sufficient degree of income replacement.