The CBA is informally targeting base money growth in 2016, with a desired move to IT in the long-run. A tighter monetary stance has helped to limit inflationary ERPT effects and pressure on the currency. However, the CBA is concerned that: (i) requests for financial stability loans linked to the bank restructuring process could disrupt monetary programming; (ii) liquidity injections could affect the ER; (iii) credit growth may not easily resume; and (iv) latent deflationary signals linked to slower growth were hidden by ERPT effects. Staff indicated that the banking system still holds excess liquidity (concentrated in a few banks) and doubts about banking system soundness were stifling normal interbank intermediation. The problems in the interbank market highlight the need to restructure quickly the banking system and to develop financial markets. CBA interest rates remain negative in real terms and are below interbank, T-bill and retail deposit rates. This suggests that CBA interest rates may need to rise further (and informal interest rate caps eliminated) given market expectations. Consistent with its monetary policy stance, the CBA should stand ready to adjust monetary conditions to reflect unexpected changes in the fiscal impulse or bank restructuring process that put the money base and inflation objectives at risk. See IMF (2015), “Evolving Monetary Policy Frameworks in Low-Income and Other Developing Countries” Staff Report, and IMF (2016), “Exchange Rate Developments and Policies in the Caucasus and Central Asia”, MCD Department Paper Series. Page 21 Azerbaijan: Key Monetary and ER Policy Recommendations Formally introduce monetary targeting; identify intermediate and operational targets. Implement liquidity forecasting and management. Set policy rate around which it would carry out liquidity management operations. Policy rate set as reference rate for CBA's OMOs. Futher expand debt securities market. Make CBA sole seller of FX through program of regular auctions. Avoid pressure on the ER by eliminating market distortions. Clearly communicate CBA's monetary and ER policy framework and toolkit. Staff emphasized the importance of modernizing monetary policy and ER frameworks. In particular, with the move to a new ER regime, markets are now seeking guidance on the future direction of monetary policy. In this regard, emphasizing the primacy of the inflation objective would help to anchor expectations. Given shallow money markets and ineffective monetary transmission, a formal move to monetary targeting would be an appropriate intermediate step. However, to meet its monetary targets, the CBA will need to improve liquidity forecasting and management, and enhance its instrument and analytical toolkit. Importantly, a true policy rate should be established, around which the CBA would carry out its main liquidity management operations. The authorities are comfortable with the degree of exchange rate volatility experienced under the new FX regime. ER markets are thin and dominated by SOFAZ oil flows. While the AzN/US$ rate had been able to move within a wide range, too much variability could still negatively impact fragile bank and private sector balance sheets. At the same time, the CBA has been able to make some ad hoc purchase of reserves—without a clear reserve management strategy. Staff noted that greater ER flexibility would help to preserve buffers, while more clarity on CBA ER policy objectives and intervention strategy would improve the functioning of the FX market and guard against policy errors. Once the ER became fully market determined, the CBA should adopt the policy rate as a nominal anchor.