Staff argued that the composition of the stimulus was less than ideal but agreed an accommodative fiscal stance in 2016 was appropriate. The authorities acknowledged that fiscal space had shrunk and the stimulus could put added pressure on the ER. However, buffers were available to soften the impact of the recession on vulnerable populations and the stimulus only partially offset the effect of the devaluations. Moreover, the 2016 budget was based on a conservative $25 a barrel oil price. Staff recommended targeting an additional 12 pps of adjustment in the non-oil primary deficit over 2017-20. This would be in line with the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) fiscal rule for Azerbaijan and bring the non-oil deficit in line with the estimated sustainable level (Box 4) Box 4. Azerbaijan: Recommended Fiscal Rule Targets MPIH Period Period Period Long-run Adjustment Front-loading Investment (Percent non-resource GDP) Azerbaijan: Non-Resource Primary Balance Azerbaijan currently uses an ad-hoc fiscal policy framework. The framework contains three main elements: (i) an ad-hoc rule to save ½ of oil revenue abroad in a well-managed oil fund (SOFAZ); (ii) using ¾ of transferred oil-fund revenue to finance investment; and (iii) broad coverage of fiscal accounts, underpinned by rolling non-binding three-year budget plans. The system is pro-cyclical (tightly linked to oil prices), lacks focus on long-term non-oil sustainability and is biased toward excessive public investment. Staff has recommended a rule-based framework to promote fiscal discipline and anchor expectations. A modified permanent income (PIH) model, which relies on a non-resource primary balance (NRPB) target (as a percentage of non-resource GDP), can be used to guide optimal consumption-savings decisions. Under the model, the initial years of scaled-up investment have to be fully reversed by fiscal adjustments. Between 2008 and 2016, Azerbaijan public investment has averaged about 15 percent of GDP. Based on expected oil prices, fiscal revenues, and the depletion of natural resource wealth by 2035, the modified PIH model computes a NRPB target of 26 percent in the long term. The projected 2016 NRPB was 38 percent. PIH annuity Modified PIH annuity FSF annuity Sources: IMF staff calculations. The non-oil primary balance as a percent of GDP is projected to be about –38 percent of non-oil GDP in 2016, while the target based on the PIH fiscal rule (Box 4) is estimated to be -26 percent. IMF Country Report No. 13/165, “Revamping the fiscal policy framework in Azerbaijan,” June 2013. Page 19 Box 4. Azerbaijan: Recommended Fiscal Rule Targets (concluded) To supplement the analysis, a “golden rule” investment rate has also been estimated. The model of Cherif and Hasanov (2013) provides an estimated optimal investment rate under different assumptions for productivity, planning horizons and initial buffers. With an assumed 10 percent return on public investment, 45-year horizon, and initial wealth-to-revenue ratio of 2, the optimal investment rate is within the range of 15- 18 percent of total government revenues. Recent estimates indicate that public investment as a percent of total government revenue could go from 52 percent in 2016 to 23 percent by 2020. Azerbaijan: Optimal vs. Projected Investment Spending Paths, 2013–21 (In billions of AzN) Optimal Investment Projected Investment Source: IMF staff calculations. The authorities stressed that fiscal policy would return to a consolidation path and outlined a number of measures. In particular, they agreed that some parts of past capital expenditures have been inefficient, and that capital spending levels are high and needed to decrease. They also indicated that there was room to lower expenditures on goods and services. Going forward, the 2016 pension, wage and social spending increases would not be repeated, capital spending reductions would resume, and new pension legislation will lower pension deficits. Notably, the devaluation effects which automatically raised certain expenditures would be absent. Moreover, efforts are underway to raise non-oil revenues—not by increasing tax rates—but by expanding the non-oil tax base over time with investment incentives. In addition, overall fiscal balances would also improve based on WEO oil price projections and as gas production commences. Staff and the authorities reached agreement on the fiscal adjustment path and the projections which incorporate policy measures. While large and subject to implementation risks, the adjustment was broadly seen to be feasible given proposed policy measures which tilted toward spending cuts and new pension reforms. Staff stated that the authorities’ non-oil tax measures reduce revenues in 2016—and it is premature to gauge their long run effect. Importantly, the temporary increase in public employments should not be made permanent, and if these recruits cannot find positions, they should be directed to targeted social assistance programs. Cash transfer programs to fight poverty could be made more effective by making them conditional (e.g., education/training). Cherif, R. & Hasanov, F., 2013. "Oil Exporters’ Dilemma: How Much to Save and How Much to Invest," World Development. Page 20 The government’s plan to implement pension system reform is welcomed. The plan— expected to be enacted by end-2016—will increase the focus on social-insurance principles, linking benefits almost entirely to individual retirement accounts. Retirement ages and contribution periods will increase. The base pension—a flat benefit that accounts for more than half of pension spending—will be eliminated and replaced by an increase of the current defined-contribution benefit. A minimum pension will soften the impact on the low wage workers. Annual pension fund deficits (some 3 percent of GDP) should gradually be eliminated. Staff recommended the full implementation of the plan without delay. There was consensus that a rule-based fiscal framework and strong institutional arrangements would preserve fiscal sustainability over the medium term. The authorities are aware of the underlying fiscal risks: (i) oil revenue volatility; (ii) an unsustainable level of public investment; (iii) uncertain recovery of IBA bad assets; (iv) Social Protection Fund (SPF) deficits; and (v) a growing debt stock. Staff stressed that a rule-based fiscal framework supplemented by a strong public financial management system, detailed multi-annual budgets, and a public debt strategy would entrench fiscal discipline and mitigate the volatility of oil revenue while promoting intergenerational equity. In this context, the authorities plan to request FAD TA on fiscal rules.