Staff encouraged the CBA to further strengthen banking sector regulations to ensure financial stability. Staff stressed that notwithstanding the government’s strong financial position and the relatively underdeveloped banking sector, actions are needed to tackle vulnerabilities. Recent measures taken on the strengthening of provisioning rules and requiring the accurate classification of NPLs are steps in the right direction and will help ensure correct capital needs but further efforts are needed to strengthen the regulatory framework. As pointed out by recent IMF technical assistance, developing the interbank money market, reducing connected lending and exposure to single large borrowers, and discouraging banks from taking on foreign-exchange exposure to un-hedged borrowers would go a long way to increase the resilience of the system. The relatively small size of the banking system by international standards, combined with recent increases in capitalization, lessen somewhat the concerns that these foreign exchange, credit, and interest rate risks give rise to. A thorough assessment of financial stability and development aspects of the financial sector will be carried out in the upcoming 2015 FSAP update. Developing the banking system requires measures by the CBA to increase competition in the banking sector. The ongoing capitalization process provides an opportunity for the CBA to encourage some consolidation in the system. This could entail reducing bureaucratic and judicial formality for mergers and acquisitions of healthier banks, introducing debt/equity swaps, and offering incentives to banks in the form of lower deposit insurance premia or tax advantages. Banks that do not meet the minimum capital requirement by the newly established deadline should be liquidated or converted into non-bank financial institutions. Restructuring the largely state-owned bank IBA so as to reduce its dominance of the sector is also a priority for achieving a more level playing field in the banking system. Actions by the CBA to increase competition in interest margins (e.g., creating a private credit bureau) and help banks reduce their costs (e.g., protecting creditors’ rights) would also place the system in a better position to support private sector–led growth, particularly for SMEs, which face high costs of borrowing (Boxes 5 and 6). Page 17 Box 5. Azerbaijan: Determinants of Bank Spreads (In percent) ROM MDA CRO UKR LAT EST SLK CZE POL BLR RUS HUN LIT P C v P Financial Deepening and Interest Spread Bank-level data on 20 commercial banks can shed light on the determinants of bank interest spreads in Azerbaijan over the period 2002–13. The application of the dealership model of Ho and Saunders, supplemented by market structure and macroeconomic environment variables, helped assess the extent to which high spreads of banks in Azerbaijan are related to bank- specific variables or to a low degree of competition, controlling for macroeconomic factors. The analysis suggests that lowering bank interest margins would require reducing operating costs, increasing competition, consolidating the small bank segments and maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment. Specifically, reducing operating costs could be achieved by strengthening bank corporate governance, adopting the best banking technologies, improving staff productivity, and introducing organizational changes. Enhancing competition in the banking sector would need actions to downsize the IBA (either by sale of assets or by splitting it into areas of businesses), promote non-banking financial institutions and capital markets, reduce loan concentration though stricter supervision of large exposures, and improve transparency and disclosure of bank products. As small banks in Azerbaijan are operating with significant unrealized economies of scale, the authorities could allow for market-led consolidation of smaller banks , which will contribute to greater cost efficiency and lower interest rate spreads. Promoting a stable macroeconomic environment (low and stable inflation) should contribute to lower equilibrium interest rates; lowering reserve requirements is likely to reduce the cost of intermediation. See Selected Issues Paper “Determinants of Bank Spreads in Azerbaijan“. Sources: Global Financial Database; and IMF staff calculations. Interest Spread GEO TJK ARM KGZ The CBA noted that plans are underway to sustain the recent progress in strengthening banking sector regulations . While indicating that liquidations should not be ruled out, the CBA stressed that only a few banks may be unable to meet the new capital requirement by end-2014. The authorities also mentioned that exposures of banks to foreign exchange risks are well contained in light of the low share of external debt liabilities in bank balance sheets (below 20 percent) and did not see it possible to extend further the January 1, 2015 deadline for the minimum capital requirement. They looked forward to the upcoming FSAP, as a useful roadmap for further improvements in this area. Page 18 Box 6. Azerbaijan: Financial Development and Non-Oil Growth KAZ RUS CEE GEO TJK TKM KGZ UZB ARM Baltic ) Caucasus Central Asia U f h ( P (In percent of GDP) Credit to the private sector (in percent on GDP) Credit to the Private Sector Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The deepening of financial systems is particularly important for natural resource–exporting economies. Cross-country analyses suggest that hydrocarbo – rich developing economies (HRDCs) often have lower levels of financial development, perhaps due to weaker financial and business climate policies and institutions. Robust financial systems can support economic diversification by promoting private sector development. Moreover, the relationship between financial depth and diversification can be mutually reinforcing so that increased diversification can spur further financial development. Azerbaijan lags behind other transition economies in credit to the private sector and the level of deposits. Cross-country comparisons assembled by the EBRD show that Azerbaijan may be on par with other economies in Central Asia and the Caucasus in financial development, yet Azerbaijan lags other transition economies in Central and Eastern Europe and Russia by large margins. Moreover, much of the financial sector growth experienced in the past decade or so has been in consumer credit. Growth in credit to the private sector increased from just under 5 percent of GDP in 2000 to around 13 percent in 2013. Yet, a large portion of the growth in credit came from growth in household lending which accelerated from around 9 percent of total bank lending in 2000 to around 40 percent in 2013. Mortgages have been an important component of banks’ credit to consumers as these comprised about 14 percent of banks’ portfolios in 2013, up from 8 percent in 2006. Empirical tests conducted by Fund staff found that the Azerbaijan financial sector is not contributing to the development of the non-oil economy. Despite some caveats, time series regressions found that public spending is highly correlated with the growth of the non-oil economy, yet credit from the banking system was not correlated when controlling for growth in public spending and real changes in oil prices. The absence of a link between finance and non-oil growth may reflect a number of factors, including the lack of adequate lending opportunities and institutional bottlenecks. Given the importance that the financial sector needs to play in supporting the growth of the non-oil economy, looking at constraints on the development of the sector, and designing a well sequenced program that supports financial development while also managing the risks that come with financial sector policy reform all require the attention of policy makers. See Selected Issues Paper “Azerbaijan: Financial Development and Non-Oil Growth”. Page 19