Recent developments and near-term economic prospects are favorable (see panel charts): The growth of non-oil GDP reached almost 10 percent in 2013 supported by high public spending and a rapid increase in consumer loans. Non-oil GDP growth will remain strong albeit somewhat slower in 2014–15, mostly reflecting the recently announced fiscal consolidation process. Oil output is likely to be flat for a number of years following the stabilization in 2013 that ended two consecutive years of decline. Currently, the shares of oil and gas in total exports are 87 percent and 7 percent, respectively. These shares could become 60 percent and 30 percent as Azerbaijan reaches the peak of gas production for delivery to Europe before 2020. The reserves to production ratio for oil and gas are 22 years and 57 years, respectively, according to the 2013 British Petroleum Statistical Review of World Energy . Major reasons behind the depletion of oil reserves are the age of the oil fields and limited investment in the oil sector. For a discussion of the marked decrease in the poverty rate (including gains in employment, wages and productivity, and social transfers) see “The Inclusiveness of Azerbaijan’s Growth” in IMF Country Report 12/05 (Box 2) and 12/06 (Chapter 1). In the remaining part of this report, oil refers to oil and gas, except when gas is discussed explicitly. Page 6 Inflation increased slightly to 2.4 percent in 2013, on the back of adjustments to the regulated price for petroleum products toward the end of the year. Though the output gap turned positive in 2013, inflation is projected to remain in low single-digit levels during 2014–15, mainly on the back of the fiscal consolidation. The de facto exchange rate regime is classified as a stabilized arrangement and is the key anchor for monetary policy. The manat exchange rate has appreciated by less than 2 percent relative to the U.S. dollar since November 2010. The impact of depreciation pressures in a number of neighboring countries has been limited, with few signs of lower manat demand or capital flight. Moreover, the CBA has continued to intervene to prevent appreciation of the manat since the beginning of this year, increasing reserves by about $0.5 billion in the first quarter of 2014. Fiscal policy. Preliminary information suggests that the 2013 non-oil primary deficit in percent of non-oil GDP remained at 2012 levels at about 45 percent, but still well above the 35 percent sustainability level implied by the permanent income rule under a conservative scenario of oil and gas production. The deficit would have been even larger had it not been for spending restraint towards the end of 2013 and some under-execution of spending at the state budget level and, particularly, on investments financed by the oil fund outside the budget. The spending restraint helped reduce the break-even fiscal oil price slightly to $77 dollars per barrel. Parliament approved a consolidated budget for 2014 that lowers the government-spending-to- GDP ratio and implies a decline in the non-oil fiscal deficit by about 2 percent of non-oil GDP. The overall fiscal surplus declined to 1 percent of GDP, on flat revenues, but this allowed the oil fund to continue to grow (its size now stands at 48 percent of GDP). Monetary policy. The Central Bank of Azerbaijan (CBA) kept the refinancing rate steady between February 2013 and end-April 2014, when it lowered the rate by 50 basis points to 4.25 percent and decreased the lower and upper limits of the interest rate corridor by 50–100 basis points (setting the floor at 0.5 percent and the ceiling at 6 percent). In August 2013, the CBA prompted a reduction in lending rates by cutting the interest rate ceiling of the Azerbaijan Deposit Insurance Fund (ADIF) from 12 percent to 10 percent. Following this reduction, private sector credit accelerated while remaining highly concentrated in personal loans. The CBA though has followed through with plans to stop lending to the real economy. The Tariff Council increased the prices of petrol, diesel fuel and some other petroleum products by 30 percent on average. This is the first adjustment to these prices since December 2007. The International Energy Agency (IEA) ranked Azerbaijan as one of the oil exporting countries in the world with lowest energy consumption subsidies in 2012 (about 3 percent of GDP). See IMF Country Reports 13/164 and 13/165 for an application of the FAD fiscal module of the Resource-rich Developing Countries Framework to Azerbaijan. Page 7 Several financial indicators 2011 2012 2013 Azerbaijan: Banking Sector Excluding IBA—Financial Soundness (In percent) 1. Regulatory Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets 2. Liquid Assets to Total Assets 3. Nonperforming Loans to Total Loans 4. Bank Return on Assets 5. Bank Return on Equity of the banking system excluding the largely state- owned International Bank of Azerbaijan (IBA) improved in 2013. The capital ratio increased to 21.6 percent boosted by a fivefold increase in banks’ minimum regulatory capital requirement. Though liquidity declined, bank profitability also improved on the back of the recent consumer lending boom. Disclosed nonperforming loans (NPLs) as a percentage of total loans decreased slightly to 4.5 percent, despite the rapid increase in consumer loans, reflecting the write-off of fully provisioned loans. NPL figures, though, only include the overdue portion of principal and interest, suggesting that NPLs are higher. Source: Central Bank of Azerbaijan. 1/ Disclosed NPLs are somewhat underestimated, as only the overdue portion of principal and interest is disclosed as NPL. Recent changes in the regulatory framework of the banking system include measures to tighten consumer loans and strengthen the provisioning rules and requirements for the accurate classification of NPLs. The CBA also extended the deadline on the new capital requirements until January 1, 2015, giving some banks (comprising about 8 percent of total banking system assets) more time to fulfill this requirement. The largest bank, IBA, is in compliance with the capital adequacy ratio. But as the financial position of IBA remains fragile, the shareholders’ assembly decided to increase the bank’s statutory capital over the next four years, even in the absence of clear plans for the restructuring of the bank. This increase will bring an additional burden of about $300 million (about 0.5 percent of GDP) on the government, which may double if the other (private) shareholders do not participate in the increase. The baseline scenario reflects the authorities’ plans to sustain the recent change in the course of economic policies and tackle fiscal vulnerabilities over the medium term. The government’s plans to rein in spending, particularly in the public investment program, would enable a decline in the non-oil primary deficit to non-oil GDP ratio to the sustainable level of 35 percent by 2019. Over the medium term, non-oil GDP growth could be in the 5 percent range, if it is underpinned by fiscal consolidation and supported by non-oil foreign direct investment (FDI). In particular, the CBA tightened consumer loan extension procedures and limited the loan-to-value of car loans. For a discussion on IBA issues see IMF Country Report 12/05. Page 8 Azerbaijan: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2012–19 Est. 2013 2014 2/ 2015 Current Policies Scenario (Annual percentage change) (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified) Overall GDP Non-oil GDP Consumer price index (period average) Overall fiscal balance Non-oil primary balance 1/ Current account balance Oil Fund Assets (in billions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Azerbaijani authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ In percent of non-oil GDP. 2/ Based on the 2014 approved budget. Azerbaijan’s external position is strong. External buffers, namely the CBA reserves and the oil fund, now amount to about 33 months of import cover and provide strong support to the peg. The current account surplus is high and sovereign foreign assets are expected to reach $55 billion, or 64 percent of overall GDP, by 2015. These assets are projected to decline to about 40 percent of GDP by 2019 as the oil fund engages in the financing of some energy-related projects of strategic importance. Although the planned fiscal consolidation would tend to increase the current account surplus over the medium term, the dominating influence is expected to be a decline in oil exports, as oil prices soften and production begins to tail off. Staff projections assume moderate returns from the energy-related projects given the inherent uncertainty, but further investment in the oil sector could keep revenues higher than in the baseline scenario. Against this backdrop, which implies a lower underlying current account, there is no conclusive evidence of exchange rate misalignment (Box 1) . The fact that Azerbaijan has been able to broadly maintain its share in global non-hydrocarbon exports also suggests that competitiveness is balanced. The authorities agreed with this assessment and stressed that improving competitiveness is a top policy priority. They saw public spending on infrastructure as critical to easing physical constraints on the business climate and improving the productivity of private investment. Page 9 Risks to the baseline scenario are tilted to the downside but financial buffers are comfortable (Annex 1). Slippages in the fiscal adjustment and further deterioration of IBA would undermine prospects for reducing vulnerabilities and fostering sustainable growth. A disruption in oil production or a sustained decline in global oil prices associated with a potential deterioration in the global outlook and emerging markets could expose fiscal vulnerabilities. Sharply slower growth in Russia would have, however, a relatively small impact. Azerbaijan’s direct real linkages to Russia have substantially declined over the past decade, following the oil boom. The impact of the tapering of the quantitative easing of monetary policy in the United States on Azerbaijan should also be limited, given the low reliance on external savings and capital inflows (Box 2). While the authorities have room to use financial buffers if such risks materialize, strengthening the non-oil fiscal position and tightening financial supervision will also be crucial to help mitigate the impact of future shocks. The potential for higher oil prices is also possible given the risks of gas supply disruptions resulting from the geopolitical situation in Ukraine and the Middle East. The authorities broadly agreed with the general assessment of risks to the medium- term outlook but did not rule out the near-term possibility of some inflows of capital from Azeris living in Russia if the situation deteriorates considerably. On the oil production time horizon, they mentioned that new wells and ongoing discussions on a possible extension of the production sharing agreement between the BP-led consortium and the government could help slow the decline in oil output. The authorities also downplayed the risks of the considerable softening of oil prices, given the trend of oil prices in recent years and geopolitical considerations going forward (if the level of oil prices over the last three years is maintained over the medium term, sovereign government assets could be near 55 percent of GDP by 2019). A 12 percent decline in the assumption for oil production in 2014 (about 100,000 barrels per day) could worsen the consolidated fiscal balance by 5 percentage points of GDP and, in the absence of spending adjustment, would result in a withdrawal of oil fund reserves by $4 billion. A similar impact on the budget would arise with US$20 decline in the oil price. The probability of such event this year is not small as pointed out by the analysis conducted by the IMF research department in the context of the 2014 Spring World Economic Outlook. Page 10 Box 1. Azerbaijan: Exchange Rate, External Stability, and Competitiveness Assessment Azerbaijan: REER and Non-Oil Exports, 2000–13 Azerbaijan's share in non-oil world exports (Index 2000=100) REER (Index 2000=100) Non-oil exports (% non-oil GDP) (RHS) The manat real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated during the oil boom years of 2004–8 though it has since stabilized, and there is no conclusive evidence of a loss of competitiveness. Between early 2004 and late 2008—the peak of the oil boom—the REER appreciated by about 78 percent. Following a sharp drop in inflation after the global financial crisis, the REER has been broadly steady. In terms of the competitiveness of non-oil exports, the share of non-oil exports to total exports has remained broadly stable, at about 5 percent, since the end of the oil boom. However, Azerbaijan has fairly steadily increased its share in global non-oil exports. The exchange rate assessment with three CGER-like methodologies provides a mixed picture. The Macroeconomic Balance (MB) approach, following the methodology set out in Beidas-Strom and Cashin (2011), suggests that with current policies, the exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals (slightly overvalued by two percent). This assessment is corroborated by the external stability (ES) approach, factoring in the need to stabilize the ratio of the net foreign asset position to output. However, estimating the equilibrium real exchange rate as a function of a number of medium-term fundamentals (ERER), finds a 20 percent undervaluation. The degree of undervaluation using the ERER has fluctuated between 10 and 20 percent since the beginning of the oil boom in the mid-2000s and is now at the levels observed in 2007 and 2010. This approach, however, does not incorporate diminishing oil reserves, an important fundamental, which may worsen the fit for Azerbaijan. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Sources: Azerbaijani authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Macroeconomic Balance Approach Contributions to Current Account Norm (In percent of GDP) Azerbaijan : Exchange Rate Assessment Fiscal balance Oil trade balance Oil wealth Current account norm Population growth Old age dependency Degree of maturity Relative income Economic growth Constant Sources: Azerbaijani authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Underlying current account Current account norm ER assessment, percent (-: undervalued) 1/ 4/ MB 1/ 2/ ES 3/ ERER Source: IMf staff estimates and projections. 1/ Exchange rate elasticity is assumed to be 0.4. 2/ Current account as share of GDP. 3/ Non-oil current account as share of GDP. 4/ MB and ES approaches measures misallignment in 2019, ERER approach is for 2013. See Beidas-Strom, S. and P. Cashin, 2011, “Are Middle Eastern Current Account Imbalances Excessive?” IMF WP/11/195. Page 11 Box 2. Azerbaijan: International Linkages and Spillovers Exports (First Year, Percent change relative to baseline) (In percent of GDP) GDP Impact of Emerging Market Slowdown Table 1: Openness Has Increased CCA Exporters MENAP Exporters Azerbaijan Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The oil price is the essential channel linking Azerbaijan to the global economy. With the oil boom since the mid-2000s, export-to-GDP ratios have increased and remained highly concentrated on the oil sector (94 percent of total exports in 2013). The exit from unconventional monetary policy in advanced economies along with its impact on the policy mix of most emerging market economies, will determine changes in global oil prices. A sharp slowdown in major emerging economies, for example, could reduce global GDP by 1¾ percent and oil prices by almost 20 percent. Azerbaijan would share the adverse consequences of a fall in the oil price. The impact of such a shock in the GDP could be similar to the estimate for MCD oil exporters, at about 1 percent in the first year. The impact of a slowdown in emerging markets will be relatively small. Azerbaijan’s non-oil export linkages to Russia and Turkey are substantial (44.6 percent and 7.5 percent respectively on average between 2007 and 2011), but total non-oil exports account only for 6 percent of total exports. Azerbaijan’s financial sector should be able to withstand moderate shocks. Azerbaijan’s financing needs are generally low by international standards, given external and fiscal surpluses. Lending by global banks to Azerbaijan’s financial sector is small and corporations rely mainly on their own resources. Higher global interest rates for Azerbaijan would be mostly felt through temporary changes in the book value of the oil fund—with assets close to $35.5 billion or about 50 percent of GDP in 2013, as about 40 percent of its portfolio has a maturity between one and five years, though higher rates will in general benefit the oil fund over time. Exposure of capital markets is nil given its underdevelopment. FDI, focused on the energy sector, will remain strong due to new gas developments. An escalation of the Russia-Ukraine crisis will have a relatively small impact as Azerbaijan’s direct real linkages to Russia have substantially declined over the past decade following the oil boom. Lower GDP growth in Russia could directly impact about less than 3 percent of total exports (or half of the total non-oil exports). The direct exposure of the financial sector is mainly through small assets of the state oil fund (SOFAZ) and the Russian subsidiary of the International Bank of Azerbaijan (IBA). Migrants’ remittances originating from Russia are also relatively small. This box tailors the 2013 Fall MCD REO Annex 2 on International Linkages and Spillovers to Azerbaijan. Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Calculated as the sum of current account deficit (excluding official current transfers) and amortization scheduled, with a floor of zero. 2/ Excludes nonresident deposits. Gross External Financing Needs in 2013 1/ Share of Non-oil Exports by Destination Sources: UN Comtrade; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations. (In percent, period average 2007-11) (In percent of GDP) R N R N Y Y E K T K P T Z K B Z U R H B E Z U Y B L E U T W K MCD Oil Exporters EU excl. Turkey E N U T R I Z K United States K T L N R R I I N EM average Total MCD F T R Euro Area U.S CCAOE China Russia Turkey GCC Russia N B L Other Turkey Page 12