Chaiman Bernanke's testimony to Congress The authorities noted ongoing efforts to improve the business climate. Azerbaijan continues to move up in the Global Competitiveness Index list and is ahead of most transition economies, owing to its strengths in the areas of macroeconomic environment and labor market efficiency. In addition, the successful sovereign issuance will contribute to the development of a yield curve and support the development of the capital market and the financing of companies in the non-oil sector. The authorities also mentioned the progress in tackling corruption with the implementation of initiatives such as e- government, the one-stop window, and the “easy service centers” (ASAN). As part of the anti-corruption program, the authorities are working on a legislative initiative to establish and develop a national mechanism for asset recovery, including possible amendments to the Criminal Procedural Code. In addition, the fourth assessment by MONEYVAL began in October 2013 and is ongoing. The authorities also noted they plan to conduct an AML/CFT risk assessment during 2014. EM (JPMorgan EMBIG) CCA MENAP oil importers Azerbaijan Russia Sources: Bloomberg. Bond Yields (In percent) Issuance of sovereign bond While noting recent progress, staff stressed that accelerating structural reforms in governance and the business climate is critical to diversifying the economy and promoting private non-oil investment (Box 7) Azerbaijan’s low rank on governance-related indicators in surveys of firms carried out by the World Bank and the World Economic Forum suggests considerable scope for improving government effectiveness and widening anti-corruption efforts. Measures to put in place an effective anti-monopoly policy, including by creating an independent competition agency, will help reduce formal and informal barriers to competition. The authorities will also need to ensure that the ongoing education reform brings curricula in line with market needs and removes the existing bottlenecks in higher education to take advantage of relatively flexible labor market regulations. Such measures could help foster non-oil private investment, including FDI, particularly if combined with World Trade Organization (WTO) accession over the near term to facilitate the opening of new markets. This latter process seems to be gaining momentum following the adoption of the new customs code in line with WTO requirements and the 11 th meeting of the working party in February 2014. See IMF Country Report 13/164 for recent amendments to the tax code aimed at providing some tax incentives to foster the non-oil sector development. Prior to March 2014, bonds from the State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) were the country's only benchmark-sized international bonds. SOCAR issued bonds in February 2012 and March 2013. Page 20 Box 7. Azerbaijan: Business Environment and Governance Azerbaijan continues to move quickly up the Global Competitiveness Index (within the top 40) list. But cross- country comparisons suggest that challenges posed by informal monopolies, access to finance, and corruption are still substantial. Despite some progress in tackling small-scale corruption, the country continues to rank poorly on the World Bank’s governance-related indicators (in the bottom third, globally). Global Competitiveness Index (Rank) Institutions CIS AE Infrastructure Macroeconomic environment Health and primary education Higher education and training Innovation Business sophistication Market size Technological readiness Financial market development Ease of Doing Business (Percentile Rank) 2010-14 improvement b g f E Azerbaijan EM Sources: World Bank, Doing Business (2010, 2014); and IMF staff calculations. Oil exporters CCA LIC Anti-Monopoly Policy Effectiveness and Trade Barriers (Rank) Effectiveness of anti-monopoly policy Intensity of local competition Prevalence of trade barriers v f f L SVN KAZ ARM RUS BGR UKR GEO Source: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2013-14. Change in Governance 1/ (Percentile rank) v g B Oil exporters Sources: World Bank, Worldwide Governance Indicators; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Average of government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law and control of corruption. CCA EM LIC Goods market efficiency Labor market efficiency Sources: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2013-14; and IMF staff calculations. Small Firms Finance (In percent of total small firms) Firms using banks to finance investments Firms using banks to finance working capital Azerbaijan CCA CEE Sources: The World Bank, Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org); and IMF staff calculations. Control of Corruption (Percentile rank) ARM BLR GEO KAZ UKR 2000 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Source: World Bank, Worldwide Governance Indicators. Page 21