A series of negative shocks have dented economic performance. Plummeting oil prices, weak regional growth, currency movements and a contraction in HC production quickly erased a large current account surplus. To preserve reserves, the central bank (CBA) undertook a 25 percent devaluation in February 2015 and a second 32 percent devaluation in December 2015, with a shift to a managed floating ER regime. Growth fell to 1.1 percent in 2015 and contracted by 3.4 percent in first half of 2016, given cuts in public investment, stagnant credit activity and flat oil production. Inflation averaged 4.1 percent in 2015 and rose to about 11 percent by mid-2016, reflecting exchange rate pass-through effects (ERPT) (Annex I) Buffers remain substantial given Oil Fund (SOFAZ) assets. Foreign exchange (FX) sales have lowered CBA reserves from $13.8 billion at end-2014 to $4.3 billion by end-June (3.5 months of projected 2016 imports of goods and services). Based on the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric, Azerbaijan should hold about 8.4 months of current imports. SOFAZ assets, which can be used to support the ER, amounted to some $34 billion (close to 100 percent of 2016 projected GDP; about 28 months of current imports). Based on the Fund’s EBA-lite methodology, the real effective exchange rate (REER) remained modestly overvalued as of end-2015 (Annex II). A counter-cyclical stimulus tailored to promote growth and protect vulnerable populations is being implemented. Public sector wages, overall pensions, and social protection expenditures have been increased by 10 percent (3 percent of non-oil GDP) in 2016. With the issuance of an external Southern Gas Corridor (SGC) bond in March for $1 billion, space was freed up in the state budget for an additional 3½ percent of non-oil GDP in capital spending to complete Page 11 ongoing projects. To ease social tensions, state-owned enterprises and local authorities have hired 35,000 minimum wage workers on temporary contracts. Moreover, new non-oil tax measures are expected to reduce revenues by ¼ percent of GDP (Box 1) . Overall, current and capital expenditures rise by about 2 percent of GDP, while the consolidated government non-oil primary deficit as a percent of non-oil GDP rises by about 3 percentage points (pps), to 38 percent. Box 1. Azerbaijan: Non-Oil Tax Revenue Others, Personal income tax, 983 Customs, 387 Corporate income tax, 2211 (millions of AZN manat) Land, road, property, 445 Revenue from different tax categories, 2015 The authorities aim to raise non-oil tax revenues without adding new taxes or raising rates. The plan is focused on fostering non-oil activity (broadening the base), simplifying the tax system and encouraging compliance via accessible e- services. However, it is not clear the extent to which these measures will improve the tax intake in the long-run or Azerbaijan’s low tax yield efficiency. The current tax structure relies on value- added (VAT), and corporate (CIT) and personal (PIT) income taxes. The PIT rate is 14 percent for income up to AzN 2,500 per month and 25 percent thereafter. The CIT rate is 20 percent, but certain firms can opt to pay a simplified tax (ST) rate (4 percent in Baku, 2 percent elsewhere). ST payers do not pay property tax or VAT. The VAT rate is 18 percent, but firms participating in production sharing agreements and joint ventures in the hydrocarbon sector are exempt. New tax policy changes focus on adjusting registration limits. For 2016 the qualifying income threshold have been raised (from AzN 200 to 2,500) while the standard deduction was held constant at AzN 136. The VAT registration and ST eligibility has been increased (from AzN 120,000 to 200,000). Traders or catering firms with turnover exceeding AzN 200,000 can now opt out of VAT and pay at the ST rate (albeit at 6 and 8 percent, respectively). Construction firms can now choose to pay a VAT or an average of AzN 45 per square meter. VAT Rates and Productivity, 2014 Revenue productivity based on GDP (RHS) Value-added tax, (in percent) Standard VAT rates Excise, 648 Sources: IMF, VAT Database (Fiscal Affairs Department), Government Finance Statistics Yearbook (Statistics Department) Less than 10 percent of these employments are part of the consolidated government accounts. Foreign currency expenditures (e.g., service on external debt) of about 1½ percent of GDP rose automatically following the devaluations. Page 12 Box 1. Azerbaijan: Non-Oil Tax Revenue (concluded) Exemptions have been recently introduced to boost private investment. From March 2016, new investment projects within certain regions and sectors, and a minimum investment amount can qualify for an “ investment certificate. ” Required investment amounts range from AzN 200,000 (rural regions) to 10 million (more urbanized). Among the priorities are industrial parks, manufacturing plants, and research activities. Valid for seven years, the certificate provides for a 50 percent reduction of income taxes, VAT-free import of technological equipment, and no property or land tax. A number of SMEs have applied, signaling a positive effect on investment. Taxpayer services have been modernized. All formal labor contracts are registered in a database that is shared between the Ministry of Taxes and the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection. Business and individuals can now pay taxes and custom duties via e-services reducing compliance time. These efforts, together with a reduction in the number of required taxes, have resulted in a marked improvement (from rd in 2011 to 34 th in 2016) in Azerbaijan’s Ease of Paying Taxes indicator (from the World Bank’s Doing Business survey). Fiscal space has declined. More than 70 percent of Azerbaijan's public debt is denominated in foreign currencies. Given the devaluations and borrowing plans, the debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that the debt to GDP ratio will move from 11 percent in 2014 to about 38 percent in 2016 ( Annex III ). The CBA tightened the monetary policy stance in 2016 to limit inflationary pressures. In three separate moves (in February, March and August), the CBA increased its refinancing rate by 650 basis points (bps) (to 9.5 percent) and adjusted the interest rate corridor. Since mid-2016, the CBA has held manat deposit auctions to withdraw liquidity. With the move to a managed float and periodic FX auctions, exchange rate volatility has increased. Credit growth has turned negative in 2016 given weak economic activity, mismatches in banks’ currency positions and expectations of additional devaluations. The authorities have taken steps to repair the banking system (Annex IV). The devaluations led to an increase in dollarization, weakened bank balance sheets and deteriorated financial soundness indicators—raising significant financial stability concerns. In mid-2015, the government created a bad bank-SPV to manage and collect nonperforming loans (NPLs) from the largest state bank (IBA), while the CBA closed or merged a number of smaller banks. In March 2016, banking and insurance supervision was transferred from the CBA and Ministry of Finance (MOF), respectively, to a new supervisory and regulatory authority, the Financial Market Services Agency (FMSA). To support confidence, household bank deposits were afforded a blanket guarantee In May 2016, the corridor was narrowed, with the floor raised (from 2 to 4 percent) and the ceiling reduced (from 17 to 15 percent). However, tight bid-ask spreads (+/- 1 percent) at the CBA auctions constrain ER movements. The amount of FX offered is determined jointly by the CBA and SOFAZ. Page 13 backstopped through the CBA. To address dollarization, new macro-prudential limits were placed on dollar lending and foreign currency reserve requirements were increased. The FMSA has put together a supervisory action plan and has started to address ailing institutions. A Financial Stability Board has also been created. Azerbaijan: Banking Sector Financial Soundness Indicators 2011–15 (In percent) 2015 1/ Regulatory Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets Liquid Assets to Total Assets Nonperforming Loans (NPLs) to Total Loans 2/ 3/ NPLs Net of Provisions to Total Loans 2/ 3/ Bank Return on Assets Bank Return on Equity Sources: Central Bank of Azerbaijan and staff estimates. 1/ 2015 data reflects prudential FSIs. 2/ Excludes restructured loans. Impaired loan ratios are higher under IFRS. 3/ Disclosed NPLs are underestimated for 2011-14; only overdue portion of principal and interest is counted.