Expectations Staff supported the CBA’s intention to keep monetary policy in a neutral stance and welcomed recent measures to slow consumer lending. The anchor of monetary policy is the maintenance of the stabilized exchange rate arrangement. Nonetheless, with Azerbaijan’s exposure to large and destabilizing capital inflows from non-government sources quite limited to date, owing to the low level of development in the financial and capital markets, there is some room for monetary policy to operate. During the mission, the CBA stated its plans—with the staff concurring—to retain a neutral stance, given expectations for stable and low inflation amid tighter fiscal policy, soft international food prices, and slowing consumer credit growth. In the event, in late April the CBA lowered the policy rate by 50 basis points, noting that the rate cut was based on low inflation expectations and the need to diversify the economy and to boost investment activity. Staff cautions the CBA against further policy rate cuts in light of risks of slippages in the fiscal consolidation, implementation problems of recent measures to slowdown consumer lending, or potential reversals in soft global food prices due to regional tensions. Indeed, monetary tightening would be warranted in case slippages in implementing the fiscal consolidation plan caused demand pressures. Strengthening the interest rate transmission mechanism is a precondition to making monetary policy more effective. Staff noted that this would entail continuing with plans to scale down the CBA’s direct lending to the real economy, including to non-financial public entities, with a view to discontinuing such lending on a permanent basis. Actions in line with recent IMF technical assistance, including the publication of inflation notes and balance of payments projections, along with efforts to deepen the financial markets could pave the way for the adoption of greater exchange rate flexibility over the longer term. Staff stressed that steps to improve monetary-fiscal policy coordination and develop currency risk mitigation instruments will also facilitate a move toward inflation targeting and greater exchange rate flexibility. Notwithstanding the benefits of maintaining a managed exchange rate, including by providing an anchor for monetary policy, a flexible exchange rate regime would increase policy options (e.g. to deal with potential capital inflows as financial development proceeds) and contribute to reduce inflation and output volatility. For detailed discussion on exchange rate policy in Azerbaijan, see IMF Country Report 12/06 (chapter 3) and 13/165 (chapter 2). Page 16 The CBA plans to sustain the unwinding of its directed lending and concurred that preparing for greater exchange rate flexibility over the medium term is important to develop a more independent monetary policy. The CBA is confident that its directed lending to the real sector will continue to decline over the next couple of years. In addition, by this summer, the CBA plans to launch the implementation of an action plan to prepare for greater exchange rate flexibility over the medium term, developed on the basis of IMF TA advice.