Financial sector discussions focused on the best way to restructure the banking system. The authorities stressed that IBA’s management has been replaced, staffing and operating costs cut, new lending standards implemented, and the balance sheet gradually cleaned. Privatization, however, would take time and would require returning the bank to full health through renewed lending. Staff noted that the SPV exchange of bad assets was at full face value, and a substantial amount of new financial assistance has been provided to IBA in the form of fresh SOFAZ dollar deposits, IBA deposits placed at the CBA at preferential rates, and new capital injections. Downsizing and privatizing IBA would reduce bank concentration, increase competition and improve efficiency in the system. Losses should be recognized quickly and The CBA refinancing rate has been more associated with CBA liquidity lending—including for financial stability purposes—and less linked to price stability objectives. Page 22 existing owners made to bear their fair share of the burden. Any residual shortfalls should be addressed by a transparent budget transfer-with no impact on the CBA balance sheet. The FMSA indicated it was ready to remove regulatory forebearance and address problems in the rest of the system. FMSA staffing and training had geared up, while basic on-site inspections and asset quality reviews have been completed. Banks have been classified into three categories (solvent, need capital/liquidity assistance or insolvent) and notifications for additional capital injections have been made. Staff argued that the process should proceed quickly and follow guiding principles, which would consist of (i) making sure bank resolution follows least-cost considerations—i.e., wiping out existing shareholders and bailing in related party deposits, before government support is contemplated; (ii) providing liquidity assistance only to economically viable banks on the basis of high quality collateral; and (iii) standing ready to pay out guaranteed deposits in closed banks. Progress in implementing recommendations from the 2015 FSAP and a recent TA mission on banking supervision should accelerate with the establishment of the new regulator. There was agreement that the real-time switch in financial sector regulators as the banking system was being restructured had slowed momentum on supervisory reforms. However, the authorities pointed out that unlike the CBA, the FMSA’s ability to conduct on-site inspections was not restricted and political support for an overhaul of financial sector regulation had strengthen. Staff has provided comments on drafts of new financial legislation. Azerbaijan: Key FSAP Findings Legal restrictions and limited capacity. Lack of an explicit mandate for systemic financial stability. Gaps in crisis management hampered bank resolution. Poor information exchange between deposit insurance fund and banking supervision. Rules on emergency lending assistance (ELA) unclear. Specific resolution plans for systemic banks lacking.