Boosting private investment and diversification. To sustain high growth rates against weakening external demand, increase productivity, and allow Bangladesh to take full advantage of its young population and low labor costs, private investment (including foreign) needs to increase and exports should be diversified into new, higher value-added goods and services. This requires: Better public infrastructure. Efforts should focus on increased public investment on high- priority and cost-effective projects in power and transport infrastructure and fostering private participation through public-private partnerships (PPP), taking advantage of the PPP Act passed in September 2015. Page 24 Easier investment climate, including through continued liberalization of FX regulations, as well as reforms to increase land availability, enhance transparency, and simplify tax and customs procedures. Reviewing the financial terms for natural gas PSCs and allowing international firms to bid for onshore gas wells would boost investment in the gas sector. More supportive financial system. Continued improvements in financial regulation and supervision, strengthening the SBs, containing bank financing of the fiscal deficit, and aligning NSC rates with market rates should make more credit available to finance productive investment. f I P Private Investment in Low-Income Countries (Bubble size by 2014 GDP per capita) ) ( P G Real GDP Growth (Average 2010-14) Doing Business Rankings (2015; higher rankings indicate worse conditions) O k G y f E R y h S Three worst rankings ) G B x ( E k w L Bangladesh (BGD) Overall median ranking ) G B x ( Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database. Source: World Bank, Doing Business database. Strengthening inclusion. Poverty has declined and income inequality has remained relatively low and stable over the last two decades. However, the poverty-reducing impact of growth could be further raised by: Improving the progressivity of public spending , by containing expenditure on regressive universal subsidies and unfunded pension systems for civil servants, and increasing spending on well-targeted social safety nets. Improving the progressivity of the tax system, by implementing the new VAT with its regressivity-reducing features, broadening income tax bases, and strengthening property taxation. Continuing to promote financial inclusion . Bangladesh has made steady progress in this area (Box 3 and Selected Issues Papers, Chapter III). Successful schemes, such as those using mobile phones for domestic remittances, or facilitating women’s access to finance, should be expanded. Authorities’ views. The authorities shared staff’s assessment of subdued private investment and highlighted the need for increased investment to attain the government’s growth targets under the Seventh Five Year Plan. They broadly agreed with staff’s policy recommendations on inclusion, and suggested bearing in mind the challenges posed by Bangladesh’s unique features, including high population density. Page 25 Box 3. Financial Inclusion in Bangladesh: A Stocktaking Policies. Bangladesh has adopted a number of policies to enhance access to and usage of financial services by those who would otherwise be excluded from them, including promoting mobile financial services, requiring banks to open at least fifty percent of their branches in rural areas, introducing agent- based banking, establishing floors on credit to agricultural and rural sectors backed by credit refinancing lines on concessional terms, prioritizing support to small businesses and women, schemes aimed at rehabilitating slum dwellers, and developing no frill accounts (including the 10 Taka accounts). Progress over time. Bangladesh has seen steady progress on financial inclusion over the last decade and a half across a broad range of indicators. Bangladesh: Progress on Financial Inclusion The ratio of bank deposit accounts in the adult population has steadily increased… Deposit Accounts (Percent of adult population) …bank branches... Number of Commercial Bank Branches Per 1,000 sq. km. Per 100,000 adults (right scale) …as have mobile money accounts… Number of Active Mobile Money Accounts Per 1,000 adults No. of accounts (in millions, right scale) 1/ Active mobile money account refers to a mobile account that has been used to conduct a money transaction over the past 90 days. …and automated teller machines (ATMs). Number of ATMs Per 1,000 sq. km. Per 100,000 adults (right scale) Bank credit to women has risen as a share of total credit… …while the share of credit to agriculture has declined. Credit to Women Entrepreneurs Amount disbursed (in percent of banks' private sector credit) Number of Women Entrepreneurs (right scale) Credit to Agricultural Sector Disbursements (billion taka) Disbursements (in percent of banks' private sector credit) Sources: Bangladesh Bank; and IMF, Financial Access Survey database and staff calculations. Page 26 Box 3. Financial Inclusion in Bangladesh: A Stocktaking (Concluded) Cross-country analysis. Bangladesh compares favorably with other low-income developing countries (LIDCs) on two key indicators of access to formal finance – accounts held at and credit from a financial institution – across different population groups. However, the use of credit and debit cards is minimal, and the prevalence of informal finance is still high. Bangladesh: Cross-Country Analysis for Selected Financial Inclusion Indicators Bangladesh scores better than other LIDCs in terms of population with an account at a financial institution (and this is true for different vulnerable groups)… Account at a Financial Institution (Percent of population aged 15 and above) LIDC (median) EM (median) Rural Youth Female Poor The use of other forms of formal finance is however still low… Access to Formal Finance (Percent of population aged 15 and above) Borrowed from Debit card Credit card Account used a financial institution to receive government transfers Saved at a financial institution While the number of bank branches and ATMs per 100,000 adults is pulled down by Bangladesh’s high population density… Commercial Bank Branches and ATMs (Per 100,000 adults) LIDC (median) Commercial bank branches ATMs …and it also does well in providing formal credit to these groups. Borrowed from a Financial Institution (Percent of population aged 15 and above) Rural Youth Female Poor …and the preference to use informal finance is still high, particularly regarding store credit. Access to Informal Finance (Percent of adult population aged 15 and above) Borrowed from family or friends Saved using a savings club or a person outside Borrowed from a store by buying on credit the family …access to branches and ATMs is much better when measured on a per 1,000 square kilometer basis. Commercial Bank Branches and ATMs (Per 1,000 sq. km.) LIDC (median) Commercial bank branches ATMs Sources: Bangladesh Bank; World Bank, Findex database; and IMF, Financial Access Survey database and staff calculations. Page 27