The case for additional fiscal space. To boost inclusive growth, Bangladesh needs to ramp General Government Spending (In percent of GDP; 2013) up public investment in critical infrastructure and strengthen the targeting of social spending. Bangladesh has one of the world’s lowest ratios of public spending to GDP in these areas (Box 4). Staff’s baseline assumes that capital spending under ADP will increase by 2 percentage points of GDP between FY15 and FY20, with social spending remaining stable as a share of GDP. To accommodate this additional spending within a fiscally sustainable envelope, the authorities need to strengthen tax revenue and improve the allocation of spending. Total Bangladesh 1/ Low-income developing countries (median) Emerging markets (median) Advanced economies (median) Social spending 2/ Investment Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ Data for Bangladesh are based on FY14 outturns for the central government. 2/ Includes health, education, and social protection spending. Boosting tax revenue. Progress is needed on several fronts: VAT implementation . The new VAT is the authorities’ main reform to expand revenue in coming years. Initially scheduled to be completed in July 2015, the implementation process suffered major setbacks and delays in 2014 as well as strong opposition from the business community. However, progress has been made this year and the authorities are working towards full implementation in July 2016. The timeline is tight, and will require focused, concerted efforts. Priority actions requiring top-level attention include completing necessary procurements; developing refund procedures; finalizing the VAT rules and regulations and prescribing the exempt items; and developing a transition strategy from the existing to the new VAT. The VAT is designed to protect the poor and small businesses, and to reduce taxpayer harassment and compliance costs. Conducting an effective communication campaign highlighting these features will be critical for the reform’s success Corporate income tax rate Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ Tax rates for Bangladesh are those applicable in FY16. Bangladesh 1/ Low-income developing countries (median) Emerging markets (median) Advanced economies (median) Tax Rates (In percent; 2013) Personal income tax rate (top marginal rate) Direct tax reforms. The draft for a modern Direct Tax Code should be finalized. In addition, while the rates for corporate and personal income taxes are in line with those of countries at similar income levels, their bases should be broadened, and property taxation expanded. See IMF Country Report No. 15/304 for more details. Page 28 Box 4. Bangladesh: World Bank’s 2015 Public Expenditure Review (PER) Update - Main Findings The PER Update finds that capital and social spending have increased recently, but project selection and implementation is weak, infrastructure remains poor, and public services are limited, while the share of interest costs is very high. Total central government (CG) spending. Bangladesh has among the world’s lowest ratios of CG expenditure to GDP (about 14 per cent). This results in very limited public services (for instance, Bangladesh spends less on health care per capita–around US$95 in 2013–than most countries in the world) and poor infrastructure (ranked 130 th out of 144 countries in the Global Competitiveness Report 2014–15), particularly for transport. Remuneration has declined as a share of noninterest current expenditure (to 30 percent) in FY14. With pay increases taking place every five years, allowances have tended to increase in intervening years. Social spending. Current spending on education, health, and welfare has risen in real terms and as a share of noninterest current expenditure over the past ten years, but remains low. The sustainability of pension spending has been aided by an increase in the retirement age for government employees (from 57 to 59 years of age). However, inflows to the unfunded General Provident Fund, currently positive and used to finance the deficit, are expected to turn negative in the longer term. Subsidies are sizeable (over 1 per cent of GDP for fertilizer and electricity in FY14) and not well targeted or efficient. Interest costs have almost doubled since FY11 and are very high, accounting for around one quarter of current expenditure in FY14, similar to what is spent on education or on health and welfare. This has been driven mainly by growth in domestic interest payments. Reflecting its higher priority, development (capital) spending has grown faster than current spending on average over FY10–14, and accounted for around 40 per cent of total CG spending in FY14. Transport, communication, energy, health and education have received the largest shares of allocated spending under the Annual Development Program (ADP), in line with the government’s development strategy. However, delayed execution and cost over-runs of development projects are common, resulting in lower returns to investment. Significant intra-year revisions to the ADP suggest poor planning and budget practices. Fragmented institutional arrangements undermine project selection and implementation. Spending on infrastructure maintenance , however, has been stagnant in real terms. ______________________________________________________ 1/ World Bank (2015): Bangladesh-Public Expenditure Review Update: An Update of Fiscal Trends Based on the 2010 Public Expenditure Review. Page 29 Administrative reforms. The focus should be on enhancing transparency, reducing discretion, and simplifying compliance. Continued progress on automation is crucial to achieve these goals. Improving spending allocation. Spending on infrastructure, infrastructure maintenance (which has stagnated and could compromise the growth benefits of scaled-up public investment), and social spending targeted to the poor should be raised. Despite policy measures to lower inefficient and regressive energy subsidies, including the recent hike in electricity and gas prices, subsidy costs remain significant. These should be gradually reduced, including by renegotiating contracts with costly rental power plants and building new plants operated by cheaper fuels. In addition, over the medium term domestic fuel prices should be aligned with international prices through a formula mechanism. The authorities should also reform the civil servants’ unfunded pension system to reduce future liabilities. Strengthen public financial management. Despite recent improvements, particularly in public debt management, further progress is needed: Budget planning, formulation, and execution need to be strengthened. Unrealistic revenue assumptions and reliance on budget revisions make planning difficult and stretch resources. Treasury cash flow forecasting should be further calibrated. Nonconcessional external borrowing should be used strictly for growth-critical, cost-efficient projects, following rigorous cost-benefit analysis. Financial reporting in state-owned enterprises should be strengthened, particularly in Bangladesh Petroleum Corporation (BPC), where the authorities should press ahead with an external audit by a reputed global firm. Authorities’ views. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to launching the new VAT by July 2016. They also noted the progress so far in VAT implementation, and agreed on the need for an effective communication strategy. The authorities welcomed staff’s views on improving the budget formulation process, prioritization of government spending, and rigorous monitoring of nonconcessional external borrowing. They agreed on the need for improving financial management in BPC and mentioned that amendments to its charter are currently under consideration of parliament, including one on allowing external audit by international firms. They preferred domestic fuel price stability over an automatic adjustment formula.