Against global headwinds and episodes of domestic unrest, domestic demand and activity have weakened. The share of private consumption in GDP has steadily declined since fiscal year 2011 (FY11, July 2010–June 2011), while private investment has remained largely unchanged as a share of GDP since FY12 after steadily increasing since the mid-1990s (though it is still higher than for the median low-income country). Moreover, domestic demand and several indicators of activity weakened markedly in the second half of FY15. Exports also performed poorly in FY15, reflecting a restructuring in the garment industry and subdued external demand. Against this background, the preliminary official growth estimate of 6½ percent for FY15 (FY14: 6.1 percent) appears somewhat high. Available indicators (exports, imports, remittances, revenue, and public investment) also suggest a slow start in FY16. Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Public investment represents spending on the Annual Development Program by the central government. Bangladesh: Selected Economic Indicators (y/y percent change) tax collections investment Exports Remittances Tax Nonoil imports H1FY15 H2FY15 Q1FY16 Public Private credit The Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics publishes national accounts data once a year in May. The release includes a preliminary estimate for the ongoing fiscal year (a projection based on data mainly from the first half of the year) and final estimates for the previous fiscal years. Page 11 Composition of GDP 1/ (In percent) Private consumption Public consumption Private investment Public investment (FY09) (FY15) Emerging markets (2014) Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and staff calculations. 1/ Country groupings are based on weighted averages, using GDP at purchasing pow Bangladesh: Contributions to Real GDP Growth (In percentage points, y/y) Private Consumption Private Investment Net Exports Real GDP Growth (y/y) Public Consumption Public Investment Statistical Discrepancy FY05 FY07 FY09 FY11 FY13 Sources: Banlgadesh authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Several factors may have weighed on private investment and growth (although the absence of adequate and timely data, particularly on private sector balance sheets, prevents a full quantification) Crippling regulations and continued bottlenecks in critical infrastructure, particularly in energy and transport, which may have become more binding in recent years as the economy modernizes and becomes more market-oriented. These constraints stem in part from low public investment and inadequate infrastructure maintenance. Bangladesh: Bank Credit to Private Sector Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Financial sector weaknesses also hamper credit, investment, and growth (macro- financial linkages flow chart below, and Figures 4–6). Bangladesh does better than other low-income countries in a broad measure of financial development. However, asset quality, profitability and capital adequacy have declined in the banking sector since end-2012, particularly in state-owned banks (SBs), beset by poor governance and scams. Weak bank balance sheets and governance issues reduce lending capacity, take credit away from productive investment, and, in the case of SBs, can lead to fiscal recapitalization costs (Box 2 and paragraph 23). High levels of non-performing loans and the high rates on national savings certificates (NSCs, a government deposit-like financing instrument), increase banks’ operating and funding costs, putting upward pressure on interest rates The index combines indicators on depth, access, and efficiency. See IMF Staff Discussion Note 15/08, May 2015. Political turmoil and uncertainty. Episodes of violence have affected economic activity both directly and via uncertainty. Subdued private sector credit growth. Credit slowed since mid-2013, with the private credit-to-GDP ratio below trend (a negative credit gap). However, causality also runs from weak domestic demand to slower credit, and the credit slowdown is partly a correction after a credit boom in FY09–12. Actual Long-term trend (HP filter) Pre-FY06 trend (HP filter) Negative credit gap relative to the long-term trend Page 12 Financial Development Index (2014; medians for country groups) Advanced economies Emerging markets Low-income developing countries Bangladesh: Private Investment, Private Consumption, Private Credit, and Stock Prices (y/y percent change; in nominal terms) Private investment Credit to private sector Private consumption Stock prices (right scale) Source: IMF, Financial Development Index database. Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and IMF staff calculations. (see Selected Issues Papers, Chapter I). Rising (albeit still small) corporate borrowing from abroad has also reduced reliance on domestic credit. Finally, the 2010–12 stock market crash (which anecdotal evidence indicates was accompanied by a real estate price decline) had some impact on private demand. It also hit the banks, which were significantly exposed to the stock market, potentially affecting credit. Bangladesh: Important Macro-Financial Linkages in the Current Context high interest National savings Weaker rates certificates Slowdown in bank Slowdown in credit to private bank credit to private sector sector high exposure Weak bank Weak bank balance sheets balance sheets High High loans nonperforming nonperforming loans crowding out Reduce bank financing Recapitalization of state banks Fiscal deficit Bank financing of fiscal deficit consumption and investment demand 2010 stock market crash Weaker external demand Political turmoil governance Weak bank corporate 1/ This flow chart illustrates some key linkages at present, but does not intend to be exhaustive. The links shown are strictly macro-financial or financial-financial. Macro-macro linkages, such as the impact of political turmoil on domestic demand, are not shown. Slower bank credit to the public and private sectors has contributed to high liquidity in the banking system (Figure 7) As a result, inter-bank (call) interest rates have fallen steeply, much more than deposit and lending rates. Also, slower credit has led to weaker broad money growth. The rates on NSCs were cut by 1½ – 2 percentage points in May 2015, but the wedge vs. bank deposit rates has widened again since. Page 13 Headline inflation has eased, but nonfood inflation is up. On the back of a good rice harvest in 2014 and declining global prices, food price inflation decelerated, helping headline inflation ease from 7.4 percent (y/y) in December 2013 to 6 percent (y/y) in November 2015. However, nonfood inflation has picked up by nearly 2 percentage points during this period to 6.6 percent (y/y). Against general signs of tepid demand, this uptick likely reflects one-off factors, including higher minimum wages in the garment industry and recent electricity and gas tariff hikes. Despite lower global oil prices, domestic retail fuel prices have not been reduced. Tax collections significantly underperformed in the past two years. Subdued activity and imports have contributed, but are not the only factors: revenues have grown more slowly than output. Thus, already one of the lowest in the world, the tax-to-GDP ratio fell in FY14 and FY15, pointing to persistent weaknesses in tax policy and administration. Moreover, nontax revenues declined significantly in FY15, in part due to lower profit transfers from public sector agencies to the government. While current expenditures remained restrained, helped in part by lower fuel subsidies, and the capital budget was under-executed, this was not sufficient to offset weak revenue performance. As a result, the fiscal deficit (excluding grants) is estimated to have risen to 4.2 percent of GDP in FY15 (FY14: 3.5 percent of GDP). The external position is broadly consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies (Box 1 and Figure 8) After two years of surpluses, the current account balance (CAB) swung into a moderate deficit (0.8 percent of GDP) in FY15 on account of subdued exports, though the CAB returned to a surplus in the first quarter of FY16 as Bangladesh: Exchange Rates , Jan. 2006–Nov. 2015 imports fell. The overall BOP, however, continued to record a sizeable surplus, supported by medium-to long-term capital inflows. Despite sterilized foreign exchange (FX) interventions by Bangladesh Bank (BB), which kept the taka/US$ rate stable and reserve money growth restrained, the real effective exchange rate (REER) has appreciated by 24 percent since the last Article IV consultation. Nevertheless, staff assesses the external position to be broadly in line with economic fundamentals and desirable policies (Box 1). International reserves are adequate at close to 6 months of prospective imports. Nominal effective exchange rate (2010=100, LHS) Real effective exchange rate (2010=100, LHS) Taka per U.S. dollar (RHS, inverted) Taka per Euro (RHS, inverted) Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and IMF Information Notice System and staff calculations. 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 There are, however, important structural weaknesses in the external sector. In particular, exports remain concentrated in garments, and foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows remain much lower, as a share of GDP, than in most low-income countries (Box 1), mainly due to the constraints on investment highlighted above. The authorities’ preliminary estimate of the FY15 deficit is 3.8 percent of GDP, but is expected to be revised up. Staff’s higher estimate is based on average historical revisions to preliminary data. Page 14 Box 1. Bangladesh: External Sector Assessment CAB (Bangladesh) Net FDI inflows (Bangladesh) Current Account Balance (CAB) and Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) (In percent of GDP; median country for the low-income developing countries (LIDC)) The external position is broadly consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies. External sector policies should seek to improve the investment climate to attract larger FDI inflows and diversify export supply. Foreign asset and liability position Background: Bangladesh had a net international investment position (NIIP) of -11 percent of GDP in 2014 (2013: -13 percent of GDP), consisting of foreign assets of 16 percent of GDP and foreign liabilities equivalent to 27 percent of GDP. About 80 percent of all assets are accounted for by Bangladesh Bank (BB)’s gross international reserves and over half of all liabilities stem from public sector debt obligations. The commercial banking system’s net foreign asset position is positive. Assessment: The structure of the external balance sheet, dominated by low-risk liquid assets and public sector liabilities, implies low vulnerabilities. Current account Background: The current account swung from a surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP in 2013 to a deficit of 0.1 percent of GDP in 2014, mainly on subdued exports. The deficit is projected to widen to 0.9 percent of GDP in 2015. Assessment: The current account equation from the extended External Balance Assessment (EBA-lite) methodology suggests that the current account balance should be lower (that is, the current account deficit larger) than the underlying one, with a current account norm of -4.4 percent of GDP. However, the fitted equation systematically under-estimates the actual current account, suggesting that the model does not capture well country-specific factors that push up the balance compared to the average country in the EBA-lite sample, including: (i) a domestic natural gas sector that substitutes for oil imports; (ii) a large, non-capital-intensive garment export industry with significant profit margins; (iii) credit constraints that prevent households from consuming today against expected future income from young demographics; (iv) relatively lower foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows; and (iv) a high (about 1/3) propensity to save out of remittances in Bangladesh, likely reflecting the short term nature of most employment contracts in the Gulf countries. Adjusting for these factors would make the current account norm higher than estimated by about 3½ percent of GDP, of which remittances is estimated to contribute about 2½ percent of GDP (compared to the typical EBA- lite country). Staff assesses that the current account gap ranges between -1 percent and +1 percent of GDP. Actual CA Cyclically adjusted CA (removing all temporary factors) CA norm (from EBA-lite model) Adjusted CA norm Of which: cyclical contribution from the model Of which: adjustment for structural country-specific factors CA gap o/w global fiscal policy gap CA Norm–With adjustments CAB (LIDC) Net FDI inflows (LIDC) Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database. Page 15 Box 1. Bangladesh: External Sector Assessment (Continued) REER HP trend Linear (REER) Bangladesh: Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) Oct. 1995 – Sep. 2015; (Index; 2010=100) Real exchange rate Background: After remaining broadly constant for about two decades, the real effective exchange rate (REER) has appreciated steadily for the past three years. Since the last Article IV Consultation, the REER has appreciated by about 24 percent. Nominal effective appreciation and relatively higher domestic inflation contributed about equally to this appreciation. Assessment: Despite the strong recent REER appreciation, there is no clear evidence of misalignment or lack of competitiveness: while export growth has been tepid over the past two years, export market shares have remained strong, and there is no import boom. Furthermore, the cost of Bangladesh’s consumption basket (in purchasing power parity terms) is lower than predicted by the country’s per capita income. Based on the EBA-lite CA regression, staff assesses the REER gap to be -3 percent to +3 percent. Source: IMF, Information Notice System database. Bangladesh: Purchasing Power Parity Price Level (In percent of U.S. price level) PPP price level 10-year average Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database. Purchasing Power Parity Price Levels and GDP per Capita across Countries P P P ( f U S ) Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database. GDP per capita (in US dollars) Capital and financial accounts Background: The capital and financial accounts have registered strong surpluses in recent years, reaching 2½ percent of GDP in 2014. Capital inflows are dominated by official development assistance and medium-term loans to the public sector. Inflows to the private sector (particularly FDI and portfolio investments) have been small (around 1 percent of GDP) and largely offset by private sector outflows. Assessment: The capital and financial accounts are relatively stable. Vulnerabilities are limited by the highly concessional nature of inflows as well as high reserve buffers. Page 16 Box 1. Bangladesh: External Sector Assessment (Concluded) FX intervention and reserve adequacy Bangladesh: Reserve Adequacy Assessment (In months of imports) Background: The de jure exchange rate arrangement is classified as floating, but BB intervenes in the foreign exchange market to keep the exchange rate relatively stable against the US dollar. As a result of this intervention, gross international reserves increased from 4.7 months of imports as of end-2013 to 5.8 months at end-November 2015. Assessment: Staff’s reserve adequacy framework suggests that the optimum level of reserves for Bangladesh would range from 2.6 (for a flexible exchange rate regime) to 8.4 months of imports (for a fixed exchange rate regime), assuming a net cost of holding reserves of 5 percent. Since Bangladesh has a de facto stabilized exchange rate regime, a reserve adequacy figure closer to the top of this range would seem appropriate. Traditional rules of thumb for gauging reserve adequacy—a reserve cover of 3 months of imports, 20 percent of broad money, or 100 percent of short-term debt—put reserve adequacy at a lower range of 1 to 4.5 months of import cover. Against these estimates, staff considers that the current level of reserves in Bangladesh is adequate. _______________ Source: IMF staff estimates. Upper bound estimate Lower bound estimate 3-month of imports reserve adequacy template Traditional approaches Low-income country broad money percent of percent of short- term debt Actual EBA-lite applies a slightly modified EBA methodology to a much larger country sample (149 countries, compared with 49 in the case of EBA). For Bangladesh, this is estimated using: (i) the marginal cost on sterilization instruments; and (ii) the cost of short- term external borrowing for oil imports. In both cases the cost, net of returns on investment assets, is about 5 percent. Page 17