Staff projects real GDP growth at 6.3 percent in FY16 , supported by higher public sector wages and public investment. This is slightly lower than in staff’s previous projections, reflecting weaker economic indicators in the first few months of FY16 (paragraph 4). The medium-term outlook is positive, provided that policies remain prudent, tax revenues are strengthened, and calm prevails: Growth is projected to accelerate to 7 percent by FY20 on the back of: (i) a ramp-up in public investment, which assumes tax revenues will be boosted by the launch of the new value added tax (VAT) in July 2016; and (ii) a recovery in private investment, as regulatory and infrastructure bottlenecks are eased and the financial sector strengthens. Despite the recent REER appreciation, Bangladesh retains a sizeable labor cost advantage (expected to be supported in the future by very favorable demographics), which should make it an attractive source country as competing producers move up the value chain. Beyond FY20, once the demand-side impact from increased investment subsides, growth is expected to converge back to a potential rate of about 6.5 percent. Inflation is expected to edge up in FY16–18 on account of higher public sector wages and a one-off effect from the introduction of the new VAT. Headline inflation should fall gradually toward 6 percent by FY20 assuming monetary policy remains prudent and supply bottlenecks are eased. Private sector credit growth is expected to average around 15½ percent over the medium term, with its share in GDP increasing by 2 percentage points to 40 percent by FY20. This is consistent with the envisaged investment and GDP growth paths, and also with pre-credit- boom trends (prior to FY06) and cross- country patterns of financial deepening. On the back of investment-led growth, Bangladesh: Bank Credit to Private Sector FY91 - FY20 FY12 FY20 FY10 Actual Staff projections Ratio consistent with income per capita (2014) Ratio based on pre-FY06 5-year average change ) ( P G P 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 Bangladesh's income per capita (in US$) Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and IMF staff calculations and estimations. the current account deficit is projected to widen to about 2 percent of GDP over the medium term, with international reserves remaining adequate. Staff’s figures and projections in this report are on a fiscal-year basis, and not directly comparable with those in the World Economic Outlook , which are on a calendar-year basis. Page 18 Bangladesh: Medium-Term Outlook Prel. Real GDP CPI inflation (annual average) Credit to private sector (end of period) Current account balance Overall fiscal balance (excluding grants) Central government debt Source: IMF staff projections. 1/ Fiscal year begins July 1. FY16 FY17 FY18 Staff proj. FY19 FY20 (Annual percent change) Political and financial-fiscal shocks are the main risks to the outlook (Box 2). resumption of political violence or heightened uncertainty would adversely impact investment, growth, and inflation. Continued weakness in the banking sector, in particular at the SBs, could undermine credit and growth prospects and affect fiscal sustainability, as would a failure to launch the new VAT (see the Debt Sustainability Analysis, DSA). On the external side, a protracted slowdown in the European Union (Bangladesh’s main export destination) could hurt exports. Implementation of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), of which Bangladesh is not a member, could also erode the competitiveness of exports to TPP member countries (which account for around one-fourth of Bangladesh’s exports) , though the impact is likely to be mitigated by Bangladesh’s significant cost and scale advantages. Moreover, the outlook for remittances (a major driver of consumption) is uncertain: while worker outflows have recovered, persistent low oil prices could eventually affect investment and employment in key host countries. From a broader perspective, natural disasters and global climate change pose major risks for Bangladesh (paragraph 24). Linkages with large emerging market economies and international financial markets remain limited, cushioning against potential shocks from these sources. The main impact is likely to be on garment exports to the United States (20 percent of Bangladesh’s garment exports), on account of increased competition from Vietnam. Bangladesh’s garment exports to the US are currently subject to a 15.6 percent tariff; Vietnam’s are subject to an 8.4 percent duty, which will go down to zero after full implementation of TPP. However, Bangladesh has a much higher population than Vietnam (156 million compared to 90 million) and more favorable demographics (Vietnam’s workforce is estimated to have peaked in 2015, whereas Bangladesh’s is projected to peak in 2030). Bangladesh also maintains duty-free access to the European Union (61 percent of garment exports and 55 percent of total exports), where it has been steadily gaining market share for several years. Page 19 Box 2. Bangladesh: Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) 1/ Shocks and Likelihood (Red= high likelihood; green = low likelihood) Resumption of intense political turmoil. Further deterioration in the financial health of state-owned banks (SBs). Large revenue shortfalls relative to projections. Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies (EMs). Significant China slowdown. Significant slowdown in other large EMs/frontier economies. Surge in the U.S. dollar Persistently lower energy prices. x E Potential Impact (Red= high; green=low) Growth prospects could be affected by a loss of confidence and a slump in investment and consumption. Balance of payments (BOP) pressures could emerge from lost export production. Fiscal consolidation efforts could slip and inflation could go up. SBs have high NPLs, low profitability, and sizeable capital shortfalls (but do not face liquidity pressures). Further deterioration in SB balance sheets would potentially have a negative impact on credit, economic growth, and the fiscal balance. Under a conservative scenario that assumes full write-off of existing NPLs and rescheduled loans, the SB recapitalization needs above recapitalization provisions already in staff’s baseline are estimated to be about 2¼ percent of GDP (as of June Continued revenue underperformance would compromise spending on growth-critical investment projects and social safety nets. Failure to launch the new VAT, in particular, would jeopardize debt sustainability (DSA's alternative scenario). The larger deficits would also stress financing and potentially crowd out private sector credit. Policy Response Fiscal Monetary/ex- change rate √ √ Financial Other There should be a moderate fiscal easing by allowing automatic stabilizers (mostly on the revenue side) to operate and increasing transfers to the poor as needed. Reserve buffers could be used through sterilized intervention to cushion the shock and smooth exchange rate volatility. √ √ Recapitalization should be tied to reforms to improve the long-term viability of state banks, including governance reforms, stricter controls over lending activities, and more aggressive recovery of bad loans. State banks should be held strictly accountable to numerical targets agreed with the authorities to improve their financial performance. √ The new VAT should be steadfastly implemented towards a July 2016 launch. Further reforms to strengthen tax administration are also necessary over the medium term. √ √ The European Union accounts for 55 percent of Bangladesh’s exports. Exports to EMs are small, but growing. Activity would be affected largely in the garment industry, with a negative impact on BOP. However, the relatively low-income elasticity of demand for garment exports and Bangladesh’s cost competitiveness would act as mitigating factors. If the shock is temporary, the policy response should be similar to that for a resumption of political violence. If the shock is protracted, the exchange rate should be allowed to adjust and fiscal policy would also require some adjustment to keep the deficit broadly in line with the fiscal anchor, with social spending on the poor protected via restraint in other current expenditure. √ Further nominal appreciation against the US$ should be resisted in the near term. If consistent with the inflation outlook, monetary policy should be eased. If appreciation pressures prolong into the medium term, the exchange rate should be allowed to adjust. √ √ Fiscal transfers to the poor and vulnerable should be enhanced. The currency should be allowed to depreciate but reserve buffers could be used to smooth exchange rate volatility. If the taka/US$ rate is kept stable and the US$ continues to appreciate against the euro, Bangladesh’s cost advantage in the European market would be eroded and pressures on the BOP could emerge. As a net oil importer, Bangladesh benefits from lower oil prices. However, low oil prices could weaken job prospects for Bangladeshi workers in Gulf countries (from which about two-thirds of remittances originate), and thereby affect remittances. This, in turn, would have a negative impact on domestic demand and the BOP. This impact could potentially outweigh the positive income shock from lower oil prices, as remittances are about four times larger than oil imports. Source: IMF staff. 1/ The RAM shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff's subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “hi gh” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Nonmutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 20 Credit shocks are the main risk for the banking system. Poor lending decisions are a major concern in the SBs and some private banks. Main credit exposures are to services sectors and to large single borrowers (exposures to households and real estate are small). While banks’ direct currency risks are low, rising external borrowing by corporations poses an indirect risk. Bangladesh: Selected Banks' Aggregate Exposure to Large Loans 1/ 2/ (Share in percent; as of end-2014) Loans and advances Capital (unadjusted) Among the sample banks (asset-weighted) Relative to the banking sector Sources: Bangladesh Bank; sample banks' balance sheets; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Large loans are defined as exposures exceeding 10 percent of capital. 2/ Sample includes 16 of the large banks by asset size, accounting for 61 percent of the total banking sector assets. For some of these banks, data include off-balance sheet claims. Authorities’ views Outlook. The authorities agreed on the drivers of FY16 growth, but viewed staff’s projections as conservative. They believed that, amid slow external demand and domestic investment, growth would likely be lower than the official forecast of 7 percent, but should still be in the 6.5–6.8 percent range. They also forecast FY16 inflation at 6.2 percent, slightly lower than staff’s, while Bangladesh Bank’s FY16 BOP projections are broadly similar to staff’s. Over the medium term, under the Seventh Five Year Plan (FY16–20), the authorities expected growth to reach 8 percent, backed by prudent policies and higher investment. They agreed with staff that the impact of TPP implementation on Bangladesh’s exports would likely be limited given Bangladesh’s significant cost and scale advantages, supported by favorable demographics. Risks. The authorities believed that political violence is highly unlikely and does not pose a risk to the outlook. On tax collections, the authorities noted that revenues had continued to grow in nominal terms and stressed their efforts to boost collections. They agreed with staff’s external sector assessment.