Macroeconomic policies. With GDP growth broadly stable, the focus of aggregate macroeconomic policies in the near-term should be to safeguard stability. However, in the event Bangladesh Bank: Financial Stability Report (June 2015). Page 21 that the economy is hit by large temporary shocks, counter-cyclical policy responses would be called for in the form of fiscal easing (including through automatic stabilizers and increased transfers to the poor) and the use of reserve buffers. If the shocks are protracted, the exchange rate should be allowed to depreciate and fiscal policy adjusted to keep it broadly in line with the fiscal anchor (Box 2). Fiscal policy stance and debt sustainability. The overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) is expected to widen to 4.7 percent of GDP in FY16, as a public sector pay hike, the first in six years, is implemented. Over the medium term, staff projects the increase in pay (1 percent of GDP) and in public investment (2 percent of GDP) to be partly offset by lower energy-related subsidies and higher revenue from the new VAT. The debt-to-GDP ratio would remain broadly stable as a share of GDP, which is a reasonable anchor for medium-term fiscal policy: while public debt is moderate, its trajectory is highly vulnerable to revenue shocks given the low revenue base and high debt service burden (see DSA). Over the longer term, the debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase slightly and then stabilize as concessional external financing declines and interest costs consequently rise, and as pension liabilities increase with aging. Throughout the projection horizon, debt remains sustainable on the key assumption that the new VAT is implemented as planned (see DSA). Deficit financing. The authorities should reconsider the need to use NSCs as a financing vehicle: they compete with bank deposits, potentially leading to disintermediation, set an artificial floor on bank rates, and reduce fiscal space for critical spending. If NSCs are kept, their rates should be systematically aligned with market rates. Over the medium term, domestic financing of the fiscal deficit should be gradually reduced given the high exposure of banks to the sovereign and the potential crowding out of private investment. Forced subscription of treasuries by banks (“devolvement”), seldom used recently amid high liquidity in the banking system, should be eliminated. Instead, there is scope to switch to more external financing for the given fiscal deficit, in light of the relatively low level of external debt, strong reserve position, and manageable currency risks (see DSA). Bangladesh: Deposit Money Banks' Holding of Government Securities (In percent of tier-1 regulatory capital) Net Credit to Central Government by Deposit Money Banks, 2014 (In percent of net domestic credit; median for the country groups) FY12 FY13 FY14 Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Standard deviation (BGD) South Asia (SA, excl. BGD) Advanced economies Emerging markets (excl. SA) Low-income countries (excl. SA) Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; and IMF, Integrated Monetary database and staff calculations. Monetary policy stance. With upside risks to nonfood inflation from higher public wages, reserve money growth in FY16 should remain at about the current pace. Over the medium term, bringing reserve money growth below the baseline projection, while protecting private sector credit Page 22 by shifting deficit financing to more external sources, would help inflation ease faster than projected (Figure 9). Looser policy, on the other hand, could stoke inflation and stock prices, risking instability. Exchange rate policy. With the REER having appreciated considerably in recent years and amid uncertainty about the impact this may have on export competitiveness, continued sterilized FX intervention is warranted in the near term. By undermining competitiveness, further significant REER appreciation could eventually impact growth, tax revenue, and bank asset quality. The authorities should monitor FX market developments and export performance, and adjust intervention policy as needed. They should also consider using a basket of trading partners’ currencies as a benchmark for FX intervention, instead of implicitly pegging to the U.S. dollar. Given the importance of the euro area as an export market, this would provide a better reference for monetary and exchange rate policy. Financial sector policies. To boost financial sector resilience, policy priorities include: Enhancing financial sector regulation and supervision , by strictly enforcing existing rules and avoiding regulatory forbearance; and completing implementation of risk-based supervision, contingency planning, and lender of last resort policies. Loan rescheduling and restructuring policies should be revised to reflect the costs of such adjustments on bank balance sheets. The authorities should consider the adoption of a coherent macro-prudential framework to mitigate risks and shore up financial sector resilience. Loan-to-value ratio limits exist for home and auto loans, but the authorities are also exploring the use of other instruments, such as counter-cyclical capital buffers. Debt-to-income ratio caps could also be adopted. Addressing risks from concentration and macro-fiscal linkages. In particular, reduce banks’ exposure to: (i) the sovereign (and reform the NSCs; paragraph 20); (ii) the capital market, in line with the limit set in the law by the July 2016 deadline; and (iii) large single borrowers. In addition to generating risks, these exposures potentially deviate credit from productive investment. Strengthening the SBs , advancing the three-pillar agenda adopted during the ECF arrangement: (i) improving governance (particularly by appointing independent, accountable boards and enhancing internal control and compliance, under strict BB oversight); (ii) shoring up SB balance sheets through recapitalization, improved loan recovery, and temporary credit growth limits; and (iii) completion of branch automation by 2016, to strengthen financial reporting and efficiency. Improving the legal and financial framework for loan recovery . Difficulties in realizing collateral and lengthy dispute resolution processes have weakened banks’ ability to bring See S. Rafiq, Monetary Policy Transmission and Financial Stability in a LIC: The Case of Bangladesh, IMF Working Paper, 15/231. Starting in June 2015, as part of the phased implementation of Basel III capital adequacy standards, BB excluded from regulatory capital past due loans, which were earlier recorded as “intangible assets” on the balance sheets of state-owned commercial banks. This is a welcome step that will more accurately reflect SBs’ capital positions. Page 23 down non-performing loans. The authorities should consider promoting simpler court procedures, alternative dispute resolution procedures, and asset management companies. Addressing long-term vulnerabilities: climate change. Bangladesh is one of the world’s most vulnerable countries to the impact of climate change, particularly in the form of flooding from rising sea levels and tropical cyclones, with potentially devastating effects on the most vulnerable (see Selected Issues Papers, Chapter II). To build resilience in this area, the authorities should: Identify, and cost, priority projects for adaptation, including protection against flooding. Strengthen the fiscal framework for climate change, ensuring that spending plans are adequately financed and reflected in the annual budget and medium-term fiscal plans. Strengthen coordination of climate change initiatives by centralizing policymaking under one agency and allowing all spending and financing to be reflected in the budget. Contain greenhouse gas emissions, including through: (i) carbon taxation and further energy subsidy reforms; and (ii) a review of natural gas pricing policies: the financial terms in production sharing contracts (PSCs) are deemed unattractive by prospective investors, discouraging exploration and production of this cleaner energy source. Also, low prices for end users, while encouraging consumption, induce waste. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly shared staff’s views. They did not support eliminating NSCs, which they saw as providing a safety net to women and the elderly, but were open to reviewing NSC rates regularly to reduce the gap with market rates. The authorities will consider the costs and benefits of a shift to more external financing of the fiscal deficit over the medium term. They broadly agreed with staff’s recommendations on exchange rate policy. On monetary policy, BB was initially envisaging somewhat higher reserve money growth in FY16 than recommended by staff, but intends to reassess reserve money targets in the next Monetary Policy Statement. Furthermore, the authorities reiterated their commitment to reforming the SBs, and are exploring options to improve loan recovery. The authorities concurred on the need for coordinated action to adapt to the challenges from climate change, but viewed the financial terms for exploration and production of natural gas as sufficiently attractive.