With debt rising and arrears mounting, the outlook is clouded. Growth is projected to rise to 2.1 percent in 2016, reflecting higher private and public investment, mainly in refurbishing and expanding the tourism stock, including the anticipated launch of two large hotel projects. While growth should continue at around this pace in 2017, it is likely to taper off thereafter as tourism plateaus and private and public investment is undermined by weak fiscal performance. In the absence of a renewed reform effort, the fiscal outlook falls short of what is needed for sustainability. Staff projects a deficit of 6.4 percent, based on the draft budget presented in March 2016, with a primary surplus of 2 percent. Despite this improvement, central government debt would continue to increase, reaching 114.2 percent in FY2021/22. In light of expected interest rates increases and low credit ratings, debt service costs will rise, increasing funding challenges and putting pressure on the exchange rate peg. Despite favorable trade developments, external reserves remain low. Low oil prices and tourism inflows should further narrow the current account deficit from 6.7 percent of GDP in 2015 to 5.6 percent in 2016. Despite the improvement in the current account and increased official disbursements (including a loan from China) reserves remain at about 2.9 months of imports at end- 2016. Although external debt is low and debt amortization is moderate, the level of reserves provides limited room to maneuver in the event of a downside shock. Over the medium-term, the current account balance is projected to deteriorate with the weakening in the terms of trade and reserves are projected to decline. The recent Moody’s downgrade highlights growing risks. The external competitiveness assessment points to challenges. The currency is judged moderately overvalued by approximately 5 to 10 percent. A cross-country comparison using global indices indicates a decline in competitiveness while record tourism arrivals suggest that Barbados is Reserves drop sharply in 2020/21 from 2.7 months of imports to 2.2 months because of scheduled amortization. Page 13 reestablishing its position as a prime Caribbean destination. Nevertheless, weak growth over the last 8 years, coupled with a slow recovery, point to serious challenges. While the financial system is sound, further deterioration of the fiscal situation could put pressure on the system. Despite capital controls (which the authorities view as necessary to support adequate reserve cover for the exchange rate peg), amplification of sovereign credit concerns would put pressure on official reserves through current and/or capital account seepage. Moreover, a confidence crisis or real economy setback would reverse the decline in NPLS and would weigh heavily on banks’ profitability. Banks do not carry large net open foreign exchange positions, hence would not be directly exposed in case of a change in the exchange rate regime. Withdrawal of Correspondent Banking Relationships (CBRs), which is a concern in the Caribbean, does not appear to have affected the domestic banks directly. All domestic banks are foreign-owned, and their CBRs have been maintained. Nevertheless, banks have terminated relationships of some IBFS corporate vehicles which could further depress growth prospects in the offshore sector. The findings of the upcoming mutual evaluation by the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF) on AML/CFT could identify reforms that increase regulatory compliance costs for IBFS entities. Other risks emanate from the external environment (see RAM, Annex I). Weak growth in advanced economies, particularly the U.K., and spillovers from Brexit, could reverse the recent improvement in arrivals and jeopardize domestic and foreign private investment in refurbishing and expanding the tourism stock. The possible spread of the Zika virus could also undermine the tourism recovery. A strong U.S. dollar could erode competitiveness and financial volatility could reduce FDI and other capital flows, putting further pressure on the peg.