Discussions focused on policies to facilitate external adjustment and mitigate risks. The staff’s adjustment scenario illustrates that consistent implementation of sound macro policies and structural reform—in line with staff recommendations—would allow for a steady reduction of external imbalances, strengthening of reserve buffers, and higher medium-term growth (Figure 4, Table 3). Specifically, improving competitiveness and cautious management of domestic demand should prompt a sustained reversal in the current account, while positive confidence effects from structural reform would attract higher FDI. Under these conditions, reserves could be rebuilt and reach about 4 months of import cover by 2019. As reforms take hold, medium-term, sustainable growth could reach close to 5 percent in an environment of single-digit inflation. Page 8 Box 1. Belarus: Possible Spillovers from Regional Geopolitical Tensions For now there are no clear spillovers to Belarus from the geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine. However, spillovers may occur through several channels (listed below in approximate order of importance). Russian support . Belarus is highly dependent on Russian support, not only through loans but also via heavily discounted energy prices. It is unclear if the recent changes in Russia’s relationship with Ukraine have implications for Belarus, and if so in what direction (more, or less support). Energy Support from Russia, 2012-13 (In percent of GDP) Total support Implied subsidy on oil imports Implied subsidy on gas imports Discounted oil product exports to Russia Transfer to the Russian budget of the export duty on oil products Sources: NBRB; Belstat; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. Trade . Growth in Russia— the destination of 35 percent of Belarus’ exports—is expected to suffer as a result of sanctions, reduced confidence, and higher interest rates. Ukraine—accounting for 12 percent of Belarus’ exports and a positive bilateral trade balance worth US$2 billion—is also a significant trade partner. It is, however, also a (potential) competitor, including for the transit of Russian gas to Europe, resulting in both up and downside risks from trade linkages. Competitiveness . The Ukrainian hryvnia and Kazakhstani tenge have depreciated sharply and other CIS exchange rates—including the Russian ruble—may be affected thereby weakening Belarus’ competitiveness and further increasing pressures on the rubel. Financial linkages . Subsidiaries of Russian banks account for a quarter of banking sector assets with two Russian subs being among the five largest banks. The Russian subs rely mostly on their parents for funding and capital and any weakening of the parent banks could have substantial spillovers to Belarus. Also, Russia accounts for about 70 percent of foreign direct investment in Belarus and any substantial declines in these flows could significantly affect Belarus’ balance of payments.