Government-dominated economic activity is increasingly inefficient, creating a drag on growth. Overall productivity is down and many corporates, including SOEs, are now generating substantial losses (text chart). Various forms of state support and involvement distort economic activity or create an uneven playing field for the private sector. Examples include implicit production targets for some SOEs (the state accounts for around 50 percent of employment and gross value added in the economy), lingering price controls, and subsidized government directed lending. Directed lending accounts for almost 40 percent of all loans, largely FX-denominated investment loans from state-owned banks to unhedged SOEs that have broadly fallen short of generating intended improvements in productivity and competitiveness. Such lending has also hindered the development of bank risk assessment capacity. The authorities are developing a comprehensive SOE strategy, and have begun implementing some important SOE diagnostics and reforms . During 2015–16, a government working group assessed repayment capacity of SOEs with the largest FX-denominated liabilities, and provided guidance on where restructuring or insolvency could be needed. Relatedly, the government has initiated a phased reduction in directed lending. More recently, the authorities have been compiling a comprehensive inventory of SOEs with key financial and employment indicators, and published their first SOE monitoring report. They have taken steps to strengthen SOE Directed Lending Stock (Percent of GDP) Commercial Banks Development Bank Directed lending percent of credit to economy, rhs Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 governance, including a recent decree that separates regulatory oversight and ownership and establishes independent supervisory boards. Another recent decree has replaced production targets with objectives of profitability, efficiency, and export competitiveness, though there is evidence that some SOEs are still receiving production target instructions from line ministries. The authorities report that some small SOEs are being prepared for privatization. Looking ahead, they hope to attract minority-stake strategic investors for large SOEs, and pursue a mixture of ongoing operations, restructuring, insolvency, and privatization for other SOEs. In terms of tangible results, employment in larger SOEs has fallen about 12 percent over the past two years, but few SOEs have entered insolvency or been privatized. Some other important real sector reforms are also underway Price liberalization . Price controls were reduced from 28 to 18 percent of the CPI basket, down from 49 percent in 2011. Price ceiling controls remain on pharmaceuticals and some staples, as well as a price floor on vodka. Rationalization of HH utility tariffs (Box 4). HH utility tariff increases in early 2016 raised utility cost recovery by an average of nearly 10 percentage points, reaching about 58 percent. The authorities are not planning further HH tariff hikes this year, but have committed to a mix of tariff hikes and cost reduction (particularly in the heating sector) to achieve 75 percent cost recovery in 2017 and 100 percent cost recovery by 2018. However, at present the authorities’ plans lack sufficient detail to be credible—particularly with respect to expected cost reductions. They plan to launch a better-targeted social support mechanism this year to help offset the impact tariff hikes on HHs. Improvements in the business climate (Figure 6). The authorities have achieved some progress in Doing Business indicators, having reduced administrative and licensing procedures for businesses and simplified startup, tax administration, and ownership registration procedures. Progress has also been made in reducing the tax burden on businesses. The government recently expanded the mandate of the Trade Ministry to include antimonopoly enforcement (aiming to ensure a more competitive environment where needed). Staff Recommendations Staff encouraged the authorities to accelerate and deepen structural reforms. Staff argued that more comprehensive, deeper, and faster reforms are needed to improve resource allocation and competitiveness, to reduce fiscal, banking, and external risks, and to support higher sustainable growth. Deeper SOE reform . The mission supported plans for a comprehensive SOE strategy, while stressing the overarching goal of greater market orientation and efficiency. Drawing on recent FAD TA, staff urged the authorities to: (i) establish a fiscal risk monitoring unit tasked to carry out a comprehensive review of fiscal risks emanating from the SOE sector on an ongoing basis; (ii) undertake an in depth inventory of SOEs to determine which carry out commercial as opposed to Page 16 government functions; (iii) incorporate all commercial enterprises; (iv) implement legislation requiring all key SOEs to adopt International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS); (v) further strengthen SOE corporate governance, including by implementing the policy to separate ownership and regulatory functions through centralizing ownership in a single coordinating entity and strengthening the independence and capacities of SOE boards; and (vi) enhance and strengthen the framework for restructuring SOEs, including by developing clear insolvency and privatization criteria and procedures. The mission also urged close coordination of SOE restructuring with financial sector reforms, notably treatment of bad loans, and stronger SSNs. Rationalization of the utility sector . Staff supported the authorities’ plans to improve utility cost efficiency, but noted that further significant HH tariff hikes are unavoidable to achieve the government’s objective of 100 percent cost recovery by 2018. Staff urged adoption of clear, time- bound measures with contingencies should cost reduction efforts fall short. Increases in cost recovery levels should be matched by pro rata reductions in budget and industry cross-subsidies, coupled with better funded and well-targeted SSNs to protect the most vulnerable. The cost recovery program should also include a clear framework to take into account changes in international gas prices and exchange rates. Once full cost recovery is reached, a clear mechanism for maintaining full cost recovery should be employed. Strengthening competition policies and the business climate Staff supported the objectives of the new antimonopoly agency, and urged a close look at product market liberalization, including in SOE-dominated sectors such as transportation and agriculture. Staff also urged prioritizing WTO accession negotiations, which could provide a key anchor for structural reforms. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the need for further structural reforms, but are still considering the most effective path forward. They are now assessing the findings of the recent IMF TA mission on SOE reform and recommendations from other international partners, aiming to develop a robust SOE reform strategy by 4Q2016. They expressed some concern about implementation capacity and how to best strengthen some key elements of the reform process such as the insolvency process and bad asset management. However, the authorities believe that with their current work plan and further effort to build technical capacity, they will successfully implement a far-reaching restructuring of the SOE sector consistent with greater market orientation and efficiency. Regarding utilities, they noted that firmly addressing inefficiencies and lowering costs were important to help build public support for needed utility tariff hikes, and expressed strong commitment to meet their cost recovery objectives. They agreed that implementing a rules-based utility tariff adjustment mechanism was an important medium-term goal. The authorities also agreed on the importance of WTO membership, including as a driver of reform, but expressed concern that they would be asked to accept less favorable terms than Belarus’s EEU partners. They also noted potential benefits from EEU member plans to further harmonize regulatory standards over time. Page 17