Rising risks in the banking sector require close attention. Prolonged weak economic performance and adverse external developments have increased financial stability risks (Box 4). NPLs at several key banks have increased rapidly in early 2014, even though system-wide NPLs remained stable on account of transfers of problem loans to the Development Bank, which is not included in the statistics and where NPLs have jumped to 7½ percent from very low levels earlier. Also, continued liquidity problems at a large bank, which started last summer, have resulted in an effectively open-ended extension of its exemption from regular reserve requirements and, at end 2013, the authorities injected new capital into another large state-owned bank to keep it from falling below minimum capital standards. On the upside, prior NBRB measures to contain FX lending have started to bear fruit with FX lending growing by a moderate 2.5 percent in the first quarter of 2014 (compared to 6.6 percent over the same period in 2013). Nonetheless, loan dollarization has continued to rise, reaching over 50 percent in early 2014, suggesting high FX risks for borrowers, many of which are believed to be unhedged. Feb-11 Nov-11 Aug-12 May-13 Mar-14 Source: Belarusian authorities. Share of FX Loans (Percent of Total) Page 15 Box 4. Belarus: Potential Impact of Exchange Rate Depreciation High financial dollarization makes the Belarusian economy and in particular the financial sector vulnerable to sharp exchange rate depreciation. Direct effects from depreciation for the banking sector appear limited, even positive. Banks maintain a long position in foreign exchange (FX), with the net open position amounting to 12 percent of capital. Recent NBRB stress tests estimate that 20 percent depreciation would initially decrease capital ratios by 1.1 percentage point (regulatory capital is held in local currency) but increase profits. However, high FX-related credit risk could have a large negative indirect impact on banks. FX loans account for a high share of corporate sector borrowing—with shares ranging from about one quarter in the agricultural sector to more than three quarters in manufacturing—likely including a significant number of borrowers without FX earnings (in some mainly domestically oriented sectors more than half of loans are in FX). NBRB estimates of 20 percent depreciation show strong increases in NPLs, significant losses in the banking sector and suggest that capital ratios of the system could fall close to the regulatory minimum (10 percent). While the quantitative effects of a depreciation are uncertain, information about FX exposures indicates different impacts across sectors. For the household sector the impact would be positive as these hold a large share of FX deposits, while FX loans to households are banned. For the corporate sector the impact would be mainly negative. Overall, the corporate sector has a negative FX position, with a large amount of FX loans and relatively small FX deposits. Exporters, however, may be able to profit from depreciation. Net FX Claims of the Banking Sector (Percent of GDP) The effect on the financial sector, on balance, would be negative, mainly because of its large FX exposure to corporates and through a negative position with non-residents in the form of largely short-term loans. NBRB & Government Corporates Households Non-residents Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. The government would be impacted through its foreign exchange denominated debt. Assuming a 20 percent depreciation, government and government-guaranteed debt would increase to 43 percent of GDP (from 37 percent at present). An increasing interest bill, and higher outlays for bank recapitalizations, would likely compound effects over time. Page 16 Financial Soundness Indicators for the Banking Sector 1/ Capital adequacy Capital adequacy ratio 2/ Tier I capital adequacy ratio 2/ Foreign exchange loans to total loans Non-performing loans to gross loans 3/ Watch loans 4/ Recapitalization costs (SOBs, percent of GDP) Source: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus. Dec Dec Dec Dec Feb Jan Mar 1/ Official statistics do not adequately reflect risks because of pervasive evergreening and reporting weaknesses. Indicators do not include DB as it is a non-bank financial institution. 2/ CARs fell in 2013 mostly on account of an increase in risk weights for FX loans that was introduced in October. 3/ NPLs fell in 2013 mostly because of transfers of problem loans to the DB (which is not included in the statistics). 4/ Watch loans include loans with delinquencies, negative information on the borrower or insufficient collateral. A joint World Bank-IMF mission urged reduction of state control in the banking system. The mission assessed state lending, the DB, capital markets, and insurance, among other areas of the financial system. It stressed the developmental challenges from pervasive state influence in the financial system and cautioned against rapid growth of the DB (Box 5). Policy Discussion Staff urged close supervision of banks and adequate remedial measures. The NBRB should closely monitor the health of individual banks and decisively address any uncovered problems. In particular, it should ensure that all banks in the system comply with capital adequacy norms and reserve requirements. In addition, recent successes notwithstanding, the NBRB needs to continue to closely monitor FX lending and take further measures—e.g., further raising reserve requirements for FX loans or provisioning requirements for FX loans to unhedged borrowers—if FX loan growth rates do not continue to decrease. In this context, staff also emphasized that loan dollarization is closely tied to distortions from directed lending policies and the exchange rate regime that need to be addressed. Staff seconded the findings of the recent joint mission with the World Bank and urged the authorities to step up efforts to reduce state control of banks and lending to promote better resource allocation and risk management. It cautioned against further growth of the DB and called on the authorities to reverse the recent decision to make its debt eligible for refinancing at the NBRB, which raised the specter of monetary financing of DB lending. The NBRB concurred that the situation in the banking sector bears close watching. Specifically, it indicated it was planning to agree on a plan for restoring liquidity at the aforementioned large bank by end May. The NBRB also shared staff’s concerns about remaining FX lending growth and had recently further restricted the issuance of FX loans further by permitting them only for settling transactions with non-residents. Further measures, including increased provisioning, would be considered if the share of FX loans in total credit continued to rise. Page 17 Box 5. Belarus: Key Recommendations from Joint World Bank-IMF Mission A recent joint World Bank-IMF financial sector mission found that the main feature of the financial system remains the government’s pervasive influence at various levels including through (i) direct ownership of large market players in all segments; (ii) directed and subsidized lending programs and their distortive impact on capital allocation; and (iii) undermining institutions governing the development of the market (e.g. lack of competition framework, oversight). The mission made recommendations in a wide range of areas, including the following: Directed and subsidized lending Develop a detailed and time-bound plan for curtailing directed lending programs. Introduce formal mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of directed lending programs. Consolidate existing and future directed lending programs through the Development Bank. Development Bank Prevent the Development Bank being used as an off-budget financing mechanism by ensuring that Introduce external regulation and supervision of the Development Bank. it operates within the resource envelope for state programs, counting its debt towards the debt ceiling, and reflecting the state’s contingent liabilities in the budget. As a transitional institution the DB should not have an indefinite lifespan and as the commercial financial sector develops, the need for a state-run Development Bank should be reconsidered. Capital market development Adopt a framework law establishing operational independence of the securities supervisor. Migrate the supervisory framework from a compliance-based to risk-based supervision of professional market participants. Analyze in coordination with NBRB the need to implement rules governing the issuance of corporate bonds in FX by unhedged issuers.