Despite high risks to stability, the NBRB is relaxing monetary policy. Monetary policy effectiveness remains constrained by a suboptimal operational framework and the disruptive impact of subsidized lending. However, domestic interest rates have a direct impact on the population’s willingness to hold local currency. Therefore, in response to the pickup in demand for foreign currency deposits last summer, the NBRB increased the reserve requirement for foreign exchange deposits and raised the overnight credit rate by 10 percentage points to 45 percent (Figure 6, Tables 5 and 6). From November, however, the NBRB has started to loosen policy again by reversing the Page 12 (Percent) Deposit rate Overnight credit rate Refinancing rate NBRB Policy Interest Rates Source: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus. reserve requirement and cutting the overnight credit rate. In addition, in April and May, the NBRB also lowered the refinancing rate by two percentage points to 21.5 percent and put regulatory caps on the interest rates banks can charge their clients. The policy loosening risks reigniting exchange rate pressures in the context of large external imbalances and continued high inflation. Slow exchange rate adjustment compounds imbalances and poses risks. Over the past year, the NBRB has tightened control over the exchange rate through interventions, with the regime increasingly resembling a crawling peg (prompting a reclassification by the staff of the de facto regime to “crawl-like arrangement”). Although the pace of depreciation has accelerated from less than ½ percent per month in the first half of 2013 to about 1–1½ percent since, it remains less than what is needed given high inflation, fast wage growth, and depreciations in key trading partners. The rubel has depreciated 15 percent against the dollar since end-2012, consistent with a real effective appreciation of 9 percent, further weakening already low competitiveness and contributing to significant rubel overvaluation, on staff estimates (Box 3). Belarus Kazakhstan Ukraine Russia (End of 2013 = 100) Jan-14 Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations. Apr-14 Feb-14 May-14 May-2014 Exchange Rates Rubel-Dollar Exchange Rate (Daily data, thousands of rubles) Jan-12 Jun-12 Dec-12 May-13 Nov-13 May-14 Page 13 (Index, Average 2005=100) Real Effective Exchange Rates Box 3. Belarus: External Stability Assessment A CGER-type assessment suggests that the rubel is now significantly overvalued. Inflation differentials and an insufficiently flexible exchange rate have led to overvaluation of the rubel. Total REER appreciation in CPI terms of about 35 percent—and over 50 percent in ULC and GDP deflator terms—since the 2011 devaluations suggests a serious erosion of competitiveness. Applying CGER methodology to Belarus is challenging . The External Sustainability (ES) approach is less informative because stabilizing NFA at the current low reserve levels is not desirable. Meanwhile, data constraints render the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate (ERER) approach infeasible for Belarus. The Macroeconomic Balance (MB) approach is best suited for an assessment of Belarus’ external stability, but needs to take into account the unsustainable nature of the current external imbalance, which reduces the accuracy and relevance of any projected medium-term current account balance. Given these challenges, the staff’s exchange rate assessment is mainly based on the MB approach using the projected 2014 current account balance (rather than the medium-term balance forecast) as a proxy for the underlying balance. Sources: INS; World Economic Outlook ; IFS; and IMF staff calculations. GDP defl.-based CPI-based ULC-based Nominal (rhs) Jan-11 Jan-12 Feb-13 The MB approach estimates a further widened gap between the projected medium-term current account and the estimated norm to around -7 percent. This is consistent with a significant overvaluation. Moreover, different from the assessment in the 2013 Article IV Consultation, the ES approach now indicates a negative gap, despite the deeply negative interest-growth differentials. CGER-Based Current Account Gap 1/ External sustainability Average CA gap Macro Balance 2012 Article IV 2013 Article IV 2014 Article IV 1/ Estimates are based on the CGER methodology explained in Occasional Paper 261, IMF 2008. Note that the ES approach computes the current account position needed to stabilize NFA at its current level, which need not be the appropriate level for Belarus. 2/ Average of the gaps under the MB and ES approaches. These estimates should be interpreted carefully . The high degree of state control in the Belarus economy and related administrative interference with price formation significantly weaken the role of price signals relative to a market based economy. This introduces considerable uncertainty in the estimated effectiveness of exchange rate adjustment. Policy Discussion Staff urged further reducing exchange rate intervention, thus allowing faster depreciation, accompanied by monetary policy tightening. Faster rubel depreciation would aid external adjustment, save reserves, and improve competitiveness. To contain inflationary pressures and guard against potential exchange rate overshooting, monetary policy should be simultaneously Page 14 tightened. Increased exchange rate flexibility should be accompanied by a carefully crafted communication strategy to guide expectations of market participants and the public. Staff also encouraged enhancing monetary policy effectiveness through a base money anchor. With Belarus not ready for a successful move to inflation targeting, staff urged the NBRB to start implementing base money targeting as a temporary policy anchor, in line with TA advice. While agreeing on the need for exchange rate flexibility, the authorities were reluctant to increase the pace of depreciation. They remained deeply concerned about potential market reactions, arguing that the expectations of the general public are still shaped by the experience of the 2011 crisis and that faster depreciation could trigger a disorderly adjustment of the rubel. They also pointed to the high economic costs of the 2011 devaluation. The authorities expected that the arrival of the promised Russian loans would help support the balance of payments. The NBRB planned to continue loosening monetary policy to alleviate credit constraints. The authorities argued that private enterprises had lived with high rubel interest rates for too long and that this was stifling investment. Lowering rates was therefore the key policy priority. They did not perceive such policy loosening as inconsistent with the challenge of reducing high inflation. While the NBRB agreed it was highly likely that inflation would remain well above the official 11 percent target this year, it argued this was mostly due to the impact of exchange rate depreciation and administrative price increases. Also, the NBRB planned to continue rationing credit volumes to avoid lower rates from resulting in a rapid acceleration of credit growth. The authorities were studying the recommendations to re-anchor monetary policy on base money.