The economy is suffering from deep recession. External shocks, including low oil prices and the downturn in Russia, have exposed deep domestic structural problems, reflected in falling productivity (Box 1). Policies during 2015–16 have supported macroeconomic stability and have begun to address long-standing structural weaknesses discussed in past consultations (Annex I). But vulnerabilities are increasing faster, marked by rising public and external debt (Annex II), weakening corporate and bank balance sheets, and low reserves. Most senior officials agree that deep institutional and structural reforms are needed, but express concern about their social impact and about the government’s implementation capacity in areas such as SOE reform. Some official sector stakeholders believe that the recession is due to ‘temporary’ external shocks and high interest rates and argue that the new 2016–20 Government Action Plan is sufficient to revive growth prospects. Belarus has responded to past pressures with episodes of tight macroeconomic policies, with structural weaknesses left largely unaddressed. In response to past macroeconomic and financial pressures, the authorities tightened fiscal policy, restrained wages, allowed exchange rate adjustment, and took some structural measures—mainly in the financial sector as well as limited privatizations. But policies tended to relax after immediate pressures mm oo Page 10 abated, and deeper-rooted vulnerabilities persisted. In addressing the most recent economic downturn, the authorities have undertaken more sustained stabilization efforts and demonstrated stronger ownership of reforms. These include initiation of some significant measures to address underlying vulnerabilities, though overall progress is still at an early stage and future reversals cannot be ruled out. Belarus is seeking to deepen and diversify its external economic relations. Economic ties with Russia remain strong (Figure 1), including through membership in the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), though disagreements over the pricing of energy imports from Russia are coloring these good relations and creating risks. Belarus is also seeking to strengthen other external economic linkages by leveraging its proximity to the European Union (EU) and growing ties with China. The EU recently lifted most sanctions on Belarus, unlocking potential loans from the European Bank for Restructuring and Development (EBRD) and European Investment Bank (EIB). Belarus is a key way station on the China-led new Silk Road, bringing additional financial and logistics resources to the economy. Belarus has revived WTO negotiations and intensified relations with International Financial Institutions (IFIs). The World Bank is considering a policy loan. Page 11