Belarus’s near-term macroeconomic outlook is further contraction and persistent elevated inflation (Box 3). Growth is expected to remain negative this year (-3.0 percent) and next (-0.5 percent) under staff’s baseline (partial adjustment) scenario, with a subdued recovery beginning in 2018 (+0.5 percent). Recovery will lag that in Russia given weaker balance sheets and structural impediments in Belarus. Real GDP will gradually rise to a potential growth rate of slightly above 1¾ percent, taking into account TFP trends and negative demographics. Under staff’s adjustment scenario, deeper and faster reforms would initially push growth lower, mainly due to lower domestic demand, but productivity gains and rising domestic demand would then drive growth up to 4½ percent during 2020–21 before settling into a 3½ percent long-term potential growth rate. BLRBGRBIHHUNHRVMKDCZEUKRSVNSVKPOLALBESTROURUSLTULVAMDA Average Annual Contributionof TFP to GDP Growth (Percentage points) Source:Total EconomyDatabase, and IMF staff calculations. hun Page 13 Inflation is expected to reach 13 percent y-o-y by end-December—almost 1 percentage point higher than last year—driven mainly by recent exchange rate depreciation and higher utility tariffs. Inflation is projected to remain in the low double digits over the next three years under the baseline scenario. Better policy implementation under the adjustment scenario would bring inflation down to around 6 percent by 2020. The current account deficit is projected to widen by about 1 percent of GDP this year and then narrow gradually in the medium term to 3–3½ percent under the baseline scenario. Under the adjustment scenario, the current account deficit would significantly narrow to around ½ percent of GDP by 2021, with higher reserve build-up. This reflects significant reforms, including to SOEs, that could sustainably lower import demand and promote higher FDI and other capital inflows. Risks are tilted to the downside (Risk Assessment Matrix, Annex III). Belarus is prone to external and domestic shocks and swings in confidence that macro-financial linkages could propagate into crisis. Lower (higher) energy prices would erode (boost) growth and external stability. Current energy price disagreements with Russia, if not resolved, could disrupt external and domestic stability. In the event of significant renewed depreciation, corporate and bank balance sheets and household (HH) confidence would weaken owing to high dollarization, currency mismatches, limited access to foreign exchange liquidity, and significant annual gross external financing requirements in the range of US$18 billion (35 percent of GDP). Risks to balance sheets would be heightened in the event of slippages in domestic policy implementation. Quasi-fiscal liabilities are particularly uncertain and could be higher (or lower) than estimated. Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that external conditions have recently improved and their stabilization and structural reform policies are bearing fruit. They expect the economic contraction to ease more rapidly in 2016—with some in government expecting a return to growth— and inflation to fall by more relative to staff’s baseline projections. They pointed to a number of important recent reforms, including the shift to a flexible exchange rate regime, price liberalization, and some SOE reforms. The authorities are more upbeat about medium-term economic prospects. They expect much higher medium-term growth in the range of 5 to 6 percent. The authorities expressed greater optimism about reform implementation and anticipated higher investment than under staff’s baseline scenario. They expect stronger external sector performance, helped by expected lower energy import prices from Russia but also higher foreign direct investment and strengthened competitiveness. They noted the challenges (and benefits) of increased competition from globalization, and remain firmly committed to both deeper external economic ties as well as to policies consistent with maintaining social stability. They broadly agreed with the range of risks identified by staff, but see their policies, taken together, as significantly contributing to risk mitigation. They expect quick resolution of the energy pricing issue with Russia and view the risk of persistently lower oil prices as somewhat less likely. They see lower risks from the SOE sector, having provided substantial support to SOEs in 2015 and taken some measures to improve SOE soundness. Page 14