17. Public debt sustainability risks are rising, despite headline fiscal surpluses. Public debt—including public guaranteed debt (PPG)—has increased significantly from below 40 percent of GDP in 2013 to nearly 54 percent in 2015 (Figure 7; Table 3), owing to sharp depreciation and quasi-fiscal operations, including recapitalizations and called guarantees. Debt is expected to reach nearly 70 percent of GDP in 2021 as quasi-fiscal liabilities are realized. The authorities have tightened fiscal policy and revamped their fiscal framework. Key steps taken by the government in response to deteriorating revenues, external pressures, and mounting debt include: Tightening the 2016 budget. Export taxes were increased on potash, oil, and fuel. Excise and property taxes were increased and tax expenditure efficiency was enhanced by elimination of preferential VAT tax treatment for transportation and telecommunication sectors. Budget expenditures have been cut, mainly through compression of capital spending and a freeze in real public sector wages that has partially unwound rapid increases in recent years (and helped ease wage pressures in the non-government sector—see text chart). The authorities are also reducing off-balance sheet directed lending. The authorities continue to hold earmarked funds in reserve for strengthened SSNs, including for unemployment benefits and a better-targeted social support mechanism to mitigate HH utility tariff adjustments. The overall fiscal stance is somewhat looser this year, but is expected to tighten next year (text chart). Updating the fiscal framework. The authorities aim to implement a 3-year budgeting process with strengthened accountability, beginning with the 2017 budget cycle. They have also set up a There have been two changes in staff’s budget calculations: (a) revenues from budgetary funds have been removed from revenue calculations to eliminate double counting; and (b) government net lending is now treated as a financing item rather than part of expenditure. Page 18 somewhat complex web of fiscal objectives: (i) a general government balanced-budget—but excluding a new nuclear power plant (NPP) project costing close to 18 percent of GDP over roughly 7 years, financed by Russia; (ii) a medium-term public debt ceiling target of 45 percent of GDP (including the NPP, but excluding guarantees and local government debt); (iii) a prohibition on new issuance of government guarantees (excluding IFIs); (iv) a medium-term objective to GDP, which they view as more consistent with peer countries; and (v) reduction of the ratio of FX- denominated public debt service-to-reserves to 45 percent by 2020. These changes follow important tax reforms in recent years, including a unified tax code and harmonization with IFRS. maintain state tax revenues below 26 percent of Reforming the pension system and embarking on other medium-term plans. The authorities recently approved an important parametric pension reform—a gradual increase in retirement ages beginning January 2017—and reindexed pension income to inflation rather than wages (Box 5). Staff expects these measures to broadly maintain fiscal balance of the pension system through 2022. The authorities are also planning further reductions in tax expenditures, drawing on FAD TA, and steps to increase efficiency in goods and service expenditures. Staff Recommendations Staff urged additional steps to reduce vulnerabilities and support reforms and growth. Strengthen the debt anchor. Staff supported the debt anchor, but recommended that it be more broadly defined to include guarantees and local government debt. Staff noted that an even lower debt threshold would be advisable given significant risks identified in the public DSA, including a history of large macro-fiscal shocks (text chart), but acknowledged a cushion from significant government cash deposits. nnu Page 19 Further strengthen the fiscal framework. Staff supported adoption of medium-term budgeting. To complement the debt anchor, staff urged a more explicit adjustment rule, preferably an expenditure rule based on a broader budget definition (while also looking to simplify the overall set of objectives to enhance communication and credibility). Staff also urged more transparency, including identification and regular monitoring of fiscal risks, explicit recognition of quasi-fiscal liabilities, and bringing all forms of quasi-fiscal government support to the economy on budget. Staff estimates that unrecognized quasi-fiscal liabilities are around 15½ percent of GDP, though this estimate is subject to significant uncertainty. Staff expects to refine these estimates using results from the ongoing bank AQR exercise, and as better SOE performance information becomes available. Staff also pressed the authorities to undertake recapitalization of the central bank (3 percent of GDP) in line with MCM TA. Near-term easing, medium-term consolidation. Some near-term fiscal easing is warranted given recession and a negative output gap, but should be followed by cyclically adjusted fiscal consolidation of about 0.5 percent of GDP annually over the next five years (based on well- specified measures), versus the baseline. With a low fiscal multiplier (about 0.1–0.3 in the first year) , the modest growth impact of the proposed medium-term adjustment can be more than offset by growth enhancing structural reforms. Such measures would bring PPG debt (including NPP) around 55 percent of GDP by 2021, and below the 45 percent target level by 2025. Additional revenue and expenditure measures. Given sustainability concerns, staff recommended that debt reduction be given priority over the aggregate tax revenue burden. Staff recommended low-growth-impact revenue measures, focusing on reducing tax expenditures and if possible, lowering the comparatively high rate of social security contributions (SSCs)—see text chart. Other Fiscal multiplier calculation methodology is based on the IMF Guidance Note on Fiscal Multipliers (2013). Company Tax rateVAT RateIncome Tax Wedge Comparative Tax Rates (Percent) Belarus Comparators CIS Central Source: KPMG tax database. MeasuresBudget Savings 1/ Revenue measures3.3 Broaden tax base, including reduction of exemptions and removal of preferential regimes1.3Higher SOE dividends and SPF contributions, due to SOE reforms2.0 Primary expenditure measures (excluding NPP)-0.5 of which: Reduce expenditure on goods, services, and non-pension related social spending.1.3Higher unemployment benefits-0.7Higher in capital expenditures-1.1 Lower off-balance sheet operations1.5Lower directed lending0.1Government guarantees10.9 Zero new gross issuance10.9 Total15.3 Source: IMF staff estimate1/ '+' results in higher budget balance, and lower debt. Total Fiscal Adjustment, 2016-2021 ( share of GDP) Adjustment vs Baseline Page 20 possible revenue measures are shown in the text table. On the expenditure side, a sustained effort to limit real public wage growth would provide both fiscal and competitiveness benefits. Capital expenditures should be protected. Additional pension reform : Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to reform the pension system. However, staff urged the authorities to: (i) continue reforms to close the pension gap after 2022; (ii) take additional measures to free up fiscal space to lower the burdensome social contribution rate (35 percent); and (iii) take complementary steps to enhance labor participation. Authorities’ Views The authorities viewed their efforts to tighten the fiscal stance in 2016 as sufficient, and were noncommittal regarding additional consolidation measures. They expressed concern about the rapidly increasing debt level, but highlighted that they have adopted several measures to bring debt down to the target level. They plan to include local government debt in their debt target and to reduce issuance of domestic FX-denominated bonds. Regarding realization of quasi-fiscal liabilities, the authorities noted a lack of fiscal resources. They argued that budget resources for SOE and banking sector should not be provided ahead of more fundamental reforms and further clarity about the size of the problem, and that central bank recapitalization could be achieved more gradually. Regarding possible future fiscal measures, they noted that they do not see space to raise property taxes, and that further increases in excise taxes should depend on profitability of companies in the relevant sectors. With respect to pension reform, the authorities stressed the importance of maintaining a fiscally balanced system, and are committed to making additional modifications as needed to achieve this. They did not see room to lower the SSC rate at this time.