Some progress has been made on price liberalization, but in other areas the stalemate continues Deep reform of the uncompetitive Belarus economy remains critical. Motivated by the requirements of the Customs Union with Russia and Kazakhstan, some progress was recently made in reducing the number of “socially important goods” subject to continuous price controls, though their share in the CPI basket was modest. In other areas there has been no apparent progress. In particular, despite increases in utility and transport tariffs, these remain far below cost recovery levels. Also, Socially Important Goods (Number of categories subject to price controls by the Ministry of Economy) share of CPI basket subject to price controls (rhs) Sources: Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Belarus; and IMF staff calculations. Page 18 notwithstanding the objective in the authorities’ 2013 joint action plan of raising US$4½ billion through privatizations and the compilation of a new “privatization list” of 88 mostly small enterprises, no significant privatizations have taken place since 2011 and the tender of a controlling stake in mobile phone operator MTS has fallen through. Privatization Receipts 1/ (Millions of U.S. dollars) Other privatization Sale of Beltransgaz to Gazprom 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Heating Tariffs (US$/Gcal) Tariff Cost Recovery Levels (Percent) Utilities ACF target - utilities Transportation ACF target - transportation Natural Gas Tariffs 2/ (US$/1000 cubic meters) Sources: Belarusian authorities; Russian Federal Statistics Service; Anti Crisis Fund; World Bank Country Economic Memorandum; www.energy.eu.; www.euroheat.org and IMF staff calculations. 1/ The privatization of the first 50 percent stake in Beltransgas in 2007 refers to an annualsale of 12.5 percentstakes at USD 625 million over 4 years (2007-2010). 2/ Belarus refers to a weighted average of summer and heating season tariffs, weighted by their respective lengths. Policy Discussion Staff acknowledged steps in price liberalization, but emphasized the need for comprehensive and much more ambitious reforms. Staff urged leveraging the recent progress on price controls by stepping up efforts in other reform areas to improve resource allocation. Specific steps would include the initiation of a time-bound plan to reach full cost recovery of utility and transport tariffs, a detailed plan to reduce the role of the state in the economy, including a rapid phase out of mandatory targets (for output, exports, wages, employment, and other variables) for enterprises and credible plans for privatization. Staff also urged strengthening safety nets to cushion the impact of reforms on the most vulnerable. Page 19 The authorities recognize structural challenges but prefer strengthening the existing system. The authorities agreed that the current economic model was not producing favorable outcomes, and that falling competitiveness was posing a structural challenge. They argued that the challenge could be met through strengthened management and appropriate reform within the existing system. In this context, they pointed out that even though mandatory targets for enterprises continued to cover a wide range of variables, in practice emphasis was increasingly placed on targets for labor productivity, profitabiliy, and exports, while compliance with other targets was becoming less critical. The authorities also pointed to their recent privatization efforts, but indicated that market conditions had not been conducive.