The economy continues to contract (Figures2–4; Table 1A). Real GDP contracted by nearly 4 percent in 2015, with signs of similar decline in the first half of 2016. Headline inflation has slowed in recent months, but remains high relative to peers at 12.1 percent y-o-y as of end-June 2016 (text chart). Real wages are down and unemployment is rising amid corporate losses and weakening balance sheets. Negative macro-financial feedback loops are taking their toll, with implications for quasi-fiscal liabilities emanating from state-owned banks and the SOE sector. The external sector remains fragile with diminished buffers. (Figure 5; Table 2). The Belarusian ruble (BYR) lost 36 percent of its value against the USD (28 percent against a trade weighted basket) in 2015, and a further 7½ percent against the USD through end-June 2016. The current account deficit narrowed to 3.8 percent of GDP in 2015, amidst sharp import compression and retention of energy export duties formerly repaid to Russia, but staff estimates the BYR remains up to 10 percent overvalued (Box 2). Gross official reserves (US$4.3 billion at end-June 2016) are well below standard adequacy metrics. Official reserves net of predetermined short-term net FX drains are negative (text chart), reflecting significant FX-denominated domestic and foreign debt. Further erosion in reserves has been avoided only by foreign exchange borrowing from Russia (US$0.8 billion) and the Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and Development (‘EFSD’, US$2 billion committed). Despite this, spreads on Belarusian 2018 Eurobonds have halved from 1,000 bps in mid-2015 to around 450 bps in July, roughly in line with similarly rated peers—reflecting a strong repayment track record as well as credibility gains from stronger policies. The banking system faces significant challenges . (Text chart). Capital adequacy ratios are falling and non-performing loans (NPLs) are rising. NPLs are likely underestimated given regulatory K RR K OQ K K Z oo K RR K OQ K K Z oo Page 12 forbearance, evergreening, and diminished real sector repayment capacity, particularly among SOEs. Bank profitability is being squeezed. Deposits have stabilized after a period of erosion that was likely driven by depreciation and consumption smoothing. Banks also face significant challenges adjusting to cuts in government directed lending and guarantees. Given the significant state presence in the banking sector (state-owned banks account for about 65 percent of the banking system assets), any needed recapitalization relating to the state bank-SOE nexus has implications for the budget.