The authorities have strengthened the monetary and exchange rate policy framework In 2015, the central bank (NBRB) replaced its crawling peg with a de jure managed floating exchange rate regime and money aggregate targeting. The authorities established broad money as the nominal target, and BYR base money as the operational target. Interventions in the foreign exchange market are broadly rules-based, guided by a wide crawling band allowing smoothing and opportunistic build-up of reserves. The authorities’ medium-term objectives are to: (i) reduce inflation to 5 percent by 2020; (ii) rebuild reserves to a ‘safe’ level of US$10 billion (roughly 100 percent of the Fund’s ARA RAM metric); and (iii) gradually transition to inflation targeting. In July 2016, the authorities redenominated the currency to help boost confidence, issuing new bills (“BYN”) that dropped four zeros. A staff assessment concluded that Belarus has eliminated all Given lags in official sector data reporting, this staff report presents figures in the ‘old’ currency, “BYR”. (continued) Page 21 previously identified multiple currency practices (MCPs) and exchange restrictions subject to IMF jurisdiction under Article VIII. Monetary policy has been tight in 2015–16 (Figure 8; Table 4). Monetary aggregate growth has been contained at levels broadly consistent with the authorities’ inflation objective for 2016 of 12 percent (while excess liquidity and credibility gains have allowed some reduction in the interest rate corridor). The reserve requirement has been used as an instrument to address structural liquidity in the banking system as well as the dynamics of money supply. Over the past two years, the NBRB lowered overall reserve requirements and unified the rate on domestic and foreign currency deposits at 7.5 percent. Domestic credit growth remains subdued, despite excess domestic currency liquidity in the system and lower interest rates. This reflects both supply and demand factors: banks remain risk averse given rising NPLs while corporate and HH balance sheets and incomes are weakened and face dim near-term market prospects. These factors, combined with high dollarization and the significant share of government directed lending have contributed to a weak interest rate transmission mechanism. The authorities expect the ongoing reduction in directed lending will help address this, but have also introduced prudential limits on lending and deposit rates to guide the yield curve and help reset market premia more in line with gains in credibility (Annex IV). Belarus eliminated previously identified exchange restrictions arising from the requirement of an NBRB permit for: (i) advance payments for imports and payments for imports with delivery outside of Belarus; and (ii) the multiple currency practices arising from: (a) the potential deviation by more than two percent of the exchange rates in the over-the-counter (OTC) market and the Belarusian Currency and Stock Exchange (BCSE); (b) the potential deviation by more than two percent of the exchange rates in the OTC market and the BCSE exchange rate or the official exchange rate with respect to the mandatory resale of unused foreign exchange by resident legal entities and foreign exchange amounts subject to mandatory sale requirement; and (c) broken cross rates among the currencies for which the NBRB establishes official exchange rates with monthly frequency with respect to the mandatory resale of unused FX by resident legal entities and FX amounts subject to mandatory sale requirement. Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Cash in vault, required and excess reserves to deposits included in broad money. Page 22 Staff Recommendations Staff urged the NBRB to maintain its focus on lowering inflation, while safeguarding external and financial stability . The NBRB’s monetary policy stance (aggregate money growth target) for 2016 looks broadly appropriate, though further efforts (including structural reforms and steps to enhance central bank credibility) will be needed to bring medium-term inflation down in line with objectives. With respect to the recently imposed prudential limits on interest rates, the mission urged the NBRB to: (i) undertake an impact assessment of the measures, including their impact on new lending and on depositor behavior; (ii) treat these measures as temporary; and (iii) rely primarily on macroeconomic stabilization and progress in reducing vulnerabilities in the real and financial sector balance sheets to bring down market interest rates. The mission advised the NBRB to stand ready to tighten money aggregates if imbalances and financial sector pressures re-emerge. To further enhance monetary policy effectiveness, staff recommended strengthening NBRB operations and operational independence . Staff urged the authorities to: (i) amend the NBRB statute to clarify the primacy of price stability; (ii) recapitalize the NBRB; (iii) strengthen communications; and (iv) propose a transition timeline to an interest rate-based operational target and then inflation targeting. Staff recommended that the authorities maintain exchange rate flexibility while seeking opportunities to rebuild reserves . The flexible exchange rate remains an important shock absorber, and interventions should remain limited to smoothing volatility and rebuilding reserves to more adequate levels as conditions allow. Given balance-sheet vulnerabilities, the authorities were advised to facilitate real exchange rate adjustment (and promote export competitiveness) through structural reforms. Authorities’ Views The NBRB broadly agreed with staff views on monetary policy. The central bank considers the current tight monetary policy stance as appropriate for reducing inflation. The NBRB noted it has been building credibility through firm implementation of the money aggregate target framework. The authorities view a stronger interest rate transmission mechanism as a prerequisite for adopting the policy rate as the operational target, and for the eventual adoption of an inflation targeting regime. The NBRB noted that its operational independence is sufficiently ensured by the Banking Code, combined with provisions on its independence from other ministries and well- specified issues on which the NBRB reports to the Presidential Administration. In addition, draft amendments to the NBRB statute are being prepared which will clarify price stability as one of the main objectives. The authorities agreed on the importance of maintaining a more flexible exchange rate regime, while aiming to rebuild external buffers. They emphasized that the exchange rate is market-determined with rules-based FX interventions limited to smoothing excessive volatility or to maintain financial stability in the face of sharp exchange rate depreciation. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of reserve adequacy. They are aiming for a steady buildup of reserves Page 23 over the medium term, though some counterparts noted that reliance on further external borrowing to rebuild buffers would carry risks of its own. The authorities felt that the exchange rate had settled to a level broadly consistent with fundamentals or even overshot, noting that the real exchange rate was below its historical average. They saw current account deficits of 2 percent of GDP or below being financeable by FDI inflows, which had historically averaged similar levels. The authorities agreed with the emphasis on structural reforms to deliver external adjustment, noting that high dollarization added to the costs of any further significant depreciation.