Quasi-fiscal directed lending operations and wage policies continue to be the key fiscal policy concerns Lending. The flow of new subsidized lending increased 35 percent—reaching 5½ percent of GDP—in 2013, thereby fueling domestic demand, raising the share of subsidized credit in overall lending, and adding to concerns about the efficiency of credit allocation. It also created contingent fiscal liabilities as a likely large share of lending was directed at ailing sectors and enterprises. While new lending has increasingly taken place through the Development Bank (DB), growth of directed lending in state banks also continues to be high, validating concerns Page 9 that the DB has become an additional source of subsidized credit instead of a consolidating institution as originally envisaged. Faced with increasing financing constraints, for 2014 the authorities have adopted a “Financing Plan” that identifies and sets a binding limit on the combined subsidized lending volumes of the DB and other banks (though it excludes subsidized housing lending). Staff estimates that the plan implies a flow of new directed lending on the order of 3¾ percent of GDP. Aug-12 Subsidized Lending Crowds Out Market Lending Lending rate, market Lending rate, concessional Share of LGP in total stock of credit (rhs) Dec-12 May-13 Sep-13 Sources: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus; and IMF staff calculations. Wages. Despite a marked moderation in the second half of the year, average economy-wide wages rose 6 percent in 2013 in real terms, thereby exceeding productivity growth (estimated at 1½ percent) by a large margin. The increases—led by government targets—translated into high consumption growth and a further decline in wage competitiveness (Box 2). For 2014, the authorities are planning a real income increase of 3 percent. However, the real wage increase over January— March (abstracting from the seasonal December spike) amounted already to 4.6 percent, pointing to upside risks to the official objective. Unit labor costs, selected trade partners 2010Q1-2013Q4 (index, 2010Q1=100) Note: EU is the average of EU trading partners weighted by trade shares. Russia Belarus EU 2010Q1 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 Source: IMF data. Meanwhile, the authorities again aim to balance the headline budget in 2014. The headline budget posted a small surplus in 2013, despite a 2 percent of GDP revenue shortfall that was countered with ad hoc increases in regulated prices and deferral of expenditures on goods and services and public investment. Including contingent liabilities from quasi-fiscal operations, however, staff estimates that the budget was over 6 percent in deficit (Figure 5, Table 4). For 2014, the authorities are aiming again at a balanced headline budget, but risks are on the downside as the erosion of revenues from external trade is likely structural owing to tariff reductions in the context of the Eurasian customs union and declining exports on reduced external competitiveness. Page 10 Box 2. Belarus. Wage Setting: The Role of the Government Closer inspection of the role of targets suggests a large role for the government in setting wages. Rapid economy-wide wage growth has been a key destabilizing factor in recent years. High wage increases—which far outstripped productivity growth—led to overheating, fueled inflation and external imbalances, and reduced competitiveness, and were a key contributing factor to the 2009 and 2011 crises. Rapid wage growth outpaces productivity... Wages and Productivity (Index numbers, 2005=100) USD wage Productivity ...and wage targets contributed to overheating. Average Economy-wide Monthly Wages, Wage Targets and the Exchange Rate (Wages in USD, m-o-m % change in NC/USD period av. exchange rate) wage wage target Exchange rate (rhs) Source: Belstat. Targets for 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005 and 2010 are from official plans, targets for 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2012 are from authorities' press statements. Note: Productivity is computed as GDP at constant prices in billion rubles/ employment. USD wage refers to the average economy-wide monthly wage measured in USD. High wage growth in Belarus is not spontaneous but prompted by government policy through widely-applied wage targets. Economy-wide wage targets in US dollars, and corresponding regional and town-level targets in local currency, have been set by the authorities in most years and apply to the entire economy, including the private sector (companies less than 50 percent state-owned). Although the importance of mandatory wage targets appears to be decreasing, the targets have been closely adhered to and are a more important driver of wages than the government’s single pay grading system, which regulates wage-setting in budgetary organizations. Very low variation of wages between regions and sectors confirms the strong influence of official wage targets. Targets appear to be an important driver of wage dynamics... ...as is also illustrated by little regional variation in wages. Nominal Gross Average Monthly Wages Nominal Gross Average Monthly Wages and Wage Targets 1/ 2/ (Average across regions, thousands of Belarusian rubles) wage wage target by Region (Thousands of Belarusian rubles) Republic of Belarus Minsk city Minsk Gomel Mogilev Vitebsk Grodno Brest 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Sources: Belstat.; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Wage targets from annual plans. 2/ Both series exclude Minsk city for consistency as no targets were set for Minsk city in 2008-2010. Page 11 Policy Discussion Staff urged a sharper reduction of subsidized lending and a halt to wage increases. Staff welcomed the authorities’ Financing Plan, which promises to be a helpful instrument in the control of overall directed lending volumes, and recommended that it become a recurring feature of the authorities’ policy framework. At the same time, given the associated cyclical and structural drawbacks, it urged the authorities to be more ambitious in scaling back directed credit and to limit new lending to 2 percent of GDP in 2014, fully channeled via the DB. Directed lending should be reduced further to 1 percent of GDP in 2015, with a view to a full phase out over the medium term. Staff also recommended forgoing the wage increases embedded in the official policy plans for 2014. Keeping wages constant in nominal terms would avoid fueling domestic demand growth and help make up for lost competitiveness from the excessively high wage growth of recent years. If directed lending and wages are not adequately contained, fiscal balance objectives should be more ambitious. Staff advised that the authorities run a corresponding surplus for any new subsidized lending above the recommended 2 percent of GDP limit, to offset the expansionary effect of such excess lending and help build fiscal buffers to cope with implied contingent liabilities. Staff also urged the authorities to optimize fiscal savings from wages and reductions in subsidies, instead of balancing the budget by reducing capital expenditure. Such savings would also pay for improvements in social safety nets that should accompany reform. The authorities argued that policies were already tightening and that scope for more ambitious cutbacks was limited. They suggested that given wage hikes in recent years, which had resulted in a large increase in average wage levels, the emphasis on meeting wage targets would be less pronounced this year. In addition, financing constraints would limit the scope for directed lending. In this context, the authorities explained that the Financing Plan was a temporary instrument aimed at ensuring sufficient financing for ongoing projects deemed critical, at the expense of lower-priority and new projects. Meanwhile, the authorities were planning to make the DB the main coordinator of all directed lending from 2015—an initiative that was welcomed by staff in principle although its modalities remain largely unclear. Regarding the headline fiscal balance, the authorities worried that achieving even the zero balance mandated by the budget would prove to be an uphill struggle if revenue performance continued to be weak. Further cuts in capital expenditure would be considered, but there was a considerable chance that a deficit would result.