The authorities’ structural policies have been guided by two main objectives: 2013H1 Total Low-skilled 20-29 years 55-64 years Belgium: Employment Rate Increasing labor activation to meet the 73.2 percent employment rate target by 2020. The authorities noted that the target may be overly ambitious in the wake of the crisis. Nonetheless, they expected that the tightening of unemployment, pension, and pre-pension benefits in the last two years would raise work incentives and lengthen working life (Appendix IV). Results of these reforms are expected to build up over time, but already employment rates for senior workers have been increasing. A commission has been charged with preparing pension reform proposals for the next government. The authorities also underscored the success of job subsidy schemes (amounting to nearly 3.2 percent of total labor costs) in activating low-skilled workers, for whom the minimum wage (roughly EUR 1,500 a month) constitutes a barrier to employment. The most developed scheme is the service voucher system which covers some 109,000 workers, at a budgetary cost of 0.4 percent of GDP in 2011. Despite its high cost, the authorities see it as an effective way of promoting durable attachment to the labor force, all the while preserving the social contract implicit in the minimum wage. The authorities also pointed to other successful examples of active labor market policies, such as subsidized apprenticeships. They stressed the desirability of transitioning more generally from passive support to in-work benefit schemes. Source: Belgian authorities. Under the service voucher system, households can purchase vouchers for domestic work from contractual workers at 60 percent of the minimum wage, with the state (and from 2015 the regions) filling the gap and other costs. Page 14 Projection error Excess gross wage increase compared to the norm Realized wage gap between Belgium and the partners Actual Labor Cost Increase versus the Ex-Ante Norm Restoring cost competitiveness . By establishing a “wage norm,” the 1996 law on competitiveness has played an effective role in keeping wage developments aligned to those of partner countries despite indexation. However, in 2007–08, wages in Belgium rose 2.2 percent above those of partners, mostly because of forecast errors. This handicap has proven hard to correct in the face of domestic indexation and very low real wage growth in partner countries. In response, the government took action by: (i) imposing a real wage freeze in 2013–14; (ii) adjusting the price index, which lowered wage growth by 0.2 percent; and (iii) reducing energy prices through structural reforms, with a resulting impact, through indexation, of wage growth. As a result of these measures, the wage handicap relative to partners was stabilized at 4.8 percent in 2013, and should decline by 1 percentage point in 2014. In November 2013, the authorities announced two additional measures: (i) a commitment to reduce labor taxes by the equivalent of 0.4 percent of GDP over the next five years; and (ii) a lowering of the VAT rate on electricity from 21 to 6 percent, effective April 2014, with an estimated impact of 0.4 percent on prices and, through indexation, on wages. Staff recommended securing the agreement of social partners that labor tax reductions would go to reducing labor costs rather than increasing wages. Staff also questioned the merits of lowering the VAT on energy, suggesting that cutting labor taxes would have been a more efficient way of reducing labor costs. Sources: Federal Planning Bureau and IMF staff calculations. The 1996 law was implemented starting with the 1999-2000 agreement. Wages are indexed to inflation, but the wage norm sets a ceiling on real wage negotiations based on expected wage developments in Germany, France, and the Netherlands. The national wage norm then guides sectoral wage negotiations which cover 90 percent of employees. Estimates of the Central Council for the Economy based on OECD wage projections for France, Germany, and the Netherlands. The wage handicap is cumulated since 1996. Page 15 Notwithstanding these reforms, substantial challenges remain. Inefficient redistribution mechanisms still create large inactivity traps and disincentives to work. Belgium’s social model produces the largest degree of redistribution in the OECD. However, in the process it also creates widespread inactivity traps. Beyond the pension reform, staff stressed the scope for increasing further work incentives by reducing interruption of career schemes and exemptions from job search requirements. Wage formation could be improved . While the 1996 law on competitiveness has worked reasonably well in generating consensus around competitive wage setting, the authorities agreed that automatic corrections for past deviations from the norm should be made more explicit. Staff also recommended introducing corrections for observed deviations in labor productivity growth (not only wages), and removing terms-of trade effects from the indexation mechanisms. The labor market should be made more adaptable . Labor market arrangements have been designed to protect existing jobs through lengthy and costly dismissal procedures. The system was reformed in 2013 to eliminate differences in treatment between blue collar and white collar workers, but it remains costly and staff underscored the adverse effect on hiring, labor mobility, and the ability of enterprises to adjust. It suggested that these resources would be better used by developing new labor market skills through in-work training, where Belgium lags behind other countries. Labor mobility would also be enhanced by strengthening job search requirements and reducing tax impediments to relocation. More efficient product markets are needed as a complement to a more adaptable labor market . Regulation and administrative burdens appear more cumbersome in Belgium than in other European countries. As a result, competition, notably in the non-tradable sector, is less intense and productivity gains are lower (and even negative for some services). A liberalization of product markets, combined with measures to foster innovation and improve education, would raise Belgium’s potential growth. Liberalization could be most effective in services sectors such as transport industries, retail distribution, and professional services, which are heavily regulated by OECD standards. Greater competition in product markets would create new job opportunities and thereby reinforce activation policies. Such liberalization would also complement the 2013 reform of the competition authority that increases its capacity to sanction anti-competitive practices. Taxes and cash transfers reduce inequality by about 15 percentage points, as measured by the GINI coefficient. Page 16 Belgium and Other EU Countries: Competition Indicators All branches Manufacturing Market Services Average price-cost margin, 1996–2005 Other EU countries Average of entry and exit rates, 2006 (in percent) The main partner countries Hirschman-Herfindahl index, 1997–2006 The main partner countries Average absolute change of market shares (in percentage points) The main partner countries Source: Kegels, C. and J. van der Linden, 2011, “Competitiveness, Productivity, Competition, and Structural Reforms: The Belgium Case”. Reflets et Perspectives de la Vie Economique, vol. 0(3), pages 27-51. Other EU countries are 9 EU-15 countries. The main partner countries are France, Germany, and the Netherlands. The index measures the concentration of market share during 1997–2006. It ranges from 0 to 100. The higher the index the more concentrated is the sector. Average for 1998–2001 and 2003–05.