Belgium faces the risk of a high debt/low growth trap in the years ahead. Growth has recovered, but is expected to remain sub-par relative to pre-crisis. With a still weak recovery in the euro area, a slowdown in global trade, and political winds shifting against free trade, external demand may no longer serve as a strong engine of growth. Four broad structural challenges are weighing on economic prospects: Belgium’s strong record of large primary fiscal surpluses was undone by the crisis, and progress in reducing high public debt has been slow since then, despite record low interest rates and the government’s ambitious consolidation goals. High and rising expenditure has undermined revenue-based consolidation and precluded a return to the pre-crisis fiscal dynamics. There is still a long way to go in raising labor market participation rates, and addressing structurally high unemployment among certain vulnerable groups and in the Brussels and Wallonia regions. There has also been little movement in product market reforms, while the business environment is affected by further devolution of regulatory power to the regional level under the sixth reform of the state. At the same time, the financial sector is being challenged by the low growth/low interest rate environment, while also having to adapt to technological changes. Addressing these challenges is all the more difficult in Belgium’s unique political economy and governance system. Besides the federal government, the system also comprises three regional authorities with significant autonomy, while at the same time recognizing three language communities (cutting across the regions), with separate competencies (e.g., in education). Authority to tax and spend is thus spread across different levels of government, with complicated sharing arrangements and sometimes overlapping responsibilities. This complex political and institutional setting means that a consensus on economic issues is difficult to achieve. In this context, the European fiscal governance framework has provided a welcome anchor to forge agreement on difficult decisions, which has allowed Belgium to exit the Excessive Deficit Procedure in 2014. However, it also means that fiscal policy needs to be negotiated across many different dimensions, and that deeper reforms, both fiscal and structural, can be challenging to adopt. Policy discussions focused on how a broad and well-coordinated reform strategy could raise the country’s growth potential and bring down public debt sustainably. A central task is to balance the budget across all levels of government, with consolidation based on an ambitious and credible medium-term strategy—agreed between all levels of government—that delivers a gradual reduction in spending while safeguarding fiscal revenues. However, fiscal adjustment alone, especially if it is of low quality (e.g. based on across-the board containment), could hurt growth, thus yielding only limited benefits for fiscal sustainability. Given the potential impact on domestic Page 14 demand, consolidation should thus be underpinned by high quality fiscal measures accompanied by reforms to raise Belgium’s growth potential, including by raising the low rates of employment among certain groups, pursuing a coherent infrastructure investment strategy, and strengthening competition in services. Flexibility in the sequencing of specific measures will be important, given Belgium’s governance context. The majority of such reforms (see below) should have a positive impact on growth, even in the short run. Fiscal and product market reforms should also generally help improve the budget position, while certain labor market reforms (such as more flexible wage setting, a youth minimum wage, improved education, training) could have a negative fiscal impact while still being positive for employment and growth. Combining the three reform areas is thus the approach that is most likely to be a net positive for growth, employment, and fiscal sustainability.