Following the May 2014 election, a center-right coalition government came into power in October 2014. The move to the opposition by the socialist party—present in every coalition government since 1988—and the entry into government of the conservative New Flemish Alliance (NVA) marks a significant political shift. The government’s economic priorities are competitiveness (fiscal devaluation and a one-time skip of wage indexation), deficit reduction (cuts in social transfers and current spending), and activation (higher retirement age, further limits to subsidized early retirement, and rebalancing of fiscal incentives in favor of work). The announced measures triggered protests and strikes, but negotiations with the unions resumed in early 2015. Belgium’s economic performance is lackluster but compares favorably with the euro area average, reflecting underlying financial strengths and employment support schemes. Real GDP stands at 2 percent above its pre- crisis peak (Figure 1), although the negative output gap remains sizable (1.3 percent). Through the crisis, domestic demand was sustained by healthy private balance sheets (Figure 2). The impact of the crisis on unemployment was muted by partial unemployment schemes, which enabled firms to maintain employment levels, and by an increase in labor subsidies (wage subsidies for household services and payroll tax reductions). These subsidies compensated in part for the deterioration in relative unit labor costs (ULCs), accumulated since 2009 (Figure 3). However, a demand shortfall in Europe weighs down on the recovery, and structural weaknesses undermine potential growth. Belgium has largely kept pace with its three main trading partners in terms of export growth, but if unaddressed the deterioration in cost competitiveness could undermine such performance. With exports contributing for roughly 35 percent of domestic value added, preserving external competitiveness has always been a key policy priority, and the previous government froze real wages and adjusted indexation to close the competitiveness gap. However, Belgium has also been losing ground in terms of fundamental determinants of potential growth and competitiveness such as productivity growth and innovation. Evidence of this is seen in the falling number of exporting firms and the increased concentration of exports to a few capital intensive sectors. Staff assesses the external position to be moderately weaker than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings . A substantial revision of the net income balance resulted in an upward revision of the 2013 current account by 2 percent of GDP. As a result, the cyclically adjusted current account is now close to the estimated norm based on the Specific reductions in social security contributions Reductions in payroll tax Service vouchers Labor Subsidies (In percent of GDP)Source: NBB. Page 6 Fund’s EBA methodology. However, the volatility of external income flows raises uncertainty about the EBA current account gap estimate. Based on the EBA exchange rate assessment of January and productivity trends in the tradable sector, staff considers the real exchange overvaluation to be in the 0–5 percent range (see Appendix I for more details). The level of economic activity is also depressed by low employment rates related to distortions from tax and benefit policies. The combination of generous access to pension and unemployment benefits, high labor taxes, early retirement schemes, and high minimum wages contribute to one of the lowest employment rates (67 percent) in Northern Europe (Figure 4). The employment rate for the 55–64 age cohort has been rising rapidly in the wake of past reforms, but it remains particularly low at 42 percent. It is equally low for non-EU immigrants (40 percent), and low skilled workers (47 percent). The low, and shrinking, level of non-subsidized private sector employment has, in turn, narrowed the tax base to pay for social transfers and government services, making the task of fiscal adjustment more arduous. Diverging patterns of public expenditure and GDP growth since 2008 have complicated fiscal consolidation efforts. Cumulatively over 2010–14, primary structural adjustment of 1.8 percent of GDP has been achieved entirely on the revenue front (Figure 5). Containment of public consumption and investment has been offset by large increases in subsidies and social transfers. Belgium exited the EU’s Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) in 2014 upon confirmation that the 2013 deficit had fallen below 3 percent of GDP. However, structural fiscal adjustment stalled in 2014, pushing the estimated deficit back above 3 percent of GDP. Belgium has also found itself in violation of the debt rule under the preventive arm of Stability and Growth Pact, and in February 2015 the European Commission will issue a new recommendation on minimum required fiscal adjustment. Notwithstanding these challenges, market confidence remains strong, with 10–year spreads vis-à-vis German rates at around 30 basis points at end-2014, and 15 basis points as of early February 2015. Primary structural adjustment of 2.9 percent of GDP in 2015 and beyond is still needed to meet the 2014 Stability Program medium-term surplus objective of 0.75 percent of GDP. Belgium’s fiscal medium-term objective (MTO) is among the most ambitious in the euro area reflecting the sustainability gap created by the projected increase in the cost of ageing—i.e., an added annual fiscal cost of nearly 6 percent of GDP by 2040. This fiscal impact reflects demographics (the ratio of working age population to person 65 and older will decline from 3.2 today to 2.2 by 2060) but also generous access to social benefits and low activity rates. Monetary easing by the European Central Bank (ECB) has been fully passed on to lending rates. Lending standards have eased for non-financial corporations (NFCs) and SMEs, but have been tightened for households in response to prudential measures taken by the National Bank. Non-financial corporate (NFC) recourse to market financing has not visibly crowded out bank credit. A drop in inflation expectations resulted in a slight increase in real lending rates in 2014 (Figure 6). Based on the authorities’ estimate of potential GDP, the needed adjustment is only 1.5 percent of GDP. Page 7 The ECB’s comprehensive assessment found capital gaps in two banks, which however did not require further action. The two Belgian banks that failed the ECB’s stress test were AXA Bank Europe (the Belgian banking arm of the French insurance group) and Dexia. Since December 31, 2013—the cut-off date for the assessment—AXA Bank Europe has taken action to meet minimum capital requirements. In the case of Dexia, which is in runoff mode, the potential capital shortfall that was revealed by the stress tests did not require further action given the orderly resolution plan supported by state guarantees. Belgian banks as a whole fared relatively well in terms of liquidity and capitalization, with a CET1 ratio of 12.1 percent in the baseline and 7.4 percent in the adverse scenario comfortably above the thresholds of 8 and 5.5. They were close to the euro area average in terms of non-performing exposure, but came last in terms of leverage (3.6 percent in the ECB’s baseline scenario). When taking into account the subsidiaries of foreign banks, the picture confirms that the system as a whole is well capitalized and liquid, and that the non- performing loans ratio is relatively low, stable and well-provisioned (Table 6 and Figure 7).