Gross Nominal Public Debt Belgium’s high level of public debt is a risk to fiscal sustainability . Under baseline projections, with moderate growth and low inflation, debt will remain above 100 percent of GDP throughout the projection period. Gross financing needs are currently almost 20 percent of GDP. Staff’s debt sustainability analysis (Appendix V) suggests that even modest changes in the economic environment would push the public debt ratio above 110 percent. The debt ratio is most sensitive to shocks to GDP growth, and a combined macro-fiscal shock could place the debt ratio on a rising trajectory throughout the forecast horizon. Debt in percent of GDP Primary balance shock Real interest rate shock Real GDP growth shock Combined macro-fiscal shock Text Table. Fiscal Adjustment Under Current Policies and the Authorities’ Objective (In percent of GDP and in percent of potential GDP) Fiscal adjustment under current policies and the authorities' objective (in percent of GDP/ structural balance in percent of potential GDP) 2015 1/ Revenue Expenditure Fiscal balance Structural balance Gross debt Revenue Expenditure Fiscal balance Structural balance Gross debt Current policies Authorities' objective Authorities' objective with estimated demand impact Fiscal balance Gross debt Cumulative impact on nominal GDP (in percent of current policies GDP) Sources: staff estimates, 2016 draft budget. 1/ Fiscal deficit and debt estimates differ because outturn figures are not yet available. Debt figures include the impact of early KBC debt repayment. 2/ Multiplier assumptions were 0.7 for expenditure and 0.5 for revenue. Page 18 A balanced budget would be a credible medium-term anchor for addressing the debt problem. The authorities’ objective is to achieve structural balance at all levels of government by 2018, which means about ⅔ percent of GDP adjustment on average per year for the next three years. This pace can be justified given the importance of underpinning longer-term fiscal sustainability after a period where structural adjustment has been very limited—just ¼ percentage point of GDP per year since 2010. Over the medium term, reaching budget balance would help reinforce the decline in the public debt ratio. However, the design of the consolidation strategy should take into account that the accelerated pace of adjustment will create significant drag on aggregate demand (even under modest multiplier assumptions, see text table above), thereby slowing the initial reduction in the debt ratio compared to the authorities’ stated objective. The quality of adjustment measures is thus of critical importance. The authorities’ target is very ambitious and requires additional measures, the bulk of which should come from the expenditure side. To reach structural balance by 2018 (using staff’s estimate of potential GDP), additional structural effort of 1¾ − 2 percent of GDP would be needed over the coming three years. There are differing views in Belgium on how to close the fiscal gap—some are skeptical about new taxes, while others are concerned about the impact of possible spending cuts. Staff argued that, given the high tax level and past strong expenditure growth, the consolidation should be mostly expenditure-based, especially as staff’s analysis (Selected Issues) indicates significant scope for making public spending more efficient, thus mitigating the impact on growth. Text Table. Possible Additional Fiscal Measures (In percent of GDP) Expenditure Revenue Total Reduce wage bill 2/ Reduce subsidies 3/ Increase social benefits efficiency 4/ 5/ Reform of taxation 6/ By 2018 Long Term 1/ 7.2 - 8.5 1/ Long term effect estimated as a convergence to EU average. 2/ Through faster attrition. 3/ Subsidies are about 2 percent higher than in EU average and the three neighbors' average (France, Germany, Netherlands). 4/ Beyond the government plan to cut social security spending (See Hallaert and Nowak, 2015). Additional measures could include (1) tightening the eligibility rules of sickness and disabilities schemes and unemployment to avoid their use as early retirement scheme and (2) increasing the use of means testing. 5/ Assuming that the redistributive power of social benefits is increased to the EU average, Belgium could achieve the same reduction in income inequality at a fiscal cost lower by 3¼ points of GDP. This number is reduced by the planned reforms of social security (See Hallaert and Nowak, 2015). 6/ Includes the reform of capital income taxation. Belgium’s High Council of Finance (2014) estimates that a comprehensive reform of the capital income taxation alone could increase the revenue by 1 to 2 percent of GDP per year. The European Council calls for structural fiscal adjustment of at least 0.6 percent of GDP in 2015 and 2016. The calculation of structural balance depends on potential output and the output gap, with Fund staff and the Commission estimating a less negative output gap than the authorities, implying that to achieve structural balance, even more structural adjustment would be needed according to staff’s methodology. This fiscal projection reflects the high uncertainty surrounding yield estimates from certain new revenue streams under the tax shift and substantial budgeted expenditure savings that are yet to be specified in detail. Other differences from the authorities’ 2016 budget estimates include macroeconomic assumptions and the projection of the 2015 budget outturn. Both the authorities’ and staff projections include additional security-related spending following the recent security lockdown in Brussels. Page 19 Making public spending more efficient requires deep reforms at all levels of government . At around 55 percent of GDP, the level of government spending is among the highest in the EU. While it is projected to decline gradually, there is significant scope for securing additional adjustment through reforms to ensure that spending translates well into better economic and social outcomes (Figure 5 and Selected Issues). Possible measures include: Wage bill . At 12.7 percent of GDP in 2014, the wage bill is high by international standards and has been increasing rapidly. To complement wage moderation, there is scope for faster than planned attrition-based and well-targeted reductions in public employment across all levels of government. Social spending . The efficiency of social spending could be improved significantly, notably through enhanced means-testing of benefits with a view to better targeting the most vulnerable. To illustrate the potential for efficiency gains, if the redistributive power of social benefits was at EU average, Belgium could achieve the same reduction in income inequality at a lower fiscal cost by 3¼ percentage points of GDP. Health spending . A significant factor in the cost of aging, health spending could be made much more efficient, including by further reducing medication and hospitalization costs, and better enforcing budget ceilings. Unemployment benefits . Linking benefits to job search and accelerating the phase-out of benefits with employer top-up that act as an early retirement scheme could improve the unemployment benefit system. More generally, as reforms are implemented, care should be taken to limit the scope for substitution across benefits, for example as observed when the tightening in early retirement was accompanied by increased use of disability benefits. Education spending has increased sharply without apparent improvements in test scores. Reviewing the system and refocusing it on the areas with the biggest education gaps would also help address labor market issues described below. Public investment . With overall investment relatively modest, the focus should be on redirecting resources to more productive projects, notably in transport infrastructure. Page 20 Figure 5. Public expenditure Current spending is among the highest, and investment among the lowest in Europe. Current Spending vs. Gross Fixed Capital Formation, 2014 f x f EST BGR POL CZE SVK CYP IRL LUX MLT SWE SVN HUN NLD HRV PRT GRC AUT ITA ESP GBR GER FIN FRA DNK BEL Current spending …. and (ii) large social expenditures, which have a relatively low redistributive power. The Redistributive Power of Public Spending, 2013 (Reduction of the GINI due to 1 percent of GDP of social benefits spending) Sources: EuroStat and IMF Staff calculations. High current spending is explained by (i) the public wage bill … General Government Wages and Employment (In percent of GDP and labor force, 2013 or most recent) DNK FIN MLT CYP LTU LVA HUN FRA BGR NLD LUX SVK ITA CZE DEU GRC BEL SVN PRT ) f b f ( v Wage bill (percent of GDP) Higher education spending did not yield clear benefits so far. PISA Scores and Spending per Student, 2003-2012 ) ( C BEL POL FIN SWE LVA IRL CZE NLD DNK FRA HUN AUT PRT ESP LUX ITA Change (absolute) in overall PISA score Sources: Eurostat, Euromod, OECD, and IMF staff estimates. Dash lines represent the EU median. Strengthening budget monitoring and close coordination between levels of government are even more important after the sixth reform of the state. The reform devolves many fiscal responsibilities to communities and regions, and involves a revised system of financing and transfers which will require additional adjustment at the sub-national level. For example, because transfers from the federal government are in part linked to specific taxes such as the personal income tax (PIT), lower PIT rates under the tax shift will imply lower revenues for communities. Closer coordination will be needed to ensure that fiscal commitments at the general government level can be met. In this context, it is crucial to improve budgetary control through strengthening and integrating intra-year monitoring of budget execution across all levels of government. Page 21 There is still scope to improve the efficiency and fairness of the tax system Beyond the measures already passed under the tax shift, staff argued for a more efficient taxation of wealth, including by introducing a broader capital gains tax, shifting real estate taxes from transactions to recurring charges, and limiting the favorable tax treatment of rental income. Further strengthening environmental charges and eliminating the generous fiscal incentives for company cars would have both environmental and fiscal benefits. There is also scope for improving VAT efficiency. Finally, regions could use their new fiscal responsibilities to further target the income tax cuts toward the lower wage ranges. The tax shift will partly address the high labor tax wedge. Tax revenue from households’ capital income is low. Figure 6. Tax System Social Security Contributions, 2014 (In percent; contributions for an average single worker without children) Employers contribution Employees contribution k K C O Property taxes are high but inefficient … Property Taxes, 2014 Recurrent taxes on immovable property Other property taxes Tax Revenue from Households’ Capital Income, 2012 k K … and there is room to raise more revenue from environmental taxes. Environmental Taxes, 2013 (In percent) In percent of total tax revenue In percent of GDP C O k K k K Sources: OECD and IMF staff estimates. OECD and EU15 are simple averages for OECD and EU15 countries, respectively. For further details see Selected Issues of the 2015 Article IV Consultation. Page 22 Authorities’ views . The authorities reiterated their commitment to reaching structural budget balance by 2018. They acknowledged that further measures would be needed, but expressed confidence that the adopted policies will go a long way toward this goal, especially as reductions in labor costs under the tax shift will lead to increased employment and revenues. They also pointed to expected savings from a redesign of the functioning of the federal government, including improving the management of real estate holdings and centralizing and streamlining procurement practices. They stressed their determination to continue the reform efforts. For example, they intend to further reform the pension system in 2016 by focusing on the second pillar, notably by disallowing benefitting from the supplementary pension before the legal age of retirement. Additional measures to reduce the growth in spending on health should further help limit the cost of aging over the medium-term. The authorities also intend to promote reactivation policies for people benefiting from disability allowance and strengthen the benefit allocation control mechanism. With respect to the sixth reform of the state, communities and regions have taken steps to improve monitoring and control, and all plan to close their (relatively small) budget deficits by 2018.