Staff expressed concern about fiscal slippages, especially given the high level of debt and the uncertain outlook. After the sizeable budget deficit overshoot in 2016, the authorities have targeted a structural adjustment of around 1 percent of GDP for 2017, to be achieved via both revenue (e.g. raising withholding taxes further) and expenditure measures (mainly on health spending), supported by a further decline in the interest bill as well as continued savings from earlier reforms on wages and social benefits. In staff’s view, this ambitious target is hard to achieve without additional measures. As missing budget targets by significant margins two years in a row could harm credibility, staff emphasized the importance of implementing a budget that is based on a credible deficit target, backed by realistic revenue and spending assumptions, and supported by high quality measures. A broad-based fiscal strategy would yield better growth and debt reduction outcomes Under baseline projections with largely unchanged policies, public debt declines only modestly over the next ten years. In the event of a “stagnation” scenario in which nominal GDP growth is lower by 0.6 percentage points per year, the debt ratio becomes explosive (see Figure 2, and Debt Sustainability Analysis in Appendix V). This illustrates how sensitive Belgium’s debt is to the macroeconomic environment (including interest rates) and how little fiscal space Belgium has to address shocks, especially if outside the context of a coordinated European response. With a view to gradually rebuilding fiscal buffers, staff recommended efficiency-oriented spending reforms (see below), anchoring primary spending growth to stay broadly flat in real terms over the medium run, together with revenue neutral but growth-oriented tax rebalancing and a package of labor and product market reforms. This could bring the structural fiscal position to near balance by 2021. Such an approach (see scenario “high quality with reform” below) would have much stronger growth and debt reduction pay offs compared to a “low quality” adjustment scenario of across- the-board spending containment. A well-designed consistent policy package would prevent output losses while bringing the debt-GDP ratio almost 20 percentage points below the baseline Page 15 over ten years (and 10 percentage points below a low-quality adjustment scenario without reforms). As for near-term budget policies, staff strongly cautioned against overoptimistic adjustment assumptions that are not backed by quality measures. On balance, additional measures to achieve around ½ percentage point of GDP of structural primary fiscal adjustment per year would appear appropriate. Since high quality structural measures take time to put in place and yield results, a decisive start on such measures would be important, including already from 2017, in the context of a revised budget if deemed necessary. Figure 2. Scenarios for Debt and the Deficit A broad-based fiscal strategy with efficiency-oriented spending reforms and growth-oriented tax rebalancing, combined with labor and product market reforms, would yield better growth and debt reduction outcomes. Stagnation: nominal GDP growth on average 0.6 percentage point lower than baseline. Low quality: flat real spending growth, multiplier of 1.15, no other reforms. High quality: flat real spending growth, multiplier of .85, product and labor market reforms. Multipliers informed by Kilponen et al, “Comparing fiscal multipliers across models and countries in Europe”, National Bank of Belgium Working Paper No. 278, 2015. V * * * = mm pp Page 16 A sustainable strategy for growth-friendly medium-term consolidation would require broad reforms that are coordinated across levels of government. With further tax cuts scheduled for 2018−20 under the tax shift, staff projects that additional measures of about 2−2½ percent of GDP would be needed to achieve the goal of a balanced budget over the medium term. For high-quality adjustment, this should rely primarily on measures to improve spending efficiency. As shown in the text table, spending levels exceed those of peers in a number of areas, and significant savings could be achieved. Revenue-neutral tax reforms could help in promoting employment and growth. Agreement and implementation of such measures would require cooperation and participation across all levels of government. Current coordination mechanisms could be strengthened by binding commitments to meet agreed deficit targets, backed up by stronger budget processes, including centralized intra-year monitoring of outcomes across all levels of government. Expenditure is at the heart of the consolidation challenge. After years of rapid growth, public expenditure amounted to nearly 54 percent of GDP in 2015, which does not necessarily translate into better services or social outcomes. There is significant scope to make spending more efficient, in particular by (i) reducing the high level of subsidies, (ii) making the division of labor between levels of government more efficient, (iii) accelerating ongoing reductions in public employment, (iv) enhancing means-testing and stronger control of social benefits, with a view to better targeting the most vulnerable. Greater efficiencies in spending would also make room for much-needed public investment spending (see below). See Hallaert, J.J. (2016), Belgium—Making Public Expenditure More Efficient , Washington, D.C.: IMF, Country Report 16/78. ill … … tt ¼ nn ee ee ee BB Page 17 Figure 3. Belgium: Fiscal Context Belgium’s strong record of large primary surpluses and debt reduction was undone by the crisis, with only limited progress in structural adjustment thereafter. Public spending is among the highest in Europe, Since the crisis, expenditures have grown faster than GDP, driven by social benefits and the wage bill. reflecting the relatively low post-crisis adjustment compared to peers. Sources: Haver Analytics, NBB, IMF World Economic Outlook , and IMF staff calculations. Further tax reform could support growth while safeguarding revenues . The targeted personal income tax and social security contribution cuts planned for 2018−20 will appropriately further reduce the still high tax burden on labor. Staff suggested that well- targeted offsetting measures could help ensure revenue neutrality, including by strengthening environmental taxation, and eliminating deductions and exemptions, including on VAT and for company cars. The authorities’ plan to lower the relatively high corporate income tax (CIT) rate has clear merits. However, as discussed with IMF tax policy experts, this should be part of a broader and revenue-neutral reform of business and W ill ee K ee BelgiumEU 28BelgiumEU28 Personal income tax Social contributions Corporate income tax Taxes on consumption & production Other Tax Revenue and Social Contribution, 2015 (In percent of GDP) Page 18 investment income taxation in order to maximize the growth impact without jeopardizing the consolidation strategy (Box 1). A key principle would be to create a more level playing field across business and investment activities, including through a review of profit tax deductions, rules against tax avoidance, capital gains taxation, taxes on interest and dividends, tax treatment of rental income and real estate, and tax preferences on savings accounts. Box 1. Growth-Friendly Corporate Income Tax Reform CIT reform is currently under consideration by Belgium’s coalition government. The relatively high CIT rate of 34 percent makes the tax base vulnerable to outbound profit shifting and can deter foreign investors, especially in a global environment of potentially intensifying tax competition. Belgium has historically attracted mobile businesses through targeted tax incentives, such as for intangible assets and financial services. Some of these are being revised to align Belgium’s tax system with EU state-aid rules, the new European Anti-Tax Avoidance Directive, and new standards under the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting project of the G20/OECD. Belgium’s fiscal constraints limit the scope for lowering overall revenue from business and investment income taxation, especially as the labor tax wedge is still high. However, there should be room for reducing the statutory CIT rate since it is significantly higher than the average effective rate (see Figure), reflecting tax provisions such as for depreciation allowances, the tax credit for research and development, the innovation box, and the notional interest deduction. While Belgium’s average effective rate is similar to peer countries, the marginal effective tax rate is comparatively low, suggesting that the tax disincentive to additional investment by Belgian firms is more limited than in other countries. CIT reform could be an opportunity to improve the broader business and investment income tax regime by reducing distortions and thus better balancing growth and revenue objectives. Areas for potential efficiency gains include the preferential rate for small businesses, the patent box, measures against international tax avoidance, and some specific deductions and exemptions. Some other forms of base broadening, however, could hurt rather than support economic growth, such as limiting R&D incentives or loss carry forward. Another reform element could be Belgium’s notional interest deduction (NID). The NID plays an important role in reducing the corporate debt bias by encouraging equity funding (IMF 2016), as it lowers the cost of capital and supports investment. Yet, it has also been used for tax planning via special-purpose vehicles of multinational companies, which could be addressed through strengthened anti-avoidance rules. Finally, to ensure a level playing field across business and investment activities, the reform could usefully be broadened to include capital gains and dividend taxation, with a view to maintaining neutrality between different business forms and limiting tax arbitrage. Contributors: R. De Mooij and S. Hebous. Z ü ä W hun Page 19 Authorities’ views The authorities emphasized the critical importance of sticking to the coalition agreement, reiterating their determination and commitment to reach structural budget balance in the near term. They agreed that most of the consolidation effort should come from expenditures, and acknowledged that further measures could be required in this area. They agreed that budget credibility is critical, and are assessing the reasons for the deficit overshoot in 2016. In this context, they noted that some revenue measures under the tax shift had taken more time to implement, such as the tax on real estate investment vehicles, and an agreement with the regions on regularization, and hence the effects will only be fully felt from 2017. The authorities appreciated the broader perspective that Fund staff brought on corporate income tax reform, without detracting from the urgency of such reform.