After a strong start, reform progress has slowed, particularly on fiscal policies. The four-party right-leaning coalition government took big steps forward during its first year in office. The 2015 pension reform and the ongoing efforts to contain rising health care costs have been major advances toward addressing the cost of ageing. Wage moderation—including through the temporary suspension of indexation ( saut d’index )—and the targeted cuts in the labor tax wedge under the “tax shift” have significantly reduced the labor cost gap with neighboring countries. Further labor market reforms to increase flexibility at the sector and firm levels, as well as a reform of the wage setting process to prevent wage competitiveness losses, are underway, although a comprehensive strategy for addressing the fragmentation of the labor market is still lacking. The government plans to reform the corporate income tax regime, but agreement has yet to be reached. Measures needed to achieve the government’s ambitious fiscal consolidation objectives are largely lacking, particularly those to sustainably reduce the high level of government spending. Growth was held back by external factors and weak consumer spending. Real GDP growth is estimated to have declined to 1.2 percent in 2016, partly reflecting the weakness of the euro area recovery, as well as the significant, though temporary, impact of the Paris and Brussels terrorist attacks. Moreover, private consumption contributed markedly less to growth than in peer countries. This likely reflected in part wage moderation combined with the tax shift, which raised certain consumption taxes to offset labor tax wedge cuts. As a result of these tax policies, inflation came closer to the ECB’s target than in most other euro area countries (Figure 1). Unemployment, averaging 8 percent in 2016, has fallen closer to pre-crisis levels, supported by solid employment growth in the services sector. Credit conditions have remained supportive. Corporate lending growth (in particular for manufacturing, real estate, and health services) has picked up alongside investment demand and interest rate reductions, while mortgage lending growth has slowed through 2016Q3 as reductions in tax deductibility of interest in certain regions and a higher VAT rate on renovations have become effective. Lending rates, particularly long term, have declined since the ECB’s quantitative easing policies were put in place. Mortgages Other consumer NFCs Total Growth of Credit to the Non-Financial Private Sector (In percent contribution, excluding securitization) Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF Staff calculations. Page 10 Low oil prices and solid export growth brought the current account back into surplus (Figure 1). Export growth, including in chemicals and transport equipment, may have benefited from wage moderation policies. Nominal unit labor costs have been broadly flat since 2013, closing the cost competitiveness gap with neighboring countries based on an hourly labor costs measure. Meanwhile, the primary income balance has turned negative, despite Belgium’s strong net international investment position; the predominance of portfolio and other investment assets with low returns has been outweighing outgoing income flows. Nevertheless, the current account has moved back toward a moderate surplus and closer to its norm of 2.7 percent of GDP. Staff’s preliminary assessment under the External Balance Assessment suggests that Belgium’s external position is moderately weaker than medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies would suggest (see Appendix II), with a current account gap of -2¾ to -¾ percent and the real effective exchange rate overvalued by 2 to 7 percent. Fiscal consolidation stalled in 2016, with a sizeable overshoot of the deficit target. Despite falling interest costs, the fiscal deficit widened to 2.7 percent of GDP, against an original budget target of 2.1 percent of GDP. Many factors have contributed, including higher expenditures from the impact of the terror attacks as well as revenue shortfalls reflecting some over-optimism on certain revenue yields and possible shifts in the tax base (such as from the withholding tax increase). There was also delay in policy implementation, such as on certain new tax measures and savings in health spending. As a result, both the headline and structural primary balance appear to have worsened, rather than improving as envisaged in the April 2016 Stability Program. Text Table. Budget and Projected Outturns Revenue shortfalls were partly offset by one-off collections such as from the excess profit tax, which was found illegal under European Union state aid rules. tt )( )( W = dg tt mm dg = dg tt Page 11 Figure 1. Belgium: Macroeconomic and External Developments Growth is constrained by that in neighboring countries, which are also Belgium’s largest trading partners. Employment growth has continued its steady pace. Headline inflation has risen as tax measures, including The goods balance surged in 2016, helping to keep the current account in surplus, despite negative primary income. Unit labor costs have come down in the past few years, reflecting policy efforts to reduce the gap with neighbors. from the tax shift, have taken effect. Energy prices have also rebounded. Belgium’s net international investment position is highly positive, mainly from private balance sheet strength. Sources: Haver Analytics, Eurostat, National statistical authorities, and IMF staff calculations. EU 28 Belgium France Germany Netherlands Italy GDP Growth During and Since the Crisis (In index number, 100 = 2007) Belgium Germany France Netherlands Euro area Employment (Index, 2008Q1=100) nnu oo cc NetherlandsBelgiumGermanyEA19FranceItalySpain Net IIP IIP Assets IIP Liabitlities International Investment Position, 2015 (In percent of GDP) = Page 12