The recovery is expected to continue at a modest pace in the near term, while inflation will spike temporarily due to tax measures . Real GDP growth is projected to remain just under 1½ percent in 2016 (as in the previous two years), driven again primarily by private consumption (supported by continued low energy prices), while investment growth pauses due to base effects from one-off transactions in previous years. External demand will help somewhat, driven by the moderate euro area recovery and the depreciated exchange rate. Headline inflation is set to rise to 1¾ percent in 2016 due to tax increases under the tax shift. Under the projected baseline medium- term recovery, the output gap will close gradually, bringing inflation back closer to euro area average and unemployment down to its structural level of around 7½ percent by 2020. Hypothetical potential GDP (pre-crisis trend) Potential GDP Actual GDP Belgium: Loss in Potential Output Since the Crisis (In index, 1999 = 100) Medium-term growth prospects remain mediocre. Though the economy has been resilient, potential output and total factor productivity have fallen, and a return to trend output is not expected. Potential output growth will also remain below pre-crisis levels (Box 2). While this is consistent with trends in other euro area countries, prospects for Belgium are worsened by slowing demographics, structural inefficiencies in specific labor market segments, and low competition in some regulated services. While capital’s contribution to potential growth is expected to return close to pre-crisis levels, both those from employment and Total Factor Productivity (TFP) will likely remain substantially reduced. 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Staff calculations. In the current volatile global environment, downside risks loom large . External risks are particularly elevated, while domestic risks are large but more of a medium-term nature. Key risks can be summarized as follows (see Appendix IV): China and emerging markets slowdown . Direct exposures are relatively low, but the economy’s openness and strong integration into global value chains through Germany means high exposure to indirect shocks from abroad. Preliminary calculations suggest that for every 1 percent reduction in the Chinese average 2016–20 growth due to a domestic negative investment demand shock, the Belgian economy could grow by about 0.2 percent slower. Financial markets volatility . New shocks from unanticipated changes in growth and financial fundamentals in large and emerging economies could enhance financial volatility (from already elevated levels in recent months), impair confidence in euro area economies, and eventually stifle the incipient recovery. Page 15 Box 2. Potential Output in Belgium Inflation Output gap Unemployment gap Inflation and Economic Slack (In percent) Potential output plays an important role in assessing fiscal efforts and projecting future growth, inflation, unemployment, and debt dynamics. Following significant revisions in recent years, IMF staff has sought to improve the consistency and robustness of its estimates by using a multivariate filter approach that incorporates empirical relationships between actual and potential GDP, unemployment, and inflation. This filter has been applied to assess potential output in the global economy (2015 April WEO) and to some of the euro area’s biggest economies. Belgium’s potential growth has slowed significantly since the late 1990s, likely mostly due to a gradual decline in TFP growth, mirrored in other advanced economies and partially related to structural factors. These include lower growth returns from ICT and the reallocation of factors to sectors with comparatively lower productivity levels and slower productivity growth; e.g personal- and non-market services . In Belgium, more dynamic employment growth initially offset this decline and maintained potential growth above 2 percent until the mid 2000s. However, the collapse of TFP growth during the crisis cut potential growth by half; despite labor and capital contributions that still compared rather favorably with peers. On average, the contribution of TFP has been zero since the crisis. Looking ahead, Belgium’s potential growth appears substantially weaker than before the crisis. Under current policies, including recent and planned reforms, potential growth should increase over the medium term, but average only about 1.3 percent over 2015–20. A continuing rebound in investment is projected to bring the contribution of capital back close to pre-crisis levels. The average contribution of labor on the other hand will be held back by slowing demographics, more than offsetting reforms in favor of employment activation. With capacity utilization rebounding, TFP growth will return to positive territory, but may be reduced (in favor of the employment contribution) if policies are effective in activating low- skilled employees. The Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU), estimated at approximately 8 percent, is expected to decline only very slowly over the forecast horizon. Belgium: Potential Output Growth (In log differences) Productive Capital Potential employment TFP Potential growth 2015–2020 2001–2007 2008–2014 1996–2000 N. Budina, H. Lin, E. Pérez Ruiz, J. Vandenbussche and A. Weber, 2015, “Potential output in France, Germany, and Spain: A re- assessment,” Chapter III, Selected Issues paper for Spain 2015 Article IV consultation. IMF Staff Discussion Note No. 15/3; Era Dabla-Norris, Si Guo, Vikram Haksar, Minsuk Kim, Kalpana Kochhar, Kevin Wiseman, Aleksandra Zdzienicka; “The New Normal: A Sector-level Perspective on Productivity Trends in Advanced Economies.” Page 16 Regional risks . If the euro area recovery were to falter, Belgium will be particularly affected given its openness and strong intra-EU trade linkages, including to Germany, France, and the Netherlands. The EU’s refugee surge has so far had a modest impact on Belgium, but could eventually pose a significant challenge, especially given Belgium’s poor track record of labor market integration of non-EU migrants (see below). Fiscal policy . A key domestic policy risk relates to the longer-term fiscal outlook, which could veer off course if benefits of recent reforms (such as the tax shift) turn out to be smaller than anticipated and/or fiscal federalism hampers the ability to deliver the overall intended adjustment. This, together with potentially lackluster growth, could worsen debt dynamics and eventually undermine confidence in fiscal sustainability. House prices . After a long period of rapid growth, house prices have stabilized since 2013. A sharp reversal could have a significant impact on consumption, even if banks’ exposures could be managed (see below). However, staff analysis does not suggest a major overvaluation, as past price trends were broadly in line with borrowing cost, demographic and income developments.