Public investment in infrastructure will be critical to support economic activity following years of erosion of the public capital stock. At 2.3 percent of GDP in 2015, public investment is well below EU average (3.9 percent). With new investment barely keeping up with the depreciation of fixed assets since the late 1980s, the capital stock has been declining relative to GDP, and is now one of the lowest in Europe (Figure 4). There is also scope for redirecting public investment to more productive investment projects such as transport infrastructure. Transport infrastructure, both rail and road, is perceived to be of lower quality than in the three neighboring countries and has declined in recent years, with traffic congestion an increasingly serious problem. Since network density is already high, the priority appears to be maintenance and efficiency improvements. To ensure efficiency, it will be critical to develop a comprehensive and prioritized infrastructure strategy that is agreed between all levels of government, and reflected in medium- term budget plans. Greater competition in services would enhance productivity, while helping to reduce prices paid by consumers and firms . Competition could be increased in sectors such as telecommunications, retail, and the legal, architectural, and accounting professions. Protection of incumbents, including through the action of self-regulatory bodies that have, by law, regulatory power, and complex and lengthy bankruptcy procedures, contribute to a low rate of entry and exit in many services sectors. As a result, the services sector’s productivity growth is substantially weaker than in neighboring countries and services’ prices are comparatively high and dynamic, affecting the competitiveness of the tradable sector for which services are a crucial input (Figure 4). Some studies suggest that, if Belgium were to reduce the regulatory burden affecting services to the level of best practice observed in the OECD, TFP could grow by 1¼ percentage point more per year during five years. Most of the gains would come from reform of professional services and retail trade. See B. Renaud, G. Cette, J. Lopez, J. Mairesse, and G. Nicoletti (2010b), The Impact on Growth of Easing Regulation in Upstream Sectors , CESifo DICE Report, vol. 8(3), pp. 8–12. Page 20 Figure 4. Public Investment, Productivity, and Regulation in Services Low public investment has led to a decline in capital stock, which is now one of the lowest in Europe. Labor productivity growth lags behind neighbors, particularly in the services sector. Regulation is particularly strong in the legal and accounting services, and in the retail sector. Source: Eurostat, WEO and Public Investment Management Assessment (PIMA) databases, OECD, Federal Planning Bureau and IMF staff calculations Labor market reforms could provide a major boost to Belgium’s growth potential Building on the reforms of unemployment benefits and pensions implemented since in 2012 (See Appendix VI) the government is undertaking several labor market reforms that should help keep Belgium’s labor costs in line with its neighbors, while increasing flexibility at the sector and firm level (Box 2). In particular, the reform of the wage setting mechanism (the so-called “1996 law”) aims to preserve the recent gains from wage moderation by linking wage growth to broader labor market and economic conditions. In this context, in setting the ceiling for wage growth, it would be important to consider not only wage developments in neighboring countries but also the differences in labor productivity growth. Moreover, while wage moderation has been successful in improving Belgium’s competitiveness, it has weighed on private consumption and growth performance. Going forward, it will be important to also focus on non-cost competitiveness by fostering innovation, improving education and training, and labor market performance. PPP K gd z nnu cc Page 21 Box 2. Labor Market Reforms The government has proposed several labor market reforms to Parliament. The main elements focus on: Adjusting the wage setting mechanism . The 1996 law on competitiveness establishes, every two years, a “wage norm” to keep wage developments aligned with those of the three main partner countries. Recent wage moderation has closed the wage gap accumulated since 1996 and the government is reforming the calculation of the wage norm to avoid that rapid wage increases erode the effects of the temporary de- indexation and to close the wage gap accumulated before 1996 (the “historical handicap” that remains to be quantified by the Conseil Central de l’Economie ). Specifically, the reform would (i) build in the calculation of the wage norm a “security margin” to avoid that, as in the past, forecast errors contribute to a wage gap (if not used, the margin would allow faster wage increase in the subsequent wage norm), (ii) require social partners to correct past slippages when establishing a new norm, and (iii) increase the fine for firms and sectors that do not respect the norm. The cut in employers’ social contributions implemented under the tax shift would be used to reduce the historical handicap and not to allow a faster increase in wages. To better take into account economic conditions, the calculation of the wage norm could take into account deviations in labor productivity growth between Belgium and its partner countries. The 2017–18 wage norm has been agreed in the context of the new mechanism. Re-instating a minimum wage for the young . To tackle youth unemployment, a lower minimum wage for employees younger than 21 (eliminated in 2015) will be re-introduced. The minimum wage would be reduced by 6 points per year below 21 (6 percent reduction for a 20-year-old, up to a 30 percent reduction for a 16-year-old). The young would receive compensation from the government so as not to receive lower pay. The authorities estimate that between 13,300 and 17,660 wage earners could be concerned and the measure would have a direct fiscal cost of about €40.5 million (0.01 percent of GDP). Increasing flexibility in work time. Legal work time would continue to be set at 38 hours per week on average, but the average would now be calculated on an annual basis rather than a quarterly basis. This increased flexibility would remain constrained by a maximum working time of 9 hours per day and 45 hours per week (with wage premium starting at 44 hours). However, a branch agreement could increase the limits to 11 hours per day and 50 hours per week. In sectors facing international competition (industry and services), it will be possible to calculate the 38-hour week average over a period of up to 6 years. This system already exists for some sectors such as the automobile industry. Possibility for night work would be extended to the E-commerce. Moreover, the administrative regulation of part time jobs will be simplified. Changing training requirements. The legal requirement would shift from dedicating 1.9 percent of the wage bill to training to providing at least 5 days of training by equivalent full time employee. _________________________ Wages are indexed to inflation, but the wage norm sets a ceiling on real wage negotiations based on expected wage developments in Germany, France, and the Netherlands. The national wage norm then guides sectoral wage negotiations. Masure, L., M. López-Novella, M. Saintrain, and P. Stockman, Herinvoering van de degressiviteit van de mininumlonen van min-21-Jaringen , Federal Planning Bureau, Rapport 11337, October 2016. Raising the low employment rates among certain groups would help reduce the severe fragmentation of the labor market . While employment growth has been solid, the labor market remains severely fragmented across regions and skill levels (Figure 5). Many younger and older persons are not working, and non-EU immigrants are less integrated in the labor market than in other European countries (Box 3). Only about half of non-EU immigrants aged 25–55 are employed, compared to over 80 percent for Belgian-born residents. The reform of the minimum wage and of Page 22 training are first steps that will need to be complemented by improvements in education and on- the-job training, in particular given the need for competency in multiple languages and unmet demand for certain technical skills. Figure 5. Labor Market Fragmentation Employment rates in Belgium are relatively low, … and regional disparities in unemployment rates are very particularly for non-EU immigrants … high. Sources: Haver Analytics, Eurostat, and IMF Staff calculations. Authorities’ views The authorities concur that there is a need to boost quality public investment, which adds to the fiscal consolidation challenge. Since transport projects such as the completion of the Antwerp ring or the 10-year plan for the public transport system in Brussels are typically large and occur at irregular intervals, the authorities argue that more flexibility in European fiscal rules is needed to avoid deterring such investment, in addition to the welcome recent clarification by Eurostat of the treatment of Public Private Partnerships. Moreover, the Prime Minister has announced that an investment plan for Belgium will be elaborated in consultation with sub-federal levels of government, which undertake most public investment. The government has also initiated plans to speed up the integration of immigrants who come from outside the EU. The Minister of Economy has commissioned a study to analyze the reasons of stronger services inflation than in neighboring countries, which could provide guidance on where greater competition may be needed. While emphasizing the importance to gains from wage moderation, the authorities agreed on the need to foster also non-cost competitiveness. NativeExtra-EU28BelgiumGermany Employment, 2015 (In percent of population) Belgium Prime age, by birth origin (25-54)All working age (15-64) (Right scale) W oo W oo W Page 23 Box 3. Which Groups Are Most Vulnerable in Belgium’s Fragmented Labor Market? Belgium suffers from low labor market participation and high (un)employment disparities across regions and population subgroups. To better gauge the factors underlying labor market fragmentation, the relative likelihood of being out of or in a job conditional on belonging to a certain socioeconomic group was explored using a standard probit regression model estimated on microeconomic data for Belgium and various other countries from the European Union Labor Force Survey (EU LFS). This allows controlling for overlap between vulnerable sub-groups (e.g., low-skilled young workers living in Brussels) to assess which individual characteristics appear to be most important for determining the probability of employment or unemployment. At the aggregate level, the results confirm significant group “penalties” for conditional unemployment probabilities affecting the young, the low-skilled, and non-EU immigrants. But while the youth and skill penalties are broadly in line with comparator countries (a bit higher than in stronger labor markets and a bit lower than in weaker labor markets), the unemployment probability penalty for immigrants from outside the EU is considerably higher than in most other countries. Moreover, the vulnerability of this group decreases more slowly with years of residency than in other countries. Comparing pre- and post-crisis probabilities indicates that the crisis has not exacerbated these penalties tangibly, which contrasts with EU countries whose labor markets were hit harder by the crisis. Estimates reaffirm strong regional disparities in labor market performance among different socio-economic groups, with Flanders’ residents of any socioeconomic group largely outperforming comparable groups in Brussels and in Wallonia. These results are broadly confirmed when looking at conditional employment probabilities, although immigrants seem equally placed to find a job across Belgium in the very first year upon arrival. Mismatches in labor supply and demand and low geographical mobility have been advanced as factors explaining persistent underperformance of labor outcomes for young, immigrant and low-skilled workers in the non-Flanders regions (High Council of Employment, 2013). This suggests the need for a comprehensive strategy involving traditionally advocated measures on labor market flexibility, complemented by activation policies, migrant integration, and steps to increase labor mobility in order to help reduce fragmentation and unlock Belgium’s large untapped employment potential. W cc K Page 24