The severe fragmentation of the labor market has major social and economic costs Belgium’s unemployment rate is slightly below the euro area average, partly thanks to public employment and labor subsidies. However, the labor market is deeply segmented (Figure 7, Selected Issues). Differences are particularly stark in four dimensions— regionally , with unemployment just 5 percent in Flanders, almost 12 percent in Wallonia, and a staggering 18½ percent in the Brussels capital region; age-wise , with employment rates low among the young and the elderly; skill-related with mismatches resulting in structurally high job vacancies and low employment rates of the low skilled; and by immigration background , with only about half of non-EU born residents aged 25–54 employed, compared to over 80 percent for Belgian-born residents. The underlying problems are complex and interlinked—involving longer-term structural changes affecting the regions, barriers to labor mobility, language barriers, significant gaps in education and training for certain groups, ill- aligned incentives for work, and a wage setting process that does not fully reflect economic conditions. Addressing this problem is all the more urgent given the ongoing refugee crisis. Between 2015 and 2017, asylum seekers alone may add up to one percent to Belgium’s population (Box 3). In the long run, the inflow of refugees could benefit potential output growth and help reduce the cost of aging, especially when migrants are young and educated. To reap these benefits, however, Belgium needs to dramatically improve the integration of non-EU migrants. The government’s decision to reduce the waiting period for refugees to get a work permit from six to four months is an important step in the right direction. However, staff noted that active labor market policies in the form of training and language support, and specific adjustments to labor and product market regulations may be needed to accelerate their integration. Because the benefits of such policies would not be limited to refugees, substantial synergies exist between facilitating their integration and addressing the underlying causes of the wider labor market segmentation. Page 23 Figure 7. Labor Market Segmentation Regional differences in unemployment rates are huge. Unemployment Rate by Regions and Provinces (In percent, 2014) 12.3 11.8 L H C R W b W b L b x L R W b Sources: Haver Analytics and EuroStat. … high inactivity among the low-skilled… Labor Market Outcome by Education Level (In percent, share of total population aged 15-64) Working Unemployed Inactive Other structural challenges include low employment rates among the young and the elderly… Employment Rates by Age Group (In percent of labor force, 2014 average) 15-24 Years 55-64 Years 15-64 Years Sources: Haver Analytics and EuroStat. … skill mismatches , as seen in a structurally high vacancy rate … Job Vacancy Rate (In percent of total positions, business economy) 2015Q2 Average since 2010 Average product with unemployment rate Germany Belgium Netherlands EU 28 Spain Italy Middle High Low Source: SPF Economy. Sources: Haver Analytics and EuroStat. Defined as (average vacancy rate) * (average unemployment rate) / 10. … and very poor labor market integration of non-EU migrants, as seen in both activity and unemployment rates. Inactivity Rates Among Extra-EU28 Migrant, 2014 (In percent, ages 25-64, difference from reporting country natives) Unemployment Among Extra-European Migrants, 2014 (In percent, ages 25-64, difference from reporting country natives) 31 31 30 30 29 29 28 26 25 25 25 Extra-EU28 Difference to natives 23 22 22 21 16 15 15 15 k Source: Eurostat. Data for Germany not available. C P b R z C K b x L P z Extra-EU28 Relative to natives 13 13 12 11 10 14 13 -1 -2 b x L k z P Sources: EuroStat. Data for Germany not available. C K b R z C Page 24 Box 3. Integration of Migrants Belgium has a poor track record of integrating non- EU migrants into the labor market. Immigration from other European countries and from outside the EU has been the main driver behind Belgium’s relatively healthy population growth. Poor integration of immigrants from outside the EU is however a source of concern not only for public finances, but also for social cohesion. In no other European country is inactivity among non-EU migrants as prevalent as in Belgium. Further, the likelihood of a non-EU migrant in Belgium being employed is the lowest on the continent. Asylum Applicants (In total persons; right scale in thousands of persons) EU28 (right scale) Source: EuroStat. Belgium in Perspective: Asylum Requests, 2015M1-M10 (In percent; right scale in percentage change) Belgium is heavily affected by the ongoing refugee crisis. As in many other European countries, refugee inflows to Belgium have increased dramatically since the beginning of 2015. The number of first-time asylum applications during the first 10 months of 2015 was two and a half times higher than during the same period a year earlier. As a share of total population, this inflow is 50 percent above the EU average, but still far below levels experienced by Sweden or Austria. As the geopolitical instability in the countries of origin continues, the authorities expect the number of applications to decline only very gradually. Between 2015 and 2017, the number of asylum seekers may reach 100,000 (including 6,000 under the agreed EU agreement), which would correspond to about 0.9 percent of Belgium’s total population. Share of 2014 population Source: EuroStat Growth since same period 2014 (right scale) Inflows of refugees bring opportunities … Predominantly male, and substantially younger than the Belgian average, the current wave of refugees can bring a demographic boost and thus benefits in terms of potential output and fiscal sustainability in the longer run. While details on skill levels are not available, there are indications that the education level for many refugees may be higher than during earlier refugee crises. Many natives of Syria and Iraq also have relevant language skills. … but also risks. Apart from the political and social risks that poor integration can bring, creating labor market opportunities should be a priority to minimize the short-term burden on public expenditure. The longer it takes for refugees to find a job, the bigger the social expenditure and foregone tax revenues. A combination of poor labor market opportunities and a generous welfare system could create inactivity traps and reduce incentives to assimilate, learn the local languages and upgrade existing skills. This would be particularly problematic in Belgium, where also low-skilled natives have comparably higher unemployment and inactivity rates. Page 25 Tapping Belgium’s full labor market potential requires a comprehensive and inclusive jobs strategy. Wage moderation and the saut d’index have led to improvements on the cost side, and the government has reinforced activation policies to address long-term unemployment, increased the effective retirement age, and strengthened incentives to return to work after long- term illness. These are important steps, which are expected to provide positive impulses for the coming years. Areas for further policy improvements include: To lock in the benefits from recent wage moderation, the wage formation process could be reformed to account not only for price developments but also broader labor market and economic conditions. Education and training could be improved to better meet languages and technical skill requirements. This could be supported by aligning curricula closer to local labor market needs and by intensifying the cooperation between schools and employers, including under apprenticeship programs (which are a successful tradition in the German-speaking community). Promoting and improving the targeting of continuous education could support the labor force’s flexibility and quality, for example to allow for greater movement between economic sectors. Work incentives for the unemployed could be strengthened, e.g. by making benefits still more degressive and enforcing strengthened job search requirements. In the meantime, the job search could benefit from more effective support by unemployment agencies, and individualized training offers. Additional targeted reductions in the labor tax wedge could further promote job creation for the low-skilled. Geographic segmentation could be addressed by reducing barriers to mobility and improving collaboration between local governments. Addressing the severe traffic congestion in some large urban centers (see below), improving public transport, and reducing disincentives to buy/sell a house (see 2015 Selected Issues) would make the labor force more mobile. Collaboration between regional entities could be further encouraged to improve the flow of information, harmonize administrative procedures, and share opportunities more effectively. Authorities’ views . The authorities acknowledged the labor market challenges, including the need to integrate non-EU migrants better into the labor force. They noted that the recent efforts at wage moderation, including through the saut d’index, and the cuts in the labor tax wedge under the tax shift should help improve conditions for vulnerable groups. They did not favor a special minimum wage, as previous experiments with lower minimum wages for the young did not boost youth employment. While a reform of the collective wage negotiation process is being discussed by social partners—including the role of seniority in the wage setting—it is unlikely that this would involve moving away from automatic indexation as this system has been an important anchor of the social contract in Belgium. Other areas for reform include the regulation of night work for e-commerce businesses and the establishment of career accounts for training. They highlighted the continued efforts to improve vocational training schemes. Page 26