Growth is projected to remain stable at 1.0 percent in 2015 owing to lackluster demand conditions in Europe, wage moderation and fiscal consolidation. The strong rebound in all components of private demand seen in early 2014 (business and housing investment, exports, and private consumption) is projected to moderate in 2015. The boost from the recent drop in oil prices—equivalent to about 0.2 percent of GDP according to staff estimates—and depreciation of the real effective exchange rate largely offset a downward revision in the underlying demand outlook in Europe. CPI Inflation is expected to slow to near zero in 2015 under the influence of lower oil prices and wage moderation. The risks to the outlook are mainly external in the short run and domestic over the medium term (see Risk Assessment Matrix in Appendix II). The risks are interconnected and, if realized, are likely to interact and occur jointly. The authorities broadly shared the staff’s assessment of risks. High exposure to euro area weakness and geopolitical tensions. With 56 percent of its exports directed to the euro area (EA), Belgium is heavily exposed to the risk of stalling growth in the euro area and, through its integration in the German supply chain, to weakness in emerging market economies. Even if direct trade and financial linkages with Russia and Ukraine are small, an escalation of the crisis would have substantial adverse effects through other European countries. Combined with the planned temporary de- indexation of salaries, weaker growth could also push inflation lower, possibly further into deflation territory. While labor cost containment measures should improve growth prospects In the comprehensive assessment’s consolidated approach, the subsidiaries of foreign banks are not part of the Belgian aggregate. Thus, the results reported for Belgium exclude BNP Paribas Fortis and ING Belgium SA, which accounted for 42 percent of total banking sectors assets (as of end 2013). Page 8 over the medium term, they may not have a positive impact on investment or job creation in the short run if expectations about future growth remain depressed. Limited exposure to global financial instability but risks from lower profitability and high leverage in the banking sector. The Belgian banking system has retrenched more than most in the wake of the financial crisis: balance sheets have been derisked and remaining non-sovereign foreign exposures are concentrated in mortgages of foreign subsidiaries in Ireland and Hungary. Low profitability from domestic operations could hamper the banks’ ability to maintain adequate capital buffers and improve the leverage ratio. Substantial cross exposures between the public sector and banks being unwound. As banks shed stressed sovereign paper in the wake of the crisis, exposure to the Belgian sovereign increased and then eased down to below 6 percent of total assets (end-2014). Public sector claims on banks are declining. KBC has repaid €5 billion of the € billion in public support it received in 2009, and plans to repay the rest on an accelerated schedule. State guarantees to Dexia (10.8 percent of GDP) support the long-term dismantling of the bank by covering market financing of the legacy assets in run-off. The guarantees could cover any hole resulting from a rise in the cost of rolling over Dexia’s liabilities or valuation losses on the asset side (notably from the structured product portfolio). In staff’s view, realization of such a contingency could be covered in part by disposal of government assets available for sale, which are valued at 9.4 percent of GDP. Limited housing sector vulnerabilities. Following a steady and prolonged appreciation, house prices peaked in 2013:Q3 (Figure 4). Given that average house prices are still lower than in neighboring countries and that fundamental shifts in demand (due to population growth, declining household size, and easier financial conditions) explain much of the price evolution, estimates based on historical price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios appear to overstate the degree of overvaluation . Based on these considerations, and taking into account the impact of less generous mortgage tax deductibility in Flanders and Wallonia starting in staff and the authorities agree that overvaluation is small to moderate (in the 0–25 percent range). Thus, real house prices are expected to decline gradually over the medium term. Given strong household balance sheets, the high owner occupancy rate, and generally healthy lending standards, the risks of a disorderly correction are limited. Still, unexpected changes in housing-related policies and a large drop in expected future income could destabilize the housing market. On the upside, supply constraints create a potential for further price hikes; but, risks of a credit-driven increase in demand are small given the tightening of macro-prudential policies and the close attention of the supervisor. See 2013 Financial System Stability Assessment for Belgium (IMF Country Report No. 13/124). See accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Belgian House Prices: Evolution and Risks.” Page 9 Long-term risks from insufficient structural reforms. Failure of structural reforms to raise employment and keep up with competitiveness improvements in the rest of the euro area would undermine potential growth, increase fiscal risks, and reduce preparedness for the looming cost of ageing.