Belgium’s economy is projected to grow at a moderate pace of around 1½ percent for the foreseeable future. Within the context of a lackluster euro area growth outlook, external demand is not expected to contribute significantly to growth in the medium term. Inflation should ease back as the impact of tax increases and recent energy price increases recede, but gradually increase over the medium term as the output gap closes. Potential output growth is estimated at around 1¼ percent, rising over the medium term as reforms already undertaken help raise participation rates, support continued employment growth, and reduce unemployment. A protracted period of low growth poses significant risks in the context of a highly uncertain external environment. Given the economy’s openness and dependence on Europe, risks arise from both global and regional factors. There are uncertainties relating to upcoming elections in neighboring countries, the United Kingdom’s negotiations to exit the European Union, and the direction of U.S. policies, in particular on trade, corporate income taxes, and interest rates. Moreover, if domestic reform efforts and fiscal adjustment stall, within an environment of structurally low growth in advanced economies, Belgium faces the risk of persistent high public debt that could ultimately undermine confidence, especially if markets were to expect a gradual withdrawal of the exceptional monetary accommodation of the ECB. Under a “stagnation” scenario, with lower nominal GDP growth, public debt could turn explosive even if interest rates remain low, and there would be no room for fiscal maneuver (see below for a more detailed discussion on fiscal scenarios). This could become a source of macroeconomic instability and a deterrent to growth. Prolonged low growth and interest rates would also create financial sector vulnerabilities. Banks’ earnings would be constrained because of fixed rate long term assets with low yields, while life insurers and pension funds need to generate sufficient returns to meet long- term liabilities. Staff simulations suggest a significant negative impact on bank profitability of a low growth scenario (see Section C below and Appendix IV). Low profitability would reduce retained earnings and therefore internal capital generation, which could have an adverse impact on future credit supply, and expose banks to shocks. Such shocks could be external, through tighter and more volatile global or regional financial conditions, likely affecting Belgium indirectly, through effects on larger neighbors. Domestically, banks would also become more vulnerable to housing price shocks. Banks are currently relatively well protected (see below), but the rise in household indebtedness bears close watch. With mortgage loans on full recourse terms, in the event of a shock households would likely try to avoid default and instead cut consumption. An unemployment shock could depress private consumption sharply, slowing growth, which could raise default rates more generally and reduce banks’ asset quality. Page 13