The government’s term comes to an end with elections in May 2014. Under the latest state reform, federal elections will henceforth coincide with regional and European elections on a five year cycle. During its 2½ year mandate, the government took actions to stabilize and reform the economy and has put forth a major banking reform, which is now before parliament. Economic integration with Germany and healthy private balance sheets dampened the impact of the crisis. Real GDP is now 1.3 percent above the pre-crisis peak (Figure 1). Germany remains Belgium’s main trading partner absorbing 17.4 percent of Belgium’s exports, with many companies firmly anchored in the supply chains of German chemical, pharmaceutical, and automobile industries (Box 1). Supported by subsidized job schemes, employment has also fared better than in much of Europe. Household debt, essentially mortgages, has increased in line with real estate prices, but remains below the euro area average. Relatively low debt has also shielded the non-financial corporate sector (NFC) from financial stress (Figure 2). However, as elsewhere in Europe, the recovery from the 2012 slowdown is proceeding slowly and inflation has declined to around 1.2 percent. The economy bottomed out in 2013Q1, and since then growth has averaged 1.1 percent in annualized terms. The recovery has been driven by modest growth in private and public consumption and a significant contribution from net trade, with investment remaining weak. Overall, the contribution of final domestic demand (excluding inventory changes) is estimated to be flat in 2013. For the first time since 2009, CPI inflation has declined faster than in neighboring countries, on the back of developments and reforms of the energy market. Belgium: Growth and Employment Developments, 2008–13 Real GDP (Index, 2008Q1=100) Employment (Index, 2008Q1=100) Germany France Netherlands Euro area Germany France Netherlands Euro area Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 6 Box 1. Belgium in the Global Value Chains The increasing fragmentation of production across borders–the “Global Value Chains” (GVCs)–is transforming the trade landscape. Countries that integrate more effectively in the GVCs appear to achieve better export performance and higher growth. But export performance also depends on the cost and quality of non-tradable inputs, and in this regard Belgium’s export performance is likely to be penalized by low productivity in the services sector. Belgium appears to be well integrated in the GVC centered around Germany (figure). In 2011, exports of intermediate goods and services to Germany amounted to 8 percent of GDP, compared to 2 percent for France and 9 percent for the Netherlands. On the import side, about 40 percent of Belgium’s consumption of intermediate goods and services was imported, compared with 27 percent on average for its three neighboring countries (France, Germany, and the Netherlands). Half of these imported inputs came from its four largest European partners. Imports of Goods and Services as Intermediates, 2011 (In percent of total trade in intermediates) From Belgium Netherlands Germany France Italy United States China By Netherlands Germany France Italy United States China Source: World Input-Output database (WIOD) and IMF staff calculations. Note: Import of intermediates by the row country from the column country as a share of total trade in intermediates reported in the WIOD database. Less than 0.3 percent 0.3 percent to 0.67 percent 0.67 percent to 1 percent Above 1 percent But integration in the GVCs does not necessarily increase the value added content of exports. Information on the value added content of exports is very limited, however. Data compiled by the OECD and the World Trade Organization suggests that the value added content of Belgium’s exports of goods and services accounted for 34.5 percent of GDP, whereas total exports of goods and services amounted to 71.7 percent of GDP. By the metric of value added content of exports, Belgium moves from the 8 th largest exporter (out of 58 countries for which data are available) to the 18 th Duprez, C. and L. Dresse, 2013, “”The Belgian Economy in Global Value Chains: An Exploratory Analysis,” NBB Economic Review, September, 7-21. Page 7 Belgium: Energy Intensity and Price Developments, 2011–13 Energy Intensity per Unit of Value Added Manufacturing Whole economy Industrial Electricity Price (In euros per kWh) June 2011 June 2013 France Germany Netherlands Belgium Germany France Netherlands European Union United States Sources: Eurostat, OECD, US Energy Information Administration, and IMF staff calculations. Despite its resilience, the economy has been losing competitiveness (Figure 3). Unit labor costs point to a gradual loss of competitiveness since 2005. Most of this comes from lower productivity growth, rather than excessive wage growth. Although the overall level of labor productivity in Belgium is higher than in its three main partner countries (France, Germany, and Netherlands), the gap has been narrowing. This reflects, in part, measures to increase low-skilled employment, but productivity growth has been low even in knowledge-intensive sector, which points to gaps in innovation capacity and education, as well as limited exposure to competition (Box 2). While structural reforms in the energy market since 2012 have contributed to lower energy prices, the large energy cost differential relative to the United States creates significant competitive pressures for the energy-intensive Belgian economy. Using the IMF’s External Balance Assessment (EBA) techniques based on information available as of end–2013, staff assesses that Belgium’s real exchange rate is overvalued relative to the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy setting by about 3-8 percent. The cyclically-adjusted current account is weaker than the level consistent with medium-term economic fundamentals and appropriate domestic and foreign policies, which EBA regression-based estimates put at a surplus of 1.8 percent of GDP. The net international investment position remains strong (Figure 2). Gross asset and liability positions, which grew in the pre-crisis period in connection with the expansion of banks’ balance sheets, have been shrinking along with bank deleveraging. Page 8 Developments in a number of non-cost competitiveness indicators suggest that Belgium could improve its standing relative to partner countries. Box 2. Non-Cost Competitiveness Innovation. While Belgian firms appear to perform well in terms of process innovation, they score more poorly in terms of product innovation. As such, Belgium’s exports face difficulties in moving up the value-added chain and, as a result, face increasing competition from emerging markets and new EU members. R&D spending has been stable in the past decade but is increasingly concentrated in the pharmaceutical sector, which accounts for a fourth of total R&D spending. Moreover, Belgium is one of the few advanced countries that had less triadic patents in 2011 than in 1997. Recognizing the importance of innovation, the government encourages R&D by subsidizing R&D jobs (9 percent of total labor subsidies), but the effectiveness of this support is unclear. By contrast the research resources of public universities do not appear to be leveraged as well as they could in support of private sector innovation. Education. Building human capital, notably in science, should be an essential part of a strategy to foster innovation. Compared to its European peers, Belgium suffers from fewer students in science and, in contrast with the experience of peer countries, student performance in science has declined in the last decade. Regional disparities within Belgium are also very strong. Similarly, training of the working age population is less developed than in other EU countries. Student Performance (PISA mean score) 2003 mathematics 2003 reading 2003 science 2012 mathematics 2012 reading 2012 science Peer countries' average 1/ Sources: OECD and IMF staff calculations. Peer countries are France, Germany, and the Netherlands. Regulatory environment. Competition appears less intense in Belgium than in other European countries notably because of regulation and administrative burden. Belgium ranks 133 out of 144 countries on “burden of government regulation” according to the World Economic Forum; and, according to the OECD, regulations are significantly more widespread than in other countries. Building on the success of the recent reforms of the telecommunication and energy sectors, further liberalization of the services sectors would yield significant gains in terms of productivity and competitiveness. Regulation in many services sectors undermines total factor productivity growth. Bourlès et al. (2010) show that Belgium is the European country that would benefit the most from services sector liberalization (after Poland). They estimate that total factor productivity of the economy would grow by 1.25 percent more per year over five years if the regulatory burden was reduced to the best practice in the OECD. Kegels, C. and J. van der Linden, 2011, “Competitiveness, Productivity, Competition, and Structural Reforms: The Belgium Case”. Reflets et Perspectives de la Vie Economique , vol. 0(3), pages 27-51. Bourlès, R., G. Cette, J. Lopez, J. Mairesse, and G. Nicoletti, 2010, “The Impact on Growth of Easing Regulation in Upstream Sectors,” CESifo DICE Report , vol. 97(2), pages 8–12. Page 9 Government Interest Rates 3-month 10-year Sources: Bloomberg and IMF staff calculations. Belgium: Financial Conditions, 2007–14 Sovereign 10-Year Yield Spreads vis-à-vis Germany (In basis points) Italy France Public finances are under repair. With structural adjustment of 1.1 percent of GDP in 2012–13, the deficit is expected to come down to 2.7 percent of GDP in 2013, enabling Belgium to exit the EU’s Excessive Deficit Procedure. The government’s sale of its 25 percent share in BNPP Fortis (0.9 percent of GDP) kept the debt ratio just below the 100 percent mark in 2013. Financing conditions remain favorable, and Belgium has seen its AA/Aa3 ratings confirmed. Belgium: Impaired Claims (In percent of total claims unless otherwise noted) Restructuring has reduced the balance sheet of banks, from 410 percent of GDP in 2008 to 268 percent in 2013Q2 (Figures 4 and 5). Deleveraging has been led by cut backs in cross-border exposures and sales of foreign subsidiaries. The remaining portfolio of legacy assets will be unwound gradually. Since mid–2012, improvements in liquidity and solvency have strengthened banks’ capacity to absorb shocks, while impaired claims have stabilized at 3.8 percent of total claims. Most banks already comply with the Basel III Liquidity Cover Ratio (LCR), which, on aggregate, stood at 116 percent as of end-June 2013 (Figure 6). A return to the repo market in 2013 and access to a large and stable deposit base enabled banks to reduce reliance on central bank financing. Solvency positions have also improved, with the Basel 2.5 Common Equity Tier 1 ratio rising by 1.5 percentage points over 12 months, to 15.1 percent in June 2013. The improvement in solvency since 2008 (core Tier 1 capital ratio increased by 6.1 percentage points) originates from Corporate Retail Other non-bank institutions Total Coverage ratio (in percent of impaired claims, right scale) Sources: National Bank of Belgium and IMF staff calculations. 2013Q2 The aggregate comprises 13 Belgian banks, including subsidiaries of foreign banks. Page 10 asset reduction (83 percent of the improvement) and capital increases (20 percent), mostly from retained earnings, offset in small part (-3 percent) by an increase in the share of risky assets in total assets. However, profitability from domestic operations has been weak owing to the combination of low interest margins and high operating costs. Ample liquidity from domestic deposits and shedding of foreign assets has enabled banks to sustain positive credit growth throughout the crisis (Figure 7). Monetary easing by the European Central Bank (ECB) has been effectively transmitted into lending rates. While overall credit conditions tightened in 2012 owing to heightened perceptions of credit risk and balance sheet constraints, they improved slightly in 2013. Banks have continued to channel excess liquidity generated in Belgium to foreign markets, either by upstreaming liquidity to foreign parent banks or by funding new foreign lending operations out of Belgium. Page 11