A wage freeze to correct the labor cost gap relative to partners. To counterbalance the impact of wage indexation, bargaining over the “real” component of wages has been guided by a wage norm. The wage norm tracks labor costs relative to Belgium’s three main partner countries since 1996. The norm has worked relatively well at preserving labor cost parity with neighboring countries over time, but a sizeable gap began to develop in 2006. The gap narrowed to 2.9 percent in 2014 following a government-imposed real wage freeze in 2013–14. The requirement that the wage gap should be closed over time leaves little room for significant wage increases in the next two-year round (2015–16). In addition, the government has announced an “index jump”, i.e., a suspension of indexation equivalent to 2 percentage points of inflation. Given the projected increases in wages in the three peer countries (1.35 percent a year in 2015–16 according to the OECD), the expectation is that the wage gap will continue to close over the next two years. But also the need for more flexible wage setting. The mission supported the actions taken to regain cost competitiveness, but noted that, even if parity with the norm were to be restored, the labor market is unlikely to clear at a sufficiently high level of employment. Apart from external competitiveness considerations, labor costs remain too high to create new employment opportunities, particularly for the less skilled. The mission suggested that wage setting should allow for greater differentiation at the enterprise level. This could involve a review of sector minimum wages, and introduction of opting-out options for firms seeking to adjust or to create new jobs. A reduction of the labor tax wedge to accompany wage moderation. The federal government also committed to lower taxes on labor income, including through a phased reduction of employers’ social security contributions (from 33 to 25 percent) in a revenue neutral way—largely by consolidating job-specific cuts in social security contributions into a generalized cut. Representatives of the major unions considered that the government should have Page 10 gone further in the direction of a “tax shift,” notably by raising the taxation of capital income to reduce labor taxes further and faster, thus obviating the need for the “index jump.” Staff agreed that fiscal devaluation could be pushed further, but also warned that government action to reduce labor costs (by reducing the tax wedge or through specific subsidies as in the past) should not become a way of validating excessive wage increases. Scope for productivity gains through product market reform. Staff noted that a large share of the service economy (network industries, regulated professions, and to some extent distribution) remains sheltered from competition. The resulting inefficiencies and rents weigh not only on the cost of living but also on the competitiveness of export industries who consume these services as inputs. In the end, foregone productivity gains have to be paid for by lower wages in order to protect competitiveness. Staff thus encouraged the new government to give greater impetus to competition to promote productivity growth and, in coordination with regional governments, to reduce the high cost of regulation which weighs heavily on SMEs. The federal authorities said they would reduce red tape by reforming legal codes and implementing an “only once” policy, whereby documents provided by companies to one government agency would become accessible to all other agencies.