Real GDP is projected to grow by 1.1 percent in 2014, on the back of gradual improvements in both domestic and external demand. In the absence of deleveraging pressures, private consumption and investment should be able to respond positively to improved external conditions, while the negative impulse from fiscal consolidation (0.5 percent of GDP) is expected to be limited in 2014. But projected growth would still be insufficient to stabilize the unemployment rate. The reduction of value-added tax (VAT) on energy should keep headline inflation at 1.1 percent, below core inflation. In the short term, risks to macroeconomic stability are mostly external (Appendix III): The spillover from protracted low growth in Europe would have durable adverse effects by raising structural unemployment and making the remaining fiscal adjustment more arduous. The sovereign-bank nexus could again become a source of vulnerability in the event of renewed financial stress in Europe, although this risk has diminished as state aid is being repaid, state guarantees are lapsing, and legacy portfolios are being derisked. Financial stability also continues to incur risks from incomplete regulatory reform and fragmentation. Domestic risks are more significant for the medium term outlook: Failure of structural reforms to keep up with international competitiveness pressures would undermine growth prospects beyond the recovery and make it much harder to meet fiscal objectives and create buffers against the looming cost of ageing. The main financial risk is the ability of banks to maintain adequate capital buffers in the face of low profitability and possible deterioration in asset quality in a low growth environment. Belgium: Medium-term Projections, 2002–19 Aggregate Demand Components (Constant prices, 2011Q1=100) Projections Private consumption Gross fixed capital formation Exports Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Savings-Investment Balances Public savings investment gap Current account balance Private savings investment gap Page 12 Belgium: Housing Prices, 1995–2013 Real House Prices (In index number, 1995Q1 = 100) Average Single Family Home Price (In euros, end 2012) Finland Germany Ireland France Italy Netherlands Spain Mar-95 Mar-98 Mar-01 Mar-04 Mar-07 Mar-10 Mar-13 Sources: KBC and IMF staff calculations. K U Exposures to mortgages in Ireland and Hungary, and overall exposures Spain and Italy remain a risk factor. State guarantees to the banking sector remain sizable (12 percent of GDP), but most of them are related to Dexia, which is in a run-off mode. The realization of financial risks could also adversely impact the government balance sheet through state owned banks. The Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA, Appendix V) illustrates the adverse impact on public finances, should a part of these guarantees be exercised. Risks of a sharp correction of real estate prices appear contained. Property prices have risen by 110 percent in real terms since 2000, and, unlike in other EU countries, continued to increase through the financial crisis. Overvaluation estimates range from 10–60 percent, but valuation estimates based on price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios often miss catch-up effects. A finer assessment (interest-adjusted affordability regression analysis) suggests overvaluation of 5– 15 percent. In fact, absolute prices remain moderate by European comparison. High ownership rates (around 70 percent), coupled with persistent housing shortages, are likely to prevent a rapid price decline. Robust household balance sheets, the prevalence of fixed interest rate mortgages, and the recent tightening of capital requirements on mortgage lending should limit the impact of an interest rate and/or unemployment shocks on the quality of the mortgage portfolio. However, the prevalence of fixed-rate mortgages shifts the interest rate risk to banks. Claims on foreign counterparties, such as mortgages in Ireland and Hungary, represent the majority of current defaults. Exposure of domestically owned banks to Italy and Spain was reduced from EUR 105 billion in 2008 to EUR 21 billion in June 2013. See also the analysis in IMF Country Report Number 13/124. Page 13