Structural fiscal adjustment of 3.3 percent of GDP is still required to meet the authorities’ medium-term structural surplus objective of 0.75 percent of GDP. The targeted surplus would place the debt ratio on a path consistent with EU commitments and create fiscal space for the looming cost of ageing. The April 2013 Stability Program envisioned reaching this objective in 2016. Meeting this target date would require an acceleration of adjustment by the federal and regional governments relative to the structural adjustment projected in 2014 under current policies (0.5 percent of GDP). Staff took the view that average structural adjustment of 0.75 percent a year would be appropriate going forward given the risks highlighted by the DSA Staff emphasized the Based on the authorities’ estimate of potential GDP, the needed effort is 2½ percent. Page 17 importance of steady quality adjustment over a specific target date for reaching the surplus objective. Average adjustment of 0.75 percent would be consistent with the gradual and limited increase in revenues over the next five years (1 percent of GDP, similar to the 2013 Stability Program) and real expenditure growth of 0.5 percent a year, which could be achieved through structural spending reforms. Since consolidation measures beyond 2014 are yet to be identified, and given the uncertainty over the regional governments pace of adjustment (see below), the staff’s baseline scenario presented in the tables assumes a more modest pace of structural adjustment of about 0.5 percent per year, which would see Belgium achieving its medium-term fiscal objective only in 2019. The DSA illustrates that public finances, under this baseline scenario, remain fragile, and even modest changes in the economic environment would push the public debt ratio above 100 percent. A negative growth shock and realization of contingent fiscal liabilities coming from bank support represent major risks to the debt outlook. Staff stressed the importance for the post-election government to identify upfront the sources of medium-term adjustment. Given that most of the structural adjustment to date has come from revenue measures, staff underscored the need to rebalance consolidation toward expenditure measures (Figure 8). For the federal government, this implies reducing current spending and rationalizing subsidies and social transfers, consistent with activation objectives (Figure 9). On the tax side, there was broad agreement that planned reductions in labor taxes should be integrated in a comprehensive tax shift toward indirect, environmental, and capital income taxation—income from capital is subject to different and favorable tax regimes relative to labor income. With responsibility for roughly ⅓ of the remaining adjustment need, regional and community governments will have to take decisive actions (Box 3). The pace at which regional governments will adjust has yet to be agreed, but the enhanced competencies of regional governments under the sixth reform of the state provide scope for both revenue and expenditure measures. For regional governments, staff noted that adjustment should focus on current spending and tax expenditures so as to preserve fiscal space for productivity-enhancing spending in education and transport infrastructure, where growing bottlenecks are undermining productivity (Figure 10). Adapting to the requirements of the EU Fiscal Compact creates opportunities for more efficient policies but also challenges in Belgium’s complex fiscal structure. Given the considerable degree of decentralization and the fact that the federal, regional, and community governments have equal standing before the law, the requirements of the Fiscal Compact have taken the form of a cooperation agreement between the various governments, backed by a stronger assessment and monitoring role for the High Council of Finance. Moving to structural targets should reduce reliance on pro-cyclical stop gap measures in pursuit of annual nominal deficit targets, which have characterized recent budget executions. However, defining and monitoring structural targets for regional governments will be challenging. Staff proposed setting nominal deficit targets with cyclical adjustors for revenues to correct for cyclical effects. Page 18 Box 3. Sixth Reform of the State and Burden Sharing of Fiscal Adjustment The Sixth Reform of the State, negotiated in October 2011, substantially increased the degree of fiscal federalism by devolving additional spending responsibilities to subnational governments and reforming their funding. The state reform was finalized in December 2013, when the parliament passed the revised Special Finance Act governing the financing of the federated entities. The reform will enter into force in July 2014, and the new financing rules will begin to be applied in 2015. The decentralized responsibilities, which should amount to nearly 5 percent of GDP in 2015, are discussed in Box 2 of Belgium’s 2011 Article IV Staff Report. The adjustment burden is redistributed towards Regions and Communities in the following way: New spending responsibilities are not fully covered by increased tax autonomy and new transfers. Tax autonomy of Regions will increase as they acquire responsibility for around 25 percent of the personal income tax (2.9 percent of GDP), which means that the share of own taxes in the regions’ total revenue will increase from 43.9 percent to 73.3 percent. Regions will be able to set their own income tax rates, brackets, and tax exemptions. Additional funding will be provided by new federal grants (1.3 percent of GDP) and new traffic related revenue (0.2 percent of GDP). Overall, total new resources of Regions and Communities will increase by 4.4 percent of GDP in 2015. The residual gap of about 0.6 percent of GDP as of 2016, relative to new spending commitments, will be the Regions and Communities’ contribution to fiscal consolidation. Additional adjustment of 0.4 percent of GDP over the medium term. Firstly, Regions and Communities will contribute to the budgetary cost of aging, in the form of decreased indexation of some grants to economic growth from 2017 onwards (for example, transfers related to labor market policies will grow by only 55 percent of economic growth rather than the current 75 percent). This measure should reduce federal transfers to Regions and Communities by 0.2 percent of GDP by 2030. Secondly, the Regions and Communities will gradually increase their contribution to their civil servants’ pension plans, which are currently fully paid by the federal government. This contribution will increase steadily to 8.86 percent of wages in 2030 (0.2 percent of GDP). Redistribution between the regions will also be scaled back. The national solidarity allowance, which redistributes proceeds from the federal income tax based on regional per capita income, will be scaled, back providing savings of 0.1 percent of GDP for the federal government. The redistribution grant will compensate for 80 percent of the difference in per capita income relative to the national average, down from the current 100 percent. Impact of the Sixth Reform of the State by the Level of Government Final Expenditure (In percent total general goverment expenditure) Before reform After reform Federal government Social security Regions and communities Local authorities Tax and Social Security Revenue (In percent of total tax and social security revenue) Before reform After reform Federal government Social security Regions and communities Local authorities Sources: Belgian authorities; Decoster, A. and W. Sas (2013), “De Nieuwe Bijzondere Financieringswet Van De 6 Staatshervorming: Werden De Beloften Ingelost?”, Flemosi Discussion paper 28; and IMF staff calculations. Calculations based on end-2012 data. Expenditure net of transfers to other levels of the government. IMF Country Report Number 12/55. Language communities do not have their own tax base and only rely on transfers. Page 19