In its first year in office, the government has taken important steps to promote competitiveness, job creation, and fiscal sustainability . The three main reforms enacted were pension reforms raising the retirement age, a suspension of wage indexation (“ saut d’index ”), and a “tax shift” reducing the labor tax wedge. Widespread strikes took place in the initial months of the right-leaning coalition, but recent efforts to better involve social partners in certain policy deliberations have helped improve relations. At the same time, the sixth reform of the state has brought a further devolution of responsibilities, greater tax autonomy for the regions, and a gradual rollout of a revised funding and transfer system. These policies are generally consistent with several of last year’s Article IV recommendations (Appendix I). Output growth has been resilient, supported by solid wage growth and comparatively slow fiscal consolidation. Consumer spending contributed more than half to 2007–14 real GDP growth, benefiting from healthy private sector balance sheets, robust mortgage lending, and solid wage growth including from the automatic indexation mechanism (until its suspension a year ago). In contrast to many other euro area countries, post-crisis fiscal consolidation was very modest, notwithstanding a sizeable level of debt and deficits, making government spending another important driver of growth. Investment contributed the remainder, while net exports were broadly neutral (Figure 1). In 2015, growth was again highly reliant on private consumption as public spending slowed while trend investment and net export growth (abstracting from large one-off transactions) were relatively subdued. Government policies have also contributed to inflation and employment growth above euro area averages. Wage indexation and continued government spending propped up domestic demand in the aftermath of the crisis, and the output gap did not widen as much as in other EU countries. As a result, core inflation has remained above peers, averaging around 1½ percent since 2011. Headline inflation rebounded in 2015, as the effect of the collapse of energy prices in the second half of 2014 wore off. At the same time, employment growth has benefitted from public support through direct hiring as well as a sharp rise in labor subsidies. As a result, the unemployment rate, at 8½ percent, is only one percentage point above the pre-crisis level, and almost entirely structural. Investment and import figures were distorted by two large transactions in late 2014 and early 2015 involving a purchase of container ships and of patents. Page 9 Output growth has been resilient … …thanks to robust domestic demand. Figure 1. Real Sector Developments Real GDP During and Since the Crisis (In index, 100 = 2007) EU 28 Germany Spain Netherlands Italy Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Inflation and wage growth have been above euro area peers. Contributions to HICP Inflation (In percent, 2007-2014 average) EA19 Germany Italy Netherlands Spain Nonenergy industrial goods Unprocessed food Services Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Energy Processed food, alcohol and tobacco Wage growth The unemployment rate has increased only modestly since the crisis… Unemployment Rates (In percent of labor force, 2014 average) Unemployment rate Increase since 2007 Germany Netherlands Belgium EA 19 Italy Spain Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Used for wage indexation. Growth Contributions of Selected Components (In percent, 2007-14 average) Private Consumption Gross Fixed Capital Formation GDP Growth Government Consumption Net Exports Germany EU 28 Netherlands Italy Spain Sources: Haver Analytics, NBB, Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Core inflation has been stable, while consumer prices and the health index declined due to low energy prices. Annual Inflation (In percent) Source: Haver Analytics. HICP inflation Core inflation Smoothed health index … partly due to ballooning labor subsidies. Labor Subsidies Specific reductions in social security contributions Reductions in payroll tax Service vouchers 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Source: NBB. Page 10 Belgium’s external competitiveness has declined significantly since the early 2000s. After years of large current account surpluses, Belgium gradually lost export market shares, until a sharp fall in net exports brought the current account into broad balance during the crisis (Figure 2). This trend was partly due to high and rapidly growing labor costs that had outpaced productivity growth since the mid-2000s. More recently, with policy actions imposing wage moderation (including the saut d’index ), a weaker euro, and growing labor productivity, the current account may again move into a small surplus, thanks to strong growth of service exports and income from the large net international investment position. Notwithstanding these recent improvements, staff’s preliminary assessment under the External Balance Assessment (EBA) suggests that Belgium’s external position is still moderately weaker than medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies would imply (see Appendix I). On the basis of the EBA exchange rate assessment, staff considers the real effective exchange rate to be overvalued by between 0 to 10 percent. Figure 2. External Competitiveness The current account surplus vanished during crisis. Current Account Balance and Components Goods and Services Primary Income Secondary Income Current Account Sources: NBB, Haver Analytics and IMF Staff calculations. Competitiveness has suffered from high and growing labor costs, which current policies are trying to reverse. Total Labor Costs - Business Economy (In euros per hour, 2014) Falling export market shares for goods were partially compensated by gains in services. Evolution of World Export Shares by Type (In percentage change over the 2008-14 period) Goods Goods & Services Services Spain Germany Netherlands Italy Sources: Eurostat and IMF Staff calculations. Belgium’s exports rely heavily on services, which are constrained by product market regulation. Services Share in Exports Value Added, 2011 (In percent, by origin) Total labor cost Increase since 2008 (in percent) Netherlands Germany Italy Spain P C O P Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Source: OECD TiVA database. K k z b x L Page 11 A long track record of fiscal consolidation has been undone during the crisis, bringing the public debt ratio back well into the triple digits. After more than a decade of running large structural primary surpluses, Belgium reduced its public debt-to-GDP ratio from 131 percent in 1995 to 87 percent in 2007 (Figure 3). Since then, real primary expenditure growth, driven by social benefits and the wage bill, outpaced real GDP growth, offsetting much of the revenue-based adjustment effort. The resulting structural deficits—plus the one-off costs for crisis support to banks—have brought public debt back to 106 percent of GDP at end-2015. While Belgium exited the Excessive Deficit Procedure in June 2014, the 2014 deficit turned out still marginally above 3 percent of GDP. The European Commission judged this episode to be due to exceptional and temporary factors; an assessment that was supported by significant reforms advanced by the new government and ambitious fiscal structural adjustment objectives. Figure 3. Fiscal Developments A strong track record of consolidation was undone by the global financial crisis. General Government Debt and Structural Balance Structural primary balance, right scale Public debt Structural balance, right scale Sources: NBB and IMF Staff calculations. … as expenditure grew faster than GDP. Primary Spending Growth (In percent) Primary expenditure Social benefits Wage bill GDP Sources: NBB and IMF Staff calculations. Post-crisis adjustment was much smaller than in other EU countries … Structural Fiscal Adjustment (Change between 2010 and 2014, in percentage points of potential GDP) Cyclically adjusted revenues Cyclically adjusted primary expenditures Structural adjustment Euro area Germany Netherlands Sources: AMECO and IMF Staff calculations. Public spending is now among the highest in Europe. General Government Expenditure (In percent of GDP, 2014) k P v b x L k v K C v L Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Staff calculations. The recent pension reform is a major step toward addressing the long-term cost of aging. Successive reforms of early retirement schemes starting in 2012 have been complemented by a broader pension reform adopted in August 2015 (See Appendix III). The main elements involve: first, a gradual increase in the legal retirement age from 65 to 66 in 2025 and 67 in 2030; second, raising the minimum age and career length required for early retirement starting in 2017; and third, Page 12 boosting the minimum age for survivor’s pension. The reforms are expected to halve the annual growth in pension costs in the long run from the current 4–5 percent per year. They should also accelerate progress in increasing the employment rate as well as the effective retirement age, which in 2012 was the second lowest in the OECD (59.2 years). The reduction in social security contributions as part of the tax shift should boost employment growth . The tax shift aims to improve competitiveness and strengthen purchasing power through tax relief and lower social security contributions for employers and reduced personal income taxes for employees. Given that the main measures are targeted toward lower incomes, they could stimulate significantly employment rates of vulnerable groups (see Box 1). Counterbalancing measures under the tax shift include increases in the VAT on electricity, excises on diesel, alcohol, tobacco, and sugary drinks, increases on withholding taxes, and new taxes on certain financial vehicles and on short-term capital gains. The yield of some of the new tax measures is uncertain, and the tax shift is not revenue neutral, even if supply-side benefits (Box 1) are taken into account. Box 1. Employment Impact of Tax Wedge Reductions To address some of the effects related to the high and—until recently—rapidly increasing labor costs, the coalition government, building on the previous government’s measures, is reducing the employers’ social security contribution (SSC) gradually from 33 percent to 25 percent in 2019. This reduction is in effect smaller on average than it might seem, given the numerous existing exceptions which leave the current effective contribution rate closer to 27 percent. The measure is targeted at lower salaries, whose contribution rates will be reduced over-proportionally (chart). The contribution for an employee at the minimum wage will be reduced by 6½ percentage points, while labor costs for the median worker will fall by only about 1¾ percent. The targeting of low wages favors the young and the unskilled, who tend to have lower wages, but also the lowest employment rates. The tax shift has thus the potential to support activation for some of the most vulnerable groups. Wage Distribution in Belgium and SSC Reduction, 2013 (In percent of full-time employed, by wage; right scale in percent) < Wage distribution Approximate reduction in SSC (right scale) 2.5 2.1 1.8 1.5 1.3 1 0.9 = > Sources: SPF Economy and IMF Staff calculations. Average Gross Wage by Age Group, 2013 (Monthly gross wage in euros; right scale in percent) Mean wage Approximate reduction in SSC (right scale) Aggregate effects could be significant. Regression results based on data that distinguishes wage- and non-wage labor costs suggest that the employment rates of workers close to the median of the distribution will increase by about 0.7 percentage points, and that for minimum wage earners by 1.6 percentage points. This could be substantial, particularly for the low-skilled whose employment rate is 37 percent. The reduction of labor costs alone could increase aggregate employment by an additional 35,000–40,000 jobs, of which more than a third would be among the lower-skilled. Belgian estimates by the Planning Bureau and the National Bank of Belgium (NBB) using more fully specified models are in a similar range. They suggest the creation of an additional 45,000–65,000 jobs by 2021. In the NBB’s model, the reduction of the employers’ SSC contributions alone will create 49,000 jobs by 2021. 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 >= 60 Sources: SPF Economy and IMF Staff calculations. <20 Page 13 The banking sector has refocused on the domestic market, in particular mortgage lending . Bank assets have fallen from above 400 percent of GDP in 2008 to about 275 percent in 2014, largely by shedding activities abroad. Credit to the private sector has risen strongly since early 2013, driven primarily by household mortgage growth (Figure 4), although the most recent growth is affected by anticipating reductions in tax deductibility (“ bonus logement ”) at the regional level. Gross household indebtedness has risen to about 62 percent of GDP, though net financial assets have remained comparatively high. Bank credit to non-financial corporations has been growing much more moderately, partly because large companies can finance themselves on the markets. The aggregate size of corporate balance sheets, with liabilities at almost 290 percent of GDP in 2014, reflects Belgium’s position as a corporate treasury center where multinationals raise funds in Belgium and distribute them to related entities abroad. Excluding these positions, corporate debt (bank loans and debt securities issued) was around 45 percent of GDP in mid-2015. Figure 4. Credit Conditions Credit growth has been rising, driven by mortgages. Credit to the Non-Financial Private Sector (In percent contribution) House prices have recently stabilized. International Comparison of House Price Evolutions (Index, 2010=100) Mortgages Other consumer NFCs Total Euro Area Netherlands Germany Sources: NBB and IMF Staff calculations. Source: EuroStat. Household net financial wealth has remained above peers. Household Net Financial Assets Corporate liabilities are high, partly inflated by holding companies and treasury centers with related firms abroad. Consolidated Gross Liabilities of Non-Financial Corps. Netherlands Italy Germany Spain Netherlands Italy Germany Spain Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Sources: Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Page 14