A resumption of fiscal adjustment following a pause in 2014. Although the financing outlook remains very favorable, all stakeholders acknowledged that continued adjustment is needed to reduce debt and regain fiscal space. The federal government set a structural adjustment target of 0.7 percent a year in 2015–16, with a view to reaching structural balance by 2018 (authorities’ estimates). The delay in reaching the structural balance objective (relative to the 2014 Stability Program) reflects the adjustment shortfall of 2014. The authorities stressed that the revenue effort under their plan (0.7 percent of GDP cumulatively over three years) would be put to better use by reducing labor taxes rather than achieving a faster adjustment (see table above). Beyond 2016, the pace of adjustment will be guided by the new MTO to be set in the April 2015 Stability Program. The authorities hope that their structural reforms would reduce the MTO, but the margin to adjust the MTO is limited since it was already set below the level consistent with the rising cost of ageing. Adjustment underpinned by pro-growth expenditure measures and shared across governments. Under a burden sharing agreement, regional and community governments committed to maintain balanced budgets and absorb the unfunded cost of the responsibilities transferred to them as of 2015—in all an adjustment of over 1 percent of GDP. Description2015-18Entity I (federal government and social security)Spending Federal government primary spending cutsAcross the board cuts of operating expenses, including reduction of civil servants through attrition, cuts of public investment, and reduced business subsidies0.7Social security spending cutsHealth careContinued cap on annual real growth of health care expenditure of about 1.5 percent 0.7 Other social security spendingTightened eligibility to pensions, unemployment benefits, and sickness and disability benefits0.5 Revenue Revenue increasesVAT, excise, and various income tax increases; new tax on financial sector and financial transactions0.7Revenue cutsCuts in social security contributions and personal income tax-0.7 Entity II (regions and communities) Reduction of civil servants through attrition, delays of investment, tax expenditure cuts (e.g. mortgage deductibility), and cuts to business subsidies0.9Source: Belgian authorities and IMF staff calculations. Page 13 The phasing of that adjustment is to be negotiated in consultation with the federal government. The federal government program targets a shift from revenue to expenditure-based adjustment (see table) consistent with past Fund advice. Regional and community government plans also target cuts to current spending and tax expenditures as the primary instruments of consolidation. This rebalancing of policies should produce more durable and efficient outcomes. Belgium: Overall and Structural Balances in 2013–2018 (In percent of GDP) Staff supportive of government plans. Given the high debt and the risks to public debt sustainability (Appendix V), staff agreed that the projected gradual recovery justified the planned pace of adjustment. Debt dynamics are particularly vulnerable to negative shocks to growth. The debt sustainability analysis illustrates that, whereas debt would revert to a sustainable path after the initial impact of standard shocks, it would remain on an unsustainable path under a stagnation or deflation scenario. By contrast, exposure to interest rate shocks has been reduced by the lengthening of the average maturity of debt (7.8 years in 2014). Staff assessed that policies were well aligned to fiscal targets. Reflecting uncertainties about the timing of adjustment by regional governments and the effectiveness of the measures announced so far, staff projects structural adjustment of 0.6 percent of GDP a year in 2015–16 (see table above), which is only marginally lower than the authorities’ projections. Because of a declining interest bill, the underlying primary structural adjustment comes to 0.4 percent of GDP a year. In this baseline scenario, the debt ratio would return to a downward path in 2016. Need to preserve room for investment. Staff was concerned that adjustment would rely excessively on postponing public investment that is needed to upgrade infrastructure in transportation, energy, education, and social housing. The constraint is tight at all levels of government, reflecting in part the changed (and less favorable) fiscal treatment of public-private partnership projects under the new ESA 2010 rules. This reinforces the need to curb and reverse the See accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Towards a Growth-Friendly Fiscal Consolidation in Belgium.” Structural adjustment 2014 Stability Program0.50.70.70.7Authorities' program0.50.30.70.70.50.1Staff projection0.60.00.60.60.60.3Staff projectionsPrimary structural adjustment 0.30.00.40.40.40.2Overall balance-2.9-3.2-2.9-2.2-1.5-1.1Structural balance-2.9-2.9-2.3-1.7-1.1-0.8Source: Belgian authorities, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Page 14 rapid increase in the wage bill (one of the highest and fastest growing in Europe) and to rationalize and cut back widespread subsidies. Strengthening coordination mechanisms between the levels of government. Fiscal coordination across governments has been based so far on nominal deficit targets, which have led to recurrent mid-course corrections through inefficient measures. The fiscal governance framework adopted in 2013 reinforces the role of the High Council of Finance (HCF) to assess and monitor the performance of the various governments relative to nominal and, for the first time, structural targets. The shift to structural targets should improve the efficiency of policies. The HCF underscored the difficulty of measuring structural adjustment at the subnational level, and said they were consulting with other federal states in the euro area on this issue.