Table. Poverty and Social Indicators, Bhutan Significant economic and social gains have been realized during the Tenth Five Year Plan (spanning 2008/09–2012/13). Against the background of strong implementation, robust donor support, and increased hydropower generation capacity over the 10 Five Year Plan (FYP), there has been a steady increase in per capita incomes to middle-income levels and substantial reduction in poverty, along with marked improvement in social indicators. Bhutan has attained or is on track to achieve most of the MDGs. Additionally, Bhutan has pioneered a unique development approach based on the concept of Gross National Happiness (Box 1). Bhutan has also enjoyed political stability, with elections and a smooth political transition taking place in mid 2013. Population below poverty line (%) GNI per capita, Atlas method US$ Gross primary enrolment (%) Human development index Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) (‰) Source: UN Publications, UNDP, World Bank, Bhutan National Statistics Bureau Bhutan Poverty Analysis, 2012 Percent of school age population World Human development index: 0.69; Global ranking: 140 0.58 (2003) 1,640 (2008) 0.61 (2006) 43.7 (2010) Notwithstanding these successes, Bhutan faces growing external imbalances. Rapid growthwas accompanied by overheating pressures which resulted in a sharp widening of the current account deficit, in part due to substantial hydro-power related imports. External pressures have led to a recurrent shortfall in Indian rupee reserves. A comprehensive set of policies should be put in place to ensure that such pressures are minimized in future as Bhutan continues on its quest to raise growth and living standards through expansion of hydropower capacity. The authorities’ macroeconomic policies and past Fund advice have been broadly aligned, but progress on fiscal consolidation and structural reforms have been slow . Consistent with Fund advice, important steps have been taken to improve the monetary transmission mechanism, to introduce macroprudential rules, and to actively manage reserves. However, the stance of fiscal policy has been looser than staff recommended in 2011 Article IV Consultation and is budgeted to remain high in FY2014. Also, progress on structural reforms has been limited.