Background The fiscal deficit worsened sharply in FY2013 due to a shortfall in grants, and is budgeted to remain high in FY2014. The FY2013 fiscal deficit was revised to 4 percent of GDP, compared with the previous estimate of 1 percent, driven primarily by a shortfall in grants. The budget for FY2014 aims for a deficit of 3.6 percent, mainly on account of lower projected revenues and grants. In addition, an off-budget economic stimulus plan, financed by official grants from India, has been prepared in the amount of ngultrum 5 billion (about 4 percent of GDP) to be spent over 5 years, of which ngultrum 4 billion will be provided to banks in the form of subordinated debt and revolving funds to reinvigorate credit growth. Furthermore, the stimulus plan proposes subsidies of ngultrum 1 billion for education, free electricity, financial support for senior citizens, and unemployment benefits. Over the medium term (corresponding to the Eleventh FYP), donor financing is projected to fall as per capita incomes rise. Accordingly, grants are expected to decline from 9 percent of GDP in 2012/13 to 6 percent by 2017/18. The impact of declining grants is expected to be mitigated by the increase in hydropower revenues as major projects currently under construction come on-stream in the outer years of the plan. The fiscal deficit is projected to be around 1 percent of GDP (on average) during the plan period . The programs and financing of the Eleventh FYP were negotiated with the Government of India, which will provide Nu. 45 billion (or 21 percent of plan outlay) in the form of grants. For a discussion of risks to India’s economic outlook, see India: 2014 Article IV Consultation (IMF Country Report No. 14/57). The authorities’ fiscal anchor in the past has restricted current expenditure to domestic revenues, and has been tightened to include part of capital expenditure in the FY2014 Budget. By the end of the medium term, the aim is to cover an increasing share of expenditure from domestic revenues. Page 8 Staff Views In the near term, fiscal policy should aim for consolidation to ensure that overheating pressures do not reemerge. Fiscal policy has generally been prudent in the past, but more recently, the fiscal stance has turned much more expansionary. Persistent large deficits, financed by domestic borrowing, risk crowding out the private sector and contributing to a buildup of public debt. Revenue reforms are essential, including reducing the number of zero-rated goods, simplifying the indirect tax rate structure, widening taxation of domestic activity, and improving tax administration (see Selected Issues Paper on “Options for Tax Reform”). Such reforms will reduce dependence on hydropower and on external aid, and will ameliorate revenue volatility. In addition, if there are further grant shortfalls, restraining spending while preserving social and productivity-enhancing expenditure will be appropriate. Further civil service wage hikes, unaccompanied by complementary revenue measures, would lead to deterioration of fiscal balances . As well, the ESP risks stoking overheating pressures which could translate into external pressures. Over the medium term, reforms should aim to place public finances on a more solid footing. As noted, over the span of the Eleventh FYP, donor financing is projected to fall as incomes rise. Caution is needed in the event of further delays in grant inflows and in the commissioning of the ongoing hydropower projects (which would lead to large revenue shortfalls in the outer years of plan). Given such potential eventualities, spending restraint and prioritization would be prudent to create the fiscal space for necessary development-related expenditure (on health and education) while avoiding a build-up of public debt. Consideration should be given to introducing a value- added tax to replace the existing system of indirect taxes, to boost revenue collection through a wider base and better enforcement. Grants (Aid Flows) (In percent) Grants/GDP Grants/Total Revenue Grants 2003-2013: South Asia, Other Asian LICs and L- MICs 1/ (In percent of GDP) 1/ South Asia: Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Myanmar and Nepal. LICs (Least-Income Countries) in Asia: Myanmar,Mongolia, Bangledash, Lao PDR, Nepal , Maldives, Cambodia, Papua New Guinea, Bhutan, Timon-Leste, Kiribati, Micronesia, Mashall Island, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu . L-MICs (Middle-and-Least Income Countries) in Asia: the LICs above and India, Vietnam, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand and Malaysia Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics, Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, and IMF staff calculations. The government has instituted a new Pay Commission to recommend wage adjustments in the public sector, which will issue its recommendations in the near future. Page 9 There is a need to improve fiscal management, including strengthening cash management (on which Fund TA is being provided). Government cash balances are prone to sharp fluctuations due to erratic and volatile inflows, particularly grants, necessitating the maintenance of large precautionary balances. Moreover, domestic financial markets are shallow and underdeveloped, and treasury bills are not issued regularly enough to handle fiscal volatility. Thus, cash flow is both complicated to forecast and difficult to smooth with existing instruments. The issuance of treasury bills should be planned and based on a cash forecasting framework, as opposed to ad-hoc short- term borrowing. Over the medium term, the multi-year budget framework could be enhanced to enable the government to better mobilize donor support, along with coordinated development of a treasury bill market to both facilitate issuance and develop demand for treasury bills. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with the need to maintain fiscal restraint, including through additional revenue-raising measures. The next Budget is expected to include a number of near-term tax measures to boost revenues, and a broader review of tax policy is envisaged in the medium term. Fiscal measures will also likely replace administrative measures restricting imports of vehicles and construction-related items. The authorities also recognized that fiscal room to implement pay hikes is limited, even as expectations of a pay hike have arisen with the appointment of the Pay Commission. On the larger-than-expected fiscal deficit in FY2013, the authorities noted that larger domestic borrowing resulted from cash management needs as grants were delayed. They clarified that the ESP will be implemented to minimize risks to banks and the possible generation of excess aggregate demand. They clarified that banks will only serve as a conduit for financing, and will be free to advance loans on purely commercial basis as long as the loans meet the criteria of import substitution, export promotion, or employment promotion.