Background For FY2015/16, while the revised budget projected a deficit of 3 percent of GDP, the outturn is projected to be a surplus of 0.6 percent . While growth in current expenditure has been tepid, the revised budget assumed an unrealistically high jump in capital spending by over 70 percent, which is now projected at about 30 percent. The increase in spending is to be financed primarily by higher GoI grants. In the absence of new revenue measures, domestic revenue growth is projected to be modest. Even though discussion of the FY2016/17 budget in the Cabinet has not yet been finalized, the authorities suggested that the budgeted capital spending will likely remain elevated, and if fully implemented, would result in a deficit of over 5 percent of GDP. Over the medium term, with the commissioning of new hydropower plants, hydropower-related revenues are projected to increase. At the same time, donor financing is projected to fall as per capita incomes rise. The authorities are working towards a major reform of the tax system. With the help of IMF/World Bank technical assistance, the authorities have launched the project of introducing a modern goods and services tax (GST) by end-2018. Numerous deficiencies in Bhutan’s tax system have contributed to a gradual decline of tax revenues. The objective of tax reform is to mitigate these deficiencies and replace the current sales tax with a simple broad-based GST that would boost government revenues, while minimizing tax-related distortions and supporting an investment-friendly environment. Staff Views In the near term, fiscal policy should avoid contributing to the reemergence of overheating pressures and large shifts in the fiscal stance. Staff cautioned against attempts to boost capital spending excessively in an effort to “catch up” to originally budgeted public investment plans. Large increases in current spending, including wage increase, should be avoided as well. The recent increase of pay and allowances of public servants, the resumption of credit growth, and the pickup in import growth point to a strengthening in domestic demand. At this juncture, a fiscal deficit of around 5 percent of GDP (as under consideration by the authorities) would entail a large fiscal stimulus that could start undermining macroeconomic stability. Staff cautions against such fiscal loosening, and recommends targeting a smaller fiscal deficit in the range of 1–2 percent of GDP in FY2016/17. In Page 12 FY2017/18, with the projected acceleration of economic growth, further strengthening of the fiscal balance is recommended. Staff recommends targeting a small surplus of around ½ percent of GDP. While in recent years the fiscal balance has been stronger than originally targeted, revenue performance has remained weak and needs to be addressed as a matter of priority. Tax revenues are projected to fall to 13.2 percent of GDP in FY2015/16 and FY2016/17, down from 15.2 percent of GDP in FY2012/13. As in other countries, the widespread and expanding use of tax incentives has resulted in a weakening of tax revenue collection. The authorities estimate that tax exemptions and holidays result in a loss of revenue of up to 2 percent of GDP. Thus, staff recommends that new tax exemptions should be avoided, expiring exemptions should not be renewed, and existing exemptions should be phased out. To increase fiscal transparency, listing and costing all tax expenditures should become an integral part of the budget. The authorities should aim for a simple, broad-based tax system. In this context, the authorities’ decision to replace the current sales tax with a simple broad-based GST is welcome. This will increase government revenues while minimizing tax- related distortions and help create an investment-friendly environment. Over the medium-term, the priority should be to place public finances on a more solid footing, to contain the already-high public debt, and to avoid excessive volatility in the fiscal stance and emergence of external pressures . On the revenue side, the priority should be the implementation of a broad-based GST. On the expenditure side, the main objectives should be: (i) keep current spending growth moderate, in support of debt reduction; and (ii) to ensure that volatility in revenues and grants does not lead to high spending and fiscal stance volatility. This may require strengthening the fiscal institutional framework to effectively manage the expected spike in hydropower-related revenues. The objective should be to avoid hurried spending of temporarily higher revenues that would pose a risk to both fiscal sustainability and the external position. One option— discussed in the 2011 Article IV Staff Report —— would be to introduce a fiscal rule that would constrain the growth of current spending. In addition, a separate account (or stabilization fund) could be created to temporarily “park” additional hydropower revenues, shield them from pressures to be spent quickly and less effectively, and avoid the real exchange rate appreciation that would harm competitiveness and diversification of the economy. Authorities’ Views The authorities explained that actual fiscal outcomes are typically stronger than budgeted. They observed that in the early years of the FYPs, capital spending is usually lagging behind, as it is a period of carrying out preparatory work for capital investment, and for mobilizing resources, The recommended fiscal balance targets for FY2016/17 and FY2017/18 are derived from a conservative revenue assumption in the absence of new measures, and the authorities’ spending plans for these years, but smoothed to avoid large swings in the fiscal balance. Each percentage point increase in the GST is estimated to yield 0.3 percent of GDP in revenues. A projected jump in hydropower-related dividends and profit transfers in FY2018/19 and FY2019/20 with the commissioning of the three ongoing hydropower projects Puna-I, Puna-II and Mangdechhu will lead to a spike in nontax revenues. See IMF Country Report No. 11/123. Page 13 with donor coordination taking time. As a result, capital spending tends to pick up only in the later years of the FYP. Thus, capital spending is budgeted to increase significantly in FY2015/16 and FY2016/17. However, the authorities agreed with the staff’s point that limited absorptive capacity puts a cap on how much capital spending can be usefully increased, and noted that government agencies do not usually spend the full budgeted amounts. Accordingly, they agreed with staff that in FY2015/16, the actual deficit could end up lower than budgeted. In the same vein, the authorities cautioned that while the FY2016/17 budget could target a deficit in excess of 5 percent of GDP, the actual deficit may well be less. The authorities noted that they have been exercising tight control over recurrent spending. Sectoral Distribution of Credit Allocation (In percent of total credit) L P f m v G d C d C h h L m h m d v C & d m m C & d Sources: Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan; and IMF staff estimates. The authorities noted that improving revenue collection and increasing reliance on domestic revenues in covering budgetary spending poses a big challenge. The original target of financing 85 percent of total spending from domestic revenues at the end of the 11 th FYP will not be met. The authorities noted that domestic revenues have been flat in recent years, and that to increase tax revenues would require measures to be taken by parliament. They recognized the importance of introducing the reformed GST, and underscored the need to have it in place before the 2018 elections, to avoid possible delays. The authorities agreed that the projected increase in hydropower-related revenues needs to be managed carefully. They have been discussing the pros and cons of establishing stabilization fund for some time, but no decision has yet been made. The authorities emphasized the need to avoid tying their hands too tightly, as Bhutan needs to use the expected hydropower revenues to finance economic development, given the likely gradual phasing out of external support.