Background The large current account deficit and the currency composition of reserves have contributed to a recurring shortfall of Indian rupees. Convertible currency reserves are much larger than rupee reserves, which have constituted less than 3 percent of reserves on average during the past 5 years. Rapid credit growth, which led to higher non-hydropower imports, as well as large hydropower-related imports resulted in strong demand for rupees. These pressures culminated in pronounced rupee shortages and prompted two reserves sales of US$200 million each by the RMA in December 2011 and June 2013. The RMA also utilized foreign exchange overdrafts with Indian commercial banks and the line of credit with the Government of India. Additionally, a bilateral swap agreement of US$100 million with the Reserve Bank of India was agreed upon in March 2013 and was subsequently used (though it was reversed in September 2013). While these financing instruments helped to relieve immediate reserve pressures, they are expensive and cannot address the ongoing structural need to mobilize rupee reserves. Staff Views The exchange rate peg with India has served Bhutan well, though the real effective exchange rate is assessed to be above levels suggested by underlying fundamentals. The peg to the Indian rupee remains appropriate and provides Bhutan with an appropriate nominal anchor, given that India is Bhutan’s largest trade and development partner. The ngultrum is currently Continued rupee shortages led to the adoption of a number of measures— including the restriction on the availability of Indian rupee for making payments for imports of vehicles and construction material from India— in March 2012. Page 12 assessed to be overvalued by between 8–21 percent, though once additional hydropower revenues materialize over the medium term, this overvaluation is projected to dissipate (see Box 5). Bhutan has also ample reserves, as its reserve cover exceeds the standard measures of reserve adequacy and is much higher than peer countries Notwithstanding an adequate level of reserves, they have to be managed carefully to contain recurrent pressures. Risks stem from the fact that hydropower-related rupee debt service payments are lumpy and there are timing mis-matches between hydropower-related rupee inflows and outflows. These features require careful management and provisioning in advance for necessary rupees. Also, the currency composition of reserves should be more closely aligned with the structure of Bhutan’s external liabilities and trade (sources of rupee-currency liquidity needs) . As noted in the 2013 IMF technical assistance on reserve management, consideration should be given to gradually increasing the share of rupee reserves and to adopting reserve management and investment guidelines. Furthermore, once the policy stance is tightened sufficiently and revenue reforms instituted, the import restrictions should be gradually withdrawn, in line with the authorities’ plans. External debt is projected to rise significantly over the medium term. Bhutan’s debt dynamics are subject to moderate risk of distress, as indicated by the Low-Income Country (LIC)- Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)—see Supplement I. The construction of new hydropower projects is expected to lead to a substantial build-up of external debt, relative to levels projected during the previous 2011 Article IV consultation. In particular, the LIC-DSA thresholds are breached for several indicators for prolonged periods of time. However, these additional projects are expected to confer strong future economic dividends, boosting future GDP growth and exports. The mitigating factors that were highlighted in the previous DSA remain valid, namely a strong track record of project implementation, commercial viability, and close economic and political ties with India, Bhutan’s main provider of financing for hydropower projects and the key consumer of its electricity exports. Notwithstanding these mitigating factors, additional non-concessional borrowing should be avoided as the level of debt has increased substantially compared to previous DSAs. Recent changes to Bhutan’s foreign exchange framework, including the regulatory responses to the Indian rupee shortage, have given rise to new exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a). These include: (i) banning residents who do not comply with the requirement to repatriate export proceeds from accessing foreign exchange for unrelated imports; (ii) requiring foreign direct investment businesses to pay for their establishment and operational expenses from their own convertible currency resources; (iii) requiring Bhutanese companies to pay the interest on and amortization of external loans from their own convertible currency resources; (iv) restricting the availability of Indian rupees for making payments and transfers See selected issues paper “Reserve adequacy and reserve management in Bhutan”. Rupee debt constitutes 61 percent of total external debt in Bhutan, with convertible currency debt accounting for 29 percent. India is the largest trading partner for Bhutan (about 80 percent of Bhutan’s commodity exports are destined for India and about 70 percent of Bhutan’s imports are from India). Page 13 to India in the following current international transactions: personal travel, study-abroad living arrangement, family and salary remittances, advance payments for import from India and to recruit Indian workers, and imports of certain construction materials and vehicles from India; and (v) banning the access to Indian rupees for unrelated current international transactions for those who contravene the RMA’s 2012 guidelines on Indian rupee transactions. The authorities should eliminate the restrictions upon establishing the necessary macroeconomic and structural conditions. Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that while Bhutan’s reserves exceed most standard reserve adequacy thresholds, reserves have been largely built up through aid flows and not through export earnings. The RMA, with technical assistance from the Fund, has revised its Reserve Management Policy (RMP) and is drafting Investment Guidelines. In line with the new RMP, the RMA has developed a reserve adequacy framework with a threshold based on essential imports and other payments, beyond which the RMA shall convert its convertible currency reserves and increase rupee reserves to meet external obligations. Nevertheless, the authorities noted that since the Indian rupee is not a convertible currency, the RMA will need to calibrate its reserve composition between convertible currencies and rupees cautiously. Also, they underscored that any conversion of convertible currencies to rupees should take into account the Bhutanese Constitutional requirement that the RMA hold 12 months of essential imports cover, as well as third country imports and debt servicing requirements. The authorities considered the maintenance of most exchange restrictions under Article XIV, and those inconsistent with the Article VIII obligations, as necessary given that Bhutan’s reserves are built on aid and external borrowing, and the continuing pressure on Bhutan’s Indian rupee reserves. POLICY THEME #2––SAFEGUARDING FINANCIAL