Background The slowdown in credit growth during 2013 and 2014 partly reversed in 2015. After a period of rapid growth in credit to the private sector averaging 35 percent in 2005–2011, credit growth fell to below 10 percent in 2013 and 2014. However, following the September 2014 termination of the ban on vehicle and housing loans (introduced during the “rupee shortage crisis”), credit growth picked up in 2015, though it remained in the 13–14 percent range for most of the year. To sterilize persistent excess liquidity in the banking system, in March 2015, the Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) increased the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 5 to 10 percent—as also recommended by staff during 2014 Article IV Credit to the private sector represents the dominant part of total domestic credit. Page 14 consultation. In the wake of the credit slowdown, financial soundness indicators have improved modestly. The RMA is expanding its toolkit of prudential measures, by increasing its reliance on macro-prudential regulations. In 2014, with the support of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the RMA outlined a comprehensive framework for macro- prudential policy. During 2014–2016, some macro-prudential regulations such as the loan to value and loan to income were implemented, while others — including counter-cyclical capital buffer and sectoral capital requirements—are yet to be operationalized and used. Staff Views Bank Credit (y/y percent change, 3-month moving average) Trade and Commerce (20%) Service and Tourism (15%) Building and Construction (25%) Manufacturing (15%) Dec-11 Jun-12 Dec-12 Jun-13 Dec-13 Jun-14 Dec-14 Jun-15 Dec-15 Sources: Bhutanese Authorities, and IMF staff estimates. Note: Percentages in the series' legends denote sector's weight in total stock of bank credit. Treasury Bill Stock (LHS) Treasury Bill Rate (New Issues) (RHS) Bhutan: Government Issuance of Treasury Bills (Outstanding stock [LHS]; and interest rate on new issues, in percent [RHS]) In staff’s view, current monetary conditions appear broadly appropriate. The decline in inflation does not reflect slack in the economy and is likely to be partly reversed in the future, and domestic demand and economic activity appear to be picking up, as suggested by accelerating import and growth. The fiscal policy stance is likely to continue to be expansionary in FY2016/17, adding to demand growth. The RMA should monitor liquidity and stand ready to promptly respond in case of a resumption of excessive credit growth that would lead to a pickup in inflation or external pressures. Rupee inflows related to hydropower projects and grants should continue to be sterilized. At this stage, the RMA needs to rely on CRR and the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) as the main available monetary policy instruments. 1-Jul-11 m 1-Jul-15 Sources: Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, and IMF staff estimates. 1-Jul-13 1-Jul-12 1-Jul-14 I Looking ahead, RMA’s monetary management should be further strengthened. The CRR and the SLR are rather blunt instruments, and adding further tools could help improve monetary transmission. This would require: (i) developing the short-term government securities market, with T- bills at market-determined rates providing a tool for liquidity management (which includes meeting the These macro-prudential measures included: (i) minimum requirement for leverage ratio; (ii) counter-cyclical capital buffer; (iii) sectoral capital requirements; (iv) loan-to-value and loan-to-income restrictions; (v) debt-to-equity ratio; (vi) time varying capital provisioning and margin requirements; and (vii) restrictions on the distribution of profits. Recently, technical assistance to the RMA on the implementation of macro-prudential regulations has also been provided by the IMF’s Monetary and Capital Market Department (MCM). Page 15 SLR requirements) and an investment alternative; (ii) improving RMA’s ability to forecast liquidity in the financial sector and the Ministry of Finance’s (MoF) ability to forecast government cash flow; (iii) promoting further development of the interbank lending market as a tool of first resort for banks to meet their short-term financing needs; (iv) introducing a RMA short-term (overnight) standing facility at a penalty rate, to complement the interbank markets and RMA’s longer-term RSTLAW facility, and help the banks meet their short-term liquidity needs; and (v) consider introducing a similar RMA standing deposit facility, to allow banks to deposit excess liquidity overnight, with penalty (low) rates setting the floor for interbank deposit rates. In step with these measures, consideration should also be given to reforming the system of base interest rates (Box 3). A more developed framework for monetary operations would bring numerous benefits. Monetary policy transmission would become more effective, as the transition from the policy rate to interbank rates and government securities rate, and from the interbank rates to bank deposit and lending rates, would strengthen. Increased supply of government securities would provide financial institutions a tool for better liquidity management, and an asset for investment. Finally, creating a risk- free benchmark yield curve should help develop an alternative source of corporate funding in corporate bonds and equity markets. Staff understands that discussions are under way in the working committee on the publication of the T-bill issuance calendar, and on improving the debt management policy, including the developments of a long-term domestic debt market, and supports these efforts. The RMA’s efforts to expand its toolkit of prudential regulation are important . Staff welcomes the introduction of additional macroprudential tools, including limits on loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios. Despite these improvements in prudential regulations, further strengthening of the RMA’s capacity to detect and prevent development of weaknesses in the financial sector is needed, in line with the recent IMF technical assistance recommendations. This includes the need to fill the regulatory gap in the supervision of NBFIs. Currently, the NBFIs are supervised as banks, and some specific risks, such as insurance risk, are not properly monitored and covered. The RMA’s steps to strengthen prudential regulation and supervision should put it on firmer ground to support financial sector development. The mission notes the concerns that parts of the economy, including small and medium enterprises (SMEs), still lack access to financial services. The Financial Sector Development Action Plan, prepared with the assistance of the World Bank, provides a good opportunity to formulate a financial sector development strategy that would properly balance prudence and development. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly shared staff’s view about monetary conditions and agreed with the staff’s assessment that further strengthening of the monetary transmission mechanism is needed. They noted that in view of the ngultrum’s peg to the Indian rupee and close economic and financial ties to India, they need to closely follow India’s monetary stance. Regarding monetary The planned placement of an IMF-sponsored long-term Treasury advisor to assist with government treasury operations can provide an opportunity to improve cash flow management. Page 16 transmission, the authorities agreed that the CRR is a blunt instrument, used currently to address both frictional and structural liquidity problems. They noted that the RMA is already considering the introduction of short term (overnight) lending and deposit windows, to replace the system of sweeping overnight balances. However, while the RMA is ready to deploy new monetary policy instruments, for the successful development of the interbank market, short-term instruments to be used as collateral are required, including banks’ certificate of deposits and short-term government securities. In addition, a proper legal framework to regulate the creditor-debtor relationships needs to be developed, so that both creditors and debtors understand their rights and obligations. The authorities also noted that there is widespread dissatisfaction with the current system of the base interest rate, and that calls are growing on the RMA to come up with a fairer system of interest rate setting. In response, the RMA is envisaging a review of the base rate system, possibly introducing a single base rate. The authorities expressed concern about insufficient access of certain borrowers to credit. They are concerned about the lack of credit availability to certain sectors and segments of the economy. In their view, too much credit goes to finance consumption rather than investment, and some sectors—in particular micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs)—face difficulties in accessing credit. Establishing a specialized credit institution is one option under consideration. The authorities expect that these issues will be addressed in the World Bank’s Financial Sector Development Action Plan that is currently being finalized.