Background The tight liquidity condition faced by the banking system in 2011 and 2012 have eased recently. Excess bank liquidity characterized the financial system from 2008 to early-2011 due to the accumulation of hydropower and non-hydro inflows (which were only partially sterilized). Tight liquidity conditions emerged in June 2011 (shortfall of Nu 1.1 bn or 1.5 percent of GDP) as a result of persistent growth in rupee imports with an equivalent drain on local currency liquidity; a reduction in retail deposits; over-dependence on more volatile and seasonal corporate and government deposits as a source of funding; and bank financing of large investment projects (e.g. Dungsam cement project). Responding to tight liquidity conditions, the Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) cut the cash reserve ratio (CRR) twice, banned construction and vehicle loans, relaxed the provisioning requirements, and suspended overnight sweeping of government accounts from the banks to the RMA, which eased liquidity. At present, banking sector liquidity is ample at around 10 percent of GDP . Page 10 The authorities have made some progress towards improving the monetary transmission mechanism. In March 2012, the RMA introduced a Short-Term Liquidity Adjustment Window (RSTLAW) for securitized RMA lending to banks at a newly-introduced policy rate which is linked to the RSTLAW facility. To further strengthen the transmission mechanism, a base rate system (below which lending is not viable for financial institutions) was introduced in order to influence credit growth, increase transparency of loan pricing, and foster lending discipline. The base rate could also serve as a reference benchmark for floating-rate loans. There remains a persistent negative interest rate differential with India. Despite substantial financing requirements recently, the government has continued to rely on bank financing rather than Treasury bill issuance. First, the Ways and Means (W&M) account is available at the RMA up to a limit of 10 percent of average revenues over the last two years. Second, the overdraft facility with the largest commercial bank could be overdrawn without limit. As shown in the text figure, the government first utilizes the cheaper W&M account before making use of the overdraft. The issuance of Treasury bills (T-bills) has to a large extent been detached from financing requirements. Since December 2009, T- bills have rarely been issued for monetary policy purposes, nor are they being issued at market-determined interest rates. Since February 2013, the interest rate has been fixed at about 3 percent which is far below deposit rates and the policy rate. Staff Views Bhutan: Government Borrowing from the Banking System Government's Current Account Positive Balance Ways and Means from Royal Monetary Authority Overdraft from Bank of Bhutan Treasury bill stock Bhutan: Government Issuance of Treasury Bills (Stock and Rate) Treasury Bill Stock (LHS) Treasury Bill Rate (New Issues) (RHS) G f m m Monetary conditions should be tightened to ward off prospective overheating and better manage pressures on rupee reserves . Liquidity conditions should be closely monitored and promptly adjusted to prevent excessive credit growth in future. Specifically, the CRR should be adjusted upward, and with further market development, regular and increased issuance of T-bills should be used to mop up excess liquidity. Hydropower-related inflows and aid flows should be fully sterilized to dampen inflation pressures and credit growth, thereby obviating the need for import compression. Tighter macropolicy stances should also help to address competitiveness concerns. Despite progress, considerable enhancements to the monetary transmission mechanism are needed. Interest rates need to be higher and be more closely aligned with those prevailing in India. Notwithstanding the introduction of a new policy rate (which is not yet operationally effective), the framework for monetary operations is underdeveloped, constrained by the limited range of government securities and the lack of money and securities markets. Over the medium term, the development of a formal interbank market and increased and regular issuance of Page 11 T-bills and bonds are the most critical elements for making monetary policy more effective, for enhancing financial markets, for improving banking system health, and for ensuring overall macro financial stability. While it would entail some costs, introduction of a well-functioning government securities market is critical, and would provide a risk-free benchmark for the financial system (and eventually a yield curve), an investment vehicle for financial institutions, and a tool for open market operations. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the need to monitor bank liquidity and credit conditions more closely. They acknowledged that external flows should be fully sterilized and that the use of current tools (including the overnight sweeping facility) are insufficient, and are therefore exploring other instruments to manage liquidity. They noted that while credit growth has been reduced, such administrative restrictions are not optimal and will be rolled back once the macroeconomic policy stance is sufficiently tight.