While committed to continuing large public investment projects, the authorities are prepared to be flexible and pragmatic regarding implementing the PDES. This is important because the projected levels of public investment envisaged in the original 5-year plan could widen the overall deficit to 15–20 percent of GDP, and increase public debt to about 100 percent of GDP by 2021. This is markedly above the threshold marking high risk of debt distress for emerging markets. Staff’s baseline scenario is consistent with a flexible approach to implementing the PDES. In particular, the baseline has a lower spending level than in the PDES, consistent with the historical execution rate for investment projects and external financing constraints. Accordingly, the non-hydrocarbons primary deficit declines gradually from around 13 percent of GDP in 2015 to 7 percent of GDP in 2021. The ratio of gross public debt to GDP is projected to increase from 41 percent of GDP in 2015 to about 52 percent of GDP by 2021. In the absence of further fiscal adjustment, the ratio would continue to increase and surpass high risk thresholds (Annex III). To maintain buffers, staff recommends a more ambitious consolidation than in the baseline scenario, but that is steady and safeguards development spending. The exhaustibility of natural resources makes it imperative to reduce the non-hydrocarbon primary budget deficit toward a sustainable level (i.e., which stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio at around current levels). Given moderate levels of net public debt, and the need to improve infrastructure and support social policies to reduce poverty, staff recommends measures that allow a reduction in the non- Page 17 hydrocarbons primary deficit by about 1.3 percent per year on average over the next 5 years (active scenario). The consolidation could be achieved mainly through streamlining expenditures. Such an adjustment would help reduce vulnerabilities with limited impact on growth: Spending. Key measures are to gradually reduce the wage-to-GDP ratio by moderating future wage adjustments, bringing the ratio closer to the regional average (chart); rationalize public investment and strengthen its management; gradually reduce energy subsidies while strengthening social safety nets (potentially yielding up to 1 percent of GDP); and increase the efficiency of social spending. For the latter, staff recommends: (i) higher but progressive fees for users of social services; (ii) greater competition in the provision of social services; (iii) better targeting of social benefits; and (iv) reform of finance mechanisms for health spending (away from the capacity-based remuneration towards a system that rewards performance) to increase incentives for cutting costs (Box 3). Revenues. The introduction of a progressive income tax or reforming the complementary VAT regime (RC-IVA) would be desirable. While difficult to implement, this reform could bring in additional revenue of around 1 percent of GDP. Staff also recommends simplifying the tax regime for small companies, and reforming the tax system for the hydrocarbon and mineral extraction sectors (see paragraph 23 below). While it may have an adverse impact in the short term, a transparent and incentive-compatible tax system for extractive sectors would help discover new reserves/deposits, and thus generate new revenues in the longer term. Additional policies to reduce local governments’ reliance on gas revenues and increase their revenues are needed, notwithstanding some recent measures. Staff welcomes subnational government efforts to streamline spending, but cautions against across-the-board cuts. The introduction of the “ Ley del Sistema de Planificación Integral del Estado ” in January 2016 will also help improve coordination between various levels of government, and the central government’s ability to monitor subnational fiscal developments. Over the near term, staff recommends strengthening own-source revenues of subnational governments. Possible measures are higher property taxes on real estate and vehicles. Over the medium term, transfers to subnational governments should rely more on criteria such as population size, development needs, and means- testing, rather than primarily on hydrocarbons revenues. Under current regulations, subnational governments have to almost automatically match their expenditures with revenues and past savings, with limited borrowing possibilities. Municipalities have been affected less than prefectures since the former have more own-source revenues through tax sharing with the central government. V ill Page 18 Box 3. Efficiency of Social Spending in Bolivia Comparisons with other countries suggest inefficiencies in health spending. These inefficiencies occur largely in the process of transforming intermediate resources (e.g. number of physicians, nurses, midwives, and hospital beds) into health outcomes. This outcome is partly related to weaknesses in the payment system for general practitioners, who are paid fixed salaries independent of results they produce, and hospitals that are largely financed based on capacity considerations. The latter reduces hospitals’ incentives to cut costs. Also, there are no co- payments made by recipients of health services, which may lead to excessive demand for these services. Bolivia’s spending on education as a share of GDP is well above the levels in its peer countries, but results are relatively poor. At more than 8 percent of GDP, Bolivia’s spending on education largely exceeds the average of 5 percent for LAC. While there is no standardized data available in terms of education outcomes such as PISA scores, Bolivia lags most LA countries in terms of teacher-student ratios and enrollment rates. Staff analysis suggests that there are inefficiencies in producing education outputs: Bolivia’s net enrollment rates are low for the given level of education spending in purchasing power terms. Bolivia also lags other LAC countries in terms of final outcomes for education, as indicated by the number of the medals and awards in the International Mathematical Olympiads compared with the education spending on secondary education per student. Furthermore, Bolivia ranks low in terms of the number of patents per capita granted by the U.S. Patents and Trademarks Office despite the fact that Bolivia’s research and development expenditure (about 0.2 percent of GDP) is close to the average for LAC. The following factors may have contributed to inefficiencies in education spending. First, the shares of wages and investment in total primary education spending are large, leaving a smaller share for spending on non-wage recurrent expenditures such as books for libraries and laboratory equipment. Second, coordination issues in decision making may be contributing to excess spending since decisions about establishing schools are made by local governments while teachers are financed by the central government. Third, public spending on education mostly benefits households with higher income as children from these families are more likely to continue their education. Spending on subsidies and social protection is high by regional standards, but only a small share reach the poor. The government spends 1–2 percent of GDP on fuel subsidies, which mainly benefit producers and the rich (World Bank, 2015). It spends 2–3 percent of GDP on social programs, but only a small share of this spending reach the poor since no or limited means’ testing is used to identify beneficiaries for most social programs (Lustig and others, 2013, Arauco and others, 2013, and World Bank, 2015). PPP V oo ou ca oo PPP V oo Page 19 Structural fiscal reforms in medium-term budgeting and SOE oversight are essential to containing risks going forward: Building on previous steps taken, develop and communicate effectively a medium-term framework to anchor the consolidation described above. Further efforts should include a faster transition to multi-year budgeting and introducing a fiscal target for the non-hydrocarbons primary balance. This target should be designed so as to assure debt sustainability while also accounting for the state of the business cycle and building cushions to absorb volatility in hydrocarbon prices. Equally important would be to clearly communicate the authorities’ policy intentions to the population to avoid surprises and unexpected reactions. Exercise greater oversight of SOEs’ activities and strengthen the evaluation and transparency of their investments. Investments by YPFB and ENDE are increasing considerably under the PDES, and a large share of this is carried out by subsidiaries that are currently classified outside the non-financial public sector (NFPS). Indeed, in 2016, about half of YPFB’s investments are to be executed by subsidiaries, while the number is close to 80 percent for ENDE. To manage associated risks, staff recommends monitoring and publishing SOEs’ financial operations and balance sheets as a first step to including all of them in the fiscal accounts of the NFPS. Staff also suggests that the efficiency of SOEs and their new investments be assessed on nonsubsidized gas and electricity input prices (Annex II).