Against the background of a sober global outlook and a new commodity price normal, economic momentum in 2015 is being maintained at the cost of twin deficits Given the lags in the adjustment of gas prices in the export contracts to Brazil and Argentina, the full impact of the oil price decline on gas exports and hydrocarbon revenues will be felt in the second half of 2015. Nonetheless, with a sizable public investment budget, strong credit growth to the private sector (13 percent y/y), and robust private consumption, growth is projected at 4.1 percent in 2015— relatively high for the region but still below the authorities’ forecast of around 5 percent. Fiscal and current account balances are expected to deteriorate significantly, registering deficits of 5.3 and 4.5 percent of GDP respectively. The outlook for Bolivia is increasingly challenging in the medium term . In the staff baseline, which assumes significant public investment and credit growth (average annual growth of around 10 percent y/y), GDP growth is forecast to remain robust at about 3.5 percent in 2016 and beyond. This is in line with potential growth, which has been revised down from 5 percent to 3½ percent, reflecting the lower commodity price normal and a reassessment of prospects for private investment and total factor productivity (TFP) growth. Given oil prices are currently forecast The credit growth assumption is consistent with financial institutions trying to meet the credit quotas under the financial services law in part by allowing the ratio of nonproductive credit to GDP to gradually decline. One-third of the downgrade is because of lower private and public investment, but there has also been a more general reassessment of TFP growth. This is consistent with the findings of the October 2015 World Economic Outlook on the impact of commodity price cycles on growth and potential growth, which points out that commodity booms can raise TFP through faster adoption of technology and higher spending on research and development. The Bolivia Selected Issues Paper (2013) also suggests that the estimated strong TFP growth since 2006 could reflect the (continued) Page 15 to recover only moderately over the medium term, the fiscal and external accounts are projected to remain in significant deficits, leading to a drawdown of international reserves, although they should remain adequate (14 percent of GDP and 6 months of imports in 2020). Financing the fiscal deficits will also likely involve recourse to existing public sector deposits and direct lending from the central bank. In line with the global context, risks for Bolivia are tilted to the downside. These include: (i) a sharper slowdown in Brazil; (ii) further dollar appreciation, which would exacerbate the overvaluation of the Boliviano given the de-facto stabilized exchange rate against the dollar; (iii) U.S. interest rate normalization, which may lead to rising NPLs given many bank loans are indexed to a variable reference interest rate; (iv) the combination of credit quotas and interest rate caps under the Financial Services Law leading to a credit crunch in the nonproductive sectors and/or excessive credit growth in the productive sector and for social housing; and (v) additional softness in energy prices over the medium-term. There could also be a perfect storm where Bolivia’s large buffers disappear steadily if a failure to discover and explore significant new hydrocarbons reserves and/or renew the Brazil gas contract in 2019 is combined with a weakening of the fiscal position and an undermining of central bank credibility. There are, however, important upside risks . A quicker and larger than expected recovery in international oil prices would improve the fiscal and external accounts, and could result in greater foreign investment to discover new hydrocarbons reserves if combined with a more attractive investment regime. Various commodity-related projects could also pay off more than expected in the staff baseline. And the ramp up in infrastructure spending could have a significant impact on potential growth if used efficiently. impact of the commodity price boom on the hydrocarbon sector that is not captured fully in the stock of physical and human capital. Moreover, estimated TFP growth in the 25 years before 2006 was much lower than subsequently. The 2011 FSAP stress testing exercise didn’t have sufficient data to carry out an interest rate risk stress test. It did argue, however, that duration mismatch was not likely to be a problem given both assets and liabilities are mostly of short duration. Any rise in interest rates may also be somewhat mitigated given limited external funding to the banking sector. Page 16 Table 1. Bolivia: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks Likelihood Expected Impact Policy Responses A sharper slowdown in Brazil High Persistent dollar strength High U.S. interest rate normalization High Persistently low energy prices Medium Financial Services Law Medium External risks M/H (↓) Brazil accounts for about ⅓ of Bolivia's exports. While a growth slowdown may not reduce short-term demand for natural gas, it could still impact activity via other trade and non-trade channels. Accommodative macro policies, including fiscal stimulus within the available policy space, accommodative monetary policy, and exchange rate flexibility. L/M (↓) Further dollar appreciation would exacerbate the overvaluation of the boliviano, impeding diversification away from commodity sectors. Exchange rate flexibility and improving business climate will help absorb terms-of-trade shocks and enhance competitiveness. L/M (↓) Many bank loans are indexed to a variable reference interest rate (TRE) and a sharp increase in interest rates could lead to a rise in NPLs. It could also negatively impact future international placements of sovereign bonds. H (↓) Prices lower than current baseline would further weaken the fiscal and external accounts, and reduce already low incentives of foreign energy companies to invest in the exploration of new oil and gas reserves. Vigilant financial sector supervision and regulation. Enhancing policy credibility and improving the business climate will help maintain sovereign access to international financial markets. Exchange rate flexibility and gradual fiscal adjustments. Large international reserves provide some buffer. While the industrialization of natural gas helps increase value-added, further diversification beyond natural resource sector will be beneficial. Country-specific risks L/M (↓) The combination of credit quotas and interest rate caps could lead to a credit crunch, and could start a vicious negative feedback loop between credit and growth. Alternatively, there could be excessive credit growth to the productive sector and for social housing, leading to a spike in NPLs and bank capital impairment with a lag. Modifying key provisions of the norm via decrees if material risks build up. Greater financial inclusion could also be achieved by relying primarily on market-based signals, such as partial credit guarantees. Failure to discover significant new hydrocarbons reserves and/or to renew the Brazil gas contract Low/Medium M/H (↓) Doubts remain regarding how successful efforts to discover/explore gas reserves will be. Negotiations to renew the Brazil contract, which will start soon, will depend on the energy supply situation in Brazil and the guarantees Bolivia can give regarding production capacity beyond the mid-2020s. Finalize legal reforms to the hydrocarbon sector and clarify the incentives for investment to encourage exploration activities. It is critical to press ahead with negotiations with Brazil before current long-term contract expires in 2019. Delay in policy adjustments Medium M/H (↓) Delays in policy adjustments could exhaust external and debt buffers that currently exist. Improving non-hydrocarbon fiscal balances is critical in maintaining fiscal and debt sustainability. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Page 17