Near-term growth should remain relatively high by regional standards as external and fiscal deficits widen. With continued supportive fiscal policy (including higher investment spending by subsidiaries of national hydrocarbons and electricity companies, YPFB and ENDE, respectively), strong credit growth, resilient private consumption, and a carryover from 2015 of over 2 percent, growth is expected to reach 3.7 percent in 2016 and 3.9 percent in 2017 despite the negative supply shocks. Notwithstanding some government measures to mitigate the impact of the drought (e.g. a new loan facility from the Bank of Productive Development), agricultural output is expected to decline by about 4 percent in 2016. Gas production is expected to marginally decline despite a recovery in 2016H2 with the entry into production of a new field. The slight growth rebound in 2017 reflects an expected recovery in agriculture. The fiscal and current account deficits are projected to widen in 2016 to 8.1 percent and 7.6 percent of GDP, respectively, given the full impact of low commodity prices on export receipts and tax revenues as well as high levels of public spending. This will involve significant recourse to public sector deposits and central bank credit. Regarding inflation, the drought might lead to some uptick in food prices in the coming months, but pressures are expected to moderate thereafter. Over the medium term, growth is expected to converge to its potential of 3.5 percent, while buffers will continue to be eroded. Staff’s potential growth forecast is based on estimates of a dynamic general equilibrium model for Bolivia (and supported by the findings of the October 2015 WEO) which show that the commodity bust will lead to lower income and spending, generating a marked reduction in potential growth (Box 2). In the absence of corrective measures, fiscal and external current account deficits are expected to persist over the medium term, further EE oo ill " " Page 14 eroding policy buffers (international reserves are forecast to further decline to close to 7½ percent of GDP or 4 months of imports by 2021). Risks to this outlook are tilted to the downside. On the domestic side, growth could be adversely affected by: (i) a slower rebound in agricultural production in 2017; (ii) a faster decline in gas production (impacting negotiations over the Brazil supply contract, Annex II); and (iii) excessive credit growth volatility linked to the lending quotas, interest rate caps, and increased taxation in the financial sector. External downside risks arise from the possibility of: (i) further U.S. dollar strength; (ii) even lower commodity prices; and (iii) additional weakness in key emerging markets (including Brazil and China). Absent policy adjustment, a combination of these risks could rapidly deplete buffers and lead to severe macroeconomic stresses (Table 6). Nevertheless, there continue to be several upside risks. In particular, growth could be higher because of: (i) better-than-expected quality of infrastructure spending; (ii) greater success in discovering and exploiting new gas reserves, and/or in bringing downstream industrialization and electricity generation projects on stream; and (iii) a stronger recovery in oil prices. Bolivia also has some of the largest lithium deposits in the world, which would provide a major windfall if lithium battery production can be made commercially viable over the medium term. Reserves could be up to 3 percent of GDP higher if the US$1 billion of sovereign bond issuance in international capital markets goes ahead. Previous staff VAR analysis suggests that a 1 p.p. decrease in real credit growth lowers GDP growth by 0.2 p.p. the following year. Bolivia ranks 138 out of 160 countries in the World Bank’s 2016 Logistics Performance Index Page 15 Box 2. The Impact of the Commodity Boom/Bust: A DSGE Model for Bolivia Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model The model has a continuum of heterogeneous households, including: farmers; informal, private and public sector workers; and entrepreneurs. Three distinct periods of time are defined: pre-commodity boom (2000–05), boom (2006–14), and bust (2015–21). The model is calibrated to the pre-boom period using Bolivia’s macroeconomic and household survey data, and then the price shocks, structural changes (migration and skill changes) and policy changes are fed into the model to test its predictions for the boom period and forecast the impact of the commodity bust. Commodity Boom The 2 percent increase in potential growth observed during the period 2006–14 (chart) is explained mostly by the commodity price boom increasing profitability in the energy and agricultural sectors, and government revenues. This allowed for more infrastructure investment, improving private sector productivity. The increase in the urban labor supply due to rural to urban migration and the substantial increase in the fraction of skilled individuals in this urban labor force helped the industrial sector to expand and take advantage of the increased private sector productivity. In terms of distributional implications, the increase in the urban labor supply and its average skill level led to higher incomes in urban areas. These factors also reduced the skills premium, accounting for about ⅓ of the observed decline in inequality (chart). In addition, higher agricultural demand and a larger increase in productivity in agriculture (the sector with lower initial average productivity) reduces inter-sectoral inequality with the urban sector. This accounts for another ⅓ of the observed decrease in inequality. Higher government revenues allowed for a substantial expansion in social programs, which account for the remainder of the observed decline in inequality. Commodity Bust Model simulations suggest that the bust could reduce medium- term potential growth by about 1½ percentage points. The forces at play are somewhat symmetric to the boom. First, the direct impact of lower commodity prices accounts for slightly more than half of the expected decline, with the rest explained by a combination of general equilibrium effects. Policies that increase fiscal space to support infrastructure investment and enhance the efficiency of such investment can halve the impact of the bust on growth. Regarding the distributional implications, lower agricultural export prices affect large farmers more than smaller ones, and hence reduces the rural Gini. The urban Gini increases as private sector wages decline more than public sector ones, and civil servants are relatively well paid. The national Gini also rises given the increase in inter-sectoral inequality (chart). The economic slowdown triggered by the bust in energy and commodity prices also lowers incomes across the board. This reduces the pace of poverty reduction. Better targeting cash-transfers can go a long way to mitigate inequality this impact. Source: National authorities and IMF staff calculations. 1.52.02.5BoomBust Potential Growth Impact of Commodity Cycle (In percent) ModelData Change Skills Commodity Prices Fiscal Policy Change in Gini During Boom (In percentage points) UrbanRuralNational Change in Gini Coefficient (In percentage points) Page 16