Increasing private investment is central to medium- term prospects . The share of private investment to GDP has long been one of the lowest in the region, and is currently around 8 percent (chart). Bolivia also ranks among the lowest in Latin America and the Caribbean in terms of economic diversification and complexity. Indeed, raising Bolivia’s complexity score— reflecting how knowledge intensive or sophisticated its exports are—to the average in Latin America and the Caribbean would increase growth by about 0.4 p.p. (chart). Addressing the key impediments listed below will be essential to ensuring the complementarity between public and private investment, and enhancing diversification (Annex IV. III.). Regulatory uncertainty. There has been important progress in adapting the legal framework to the new Constitution (including the Investment Promotion Law in April 2014, the Mining Law in May 2014, and the Arbitration Law in June 2015). Some of these laws, however, do not fully resolve regulatory uncertainty. For example, the Arbitration Law exempts many key sectors, while the right of the Bolivian state to ultimately accept or reject the verdicts of external tribunals could weaken the purpose of the law. More generally, important aspects of the legal framework are left to decrees, many of which are still pending or can be modified. Finally, a few key laws are still pending, such as the See IMF (2015), “Long-Run Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Role of Economic Diversification and Complexity”, Regional Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere (April 2015) for more detail. Net Impact onPredicted GDP per Capita Growth Rates: Own Complexity Versus LAC Average Complexity (Inpercentage points, annual averages) Source: Rodrigues Bastos and Wang (2015). -0.5-0.3-0.10.10.30.5ECUBOLHON VEN PRYPERTTOJAMCHLCSI DOM SLV GTM COLURYARGPANBRAMEX N N D N X U Y U V Y V N Private Investment,2014 (In percentof GDP) Source: IMF WorldEconomic Outlook. (WEO). Page 22 hydrocarbons and labor laws, a new tax code, and sectoral incentive laws. This creates uncertainty. Other impediments. Competitiveness is being further crimped by high real wage growth and other mandated bonuses, which have led to real income growth exceeding productivity growth. Meanwhile, labor market inflexibility and pervasive informality continue to undermine productivity and SME financial access. Importantly, the government’s increasing incursion into product markets through price controls and public enterprises crowds out private investment, given that public enterprises are less bound by competitive forces and efficiency levels needed in the private sector. Bolivia has registered some of the largest declines in inequality and poverty in the region over the last decade, but further progress will be challenged by the end of the commodity boom (charts). Social transfers to the elderly, pregnant and school kids benefit about 30 percent of population, and have helped improve primary schooling, maternal health, and reduce extreme poverty especially in rural areas. However, most of the reduction in poverty and inequality is explained by declining wage inequality as the skills premium has fallen, and not larger transfers (Box 3). Importantly, labor market policies have played a role through sustained minimum wage increases and salary caps in the public sector. The skills premium could well increase as the spillovers to low skill workers from the commodity boom go into reverse. Given a tighter revenue envelope, it is essential to ensure that the social transfers are well designed and targeted and there is a focus on the quality of education and healthcare. Source: SEDLAC (CEDLAS and The World Bank)1/ Includes ARG, BRA, ECU, SLV, HON, MEX, PRY, PER and URY. Latin America range 1/ BOL Gini Inequality Index >$4 and <$5 >$2.5 and <$4 >$2 and <$2.5 >$1.25 and <$2 Under $1.25Source:World Bank Development Indicators (WDI).1/ 2005 Purchasing Power Parity USD. Population Under Poverty Lines 1/ (In percent of total population) Page 23 Box 3. Inequality and Poverty Reduction The tremendous inequality and poverty reduction in Bolivia over the last decade has a few potential explanations : i) changes in the levels of average labor income, which are explained by sustained economic growth fueled by favorable terms of trade and high levels of public investment; and ii) changes in the distribution of total income, which in turn respond to changes in the skills premium, transfers and social programs, and specific labor market policies such as the sustained increase in the real minimum wage. Targeted public policies have played an important role Redistributive policies hinged on transfers to specific population groups: school age kids (Bono Juancito Pinto), elderly people (Renta Dignidad) and pregnant women and newborns (Bono Juana Azurduy). Together, these three programs benefited just under 30 percent of the total population, and totaled 1.5 percent of GDP in 2014. A closer analysis suggests that fast growth was the main driver behind poverty reduction; while a declining skills premium drove down inequality . During 2007–2013, nearly 70 percent of the decline in extreme poverty is explained GDP growth, while the remaining 30 percent is associated with changes in the distribution of income. Moreover, real labor income increased rapidly for low skilled workers, while it declined for high skilled workers (this was something also seen in Ecuador and Peru, although Bolivia had the highest decline for high skilled workers). This declining skills premium was the main factor behind the drop in the Gini coefficient, while the effect of changes in non-labor income (transfers) was limited, notwithstanding an important impact for some groups such as for the elderly poor after the introduction of Renta Dignidad. Prepared by M. Vargas. See “Explaining Inequality and Poverty Reduction in Bolivia,” IMF Working Paper (forthcoming). Bolivia: Renta Dignidad, Bono Juancito and Bono Juana Azurduy 1/ Source: APS Bolivia; IMF staffcalculations. 1/ 2015 includes data to May. Number of beneficiaries correspond to the average number of payments. Benef. as % of total pop. (RHS) Transfer (millions of US$) Transfer as % of GDP (RHS) -25-20-15-10-505-25-20-15-10-5052001-062007-132001-062007-13ModerateExtreme Distribution Growth Total change in p.p Datt-Ravallion Decomposition of Changes in Poverty AverageBoliviaPeruChileEcuadorCountries with commodity boomCountries without commodity boom Low Mid High Annualized Real Wage Growth byEducation Level Source: SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank). 2001-062007-132001-062007-132001-062007-13Moderate PovertyExtreme PovertyInequality Decomposition of reductions in Poverty and Inequality by Education Level Non-labor income Labor no skill cat Skilled Low skilled Unskilled Source:IMF staff calculations using Bolivia's Household Surveys. Gini coefficient change based on re-scaledgini coefficients in the range (0-100) Page 24