While containing several important reforms, the Financial Services Law continues to lead to high credit growth and appears to skew lending away from small borrowers. The implementation of some Basel II–III principles, setting up of a deposit insurance scheme and credit registry, and creation of a Financial Stability Council—which meets every quarter—were welcome steps. The quotas and interest caps on the so called “productive sectors” and social housing, however, are inducing banks to expand credit rapidly, potentially lowering credit quality. With the July 2015 decree broadening the definition of these sectors, large institutions appear set to meet the credit targets for 2016, but some small institutions are experiencing difficulties in meeting the targets. Additionally, there are risks that the law is producing negative effects on financial inclusion. In particular, all segments of the financial sector are increasing the average size of loans, while the growth in the number of borrowers has declined substantially (chart). In the microcredit sector there are signs of disintermediation and a shift of activity towards unregulated lenders (chart). Key provisions of the Financial Services Law should be modified to reduce distortions and avoid an unnecessary buildup of risk. Heightened risks owing to rapid credit growth warrant close monitoring, and the credit quotas should be relaxed to avoid excessive and potentially poor- quality credit growth. The interest rate caps, which are set by decree, should be phased out to better reflect the costs of doing business and inherent risks. More market-oriented mechanisms to improve financial access should be considered (e.g., partial credit guarantees). Finalizing and publishing a housing price index will also help inform the analysis of credit risk. Stress tests suggest that while the system as a whole remains stable, there are risks related to credit growth, funding and credit concentration, and liquidity needs that mainly affect smaller banks. Staff considered several scenarios of possible stress to the system that highlight latent risks, the most relevant being higher nonperforming loans (NPLs) and liquidity shortages (Annex V): Credit risk An adverse economic climate along with rapid credit expansion could result in a sharp increase in NPLs in the medium term. Moreover, lower profitability in such an environment The quotas are set at 60 percent for general license banks and 50 percent for SME banks. The exercise includes 13 general license banks and the relatively large state-owned bank (Banco Unión). -4%-2%0%2%4%6%8%10%12%0123456720122013201420152016 /2 Growth Rate of Number of MFI Borrowers - RHS Average Loan Size ('000 USD) - LHS Number of Borrowers -Microfinance Institutions (MFI) 1/ Sources: ASOFIN, and IMF Staff Calculations1/ Includes all ASOFIN members.2/ Through May-2016 Page 22 would reduce the scope for building capital through retained earnings. In the event the NPL ratio doubles, capital would need to be raised to meet regulatory requirements in just over half of banks (chart). An even more adverse scenario, which involves a quadrupling in NPLs (a “one- in-twenty year” shock, calibrated using historical patterns; a level that is still well below the peak observed in 2002) would leave nearly all banks with some capital shortfall. Although nontrivial, these losses remain broadly manageable (0.2 and 1.2 percent of GDP, respectively). Concentration risk: The single largest credit exposure exceeds 10 percent of regulatory capital in 10 banks in the system, and the five largest exposures together exceed half of the regulatory capital in 8 banks in the system. This represents an important potential risk stemming from the default of a small number of borrowers, especially for a few small banks. Liquidity risk There is currently sufficient liquidity at the system level, with an aggregate liquidity coverage ratio of around 110 percent (chart). However, a stress scenario corresponding to the largest deposit withdrawal rates observed in recent years suggests that several small banks would struggle to cover required liquidity needs, but with no systemic implications. The Financial Services Law requires banks to retain 50 percent of their annual net profits to increase their capital base. Although Bolivia has not adopted the Basel III regulation (including LCR), liquidity stress tests were based on the computation of LCR proxies in the spirit of Basel III requirements and assumptions, using data for end-June 2016. The “Bolivia specific assumptions” allow for the largest deposit withdrawal rates observed in recent years in Bolivia to materialize throughout the banking system (an extreme assumption). qu " III " " " qu " " " " Page 23