The Financial Services Law includes several reforms recommended in the FSAP setting up of a deposit insurance scheme and a credit registry are welcome steps, as are the implementation of some Basel II and III principles (such as adding market risk to capital requirements and completing the guidance on operational and interest rate risk). The creation of a Financial Stability Council―which met for the first time in August 2015—is another important step. Developing a framework to monitor systemic risks and a macroprudential toolkit will further strengthen financial sector surveillance. The recent advances in AML/CFT are expected to culminate in the publication of a national strategy in late 2015. The Law, however, could pose risks to financial stability and reduce financial inclusion While meeting the 2015 credit quotas appears manageable, trying to reach the medium-term targets could lead to excessive credit growth in productive sectors (including social housing) and/or a credit crunch in nonproductive sectors. And staff VAR analysis suggests that credit dynamics have a significant impact on growth, with a 1 p.p. increase in real credit growth raising GDP growth by 0.2 p.p. the following year. Overall, scenario analysis points to credit growth rates potentially in excess of 30 percent for the productive sectors to meet the 5-year credit quotas (Box 2). This could lead to deterioration in asset quality and rising NPLs. Stress tests suggest a doubling of NPLs is manageable for most banks but a spike to peak levels reached over the last decade would cause many banks to be significantly below regulatory capital thresholds (chart). The above-trend increase in the average loan size of microfinance institutions and the declining number of borrowers point to adverse effects of the interest rate caps on financial inclusion. This may also result in increased activity of unregulated lenders as they attract the non-productive sectors and small borrowers no longer serviced by microfinance institutions. The stress tests also adjust provisioning levels to international standards given that the 2011 FSSA highlighted this as an important issue (the “standard provision” test). For the higher NPL test, the increase in NPLs is provisioned at 50 percent, which is reflected fully in risk-weighted assets and capital. B1B2B3B4B5B6B7B8B9B10B11B12B13B14B15 Pre-shock CAR Standard Provision Standard Provision and NPL 3.2 percent Standard Provision & NPL at Dec-06 Level (8%) Capital Adequacy Ratio Page 21 Key provisions of the regulations should be modified if material risks build up, and greater financial inclusion could be achieved by relying primarily on market-based signals interest rate caps and credit quotas were set by decrees and hence can also be modified as needed, although clear and transparent rules regarding changes are critical to avoid creating regulatory uncertainty. Indeed, the recent expansion of the definition of productive sectors likely increases the scope for circumvention of the quotas, effectively watering them down but also increasing the supervisory burden to police them effectively. Staff strongly recommends the creation of a real estate price index to have a better idea of risks building up in the real estate sector. This is especially important given the inclusion of social housing in the credit quotas and the associated lack of need for a down payment. Staff also reiterates that financial inclusion could be better attained by more limited and carefully-designed state intervention, such as further use of partial credit guarantees.