An incomplete adjustment to the new commodity price normal would raise concerns about Bolivia’s debt sustainability . Preserving fiscal sustainability is critical for the achievement of the governments’ development objectives. Under a passive scenario of no policy change and assuming public investment to GDP remains at 2014 levels, the overall fiscal deficit could widen to about 10 percent of GDP and public debt could reach 70 percent of GDP by 2020. This is above the threshold marking a high risk of debt distress for LICs (Annex III). Improving the non-hydrocarbons fiscal balance is essential, but a gradual approach can be taken given large buffers and development needs . The non-hydrocarbons primary deficit has widened from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2006 to a whopping 12.3 percent of GDP in 2014 (text table). In addition to the short horizon of Bolivia’s current proven gas reserves, lower international oil prices and uncertainties related to the long-term export contract with Brazil add to the urgency for improving the non-hydrocarbons primary balance. Nonetheless, given Bolivia’s low level of net public debt and the need to improve infrastructure and further reduce poverty, the authorities can pursue a calibrated approach and adjust the path to respond to future shocks as needed. The baseline projection builds on a moderate consolidation of the non-hydrocarbons primary deficit over the medium term . In 2015, the consolidation is based on a capital budget execution rate of around 80 percent, consistent with outturns in years before 2014 (an election year). Under the baseline scenario, Bolivia shows low risk of debt distress for total and external public debt. The 2016 Budget is expected to be presented to Congress in November. (in percent of GDP) Baseline scenario Overall balance-3.4-5.3-5.8-5.5-5.1-4.6-4.3 Non-hydrocarbon primary balance-12.3-10.1-8.7-8.5-8.3-8.0-7.8 Public debt33.038.042.044.145.846.847.6 Active scenario Overall balance-3.4-5.2-5.3-3.1-1.4-0.11.3 Non-hydrocarbon primary balance-12.3-10.1-8.2-6.2-4.6-3.5-2.2 Public debt33.038.041.541.339.536.632.5Sources: Ministry of Economy and Public Finances and staff projections.Projections Bolivia: Fiscal Balances and Public Debt Page 18 Thereafter, public investment continues to decline and stabilizes at around 9¼ percent of GDP by 2020. This reflects capacity constraints, more conservative expectations regarding official financing, and lower hydrocarbons revenues. The non-hydrocarbons primary deficit shrinks by 4½ percent of GDP to 7.8 percent of GDP in 2020, with public debt stabilizing at around 50 percent of GDP. Staff, however, recommends a more ambitious consolidation to build fiscal buffers The baseline scenario projects a relatively high level of debt in the medium term for a low income country like Bolivia. An active policy scenario targets a more ambitious but still gradual reduction of the non-hydrocarbons primary deficit to 2.2 percent of GDP by 2020, with debt declining to 32½ percent of GDP. If credibly implemented, automatic stabilizers could be allowed some play around this path. Measures to adjust the non-hydrocarbons primary balance by an additional 5½ percent of GDP could include: Revenue Introducing a progressive personal income tax (PIT) or reforming RC-IVA (the complementary VAT regime), as well as establishing rules to deal with transfer pricing practices and preparing the tax administration to control them. A fully fledged PIT could bring additional revenue of around 1 percent of GDP and improve the equity and efficiency of the tax system, in addition to rendering the tax system more progressive. While it may have a negative revenue impact in the short term, ensuring transparent and incentive compatible hydrocarbons and mining fiscal regimes is essential to discovering new reserves/deposits and generating commodity- related revenues in the longer term. Expenditure Public investment has scope to decline further and still remain above the average level in 2006–12 (chart). Prioritization should be based on economy-wide returns, with a focus on the quality of investment. Reducing energy subsidies could yield over 1 percent of GDP. There is also scope to reduce the wage bill, which is high by low-income country standards, and rationalize goods and services expenditures to pre-2014 levels. Staff reiterates the importance of introducing a medium-term fiscal framework Ministry of Finance has taken some welcome steps in this regard, including creating a Macro-Fiscal unit that produces fiscal projections, enhancing coordination with the Central Bank regarding the overall macroeconomic framework, and instructing public enterprises to prepare multi-annual budgets during the formulation of the 2015 Budget. These steps should be built on to implement a fully fledged medium-term fiscal framework. Key aspects of this are a multi-year budget and setting Bolivia received an IMF technical assistance mission on implementation of a medium-term fiscal framework in October 2014. Public investment (LHS, in percent of GDP) Price of oil (RHS, USD per barrel) Price of oil projections (RHS, USD per barrel) Price of Oil and Public Investment Source: IMF Global Assumptions (GAS) and staff calculationsbased on authorities' data. Page 19 a fiscal target for the non-hydrocarbons primary balance that is consistent with long-term debt sustainability, taking into account the state of the business cycle and oil price volatility. State-owned enterprises and their quasi-fiscal activities pose additional fiscal risks, requiring a credible monitoring framework to assess their financial health . (Annex IV. I.) There exist some important quasi-fiscal activities conducted through subsidiaries of strategic public enterprises which are currently classified as outside the Non-Financial Public Sector (NFPS). In addition, the Plan Quinquenal will likely have further significant investments in manufacturing activities and the creation of more SOEs. To manage these contingent risks, the authorities should start monitoring and publishing SOEs’ financial operations and balance sheets as a first step to including them in the fiscal accounts of the NFPS. More broadly, the legal requirement that SOEs should “generate surpluses”, or otherwise be subject to closure, should make sure that surpluses more than offset capital depreciation.