Creating conditions for greater exchange rate flexibility is critical . This would help facilitate adjustment to the large terms of trade shock and to future external shocks. And it is especially important given the assessed overvaluation of the Boliviano and potential for further dollar appreciation. In staff’s view, the tremendous progress in de-dollarizing the economy is one important pre-condition for an orderly transition to a more flexible exchange rate regime. Country experiences also suggest that cementing de-dollarization usually requires migration to an exchange rate regime that allows for two-way flexibility. This helps internalize exchange rate risks and reduce incentives for dollarization (Annex IV. II.). Any transition would need to be carefully crafted, however, including credibly anchoring inflation expectations and ensuring that the appropriate monetary policy instruments and money markets’ infrastructure are in place. An effective monetary policy framework which anchors inflation expectations will require central bank credibility and fiscal sustainability . The new central bank law under preparation should maintain the bank’s operational independence and preserve its capital base. To this end, the practice of direct lending by the central bank to public corporations or trust funds for development objectives should be discontinued. The direct lending, started in 2009, has expanded to US$2.9 billion (equivalent to 8.4 percent of GDP) as of mid-2015, of which about 60 percent are directed to YPFB (the state oil and gas company). In addition, the “Fondo para la Revolución Industrial Productiva (FINPRO)” was established in 2012, with lending and grants from the central bank totaling US$1.2 billion. Staff recommends that lending activities are stripped from the central bank balance sheet and consolidated in a separate fund for development. This fund would need transparent investment rules, a strong governance structure, and a clearly-stated development mandate. This separation would contribute to enhancing central bank credibility by eliminating the possibility of conflicting objectives: price stability should be clearly stated as the central bank’s first priority. An effective monetary policy transmission would also benefit from a revision of the targets in the Financial Services Law that distort interest rates and credit allocation. Page 20