After a decade of admirable macroeconomic performance and poverty reduction, Bolivia’s policies are being challenged by the end of the commodity boom Facilitated by prudent macroeconomic management, in the context of a commodity boom, Bolivia has registered average annual real GDP growth of about 5 percent since 2006, when President Evo Morales and his party (Movimiento al Socialismo—MAS) took power. The poverty ratio has also declined by 16 percentage points. However, given Bolivia’s large dependence on commodities (among the highest in the region, text chart), the end of the commodity boom poses significant challenges. The key one will be to deliver on the government’s policy objectives laid out in the Patriotic Agenda 2025— including eradication of extreme poverty, better access to health and education, and state-controlled industrialization—while maintaining debt and external sustainability. Although President Morales has a strong mandate, a referendum on his ability to be reelected is looming on the horizon President Morales was sworn in for a third term in January 2015 with a two-thirds majority in both houses of Congress. A national referendum on a constitutional change allowing him to run for the Presidency again is slated for February 2016. The expansion continued in the 1 st half of 2015 but imbalances are developing given lower commodity prices: Real GDP growth has remained robust and high relative to the rest of Latin America. Economic activity decelerated but remained strong at 5.5 percent in 2014 (chart). The momentum was maintained in 2015, with a growth rate of 4.8 percent through Q2. There are some recent signs of deceleration, however, with economic activity indicators growing only 2.4 percent and 3.9 percent in July and August, respectively (Figure 1). The recent drop in commodity terms of trade is estimated to have resulted in about 7 percentage points of GDP loss for Bolivia. See Regional Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere (October 2015), chapter 2 for more detail. 1012142009Q12010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q1 Bolivia25 percentile in southern cone75 percentile in southern cone 1/ Real GDP Growth Source: Haver Analytics, Inc. 1/ Includes ARG, BRA, CHL PER, PRY and URY. 161820Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14Jan-15 Headline Food Non-foodSep-15 CPI Inflation Page 10 Inflationary pressures have subsided. Abstracting from seasonal patterns, monetary conditions started to loosen in the 1 st half of 2014 as liquidity declined and the inflation rate fell (Figure 2). By September 2015, inflation had declined to 4.1 percent y/y, in part also helped by declines in import prices given the relative strengthening of the Boliviano against the neighboring currencies (chart, Box 1). The fiscal balance has swung into deficit and the non-hydrocarbons balance continues to worsen fiscal deficit of 3.4 percent of GDP in 2014 partially reflected record-high capital expenditure coinciding with general elections that year and regional elections in March 2015 (Figure 3). The non-hydrocarbons primary balance has also deteriorated by 9.1 percentage points of GDP since 2006 (to -12.3 percent of GDP in 2014) as the hydrocarbons revenue bonanza led to a major ramp up of public spending (chart). So far in 2015, the fiscal balance has stayed in surplus (1.8 percent of GDP through August), similar to the situation in 2014. The increase in tax collections, especially of corporate income tax, has offset the decline in hydrocarbon-related revenues. The current account balance has worsened substantially Having been in significant surplus since 2003, the current account surplus declined to 0.2 percent of GDP in 2014 and slipped into a deficit of 1.4 percent of GDP in 2015Q1 (chart). Lower international oil prices started to feed into gas export prices in the 1 st half of 2015 (export prices were down 34.2 percent y/y), while real import growth remained robust given the continued economic expansion and real currency appreciation. Current Account Q Other balances Imports Other exports Mining exports Gas exports Current account (RHS) Source:Central Bank of Bolivia. 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Nonhydrocarbon primary balance Public investment Overall balance before nationalizationSource: IMFstaff calculations based on national authorities' data. Fiscal Balance and Public Investment Jan-Aug 2015 Page 11 Box 1. Monetary Policy and Inflation in Bolivia Inflation has remained low and stable in the last few years, anchored by a stable exchange rate and central bank intervention in money markets to control the level of liquidity. Open market operations (OMOs) are the main operational instrument. The central bank monitors the growth rate of monetary aggregates; mainly net domestic credit of the central bank and excess reserves of the banking sector. It also intervenes in the foreign exchange market through daily auctions at a set U.S. dollar exchange rate, within a narrow buy-sell spread band. This exchange rate at the central bank window has remained virtually unchanged since 2008, with a de-facto stabilized regime since 2011. Central bank policies have so far been effective in managing inflation, especially given ample liquidity related to the significant increase in public investment spending. This is associated with the nationalization of hydrocarbons in 2006 and the subsequent boom in oil prices. Staff estimates indicate that the central bank has been able to control about 30 percent of consumer inflation variability with timely monetary policy reactions affecting money markets and bank lending activities . These estimates are based on an empirical model including (a) the central bank’s monetary policy instruments; (b) the exchange rate and base money as long-term nominal anchors; (c) the interbank interest rate and banks lending rate and credit as monetary policy transmission channels; and (d) consumer and core prices, the economic activity index and the real effective exchange rate as ultimate indicators of the effects on the real economy. Prepared by A. Guerson. See “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy in Bolivia,” IMF Working Paper (forthcoming). Source: Central Bank of Bolivia and staff calculations. Central Government Social Security Local governments Public enterprises Public Sector Deposits at the Central Bank (In billions of Bolivianos) Other accounts net Credit to the private sector Net credit to the public sector = Net credit CG + Net credit LG + Net credit SS + Net credit SOE Net external assets = ST external assets - ST external liabilities Liquidity (M4') Sources of Liquidity in the Financial System (Growthdecomposition of M4' as of December, in percent) Source: Central Bank of Bolivia and staff calculations. Inflation inertia: lags consumer prices Economic activity and competitivenes: REER and index of economic activity Banks' lending: interbank and lending rates; private loans Monetary policy: OMO; CB intervention in FX market; CB 91day bills rate; CB exchange rate; M0 Percent of the Varianceof Consumer Prices Explained by of Inflation Drivers ContractionaryOMO Interventionby the CentralBank Bank Lending Response (In bns. of Bolivianos) ConsumerPrices Response Economic Activity Response Page 12 The Boliviano is assessed to be stronger than warranted by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies in 2015 (Annex I) . The de-facto stabilized exchange rate against the dollar combined with significant dollar appreciation—especially against the Brazilian real and the Argentine peso—has led to an appreciation of more than 40 percent in real effective terms since 2010. Competitiveness has also deteriorated, on the back of sizable minimum and average wage increases (the former nearly fourfold in the last decade), which have been significantly above productivity growth, and scarce investments in non-traditional export sectors. International reserves are more than adequate by any metric at US$14.2 billion (42 percent of GDP) as of September 2015, although they have fallen by nearly US$0.9 billion since end-2014. Headline financial indicators are solid, although vulnerabilities are beginning to develop and likely to increase as growth slows and lower oil prices bite (Annex II). Banks’ overall capital adequacy ratio stood at 12.7 percent in June 2015, with all major banks above the regulatory minimum of 10 percent, and the aggregate leverage ratio is around 8 percent. Profitability continues to decline, although it remains adequate with the return-on-equity at 13.8 percent as of June 2015. NPLs remain among the lowest in the region (around two percent). Dollarization of deposits continues to decrease, standing at about 20 percent as of August. However, while credit growth to the private sector has moderated somewhat to around 15 percent (y/y), the credit-to-GDP ratio has picked up considerably. It stood at above 45 percent of GDP in June 2015, 3½ percentage points more than a year ago and suggestive of potential vulnerabilities on the rise. The Financial Services Law appears to be altering the allocation of credit flows, and could pose risks to financial stability and inclusion (Box 2). For 2015, the minimum credit quotas to productive and social housing sectors are being met by most financial institutions. Meeting the quotas, however, has required a sharp acceleration of loans to the productive sector and for social housing (growth of 26 percent since December 2014), and a reduction in credit growth to the service and commerce sectors (chart). The interest rate caps seem to be having a material effect on microfinance institutions, which have increased loan sizes above trend to reduce operational costs while the number of borrowers has declined (chart). 60801001201401601802006080100120140160180200Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14Jan-15 RER with Argentina RER with Brazil Multilateral REER Real Exchange Rates (Index, Jan 2010=100) Source: Central Bank of Bolivia. 2007200920112013Jun-15 Non-productive+household Credit Growth Source: FinancialSystem Supervisory Authority (ASFI). 2011201220132014Jun-15 Above trend (RHS, in USD per borrower) Average MFI loan size (RHS, in USD per borrower) Number of bank borrowers (LHS) Number of MFI borrowers (LHS) Number of Borrowers and Loan Size (In thousands of borowers unless otherwise specified) Source: FinancialSystem Supervisory Authority (ASFI). Page 13 Box 2. The Impact of the Financial Services Law The Financial Services Law aims to promote financial inclusion, preserve financial stability, and enhance credit to housing and productive sectors . Productive sectors are defined broadly as non-service sectors, including agriculture, mining, and manufacturing. Supreme Decrees issued in 2013 and 2014 set the floor on deposits rates and ceilings on lending rates for social housing (5.5–6.5 percent), for corporate and SME loans to productive sectors (6–7 percent), and microfinance loans (11.5 percent). Full service banks are also required to direct at least 60 percent (50 percent for SME banks) of their loan portfolios to social housing and productive sectors within five years, guided by intermediate annual targets. Guarantee funds were created from a 6 percent tax on banks’ 2014 profits to finance down payments for productive sector and social housing loans. Looking ahead, achieving the 60/40 target by 2018 could imply rapid credit growth, raising concerns about concentration risks, compromised asset quality, and over-indebtedness in the productive sector . If the share of non-productive sector credit to GDP were to remain constant, total credit growth needs to be around 18 percent with productive sector credit growth (including for social housing) of 33 percent (“Non-productive Credit-to-GDP Scenario”). If credit growth for non-productive sectors continues at the rates seen in 2014, the 60/40 target by 2018 implies annual overall credit growth of about 25 percent and productive sector credit growth of 42 percent (“Credit Growth Trend Scenario”). In each scenario, the credit to GDP gap, a measure of whether credit growth is excessive or not, is high, indicating the buildup of financial stability risks. An alternative scenario would be to meet the credit quotas by balance sheet reduction, implying a credit crunch in the non-productive sector as banks reduce lending to it. A July 2015 modification to expand the scope of the “productive sector” helps address the credit growth pressure but may lead to other risks . This change allows the inclusion of the tourism sector and intellectual property. The risks, however, could simply be shifted to loan quality and the supervisory burden given increasing complexity and scope for circumvention. 1/ Prepared by D. Heng. See “Impact of the New Financial Services Law in Bolivia on Financial Stability and Inclusion” IMF Working Paper (forthcoming). Credit Growth Trend Scenario Non Productive Total Non-productive Credit-to-GDP Scenario Non Productive Total Page 14 The authorities are finalizing a 5-year development plan ( Plan Quinquenal ) centered on sizable public investments playing a catalytic role in the growth process . These will be in a vast number of areas, including public infrastructure, productive activities, health, education, and technology. Key commodity related projects cover discovery/exploration of gas and oil reserves, petro-chemical plants, thermo- and hydro- electricity plants, and large iron ore and lithium mines. While details are still being finalized, fiscal and external deficits will likely persist under the plan, with a sizable share of external financing expected. Policies implemented in recent years have been partially in line with previous Fund advice (Table 2). Pro-cyclical fiscal stimulus has been avoided, and the authorities have taken some important steps towards adopting a medium-term fiscal framework. Inflation pressures have also been contained and there have been significant increases in public infrastructure spending. Recommendations to improve the non-hydrocarbons fiscal balance, discontinue central bank lending to public enterprises, and gradually allow greater exchange rate flexibility have gained less traction.