Staff noted that the rapid response to the food price shock of 2013 was appropriate. Bolivia’s highly open and commodity dependent economy is vulnerable to inflationary pressures from both external and domestic supply shocks (Box 2). Past experience suggests that second round effects take 5–8 months to reach their peak and are more persistent amid lax monetary conditions, such as those present in the first half of 2013. In addition, incomes policy decisions recently taken by the government, coupled with the end year seasonal hike in demand entail upside risks. Given these risks, staff argued that further tightening may be necessary if second round effects prove persistent. The authorities stressed that measures taken had successfully decelerated inflation already in October. In addition, as the new instruments effectively withdrew liquidity in a short period of time, they noted that the food price shock could be less persistent. Persistently high volatility of food prices and sizable pass-through suggest the need to strengthen the monetary policy framework. The gradual weakening of central bank independence and increased central bank lending to public corporations highlight the need to strengthen the framework and safeguard the hard won anti-inflation credentials of the central bank. To attain these objectives, staff recommended: Discontinuing the practice of direct lending by the central bank to public corporations . Since 2009, the central bank is authorized to lend to the central government at concessional terms. In 2013, this lending limit was increased to US$5.3 billion, of which US$2.2 billion had been disbursed by November. Staff noted that this lending exposes the central bank to quasi-fiscal losses in an adverse scenario and creates a potential conflict with its price stability objective. Staff recommended that financing of public investment be implemented by the ministry of finance through a savings fund, which could absorb the credit portfolio of the central bank. Staff argued that the “Fondo para la Revolución Industrial Productiva” (FINPRO), established in 2012 using part of international reserves, could be the stepping stone of a savings fund, provided that it generates sufficient positive returns, makes investments based on sound financial considerations, and is supported by a strong institutional setup (Box 3). The authorities stressed that price stability was a constitutional mandate that was not imperiled by lending activities on strategic areas. Moreover, the lending to public corporations constituted an income source for the central bank. They also argued that coordination among public institutions was essential to pursue appropriate policies, rather than a detriment to central bank independence. The authorities expressed interest in further input from staff on the accounting treatment of the lending operations currently on the balance sheet of the central bank. Continuing to rely primarily on market-based signals to allocate financial savings . Regulated interest rate margins and credit quotas contemplated by the new Financial Services Law may create costly distortions and complicate the conduct of monetary policy. In view of these risks, staff advised to establish a clear and transparent process for setting interest rates that minimizes distortions with market signals. It also stressed that any changes stemming from the new The 13-month wage was doubled and the solidarity pension increased in 2013. Page 13 constitution conserve the supremacy of the Central Bank Law. The authorities clarified that regulated interest rates and credit quotas would apply to a fraction of the loan portfolio, leaving room for market-based signals. Creating the conditions for a gradual exit from the de-facto stabilized exchange rate arrangement in place since end-2011 . This will enhance the capacity to absorb external shocks and to conduct independent monetary policy. Staff and the authorities concurred that there is no evidence of exchange rate misalignment (Annex IV). The authorities emphasized that their exchange rate policy allowed for sufficient flexibility to respond to changes in the international environment and had been appropriate for Bolivia, especially given volatility in external markets in recent years. Moreover, the steady fall in dollarization had won them increased independence in their monetary policy. Staff noted that several steps would help transition to greater exchange rate flexibility, including improving liquidity management, enhancing the role of the policy rate, continuing to develop inflation forecasting, collecting more high frequency indicators, and increasing central bank operational autonomy.