Policy Framework The boliviano is assessed to be overvalued and diversification remains modest. Despite a moderate depreciation in recent months, the boliviano—de-facto stabilized against the U.S. dollar—has appreciated by 49 percent in real effective terms since January 2010 (chart), while exports are highly concentrated in commodities whose prices remain low (chart). Significant mandatory minimum and average wage increases—that have largely exceeded productivity growth—have also eroded competitiveness. This is reflected in Bolivia slipping in international rankings of competitiveness. Against this backdrop, the two EBA-lite approaches (the current account and real effective exchange rate models) and the external sustainability assessment suggest a significant overvaluation of the boliviano (Annex IV). In the 2015–16 Global Competitiveness Index, Bolivia slipped to 117 th place from 105 th place in 2014–15 Page 20 Staff sees merit in gradually permitting greater exchange rate flexibility. Such a transition would help address longstanding competitiveness and diversification challenges, facilitate the adjustment to lower commodity price prices, and limit the potential impact of future shocks. It would also help cement the tremendous progress on de-dollarization and build capacity to manage exchange rate risks by requiring agents to internalize the effects of two-way flexibility. Importantly, with buffers still ample, the financial sector stable, and macroeconomic performance solid, preparations for greater flexibility could take place in fairly tranquil conditions—a key factor behind smooth transitions to greater flexibility in other countries. Policies to implement the transition will need to be carefully crafted and clearly communicated, with a view towards keeping inflation expectations anchored, building market infrastructure, and strengthening policy and analytical capacity as needed. Central bank independence and a strong BCB balance sheet are critical elements of the reform process. The BCB’s exposures to the SOEs—especially the state owned natural gas and electricity companies—have grown substantially in recent years (Annex II). To avoid potential conflicts with the BCB’s commitment to price stability, the BCB’s exposures to the SOEs should be phased out. Instead, the developmental spending currently financed by BCB credit should be transferred to a separate agency, funded by other means, and guided by transparent investment rules, strong governance, and a clearly-stated development mandate. Enacting a new central bank law has been delayed, and a first draft is now expected in 2017 H1. = EE Page 21