The authorities reiterated their commitment to prudent fiscal policy . They highlighted that the overall fiscal deficit target of 3.2 percent of GDP included in the 2014 draft budget was significantly smaller than the fiscal deficit target of 4.6 percent of GDP that had been presented in the 2013 budget, supported by the established practice of conservative forecasting of oil prices. Replacing these forecasts with the WEO baseline for oil prices results in a projected fiscal deficit of 0.4 percent of GDP for 2014, which would imply a moderately expansionary fiscal stance. In view of prospects for strong growth and the closed output gap, staff recommended aiming for a neutral fiscal stance in 2014, saving stimulus to respond to downside external shocks, and cautioned that fiscal tightening may be warranted if inflationary pressures persist. The authorities noted that an overall fiscal surplus could be within reach in 2014. They highlighted that any fiscal stimulus would be driven by public investment, rather than current spending, as investment was essential to deepen the diversification and industrialization of the economy, with important projects already in the pipeline. The authorities did not see any reasons to be concerned about the impact of the election cycle on fiscal sustainability. Staff underscored that improving the non-hydrocarbon fiscal balance is critical for medium term sustainability. The non-hydrocarbon primary deficit has widened from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2006 to 9.1 percent of GDP projected in 2013. On current proven gas reserves and resource horizon, staff estimates that the sustainable level of the non-hydrocarbon primary deficit is around 3¼ percent of GDP, requiring an improvement of 5¾ percent of GDP from the 2013 projected level (Annex I). The short resource horizon has a visible impact on the debt trajectory after the mid-2020s, underlying the urgency to invest in exploration with support from the private sector. The authorities indicated that they were giving priority to investment in gas exploration, with 18 new contracts expected to be subscribed by 2025. At the same time, they disagreed with staff’s concern about the level of the non-hydrocarbon fiscal deficit, given good prospects for the sector. The authorities argued that Bolivia had been able to post fiscal surpluses for several years without having to focus on the non-hydrocarbon fiscal balance and were committed to continue doing so in the future. See accompanying Debt Sustainability Analysis. 2008200920102011201220132014Nominal balances Overall balance2.80.21.70.81.80.6-0.4Non-hydrocarbon primary balance-5.6-8.7-6.7-8.3-8.7-9.1-9.5Cyclically-adjusted balance Non-hydrocarbon primary balance-5.4-8.0-6.5-8.2-8.4-9.3-9.6Fiscal impulse2.12.6-1.51.70.30.80.4Sources: Ministry of Economy and Public Finances and Fund staff calculations.Proj. Summary of Fiscal Balances Page 11 Strengthening the non-hydrocarbon fiscal balance will require both expenditure and revenue measures. On the expenditure side, measures that would help fiscal consolidation include a gradual reform of fuel subsidies to target the most vulnerable groups and enhancements in the quality of capital expenditure. On the revenue side, staff recommended (i) introducing personal income taxes or reforming the existing VAT complementary system; (ii) strengthening compliance of the corporate income tax; (iii) reforming revenue agencies; and (iv) quantifying and reporting tax expenditures in the budget with potential to curtail those with high cost-benefit ratios. With quasi- fiscal risks of public corporations and financial institutions on the rise, staff noted that a comprehensive risk statement in the budget would help identify fiscal vulnerabilities and inform any additional reform needs. The authorities acknowledged that revenue measures undertaken in recent years, even if different in nature, pursued the same goals suggested by staff, but clarified that there was little scope for structural fiscal reforms during the election year. Staff recommended developing a fully-fledged MTFF to manage resource wealth. Staff welcomed the progress made by the authorities in preparing medium term fiscal projections, but noted that these projections should be part of the budget documentation, in line with best practices in fiscal transparency. Staff stressed that a fully fledged MTFF comprises, in addition to numerical projections, mechanisms to insulate the fiscal sector from commodity price volatility, improve the predictability of the budget, and promote countercyclical fiscal policies. Staff advised the authorities to consider the eventual adoption of a fiscal rule that would set a target for the structural primary balance, supported by a stabilization/savings fund with clear investment objectives and a strong governance structure. Recognizing that the effective implementation of such a complex rule requires meeting important pre-conditions, staff suggested as a first step the calculation, reporting, and discussion of structural fiscal indicators in the budget. In addition, hydrocarbon revenue sharing agreements may need to be revisited in the context of the fiscal rule. The Fiscal Pact called for by the decentralization law of 2010 provides an opportune time for such a revision. The authorities noted that the preparation of a MTFF is an ongoing process that will evolve into multi-year budgeting in the future. They concurred with the need to continue strengthening fiscal reporting and analysis for budget formulation, but saw the preparation of a MTFF as a more gradual process with some essential elements already underway. With respect to a stabilization fund, while it is foreseen in the decentralization law, they noted that it would be difficult to build the necessary consensus for its implementation during an election year. Still, the sizable resources of subnational governments held at the central bank already provide an important source of fiscal savings. The authorities were not persuaded about the benefits of a fiscal rule. In addition to the new taxes on the financial sector, the authorities have strengthened tax administration and significantly broadened the base of contributors. Page 12