The authorities have made progress in expanding access to financial services, amid improving financial soundness indicators. Preserving these gains will require monitoring the current credit expansion closely, maintaining banking sector buffers, and continuing to strengthen supervision. Staff encouraged the authorities to advance quickly with the creation of a real estate price index that would allow a better assessment of any potential misalignment in property prices. It also urged the authorities to expeditiously bring the large number of unlicensed financial institutions into the regulatory perimeter. The authorities noted that work on a real estate price index is underway. Several FSAP recommendations have been implemented. In particular, progress has been made in adopting Basel II and III principles (such as adding market risk to capital requirements and completing the guidance on operational and interest rate risk), and introducing a deposit insurance scheme. Shortcomings remain in the areas of independence of the supervisory authority (ASFI), criteria for setting provisioning requirements, limits on total foreign investments as a share of capital, and regulations for the pensions and insurance sectors. Plans to strengthen ASFI’s resources will help to ensure that the quality of oversight does not deteriorate in light of new tasks mandated by the Financial Services Law. The authorities noted that the close working relationship between the ministry of finance, ASFI, and the central bank is important and will be further strengthened under the Financial Stability Council created by the new law. Bolivia’s exit from the FATF monitoring process attests to the recent strengthening of the AML/CFT legal framework . Working towards effectively implementing the AML/CFT regime as The Financial Services Law explicitly states the supremacy of its provisions over contradictory laws, but recognizes that the Central Bank of Bolivia is regulated by its own legal framework (Art. 5). Page 14 the Financial Services Law comes into effect should be a key next step towards further enhancing the integrity of the financial system. In particular, it would be important to ensure a smooth transfer of the Financial Investigations Unit (FIU) and its resources from ASFI to the ministry of finance, to clarify the FIU’s organization, functions, and sanctioning procedures in forthcoming regulations, and guarantee the autonomy of the FIU. Staff expressed concern about potentially significant risks to financial stability stemming from the new Financial Services Law. In particular: The regulated interest rates and credit quotas may distort resource allocation and negatively affect the profitability of financial institutions . Controlled deposit rates may encourage circumvention and disintermediation more generally. Ceilings on lending rates and credit quotas may “crowd- in” sectors ill-equipped to efficiently absorb the funds and create concentration risks to the financial sector as a whole. Compressed interest margins are likely to hurt banks’ profitability and thereafter capitalization. Banks’ diverse credit portfolios and operational structures also pose challenges to set regulations consistent with financial stability and to ensure a level playing field among different types of institutions. The legal framework regarding contracts could expose financial institutions to additional risks. The law would allow clients to terminate contracts with financial institutions without incurring any penalty. In addition, mortgage loans would be considered fully paid with the amount that is recovered from the collateral, thus creating incentives for strategic defaults. Increased intervention in financial institutions and regulatory uncertainty may discourage investment in the financial sector. The law authorizes the Executive branch to impose “temporary preventive measures” (Art. 6) to safeguard the continuity of financial services and the stability of the financial system. In addition, the law does not elaborate on the functions, scope of powers, and accountability framework for the Financial Stability Council. Staff argued that the authorities’ financial inclusion goals could be attained through other policies. Such policies could include transparent fiscal transfers to financial institutions to subsidize lending to target beneficiaries. Moreover, staff noted that innovative interventions (such as partial credit guarantees and productive development services) could be more effective instruments to leverage public funds for development and housing finance. The authorities did not see merit in staff’s concerns and stressed that regulations in Supreme Decrees would be set with due consideration for the stability and growth of the financial system and the economy.