After a decade of substantial economic and social progress, underpinned by sound macroeconomic management, Bolivia is being challenged by low commodity prices. Growth averaged around 5 percent per year over the last decade (2006–15), while the poverty ratio declined by a third to less than 40 percent. The authorities built up sizable international reserves and fiscal buffers while considerably de-dollarizing the financial system. But the global outlook has changed, and commodity prices have been on a trend decline since 2011, stabilizing only very recently, albeit at significantly lower levels compared to their peak. As one of the most commodity-dependent countries in Latin America (Box 1), Bolivia has suffered a massive decline in commodity terms of trade over the last few years, which has led to a reduction in income of close to 14 percent of GDP (charts). A period of lower commodity prices is expected over the medium term, posing significant challenges in making further progress towards the targets set out in the authorities’ Patriotic Agenda 2025, including eradication of extreme poverty, better access to health and education, and state-led industrialization. To achieve these targets, the government is anchoring policies on a 5-year Plan de Desarollo Economico y Social (PDES) that scales up public investment projects to sustain high growth. As a result, the sizable fiscal and external current account surpluses generated over a decade have now turned into large twin deficits. Political challenges have grown. While Movimiento al Socialismo holds a ⅔ majority in Congress, President Morales lost a referendum in February 2016 that would have allowed him to stand for reelection (for a fourth consecutive term) in 2019. Protests by miners that led to the death of the Deputy Interior Minister, strikes by truck drivers and the handicapped, and requests for bailouts from subnational governments have added to the challenges. In light of slowing growth, the government announced that the second monthly Christmas bonus would not be paid in 2016. X V mm Page 10 Box 1. Impact of Oil and Gas Production in LAC and Bolivia There exists a strong positive long-run relationship between real GDP per capita and the real value of hydrocarbons production in Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) oil and gas producers. Panel co- integration analysis for the period 1980–2014 suggests that a 100 percent increase in the value of oil and gas production increases the level of GDP by 14 percent on average. The relationship is particularly pronounced in Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela while for Bolivia it is close to the LAC average. Between 2000 and 2014, the real value of oil and gas production per capita in Bolivia increased by about 370 percent, while real GDP per capita increased by 43 percent. The developments in Bolivia over the recent boom period are thus very close to what one would have expected based on this general relationship. At the provincial level in Bolivia, real GDP per capita in the main gas producing region (Tarija), increased nearly 150 percent during the boom in the 2000s. The huge gas fields discovered in Bolivia in the late 1990s are located in the southern province of Tarija, which now produces about 70 percent of all Bolivian gas. The massive growth in the extractive sector and the related fiscal windfall (with Tarija receiving more revenues than all other 8 provinces combined in 2014) does not seem to have produced important spillovers to other sectors. The only sector besides the oil and gas one which grew substantially more in Tarija than in the rest of Bolivia was construction. The gas boom and associated fiscal windfall reduced poverty in producing municipalities. Data from the 2001 and 2012 population censuses indicates that the large gas discoveries were associated with significant reductions in poverty of around 10 percentage points (as measured by population without access to basic necessities) in directly affected municipalities. Gas producing municipalities also experienced a very large increase in public sector employment (more than 1 standard deviation) as well as important increases in construction and manufacturing employment. In municipalities with mining—which is more labor intensive but generated a smaller fiscal windfall—a larger reallocation of labor away from agriculture, a positive migration effect, but a smaller reduction in poverty was observed. GDP per Capita and Hydrocarbons Production per Capita in Bolivia Real Value of Oil and Gas Production per capita (logarithm) - RHS Real GDP per capita (logarithm) - LHS Page 11 The economic expansion continues, but fiscal and external imbalances are growing: Economic growth in Bolivia remains among the highest in Latin America, but has slowed (chart). While real GDP growth over the last 12 months to June 2016 was 4.4 percent, this masks a significant slowdown recently, with 2016Q2 growth of 3¼ percent (y-o-y). This outcome partly reflects temporary supply shocks in the hydrocarbons and agriculture sectors, with the latter due to a drought linked to the La Niña climate phenomenon. Consumption growth has been strong given solid real wage increases, but unemployment has increased slightly to 4.4 percent (Table 1 and Figure 1). Inflation has remained moderate (3.5 percent y-o-y in October 2016), despite rapid monetary growth (Table 2 and Figure 2), due in part to falling import prices and stable administered prices. While public debt remains moderate, fiscal imbalances are growing. The fiscal deficit reached 6.9 percent of GDP in 2015 due to sharply lower hydrocarbon revenues and large increases in spending. This was mainly financed by Central Bank of Bolivia (BCB) net credit (either the use of the government deposits or direct credit to SOEs). There has been a broad decline in tax collections through June 2016, reflecting also falling imports and corporate profits, but the shortfall has been partly offset by restraint in current expenditures. Gross public debt remains moderate at 43 percent of GDP in August 2016, while net debt is lower at 28 percent of GDP (Table 3 and Figure 3). At the subnational level, the financial positions of several administrations that rely heavily on hydrocarbons-related revenues have significantly worsened. Reserves remain substantial, but the current account deficit has widened. After being in surplus for over a decade (2003–14), the current account registered large deficits of 5.8 percent of GDP in 2015 and about 7 percent of GDP in 2016Q1. This reflects a marked drop in export prices (and some weakness in hydrocarbon export volumes), which Balance of Payments data in this report are compiled according to the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM). The authorities are transitioning to the sixth edition of the BPM. In the first half of 2016, the current account balance compiled under the updated methodology was -6.5 percent of GDP. Page 12 have been only partly offset by import compression. Given the widening current account deficit, reserves have dropped sharply, by US$2.1 billion in 2015 (about 6 percent of GDP) and an additional US$2.3 billion through mid-October 2016 (Table 4 and Figure 4). Nevertheless, at 32 percent of GDP, reserves remain more than adequate by any metric. The fall in hydrocarbon prices is putting pressure on the financial health of public enterprises. Over the past several years, public enterprises have been ramping up their spending, particularly investments. This had been sustained by vigorous revenues, supported by relatively high global hydrocarbon prices (chart). However, the increase in spending, combined with the sharp fall in hydrocarbon prices has tipped their financial balance into negative territory over the past couple of years, which has largely been financed by the central bank. Financial indicators are relatively solid, but vulnerabilities are growing as credit growth remains high. While low by regional standards (chart), banks’ overall capital adequacy ratio stood at 12 percent in mid-2016, with all banks above the regulatory minimum of 10 percent. The return on bank equity is at relatively high levels (12 percent in June 2016), but profitability continues to decline given a higher tax burden and reduced interest margins. Private sector credit increased by about 8 percentage points of GDP in 2015—well above its trend, suggesting the possibility of growing systemic risks (chart). To finance the rapid credit growth while maintaining reasonable capital ratios, banks have increased issuance of subordinated debt. Nevertheless, taking into account the large real appreciation of the currency (see paragraph 15), financial conditions have tightened for exporters and import substituting sectors (chart). At the same time, dollarization of deposits has fallen significantly and stabilized at around 17 percent as of mid-October 2016, while credit dollarization is around 3 percent of total loans (Annex I and Figure 5). AA X ba )) Page 13 Implementation of previous Fund advice has been mixed. The authorities have taken some measures towards adopting a medium-term fiscal framework, including creating a Macro- Fiscal Unit at the Ministry of Finance to produce fiscal projections and requiring subnational governments and public enterprises to prepare multi-year budgets. However, recommendations to improve the non-hydrocarbon fiscal balance, discontinue central bank lending to enterprises, and gradually allow greater exchange rate flexibility have gained limited traction (Table 5).