Background The authorities’ gradual fiscal consolidation over the past several years brought the increase in the public debt ratio to a halt—and would have supported a decline if not for the floods. The overall budget deficit was reduced from its peak of 6 percent of GDP in 2009 to just under 2 percent of GDP in 2013, mainly by strictly containing current spending. This downward trend was interrupted by the floods in 2014. The reduction in the deficit was achieved despite a worse economic environment: economic growth during 2012–14—both in nominal and real terms— turned out to be much lower than anticipated at the start of the last Fund-supported arrangement in 2012, due to lower growth in Europe, deflation, the floods, and weak bank lending. Consequently, revenues also did not reach the levels projected three years ago, forcing much lower spending levels. Despite the natural disaster and the elections, the overall fiscal stance in 2014 was tighter than anticipated. The overall deficit is estimated to have reached 3 percent of GDP in 2014, from an original pre-disaster target of 1.7 percent of GDP. However, this was much lower than the 4 percent of GDP deficit projected immediately following the disaster, owing to a faster than expected recovery in revenues, slower reconstruction efforts, and restraint on non-flood related expenditures. Public debt reached 45 percent of GDP by the end of 2014. A number of key fiscal structural weaknesses remain: Deficiencies in tax policy and revenue administration. The overall level of tax and social security contributions is one of the highest in the region, with indirect taxes and social security contributions together providing more than 90 percent of revenues. Standard tax rates of both income taxes and VAT are low and competitive in the region. Notably, the single VAT rate of 17 percent and its broad base ensure a high efficiency of VAT collection. Some progress has been made in recent years in improving revenue administration, especially in the collection of indirect tax revenues. Revenues from corporate and personal income taxation on the other hand are very low, and not only because of low rates. Narrow tax bases, generous incentives, and low compliance erode revenues. A high tax burden on labor. The tax wedge— comprising both personal income taxes and social security contributions, but with most of the burden coming from the latter—is higher in the FBiH than in the RS, but it is relatively high in both entities compared to elsewhere in the region. The high burden on labor is a strong disincentive for people to move from informal to formal employment and for some, possibly, even to enter the labor market. The tax base of b d C p s EE ( x ) G ee C un b I s G F Social Security Contributions Revenue, 2012 Source:IMF's Government Finance Statistics and World Economic Outlook, Eurostat, and country authorities. Page 17 both personal income taxes and social security contributions is very narrow, with a substantial share of workers’ compensation provided through untaxed benefits, in the form of allowances, especially in the FBiH. An outsized public sector with a high share of current spending, but with a low quality of spending. The public sector is among the largest in the region, and has the highest share of spending on wages and goods and services. And while public financial management has improved, outcome indicators of public spending on health care and social assistance are among the worst in the region, even though spending in these areas is the highest. Moreover, due to administrative problems and difficulties in reaching agreements between the entities and the central government, the public sector has not managed to unlock all the donor support for reconstruction. Faster absorption of donor assistance could have provided a much-needed boost to the economy. Policy Advice Looking ahead, with a tight monetary policy and deflation imported via the currency board arrangement, a gradual fiscal consolidation would strike an appropriate balance between ensuring medium-term sustainability and supporting the nascent recovery. A gradual reduction of the budget deficit to between zero and one percent of GDP over the medium-term is a suitable target consistent with reducing public debt to below 40 percent of GDP—an appropriate level for an emerging economy with a currency board and limited access to international markets. The 2015 central government budgets that were adopted in late 2014 and early 2015 and which aimed to contain current spending were consistent with this goal. The overall budget deficit was initially projected to decline to about 2½ percent of GDP this year, although this depended on the availability of sufficient financing, progress in implementing foreign-financed capital projects, and the ability to control spending by lower levels of government, extra-budgetary funds, and state-owned companies. Given delays, however, in the preparation and implementation of foreign-financed capital projects—including the ones to address the impact of last year’s floods— the overall budget deficit is more likely to remain limited to just over 1½ percent of GDP this year. Continuing with a gradual pace of fiscal consolidation will require the authorities to mobilize sufficient financing. External debt servicing obligations are projected to increase again in the coming years and BiH has little or no access to international capital markets. The authorities could raise additional domestic financing, as banks have ample liquidity, but banks may be reaching exposure limits, while too much reliance on domestic financing could crowd out private sector lending and hurt growth. A gradual fiscal adjustment will therefore depend on the authorities’ ability CroatiaBiHSerbiaMontenegroMacedoniaAlbania NMS (Median) 2014 NMS (Median) 2007 General Government Expenditures in the Balkans Source:IMF's Government Finance Statistics and World Economic OutlookNew Member States include: Bulgaria, Czech R., Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia Page 18 to secure official external support. Without this, fiscal policy would have to be tightened considerably faster than appropriate—and cuts would likely fall heaviest on public investment, although spending on wages and benefits would be affected too—which would undermine the economic recovery. In any event, comprehensive fiscal reforms are needed to make fiscal consolidation sustainable, create room for investment in infrastructure, and improve the efficiency of public finances: Improving revenue collection. Progress has been made in recent years to improve revenue collection, but more remains to be done to fight tax evasion and collect tax debts. Revenue collection and administration will need to be strengthened by: (i) enhancing the cooperation between the four tax authorities and strengthening the powers of the entity tax administrations to improve compliance; (ii) moving more toward a risk-based approach for the selection of tax audits and inspections; and (iii) increasing efforts to collect outstanding tax and social security contribution debts. Meanwhile, the single-rate VAT tax that is applied to a broad base is highly effective and will need to be preserved. Lowering the tax burden on formal employment. The tax wedge could be reduced by lowering social security contribution rates. This could be offset by broadening the tax base for labor income by taxing all sources of work-related income, in particular allowances, and by eliminating corporate income tax exemptions and incentives. Reducing public spending, while improving its composition and quality. This includes: (i) implementing public administration reform, including limiting new hiring and refraining from general public sector wage increases as wages in the public sector appreciably exceed those in the private sector; (ii) initiating health care reform; (iii) ensuring the sustainability of the pension system by completing pension reforms, including by increasing the effective retirement age and broadening the base for contributions; and (iv) improving the targeting of social assistance to protect the most vulnerable, while containing the costs of benefits to war veterans, including by completing audits of beneficiaries. Strengthening controls over lower levels of government, extra-budgetary funds, and state- owned enterprises. Efforts are needed to fully account for and stop the increase in uncovered liabilities by lower levels of government and loss-making state-owned enterprises. Further efforts are needed to strengthen fiscal accountability frameworks and reporting in both entities, including by adopting a new fiscal responsibility law in the RS and strengthening implementation of the new law on budgets in the FBiH. Moreover, a comprehensive strategy is needed to tackle the issue of unpaid social security contributions by state-owned enterprises. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that fiscal policies need to be aimed at resuming fiscal consolidation, while making adequate room for capital spending. They are committed to strictly Page 19 contain current spending, notably the wage bill, and to adopt new civil service laws to increase flexibility. The authorities are aiming to mobilize sufficient external financing to allow for a more gradual pace of fiscal consolidation and they expect that strong implementation of the Reform Agenda will help them in securing the necessary financing. They also noted the difficulties in controlling lower levels of government, given the high degree of decentralization. The authorities are planning to lower the tax burden on labor and adopt new income tax laws. New personal and corporate income tax laws are under preparation in the RS, with assistance from the Fund, while in the FBiH a new corporate income tax law, also developed with Fund assistance and substantially broadening the base by eliminating exemptions, has been submitted to parliament. While there was general agreement on the need to broaden the tax base and improve revenue administration, some expected only limited effect from enhanced cooperation between the tax agencies and stressed the need to adhere to constitutional competencies. Instead, they preferred raising the VAT rate to finance a reduction in social security contribution rates. Staff concurred that a VAT rate increase—albeit a more modest one—could be considered but stressed that this hike should only be a last resort measure if other measures proved insufficient. The authorities are seeking the assistance of the World Bank and the EU to improve the effectiveness of government spending. Immediate efforts are to be focused on pension and health care reform, reform of state-owned enterprises, as well as on public administration reform. In the FBiH, new pension legislation, prepared with the assistance of the World Bank, is expected to be submitted to parliament in the coming months.