Background Some progress has been made in the last few years to improve the business environment, but much remains to be done. As noted above, structural reforms have been progressing slowly and face resistance from vested interests. Both entities have been making progress in making it easier to start and operate a business. In the RS, the one-stop shop for business registration has been fully operational since late 2013, resulting in a surge in business registration. Similarly, in the FBiH, amendments to the Law on Business Registration and a new Law Page 14 on Companies and on Inspections were adopted. It had proven difficult in both entities, however, to achieve consensus between the social partners on new labor market legislation that would help create more jobs. The privatization process has yet to be completed, notably in the FBiH, as continued public ownership allows for a system of patronage and weak financial discipline. Policy Advice To attract investment and boost job creation in the formal economy, it will be critical to: Improve the business environment by: (i) further reducing the administrative burden on businesses, including by harmonizing regulations between the entities and reducing para-fiscal fees; (ii) restarting privatization of state-owned companies, notably in the FBiH, by divesting minority shares and the resolution of remaining state-owned enterprises either through the restructuring and privatization of viable enterprises or the liquidation of non-viable ones; (iii) improving the resolution framework for commercial and labor disputes, including by adopting new entity bankruptcy legislation and enhancing the court system by establishing commercial courts in the FBiH and improving their functioning in the RS to speed up the processing of disputes; (iv) enhancing anti-corruption efforts, including by implementing the anti-money laundering framework; and (v) finalizing the process of WTO accession and resolving trade issues with the EU. Enhance the functioning of the labor market by: (i) revitalizing the collective bargaining process by setting a limit on the duration of collective agreements and requiring renegotiation of existing ones; (ii) allowing wages to be better linked to performance; (iii) reducing disincentives for hiring by increasing opportunities for part-time work and fixed-term contracts and by limiting severance payments; and (iv) increasing labor inspections to reduce informal employment and better protect workers’ rights. This will need to be accompanied by strengthening the system of unemployment benefits and active labor market policies, including by expanding training and education opportunities, and by broader education reform to reduce skills mismatches. Authorities’ Views The authorities recognized that future growth must be based on attracting investment and agreed with staff’s recommendations. The Reform Agenda includes a set of measures to make it easier to start and operate a business, including by simplifying and harmonizing regulations, as well as commitments to proceed with the restructuring, privatization, or liquidation of most remaining state-owned enterprises and to adopt new labor market legislation that is more conducive to job creation. In a major step forward and notwithstanding continued strong resistance from the labor unions, the FBiH parliament adopted a new Labor Law in line with IMF and World Bank recommendations by the end of July 2015. The RS authorities aim to adopt a new labor law in the coming months. Page 15 Box 1. Implementation of Recommendations of the 2012 Article IV Consultation and Performance under the 2012–14 SBA The 2012 Article IV consultation coincided with the start of a new SBA aimed at countering the effects of a weak external environment and addressing domestic structural weaknesses. The program had as goals to: (i) improve national policy coordination; (ii) maintain fiscal discipline, and advance public sector reforms to reduce the size of the government and improve the composition of expenditure; (iii) safeguard financial sector stability in the context of the currency board; and (iv) intensify reforms to improve the business and investment environment to support growth, investment and job creation. During the program period, the authorities have been successful in reducing external and internal imbalances. While the external environment proved more adverse than expected, the budget deficit was steadily reduced, the current account deficit narrowed, and official foreign exchange reserves rose steadily. An augmentation of the SBA in June 2014 helped address the urgent balance of payment needs created by the floods. While macro-economic policies were sound—and remained so in the run up to the October 2014 elections—progress in structural reform implementation was mixed and reform efforts stalled once the election campaign got underway: Progress was made in strengthening public financial management—with the adoption of a new budget framework law in the FBiH, amendments to the Law on Financing of the Institutions of BiH, and a new BiH procurement law—and in the area of taxation—with an increase in tobacco excises and a start with the exchange of taxpayer information between the four tax agencies. In the FBiH, privileged pensions for war veterans were reduced, although the number of beneficiaries was increased. New pension legislation is under preparation. Little or no progress was made, however, in improving the composition and quality of government spending. Progress was also made in strengthening bank oversight and in safeguarding financial sector stability. Financial sector contingency plans were adopted, including a BiH-wide plan focusing on systemic events. Asset quality reviews of weaker banks were conducted or are underway. All banks conducted bottom-up stress tests for the first time in addition to the regular top-down stress testing. New banking laws are under preparation, while amendments had already been introduced regarding treatment of confidential information to allow for enhanced cooperation with foreign supervisors. Less progress was made in improving the business environment and labor market, although a one-stop business registration process was introduced in the RS and the last of a series of legislative changes was recently approved in the FBiH to achieve the same. Moreover, after long delays a new labor law that is more conducive to job creation was recently adopted in the FBiH, while this is still pending in the RS. No progress was made in restructuring or divesting remaining state-owned assets. Page 16