Background The currency board arrangement has served the country well by providing stability in an otherwise uncertain environment, even though more recently it resulted in the importation of low inflation. Official foreign exchange reserves are adequate and the currency board has a sizeable foreign exchange buffer. BiH continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV, but no longer maintains restrictions under Article XIV. Restrictions subject to Fund jurisdiction under Article VIII remain on the transferability of frozen foreign-currency deposits. The Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) concluded in June 2015 found the financial system at the aggregate level to be liquid, adequately capitalized, and resilient to shocks. The financial system is dominated by a moderately concentrated banking sector which compromises mostly foreign subsidiaries. A conservative regulatory framework and a traditional banking model have supported high capital and liquidity buffers in the system. Banks have HUNBGRSRBHRVBIHLVAMKDALBROU Reserve Adequacy (in percent of ARA metric) Suggested AdequacyRange Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 20 withstood the impact of the floods well and only made limited use of temporary regulations that allowed them to reschedule or temporarily halt the repayment of loans of clients affected by the floods. Nevertheless, pockets of vulnerabilities exist among domestically-owned banks. Some domestically-owned banks with governance and risk management shortcomings, high loan concentration ratios, and higher levels of non-performing loans are struggling to meet capital requirements or rely on government support. A number of detailed asset quality reviews (AQRs) of banks that had been under enhanced supervision were conducted last year. Based on these, banking supervisors required several banks to raise additional capital, much of which has been already implemented. One small bank that failed to raise new capital was closed in late 2014 and insured deposits were paid out quickly. Moreover, credit to the private sector is still stuck in low gear, as demand for new loans is weak and banks continue to repair their balance sheets. A deterioration in banks’ asset quality and profitability, together with an inadequate resolution and insolvency framework, have resulted in a persistently high level of non-performing loans—14 percent of total loans at the end of the first quarter of 2015, although these are largely provisioned for. Coordination among the various institutions involved in bank oversight has improved, but there remain critical gaps in the financial sector safety net. The Standing Committee on Financial Stability (SCFS) adopted an overarching contingency plan for BiH, focusing predominantly on systemic events, including the role of the Fiscal Council, the fiscal coordination body between the national and entity governments of BiH. The plan defines the principles of information exchange and communication; the triggers for actions by all levels of government; and the tools and actions in the event of severe financial sector difficulties. Significant deficiencies remain in the financial safety net, especially with regard to resolution powers, institutional responsibility for resolution, and recovery and resolution planning. Capital Adequacy Ratio Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Kosovo Macedonia, FYR Serbia Liquid Assets to Total Assets Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Kosovo Macedonia, FYR Serbia Page 21 Policy advice Further efforts are needed to ensure financial sector stability and to help revive bank lending. These include: Taking strong and timely actions to deal with weaker banks. This will require developing a more comprehensive strategy—backed by a thorough diagnostic assessment—including a credible backstop to deal with any systemic cases. This includes: (i) completing pending AQRs and requiring AQRs to be conducted also for banks that have been expanding rapidly in recent years; (ii) setting clear deadlines for banks where AQRs revealed capital shortfalls to remedy these; (iii) and closing any bank that continues to fail to meet capital requirements after the deadline. Finalizing new banking legislation, including elements to strengthen the financial sector safety net. Both entities, supported by Fund staff, have made good progress in preparing new banking laws that are consistent with EU directives and Basel requirements, but gaps remain, and further assistance will be needed. These laws are expected to strengthen supervisors’ corrective and enforcement powers, introduce consolidated supervision, and improve crisis management and resolution frameworks, including by designating resolution authorities. Related legislation, such as the Deposit Insurance Agency law, and Banking Agency laws, will need to be reviewed and amended accordingly, also to allow for the establishment of a single resolution fund to deal with any failing systemic banks and for the Deposit Insurance Fund to provide funding for bank resolution subject to the least cost principle. Introducing legislative and regulatory changes to improve the framework for recovering and resolving non-performing loans , including by facilitating out-of-court restructuring of debts and the sale of non-performing loans by banks—including by clarifying the tax treatment of loan sales and the establishment and supervision of private asset management companies. Strengthening the liquidity management framework. Adding liquidity coverage ratios to the liquidity regulations would help to improve banks’ liquidity risk management. Also, given the current high level of liquidity in the system, reserve requirements for banks could be raised to rebuild liquidity buffers, while they could be better tailored toward prudential purposes by increasing the number of holding periods during which the bank under stress can breach the reserve requirements and supplementing this with minimum holding thresholds and higher penalty rates for a breach before more severe sanctions are applied. Ensuring that remaining deficiencies in the legal and regulatory framework for combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism are addressed. While progress has been made in the last year, failure to complete this work by fully implementing the action plan agreed with the Financial Action Task Force could result in serious obstacles to cross-border transactions. Page 22 Box 2. Financial System Stability Assessment—Key Findings and Recommendations Systemic Solvency and Liquidity. Aggregate solvency and liquidity indicators of the banking system appear broadly sound, but significant pockets of vulnerability exist within domestically-owned banks, some of which are struggling to meet capital requirements, while some others are relying on public support. Decisive and timely actions to deal with weak banks are critical for preserving financial stability, including by developing a comprehensive strategy—backed by a credible diagnostic assessment—to either facilitate the recovery of weak banks or to resolve them in a cost-effective manner, while maintaining financial stability and protecting insured depositors. Financial Safety Net. The financial safety net needs to be strengthened by establishing resolution authorities with comprehensive powers, appropriate resolution tools, and temporary and limited emergency liquidity support—within the currency board arrangement—for solvent but illiquid banks. While the deposit insurance system is largely compliant with international standards, shortening the payout period would be appropriate. Well-coordinated contingency planning—domestic and cross-border—would contribute to an effective financial safety net. A macro-prudential framework should be established, underpinned by broader and more focused cooperation among the relevant agencies. Banking and Insurance Oversight. Banking and insurance oversight has improved, but complex institutional arrangements for cooperation among the various oversight institutions and the lack of adequate governance and risk management have contributed to the vulnerabilities. The administrative powers of the agencies to sanction and fine supervisory board members and significant owners are inadequate, while the supervisory board selection process and internal audit functions of state banks need to be strengthened. The identification of ultimate beneficial owners of banks needs to be strengthened as related-party lending and group exposures are obscure. The prudential framework for the insurance sector should be updated to improve its risk sensitivity. Consumer protection and financial literacy in the insurance industry are weak and should be improved. Resolution of NPLs. High system-wide NPL ratio is a consequence of the impact of the crisis, low growth since then, and a history of lax lending policies. Bank governance problems, related-party loans and inadequate corporate resolution and insolvency frameworks pose significant obstacles to addressing asset quality problems. The legal framework governing creditor/debtor relationships is comprehensive, but neither debt resolution nor bankruptcy liquidation work effectively. There is a need to streamline execution procedures, introduce incentives to facilitate corporate debt restructurings and resolution, and adopt out-of- court restructuring guidelines. Hiring more commercial court judges and improving the regulation of the insolvency profession is needed. Financial Market Infrastructure. The payment system meets the international standard, but liquidity and legal risks exist, arising from the high concentration of transaction values in the payment systems across a few banks and lack of legal certainty on finality and netting arrangements. Progress has been made in enhancing the AML/CFT framework, but further efforts are necessary to address remaining deficiencies. The securities market legal and regulatory framework is sound and the infrastructure is well developed. But the markets would benefit from introducing a ‘passporting’ framework, and from increased transparency and information disclosures. Leasing operations could be enhanced by revising collateral requirements and strengthening repossession of assets. The 2015 FSSA of Bosnia and Herzegovina was completed on June 29, 2015 (SM/15/120). Page 23 Authorities’ Views The authorities welcomed the FSSA findings and recommendations, especially its efforts to tailor the advice to the country’s specific institutional set-up, and shared staff’s assessment of banks’ health. They acknowledged that not having a single body that has the mandate for financial supervision and crisis preparedness poses considerable challenges, particularly in case of systemic events. The authorities emphasized that it is the role of the SCFS to coordinate financial sector oversight and supervision, although they recognized that its efficiency and effectiveness could be strengthened further. The banking agencies are considering expanding the number of banks to undergo AQRs and are determined to close banks that continue to fail minimum capital requirements after deadlines given for recapitalization expire. Views of the SCFS members on how best to create an effective bank restructuring and resolution framework diverged. Some considered a centralized restructuring and resolution authority at the state level to be optimal, while others preferred to keep resolution powers fully at the entity level. Staff’s suggestion to establish a single resolution fund for systemic banks under the Deposit Insurance Agency, while maintaining the banking agencies as resolution authorities could be a pragmatic solution, provided an appropriate governance structure for the resolution fund can be agreed upon. The authorities agreed with the need to revive bank lending to support economic growth. They expect greater impact from improving the court systems and new bankruptcy legislation to address non-performing loans than from facilitating out-of-court restructuring. Banks, on the other hand, saw greater merit in the latter. The authorities stressed they are committed to address remaining shortcomings in the AML/CFT framework.