BiH has a complex constitutional set-up that has made it difficult to effect policy changes and implement reforms. It has a central government—the Institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina—two regional entities with a high degree of autonomy—the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the Republika Srpska (RS)—and a small district, Brcko. Furthermore, the FBiH is comprised of ten highly autonomous cantons. BiH has been lagging other countries in the region on the road toward EU integration, although progress has been made recently. While the 2012 Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) helped support macroeconomic stability in a difficult external environment, progress in addressing domestic structural weaknesses was limited. The adoption of a written commitment by the authorities in January 2015 to conduct all reforms needed to prepare BiH for future EU membership allowed the EU Foreign Affairs Council to let the Stabilization and Association Agreement enter into force in June this year. The Council also urged the authorities to develop an agenda for economic reforms, stressing that strong reform implementation would be necessary for a membership application to be considered by the EU. The new governments that came to office following the October 2014 general elections have pledged to accelerate economic reforms. Against the backdrop of popular discontent with a high rate of unemployment, the new governments adopted a comprehensive Reform Agenda in July this year, in close cooperation with the EU and the International Financial Institutions (IFIs) (see below). Implementation of the Reform Agenda will face considerable challenges, however, given a difficult domestic political environment and the need to overcome strong opposition from vested interests. Data are adequate for surveillance purposes. The authorities are working, including with Fund assistance, to address remaining shortcomings, notably in the coverage and quality of fiscal and real sector data. B. A Steady Reduction in External and Internal Imbalances since the Global