Growth Prospects Returning to an era of strong growth and accelerating Botswana’s convergence to a higher income level would require policies to reinvigorate total factor productivity. As noted above, skills mismatches and problems with SME access to finance are important structural bottlenecks, and peer comparisons also point to problems with adequate access to electricity and with bureaucratic procedures needed to start a business (Figure 4). The authorities should thus focus on: (i) improving the quality of public spending, most notably on education to minimize the skill mismatch in the labor market and on the public investment program to provide the needed infrastructure in a timely manner ; (ii) reducing further the regulatory burden on firms; and (iii) improving SME’s access to finance. The efficiency gains from higher total factor productivity would enhance prospects for successful economic diversification . The authorities’ diversification strategy aims to leverage Botswana’s areas of comparative advantage. Given the country’s well-established infrastructure for In Mauritius, the ministry of finance in close coordination with the central bank provided a framework through which finance could be extended to SMEs by banks on favorable terms and conditions in a market conforming manner. Page 12 mineral development, a focus on expanding the mineral product space beyond diamonds, and including downstream sectors, could have relatively large employment multipliers. The authorities’ efforts to improve the quality of Botswana’s institutions and improve the skill base of the labor force could also enhance prospects for development of the knowledge-based service sectors. The authorities noted that the recent MTR of NDP 10 aims to address Botswana’s long term challenges. A skills development policy has been announced in the FY2014/15 Budget. To enhance competitiveness and doing-business in Botswana, the government in collaboration with the World Bank is also implementing several projects under the Economic Diversification and Competitiveness Program that include: streamlining business registration, licensing and issuance of permits; establishment of e-Government policies and standards, including through one stop shop; and capacity building to support monitoring and evaluation of the national strategies and policies.