As the fiscal stimulus is rolled out, additional monetary easing may not be required, but the authorities need to be cautious with public investment projects and consider reforms to mobilize revenue in order to limit fiscal risks. Financial sector risks call for continued close monitoring of the sector. Given a negative output gap, some near-term easing of macroeconomic policies is appropriate. Staff estimates a negative 1.4 percent output gap in non-mining GDP (as of the third quarter of 2015), supporting the case for expansionary policies. As inflation has approached the lower band of the BoB’s objective range, and in light of a relatively weak monetary transmission mechanism, the authorities have been appropriately shifting the policy mix in favor of fiscal stimulus. Furthermore, the space for further monetary easing in the period ahead may be constrained by rising global interest rates. The 2016/17 budget envisages a larger overall deficit with a strong focus on public investment and restraint on recurrent expenditures. The budget submitted to Parliament in February 2016 roughly maintains the level of spending in nominal terms compared to the previous year’s projected outturn, but proposes somewhat higher capital expenditures and lower wages and transfers to SOEs (Table 4a). As mineral and non-mineral revenues remain subdued, the fiscal deficit is projected to reach about 4 percent of GDP and be financed by government deposits and domestic . Going forward, the authorities indicated that they would continue to limit public spending by containing the wage bill, subsidies, and transfers to SOEs. The drawdown of government deposits from the central bank could improve liquidity conditions. The change in fiscal policy is expected to enhance monetary policy transmission through the lending channel (i.e. by releasing commercial banks’ liquidity constraints through increased deposits); in this way supporting domestic demand. In this regard, the BoB agreed on the Despite the higher overall deficit, the non-mining primary deficit is projected to improve slightly by 1.6 percent of GDP (relative to the current fiscal year). The focus on domestic debt reflects the intention to further develop the domestic debt market and the fact that the level of external debt is nearing the statutory limit of 20 percent of GDP. The authorities expect to contain the wage bill through limits and reductions in non-salary components such as travel and overtime. Meanwhile, transfers to SOEs are projected to decrease as the regional drought comes to an end and water and electricity constraints are progressively eased (through higher domestic production). Page 18 need to continue using existing liquidity management tools (i.e. auctions of BoB certificates and repo transactions) and lending facilities to ensure that interest rates and liquidity conditions are consistent with sustainable credit growth and the BoB inflation objective. Should inflationary pressures emerge, the BoB stands ready to tighten monetary policy. Concerns about investment efficiency call for caution on public investment plans. The staff pointed out that, in light of difficulties and delays experienced in previous years with the execution of investment projects, a more cautious approach may be warranted—including in project selection—to increase the odds that projects can be efficiently executed and prevent the waste of public resources. The authorities indicated that they were making every effort to address this concern and ensure that the additional investment would be effectively implemented. They were also receptive to staff proposals to move forward with complementary reforms that could, over time, build implementation capacity and ensure higher investment efficiency (see Section C). Constrained mining and SACU revenues highlight the importance of domestic revenue mobilization. The authorities noted their commitment to return to a fiscal surplus within the next three years. The staff concurred on the importance of avoiding protracted fiscal deficits that could compromise fiscal and foreign exchange reserves and the country’s track record of fiscal discipline. The staff also noted that, in light of the recent decline in mining and SACU revenues and uncertainties about their level in coming years, it would be important to consider domestic revenue reforms to improve VAT collections, review exemptions, and reform property taxation. The authorities indicated that, while they were not planning any major reform in 2016/17 (also as a way to avoid interfering with the stimulus program); they intended to continue with efforts to mobilize revenue and requested IMF technical support to conduct a diagnostic of tax administration. A number of actions were discussed to mitigate financial sector risks in a slowing economy, namely: The authorities agreed on the staff proposal to perform annual on-site supervisory reviews of each institution deemed systemic (regardless of its CAMEL rating) in addition to the already established supervisory framework for banks with a higher risk profile. Given the large exposure of banks and non-bank lenders to the household sector, the BoB will consider conducting a stress test exercise aimed at assessing the impact of different shocks on households’ debt-servicing capacity. VAT collection averaged 5 percent of non-mining GDP over the past three years. A preliminary estimate of the additional revenue potential from enhanced administration point to possible gains of 2 percentage points of non- mining GDP; this does not include gains from rationalizing exemptions. In addition, there is scope to increase the property tax rate (which is low by international standards) and the valuation and coverage of residential and commercial properties (the additional revenue potential has been estimated at 0.6 percent of GDP). Should NPLs increase, the BoB is expected to manage the risk by encouraging higher provisions and continue to ensure compliance with provisioning rules. Page 19 The staff supported the efforts of the Non-Bank Financial Institutions Regulatory Authority (NBFIRA) to implement a tiered prudential framework for large non-bank lenders by September 2016 in line with IMF technical assistance recommendations (there are close links between large non-bank lenders and the banking sector, implying contagion risks). To improve access to credit and lenders’ capacity to screen borrowers, the authorities agreed on the importance of expediting the reform of credit bureaus to reduce fragmentation of credit information and broaden the scope of the creditor database to both positive and negative credit data. The reform also envisages allowing lenders to enforce securities out of court through a collateral agreement in case of defaults and introducing a collateral registry for immovable and movable assets. Lastly, to deal with limited monetary policy pass-through, the staff noted that the authorities could consider the introduction of new liquidity and/or lending facilities at the central bank, such as open market operations involving a lengthening of the average maturity period, but this may not be needed in the short run as fiscal policy takes center stage. Over time, however, changes in banks’ asset/liability management and some consolidation in the sector (the market is rather small but there are 11 commercial banks operating) may be appropriate.