Building on a good track record of fiscal soundness and macroeconomic stability, there is scope to strengthen the framework for managing mineral revenues and safeguard financial stability. Over the past decade, Botswana experienced higher, albeit more volatile, economic growth than other SACU members. Prudent macroeconomic policies, a strong institutional setup, and the country’s dependency on mining, especially diamonds, explain this outcome. While the share of mining in GDP has declined from 28 percent of real GDP in 2007 to 17 percent in 2014, it nonetheless remains high (Figure 3) and the exposure of other sectors to diamond market developments has actually increased as a result of the Diamond Hub Program aimed at developing the downstream segment. Also, the fiscal and external positions are highly dependent on minerals, which account for 39 percent of government revenues and nearly 90 percent of goods’ exports. Larger non-bank lenders are treated as ‘micro lenders’ under the NBFIRA Act but have business models that are more like small retail banks. However, total assets of the micro-lending sector are limited when compared to the banking sector (about 4 percent of banks’ total assets). The downstream sector has been exposed to higher pressures than the upstream segment as, in addition to reduced prices for polished diamonds; access to lending for firms operating in the segment has declined with the closure of Antwerp Diamond Bank (the second biggest diamond bank in the world) at end-2014, adding funding constraints to reduced profitability. Since the beginning of 2015, a number of polishing and cutting firms in Botswana have closed, shedding about 1,000 jobs (out of a total of about 3,700). Page 20 To date, the authorities have successfully implemented countercyclical policies, built strong buffers, and avoided debt accumulation. Foreign reserves and fiscal cushions have been built during booms and judiciously used during busts to smooth aggregate demand and economic activity. Combined with formal debt limits, this sound management has resulted in low debt levels and a strong net external credit position. As such, Botswana exhibits no debt vulnerabilities and remains a low debt scrutiny country (Appendix III). Going forward, there is room to strengthen the principles for managing mining receipts. Since 2006, debt ceilings on domestic and foreign debt, equivalent to 20 percent of GDP each, have been consistently observed. More recently, the authorities adopted two guiding principles in their National Development Plans, namely a 40 percent of GDP government spending cap introduced in 2006 and a target for reducing spending to 30 percent of GDP by the end of 2015/16. The 40 percent limit was only breached during the 2008 financial crisis, while the 30 percent target is not expected to be observed. In addition, a cap on government spending can give rise to unintended procyclicality; for instance, when the price of diamonds increases, GDP also increases, thus enabling for a corresponding increase in spending (Appendix IV). In the context of the forthcoming NDP11, the authorities are considering reviewing these principles. This is timely, given the experience so far and the importance of prudent fiscal management by future governments. Replacing the expenditure ceilings with a new fiscal rule and clearer links with the Pula Fund and the budget process could help avoid pro-cyclical spending and ensure fiscal sustainability. The authorities may consider replacing the above principles (while retaining the legal debt ceilings) with a new (possibly legislated) fiscal rule. In this regard, one option could be a rule that ensures convergence of the non-mining primary balance (measured as non-mining revenue minus non-interest spending) as a share of GDP to a given level at the end of each NDP cycle. Regardless, any decision on a new fiscal rule will need to be carefully evaluated and accompanied by a framework that strengthens and clarifies the link between the budget process, Pula Fund deposit and withdrawal rules, and a public investment program. Regarding the financial sector, a formal macro-prudential framework and Basel II implementation could better protect the sector and the economy against future risks. The authorities have begun developing inter-agency cooperation on financial stability issues. Going forward, they agreed on the importance of strengthening their capacity to mitigate systemic risks, including through a formal institutional framework that assigns the macro-prudential mandate and the legal powers to exercise that mandate to an existing or new agency. The staff team also supported the BoB’s efforts to implement the Basel II simplified standardized approach by 2017, including Pillar 2 requirements. Botswana’s public and publicly guaranteed debt has been under 25 percent of GDP and declining and is projected to remain low over the medium-term, with sustainable debt dynamics under the baseline and standard stress tests. Page 21 Figure 3. Botswana: Macroeconomic Performance and Resource Intensity Botswana’s economic performance has been stronger than other SACU members... Reflecting higher exposure to minerals… …Making the external current account susceptible to changes in the global demand for diamonds. …but also more volatile. …and especially a heavy concentration of exports in diamonds To counteract the impact of commodity volatility, the authorities have followed a countercyclical fiscal policy Sources: Botswana authorities, IMF World Economic Outlook, IMF staff estimates. CountryAverage Growth RateBotswana 4.70 Namibia 4.33South Africa 2.61Swaziland2.73Lesotho4.52 SACU3.78Average of all middle income countries Average Annual Growth Rates in Selected Middle Income Countries (MICs), 2006-2015 Namibia South Africa Average of all middle income countries Swaziland Lesotho Real GDP Growth (percent change) 0102030405060708090100BotswanaSouth AfricaNamibiaLesothoSwaziland % of total exports % of real GDP Commoditiesin SACU Countries, 2005-14 (percent, average) Diamonds Copper-Nickel Gold MineralExport Composition, 2005-14 (percent of total, average) Current Account Mineral Revenue Total Expenditure (RHS) Mineral Revenue and Total Expenditure Page 22