Outlook: Real GDP growth is expected to moderate to 4.4 percent in 2014, reflecting the slowdown in diamond recovery and continued problems in the electricity and water supply (Table 1). Subsequently, growth is expected to stabilize around 4 percent in the medium-term, with slightly higher growth in the non-mining sector as the bottlenecks in the energy sector are removed. Headline inflation is likely to remain within the BoB’s medium-term objective range in 2014. The current account surplus is projected to stabilize at around 2 percent of GDP supported by the planned fiscal consolidation and the expected recovery in diamond exports. Risks: The uncertain external environment, such as the potential slowdown in emerging markets, poses downside risks to mineral export demand. Although significant progress has been made in negotiations with the EU and the authorities are optimistic about reaching an agreement, Botswana could lose all its preferential trade access to the EU market in October 2014, if they fail to reach agreement with the EU on the economic partnership agreement. Under some adverse scenarios, output growth could be lower by 1–1½ percentage points compared with the baseline forecast (Appendix II). If further adverse global spillovers beyond the staff’s baseline scenario lead to a decline in diamond prices and a significant loss of revenues, staff advised the authorities to allow the automatic stabilizers to work on the revenue side. Botswana has ample reserves and the debt level is very low. Such a policy response would avoid a procyclical fiscal stance and only slightly delay the envisaged pace of fiscal consolidation in the FY2014/15 budget without posing risks to both medium-term fiscal and external sustainability. On the domestic front, delays in the full commencement of the Morupule B power plant pose an additional risk. The current problems with power and water supply have the potential to unravel the ongoing recovery, including through the negative impact on investor sentiment. Although the level of household indebtedness does not give rise to an imminent macroeconomic and financial stability risk, the continued high rate of growth of household borrowing poses a potential risk to consumer welfare and could generate vulnerabilities in the financial sector. A key medium-term risk relates to the sustainability of long-term growth, which relies on removing the existing structural bottlenecks and on finding new growth drivers. However, Botswana’s export to the EU is only about 5 percent of the total export base. Page 8