The authorities’ gradual fiscal consolidation strategy is appropriate given the uncertain external environment and the existing policy space This would bring the nonmineral primary balance (NMPB) closer to its long-term sustainable level of about 5 percent of nonmineral GDP. The emphasis on improving the performance of state owned enterprises (SOE) is also well placed. In line with staff advice, the inclusion of a medium-term projection for the government accounts in the FY2014/15 budget is welcomed. Achieving targets in the government’s medium-term fiscal framework would require implementing concrete measures to reduce the wage bill relative to GDP, broaden the tax base, and improve the quality of government spending. Despite the modest wage awards by the government in recent years (3-4 percent) and the de facto hiring freeze (except for teachers and nurses), the wage bill continues to be high reflecting the impact of promotions, re-grading, non-wage allowances, and overtime. The policy measures that staff has recommended to the authorities include in the short-term— streamlining the system of nonwage payments and including tighter eligibility criteria for allowances. Over the medium-term—rationalizing the size and structure of government, tightening the link between pay and performance, and strengthening payroll systems should be considered. The change in the VAT registration threshold initiated in the FY2014/15 budget will support the authorities’ objective to simplify the existing tax system. However, further VAT exemptions could undermine the government’s objective of broadening the tax base and simplifying the tax system. There is in general a need for the government to rationalize existing tax incentives and avoid granting unwarranted preferential tax regimes for businesses. Given the recent improvements in Botswana Unified Revenue Service’ (BURS) information technology system, staff believes that a comprehensive study on tax expenditures that would inform policymakers about the magnitude of tax revenue that is lost through tax incentives can now be done easily and should be of high priority for the Botswana’s debt ratio has been historically very low and is expected to decline over the medium term—see the annex on the debt sustainability analysis (DSA) using the new market access DSA template. See 2012 Article IV staff report (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=26166.0). Page 9 government. The estimated value of the forgone tax revenues of the existing tax incentives should also provide a solid foundation for future policy decisions on net reductions in tax expenditures. The expansion of social welfare programs, including the feeding programs, the Old Age Pension program, the Orphan Care program, and the Program for Destitute Persons, has helped to reduce poverty significantly. However, the authorities should make these programs more targeted since income inequality remains very high. The government’s efforts to improve the quality of spending on health and education and make them more targeted are also essential for reducing income inequality. And existing redistributive policies should try to minimize the adverse effects on incentives to work, save, and invest. The continued privatization and merger of some of the SOEs would help to reduce their reliance on public resources. In addition, guidance developed by the Public Enterprise Evaluation and Privatization Agency for overseeing the performance of SOEs and efforts to reform SOEs governance structure to increase their accountability and set clear performance targets would increase efficiency of SOEs and contain their cost. The authorities affirmed their medium-term fiscal consolidation goals, centered on reining in unproductive elements of current expenditures. They agreed with the need to address the size of the government (as a share of GDP) and are exploring ways to gradually reduce its size. They noted that the outsourcing of low-skilled government services has not significantly reduced the wage bill as some of the affected employees have been redeployed to other government departments. The government also hired new personnel to fill up positions in recently completed infrastructure projects such as schools and hospitals. The authorities’ approach to the SOEs focuses on reducing overlaps among them, optimizing the use of resources, and improving shareholders’ oversight. They are also exploring sustainable ways to rationalize the large scale discretionary tax incentives. B. Policy Theme 2: Strengthening the Monetary Regime, the Transmission