Under current conditions the economy remains internally and externally balanced. Botswana is undergoing a cyclical recovery in line with its major trading partners and the output gap is largely closed. The economy grew by 5.9 percent in 2013, driven by the recovery in the See 2013 Selected Issues, chapter 1 (SM/14/23). Page 6 mining sector, while the nonmineral sector slowed down, partly reflecting power and water supply disruptions (Figure 2 and Table 1). Inflation decelerated significantly in 2013 and stayed well within the BoB’s medium-term objective range (Figure 2). Staff endorses the BoB’s broadly neutral monetary policy stance as reflected in the April 2014 Monetary Policy Committee decision. The monetary policy committee (MPC) statement by the BoB in December 2013 reinforced an existing measure on the floor on deposits that required banks to offer and publish a 91-day deposit at the minimum, 4 percent per annum, with commensurate higher interest rates for longer-dated deposits in order to boost savings and protect the interest of depositors. The government recorded a small surplus in FY 2013/14. The budget surplus was achieved through reining in current expenditure, higher mining revenue, and an increase in the Bank of Botswana’s profit transfer (Table 2b). Staff supports the FY2014/15 budget, which reins in unproductive elements of current spending, while protecting growth-promoting capital spending. While the current size of the Pula Fund is adequate for stabilization purposes, the envisaged accumulation of additional savings from non-renewable resource revenues is desirable from an intergenerational equity perspective. The current account balance turned into a surplus in 2013 supported by a rebound in diamond exports. Imports continued to grow partly attributed to the increased electricity imports. Botswana’s external position remains broadly sound. Staff’s econometric analysis, using CGER-like methods, which incorporate features appropriate for a mineral-based economy like Botswana, shows that the real effective exchange rate (REER) is broadly in line with macroeconomic fundamentals from a medium-term perspective (Appendix I). While other methods suggest a mild undervaluation, the two most relevant approaches to Botswana’s natural resource-rich economy, the macroeconomic balance and the external sustainability approaches, give point estimates that are not significantly different from zero. Moreover, Botswana’s reserves are well above the adequate range suggested by the Fund’s new metric for reserve adequacy (SM/13/22). Non-price competitiveness indicators suggest that Botswana performs well relative to its peers, but some challenges remain, most notably in the areas of education and skills shortage. Overall external stability is also affected by the lack of export diversification, which leaves Botswana’s economy vulnerable to sustained fluctuations in the international demand for diamonds. The banking system is well capitalized, profitable and liquid, but rapid growth of credit and the non-bank financial sector represent concerns. While decelerating, credit to households continued to grow at about 24 percent—which is among the highest growth in the region (Figure 2). The increase, however, is from a low base. Banks’ nonperforming loans (NPLs) doubled to 5.3 percent in December 2013 (Table 7) driven by the deterioration in the asset quality of banks’ loans to corporate borrowers (although this is also from a low base). The nonbank financial Botswana’s foreign reserves include the Pula Fund, which essentially is a long term saving. However, the fund is liquid and readily available for stabilization purposes. Page 7 institutions (NBFIs) sector has also been growing rapidly in recent years. Total assets of NBFIs account for about 50 percent of GDP. Furthermore, the cross linkages between NBFIs and the commercial banks (NBFIs wholesale deposits constitute about 40 percent of banks’ liabilities) have increased in recent years, which could propagate and amplify system-wide contagion.