Botswana, has over the years, been one of Africa’s success stories; however, poverty and unemployment remain relatively high with the country’ income inequality being among the highest in the world (Figure 1). GDP per capita more than quintupled during the last three decades and the country has earned a good reputation in the areas of governance and prudent management of natural resources. The government was also successful in increasing the literacy rate of the population. Despite the strong growth performance, Botswana is still some way from meeting the objectives of poverty elimination and reduced inequality. Poverty rate remains high at about 19 percent and Botswana is among the most unequal countries in the world with a Gini coefficient over 0.60. In sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) Botswana scores well in terms of the level of human development index (HDI), including the level of education and absolute poverty. However, the improvement in the HDI has been very small over the last decade and Botswana also lags behind its peers outside the region (Figure 1). Moreover, driven by the decline in TFP growth, trend growth has slowed down amidst persistently high rate of structural unemployment. The skill mismatch in the labor market remains a perennial challenge despite the fact that significant resources have been invested by the government in education. The government is aware of the economy’s challenges, and the recent Mid-Term Review (MTR) of the 10th National Development Plan (NDP 10) serves as the blueprint for structural transformation. The policy thrust of the MTR of NDP10 is reducing the size of the government relative to GDP so that the private sector can take the lead in driving growth. NDP 11, which is under preparation, is being framed around policies to boost economy-wide productivity, enhance financial inclusion, and reduce the high unemployment rate to pave the way for higher, sustainable, and more inclusive growth. The government’s Vision 2016 aims at “prosperity for all”, with the goals of: poverty eradication; a more equitable distribution of income; and rapid economic growth and diversification.