The government’s focus on controlling fiscal spending growth is an imperative and welcome. Unsustainable fiscal dynamics are being driven by unfunded and increasingly onerous mandates on the expenditure side, which increase government financing needs, raise borrowing costs for all agents in the economy, and slow down economic growth, contributing, in turn, to a further worsening of the public debt dynamics. The approval and steadfast implementation of the spending cap could be a game changer—it would help improve the long term trajectory of public spending and permit the stabilization and eventual reduction of public debt as a share of GDP. In addition to the spending cap, the draft budget law before Congress contains a series of one-off revenues arising from the granting of concessions and the sale of some assets. Together with revenue projections based on the authorities’ macroeconomic assumptions, this yields a primary balance target (floor) of -2.1 percent of GDP for 2017. Credible implementation of the spending cap, and more generally restoring sustainability of the public sector finances, requires addressing the structural drivers of public expenditure growth and increasing flexibility in the allocation of public monies. The main areas for reform include: Social security. The success of the expenditure rule would depend on reforming the social security system—which is necessary in its own right, and would be a priority even in the absence of a spending cap. Pension and other benefits represent nearly one half of federal noninterest spending and at least 13 percent of states’ noninterest spending. These outlays have strong real growth momentum as a result of demographic trends and benefit indexation rules (see Selected Issues Paper). The reform of the pension system should be comprehensive, bearing upon the rules governing retirement age, replacement rates at retirement, the growth of benefits post- retirement, and the duplication of benefits. The retirement benefits system has been providing support for persons who should instead be covered by targeted social assistance programs; these programs should be ready to step in as the retirement system is reformed. Bringing civil servants’ pension schemes closer to that of the private sector would be fiscally prudent and also fair and equitable. Page 27 Ending revenue earmarking. Revenue earmarking needs to be eliminated to create the flexibility in the allocation of budgetary resources the expenditure cap will demand. In this context, an important feature of the expenditure cap legislation is that it aims to remove the obligation to dedicate an increasing share of net federal revenues to spending in education and health. This provision will need to be supplemented with measures to control the growth of spending per capita on public health, which is set to rise as Brazil’s population ages (see Selected Issues Paper). Containing payroll growth. Payrolls represent a large share of spending, especially in subnational governments. Ensuring prudent hiring and remuneration decisions will be essential. In this context, reforms to make exit from civil service feasible and to rationalize automatic career progression are also needed. Subnational governments: Strengthening institutional relationships across levels of government and enacting legislation enabling states to make difficult expenditure adjustments should be part of the strategy to help states regain control of their finances. The recommendations on social security and payroll control apply fully to the case of states. A firm commitment by states to increasing transparency is also key. Minimum wage and indexation . The current formula for minimum wage revisions affects the growth in pension and other benefits, and is thus a source of fiscal pressure over the medium term. Severing the automatic link between benefit payments and the minimum wage is advisable, as would be limiting minimum wage increases to cost of living adjustments. Spending efficiency and composition. The spending cap will make it imperative for government agencies to make better use of their resources to prevent a decline in the quality of their services. Also, decisions over the composition of expenditure should preserve programs with a positive impact on growth, including investment, and social safety nets for the most vulnerable members of society. By itself, the expenditure cap could take several years to stabilize and reduce debt. As designed, the cap would give the government one and possibly two more years of positive real spending growth, before freezing real spending when inflation stabilizes. In staff’s baseline scenario, the expenditure cap is implemented fully and one-off revenues like those in the 2017 budget proposal are assumed to be collected each year. Given staff’s macroeconomic assumptions, this policy combination would keep the overall deficit high for many years, during which the government would continue to crowd out private agents from scarce funding (Tables 1 and 3, and DSA). Public debt (GFSM definition) would reach 93.5 percent of GDP in 2021, and would peak around two years later before beginning to decline. Against this backdrop, a more frontloaded adjustment which results in a faster regeneration of the currently exhausted fiscal space has merit. The eventual trajectory of debt ratios will depend on the evolution of growth, real interest rates, and primary balances—with the last of these elements being most closely under the government’s influence. Frontloading fiscal Page 28 consolidation may be a headwind to growth in the near term, but it can boost confidence and reduce pressures on funding markets, bolstering growth in subsequent years. Staff’s recommendation is to gradually raise the primary balance to about 3 percent of GDP by 2021; with this, public debt would start declining from a peak of 86 percent of GDP already in that year (see DSA). Beyond that point, the primary surplus would have to remain at a similarly high level for debt ratios and borrowing costs to decrease to more comfortable levels. The additional adjustment, which would rise gradually, would require a mixture of efforts to undershoot the spending cap and mobilize quick-acting revenue gains, over-performing on the government’s own primary balance targets by 0.3 percent of GDP in 2017 and 2018, and by larger margins in subsequent years (text table). Moreover, these efforts may be even more urgent if one-off revenues cannot be sustained at the 2017 level going forward. Some revenue measures should be temporary, remaining in effect only while debt is still rising, and could include, in addition to asset sales, increases in fuels taxes (CIDE) and federal turnover taxes (PIS/COFINS), an increase in the IOF tax on new loans, and the roll- back of payroll tax cuts and other tax expenditures (including the SIMPLES program). Expenditure measures should include the extension of the spending cap to subnational entities, and an additional reduction of inefficient discretionary expenditures. Given concerns over the short run effects on output of adjustment, these actions should proceed as economic growth firms up. Scenario: Debt Reduction Begins by 2021 Growth Inflation (GDP deflator), % Primary Balance, % GDP Authorities’ Target IMF Baseline IMF Recommended Path Measures Required, % GDP Revenues Expenditures Gross Debt, % GDP In the period 1999–2014, fiscal multipliers in Brazil were around 0.3–0.5 percent (Selected Issues Paper for the 2014 Article IV Consultation). The text table reflects this adverse effect on growth in 2017, but assumes that tailwinds from faster restoration of fiscal sustainability will more than offset this “multiplier” effect in the following years, with this boost tapering toward the end of the projection period. The scenario does not assume additional supply side structural reforms that would lead to a permanently higher rate of real GDP growth. Page 29