Activity is expected to start to recover gradually, but will remain weak for a prolonged period. The near-term outlook is for a gradual recovery to start in the second half of 2016, assuming that political uncertainty diminishes and that other downward economic shocks (such as the large administered-price adjustments of 2015 and the major investment cuts by Petrobras) run their course. A sharper recovery is difficult because of the excess leverage and slack among firms, and weakened income and balance sheets of households. Monetary policy is expected to remain relatively tight and credit growth is projected to fall further as a share of GDP in 2017. While deteriorating economic conditions are expected to affect the quality of banks’ assets, the largest banks have enough capital to absorb possible losses (see Selected Issues Paper). The baseline assumes that the proposed fiscal target for 2016 will be met, and that the authorities’ proposed structural reforms on the public expenditure side will be approved and implemented. Over the medium term, inflation is expected to slowly converge toward the target midpoint as output growth reaches its potential rate of 2 percent (which does not assume the adoption of any major structural reforms on the supply side beyond the implementation of the authorities’ infrastructure concession program); the current account deficit is expected to stabilize around 2 percent of GDP. Credit is expected to recover broadly in line with activity, albeit with a lag (the credit to GDP ratio will begin to edge up in 2018). In this context, BNDES is expected to rely on its own balance sheet and to prioritize lending for infrastructure. The health of the banking sector is expected to improve as the economy picks up and funding costs decline. Government spending is assumed to continue growing in real terms in the near term, albeit at reduced rates, consistent with the gradual tightening implicit in the expenditure ceiling. The gradual recovery of growth will have positive spillovers on other economies in the region, notably those of Brazil’s Mercosur partners. Growth, % Inflation (GDP deflator), % Primary Balance, % GDP Gross Debt, % GDP Scenario: Baseline As noted in the Selected Issues Paper, output has a stronger impact on credit than credit has on output. Page 25 Downside risks continue to dominate the outlook, but upside risks are emerging (Appendix I). A key domestic risk is that the new government fails to deliver on its fiscal consolidation strategy and provide a durable boost to confidence. Re-intensification of political uncertainties (e.g., as a result of developments in the corruption probe) could also exacerbate downside risks resulting in a “sudden stop” of capital inflows, a sharp asset price adjustment and widening of credit spreads, and a defensive tightening of the monetary policy stance. In this financial stress scenario, higher risk premia would also trigger losses on fixed income securities for banks, while a “double dip” recession could further impact private agents with weakened balance sheets, resulting in larger loan losses and capital shortfalls for some banks; this would further dampen credit supply and economic activity, and damage the fiscal position with recapitalization costs and the realization of deferred tax credits (see Selected Issues Paper). Petrobras’ balance sheet may be subject to risks from unfunded contingent liabilities, as is the case for other SOEs, (Eletrobras and Caixa Economica). External downside risks relate to a protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies, especially China, further declines in export commodity prices, and tighter financial conditions. Upside risks have also emerged. Recent policy pronouncements have boosted confidence and asset prices which, if sustained, could foster a sharper turnaround in investment and growth. Faster-than-envisaged progress in the approval of the authority’s fiscal reform agenda could spark a more vigorous recovery in sentiment, boosting foreign interest in Brazil in the context of an external environment marked by low interest rates. This would result in stronger investment and growth in Brazil, although a possible surge in capital flows may pose challenges, notably for sectors that have benefitted from the recent currency depreciation. The authorities have been responsive to some of Staff’s past recommendations. In particular, monetary policy was tightened in 2015, and the National Monetary Council narrowed the inflation tolerance range from 4.5 percent +/- 2 percent to 4.5 percent +/- 1.5 percent for 2017, and raised the long-term lending rate (TJLP) from 5.5 to 7.5 percent over the past year and a half. The net FX swaps position was also lowered significantly over the past year, in line with Staff’s advice. The ongoing push for reforms that address structural sources of fiscal pressure, including the announced plans of the government to pursue social security reform, are also consistent with past advice from Staff. These results, obtained independently by Staff, are broadly consistent with the results of the central bank’s own stress test published in their April and September 2016 Financial Stability Reports. In the SIP it is also noted that a sharp slowdown in credit can be harmful to growth. Such a situation could be provoked, for example, by a greater need to strengthen balance sheets as buffers reach critical levels in a financial stress scenario. Page 26