Brazil is still in the grip of a deep recession. Led by plummeting confidence that triggered sharp declines in investment and consumption, the contraction in output has been one of the largest in memory. Since the beginning of 2015, the unemployment rate has almost doubled and 2.7 million formal jobs have been lost; youth employment has been particularly hard hit (Box 1). Household income fell and inequality increased during the recession, bucking a decade-long trend. Brazil: Real GDP per Capita Growth (1902-2017) (in yearly percentage change) ‐ Great depression Debt crisis + hyperinflation + impeachment Current Crisis (2014-2017) Sources: For 1902-1947. Haddad, C. "Crescimento do produto real no Brasil, 1900-1947", R. bras. Econ., 1975. For 1947-2015, IBGE. For 2016-17, IMF Staff forecasts. Population data from IBGE's decennial census with log-linear interpolation. Box 1. Brazilian Unemployment in a Recessionary Environment Brazil: Comparison of Different Unemployment Rate Measures (In percent of labor force) Labor market conditions deteriorated severely during the recession. Over the last eighteen months, unemployment rates reached levels last observed more than a decade ago. Overall, unemployment rates jumped from 6.5 percent in 2014Q4 to 11.3 percent in 2016Q2. PNAD PNAD Contínua 1/ PME Backfitted PNAD Contínua The analysis of market trends is complicated by changes in the measurement of unemployment. In 2016, the Brazilian government adopted a new official unemployment rate series, improving coverage of the underlying survey and reliability of the numbers. The previous official statistic for monthly unemployment rates came from PME (Pesquisa Mensal de Empregos), which covered 145 cities and focused on six metro areas. The new one comes from a PNAD-Contínua (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios Contínua), which has a national coverage of 3500 cities. For methodological details, see IBGE (2015). “Nota Técnica: Principais diferenças metodológicas entre as pesquisas PME, PNAD e PNAD Contínua”. IMF Staff analysis uses structural trends in unemployment from a national-coverage survey (PNAD) and seasonal factors from a metro-area survey (PME) to extend the new series backwards. The overall patterns of the old and new series, both actual and extended, are consistent. Sources: IBGE and IMF Staff estimates. 1/ From 2012Q1 onwards, series reflect official data from PNAD Contínua. Before that, data were backfitted using changes in interpolated annual PNAD data adjusted with seasonal factors from PME. Based on unofficial estimates produced by Fundação Getulio Vargas with data from official household surveys. Page 11 Box 1. Brazilian Unemployment in a Recessionary Environment (Continued) The increase in the youth unemployment rate was even sharper, rendering nearly 1 in every 4 Brazilian youngsters (18 to 24 years old) unemployed. Youth unemployment climbed from 14.1 percent in 2014Q4 to 24.5 percent in 2016Q2. There are significant differences between adult and youth labor dynamics. For adults (25 to 59 years old), the labor force has been growing at a steady pace, but since the end of 2014 the decline in employment growth has led to an increase in adult unemployment. By contrast, since early 2015 the youth labor force, which had been declining, has been rising again while youth employment has collapsed, causing youth unemployment rates to increase by more than 10 percent. Brazil: Unemployment Rates (In percent of labor force, by cohort) 1/ Overall Youth (18- to 24-yo) Sources: IBGE and IMF staff estimates. 1/ From 2012Q1 onwards, series reflect official data from PNAD Contínua. Before that, data were backfitted using changes in interpolated annual PNAD data adjusted with seasonal factors from PME. Brazil: Decomposition of Changes in Youth (18- to 24-yo) Unemployment Rate (In yearly percentage changes) Decrease in unemployment Increase in unemployment Change in labor force Change in employed population 2013Q1 Sources: IBGE and IMF Staff estimates. 2014Q1 2015Q1 2016Q1 Brazil: Decomposition of Changes in Adult (25- to 59-yo) Unemployment Rate (In yearly percentage changes) Decrease in unemployment Increase in unemployment Change in labor force Change in employed population 2013Q1 2014Q1 2015Q1 2016Q1 Sources: IBGE and IMF Staff estimates. The effects of the recession on youth employment are exacerbated by a high minimum wage. In Brazil, youth employment is significantly more sensitive to increases in the minimum wage (holding the average wage constant) than adult unemployment. Although real average earnings dropped by more than 4 percent year-over-year in 2016Q2, the real minimum wage increased, likely pricing younger workers out of the labor market. Since the beginning of the recession the Brazilian economy lost 2.7 million formal jobs. Facing of decreasing industrial production, retail sales, and real wages, most sectors of the economy experienced negative job creation, but the bulk of the formal job destruction (about 1.8 million) has come from industry and construction. IMF, 2015, “Macroeconomic Implications of Minimum Wage Increases in Brazil,” Selected Issues Paper. Page 12 Box 1. Brazilian Unemployment in a Recessionary Environment (Concluded) Brazil: Net Formal Job Creation Since the Recession Began (In million jobs) Brazil: Net Formal Job Creation and Economic Cycle (In thousand jobs and year-on-year percentage change) Real GDP, rhs Net Job creation Industry Construction Other sectors r y p e S v o r y p e S v o r y Sources: Brazilian Ministry of Labor. Sources: IBGE, Ministry of Labor, and WEO. Formal job destruction is likely to continue for a few more quarters . The Brazilian formal job market is historically highly correlated with the business cycle. This suggests that, under Staff’s forecast for Real GDP, cumulative formal job destruction during the recession can ammount to as much as 3.1 million jobs between 2014Q1 and 2017Q4. We regress quarterly net formal job creation numbers (1999Q3 ‒ 2016Q1) on year-on-year percent changes of real GDP (contemporaneous and two lags) and two lags of formal job creation. We then use IMF Staff forecasts to derive predicted values of future net job creation and cumulate the result from 2014Q1. Domestic factors largely explain the deterioration in growth, although terms of trade changes and weak global demand also played an important role. Activity has contracted in 7 out of the 10 quarters through 2016Q2. The weakness reflects the confluence of long-standing domestic issues and other factors. In particular: Brazil: Historical Decomposition of Real GDP Growth (Deviation relative to the sample mean) Domestic + residual External Real GDP Investment contracted severely, reflecting a sustained period of deteriorating competitiveness and tighter financial conditions (evidenced in a retreat in real private credit during 2015 − 16), rising unit labor costs, worsening terms of trade, and a reassessment of Brazil’s future growth prospects (Box 2). The reassessment of prospects for export prices has caused drastic cuts in the expansion plans of the largest investor in the country, Petrobras (which is also dealing with the legacy of poor governance and high debt), and other large companies in the Source: Staff estimates. Historical decomposition from a SVAR model with four lags that includes a set of external variables US GDP, US CPI, US 10-year bond yield, Global EMBI Spread, Terms of Trade) and a set of domestic variables (CPI, policy rate, exchange rate, and GDP). All variables are specified in log changes and orthogonally identified in the order as listed above. Page 13 extractive sector. These firms have faced difficult financing conditions and have scaled down their traditional bond issuance abruptly, especially in 2015. The infrastructure concessions program has had difficulties making progress. Consumption contracted as well, owing to deteriorating labor market conditions and a tightening of credit conditions (see Selected Issues Paper). On the positive side, net exports have begun to support growth, reflecting both a demand- related contraction in imports and strong exports on the back of the depreciation of the real in 2015. Also, commodity export volumes expanded strongly owing to increases in capacity resulting from investment initiated during the boom years (e.g. in mining). However, the currency appreciation since March this year raises doubts about the momentum of net exports going forward. A sharp realignment of regulated prices and monetary policy tightening also represented a drag on growth in 2015. Fiscal policy was broadly neutral over 2015 ‒ 16 (not counting the reduction in quasi-fiscal activity) despite cuts in discretionary spending introduced in early 2015. The government started 2015 promising rising fiscal surpluses, and took early adjustment measures, such as the discontinuation of policy lending to BNDES, the modification of some excesses in entitlement programs, and the realignment of electricity tariffs, which staved off the expected flow of subsidies to the sector. However, momentum was not sustained, and policies, including those originating in Congress, were at times expansionary. Policies under the new government have shifted focus toward the pursuit of medium-term reforms and away from meeting tight primary balance objectives in the near term. Additional factors hampering growth related to uncertainty surrounding the political situation and the corruption probe at Petrobras. The corruption investigation has broadened to include more firms in the private sector and high-ranking politicians. Some of these effects are hard to disentangle from economic factors: for example, some large construction firms involved in corruption were banned from competing for new projects at Petrobras, but Petrobras has been cutting investment in any case in response to the new realities in the oil market. Page 14 Box 2. Investment and Growth Expectations Investment has been particularly hard hit recently, falling by around 25 percent since the beginning of 2014. As a result, fixed capital formation in Brazil has fallen further behind other emerging economies. Brazil: National Accounts Components (Index, 2010Q1 = 100) Real GDP Private Consumption Government Consumption Gross Fixed Capital Formation r p e S r p e S r p e S r p e S r p e S r p e S r Sources: Haver Analytics and World Economic Outlook. Brazil and EMs: Real Gross Fixed Capital Formation (Index, 2000 = 100) EM Interquartile range EM Median Brazil The recent worsening of the economic environment has contributed to a deterioration in medium- term growth expectations, but these have fallen by more, and for longer, than the recession can explain. Between 2002 and 2012, expectations of annual growth (3 years ahead) were broadly stable, averaging around 4 percent. Since then, growth expectations have deteriorated, falling to about 2 percent by end-2015. As of 2016Q2, the change in current conditions helps to explain roughly one quarter of the recent decrease in medium-term growth expectations, with the remainder of the decrease explained by other, ‘non- current’ factors. These factors in essence represent an autonomous reassessment of Brazil’s growth potential over the medium term, above and beyond the impact of contemporaneous growth. Brazil: Mid-Term Growth Expectations (In Percent) 1/ 2002-2013 average Estimated 3-year ahead forecast Consensus 3-year ahead forecast Brazil: Decomposition of Mid-Term Growth Expectations (Deviations from average, all variables demeaned) 2/ Non-current conditions Current conditions Sources: IMF Staff estimates and Central Bank of Brazil. 1/ Estimated through regressions of end-of-year forecasts on forecast horizons and their squares and then using time varying parameters to fit a continuous series 2/ Current conditions include contemporaneous changes in GDP, regulated prices, terms of trade, and equity prices. Page 15 Box 2. Investment and Growth Expectations (Concluded) What explains the rapid drop in investment? Estimates suggest that developments hampering investment over this period include a rise in costs (chiefly a sharp increase in regulated prices, such as energy prices), falling terms of trade—impacting prospects for commodity exporters—and tighter financial conditions (through both higher real interest rates and lower equity prices). The “autonomous” part of the deterioration in the medium-term outlook for growth has been a significant drag to investment over the past 2 years, reducing investment by more than 10 percent since beginning of 2014. Brazil: Decomposition of Gross Fixed Capital Formation Growth (Quarter-on-quarter growth acumulated since 2014Q1, deviations from avg, all variables demeaned) Regulated Prices Terms of Trade Real interest rate Autonomous mid-term growth exp. Equity Prices Other factors Source: IMF Staff estimates. What does this imply for investment going forward? The results suggest that stabilization of regulated- price inflation, the terms of trade, equity prices, and real interest rates should improve both investment growth and growth expectations. In particular, the large, necessary, tariff increases of 2015 corrected past policy mistakes, and need not be repeated; subsequent increases can be more moderate and thus are not expected to represent large headwinds. Interest rates are expected to be eased as disinflation allows, also removing another important headwind. While stabilization of these factors is expected in the short term, reducing some of the drag on investment, the prospect of a return to investment growth crucially depends on an alleviation of other sources of weakness, such as a reduction in uncertainty related to the political situation, improvements in policy credibility, and addressing impediments to potential output. The analysis also suggests that if medium-term growth expectations remain subdued, the recovery in investment may be incomplete. ___________________________________________________ Results are from the joint estimation of two equations. The first regresses mid-term (3-years ahead) growth expectations on contemporaneous yearly percent changes in GDP, regulated prices, terms of trade, and equity prices. The second regresses quarterly changes in real gross fixed capital formation on lagged quarterly percent changes of regulated prices, terms of trade, real interest rates, equity prices and on the lagged residual of the first equation (i.e., the part of mid-term growth expectations which is orthogonal to current conditions). To account for correlation of residuals, Seemingly Unrelated Regressions is used, estimated with a two-step Generalized Least Squares method. Tentative signs point to the end of recession. The rate of output contraction has slowed and the economy appears to have regained some footing, with industrial production and business confidence improving since early 2016. Indicators related to international trade and the labor market are also showing signs of stabilization, and staff’s financial conditions index (FCI), a leading indicator of real activity, has improved significantly since end-February 2016 (Figure 5). Page 16 Inflation is normalizing slowly. The policy rate has been on hold for more than a year now. To prevent second round effects from the large increases in regulated prices and exchange rate depreciation, the monetary policy rate (SELIC) was hiked by 250 basis points to its current level of 14.25 percent between January 2015 and July 2015. The interest rate on subsidized loans (known as “TJLP”) was increased by 250 basis points to 7.5 percent between late 2014 and early 2016. Consistent with previous Staff advice, the central bank’s inflation tolerance range was reduced from 2.5 percent to 6.5 percent to 3 percent to 6 percent for 2017. However, headline and core inflation have been above the central target and around the upper limit of the central bank’s tolerance range for several years. In 2015, inflation spiked to 10.7 percent (e.o.p.), largely because of much needed relative-price adjustments (Box 3). But in 2016, some price increases have begun to moderate and 12-month inflation has fallen back to single digits. Yet, disinflation proceeded slowly due to inflation expectations that were higher than the target, and rising food prices owing in part to drought in the Northeast (Figure 2). Box 3. Relative Price Realignment Impact of Price Changes on Headline Inflation\1 (percent change in IPCA after one year) 10 percent Real Exchange Rate Depreciation Non-Tradable Tradable Regulated 2004 to 2015 10 percent Rise in Regulated Prices Tradable Non-Tradable Regulated (Indirect) Regulated (Direct) 1999 to 2015 2004 to 2015 Source: Staff Estimates. \1 Estimated responses. 90 percent confidence bands. IPCA-weighted contributions to headline IPCA inflation. The direct regulated effect is the effect of the initial 10 percent rise in regulated prices; the indirect effect captures all subsequent changes in regulated pricesdue to second-round effects and inertia. Two sharp relative-price realignments occurred in 2015, contributing to a spike in inflation. Headline inflation rose to 10.7 in December 2015, more than 6 percent above the center of the central bank’s tolerance range. Regulated prices were a key contributor, rising by almost 18 percent over the year. Over this time, the exchange rate also depreciated by around 20 percent in real effective terms, putting further pressure on tradables’ prices. While boosting inflation in the short term, adjustments were necessary. In the several years prior to 2015, regulated prices had been contained by government policy, creating distortions, and contributing to rising inflation expectations. In the electricity sector, a policy to subsidize electricity prices was introduced in 2012, increasing demand despite early signs of drought, and driving companies to borrow to cover higher generation costs. In an attempt to protect consumers from rising international prices, Petrobras was directed to sell fuel at a loss from 2012 to early 2014, contributing to rising debt levels at the company and a deterioration in its share price. The recent increases in regulated prices have alleviated these distortions. Likewise, the depreciation of the currency has moved it towards levels more consistent with fundamentals, improving Brazil’s competitiveness. Page 17 Box 3. Relative Price Realignment (Concluded) (percent year-over-year, deviation from center of tolerance range) Headline Inflation and Contributions, based on 1999-2015 estimates\1 The impact on inflation has been large and broad based. Regulated prices currently have a significant weight in Brazil’s CPI (around 25 percent of the basket), making the direct effect of regulated-price increases on inflation particularly large; the impact of an exchange rate depreciation is much smaller in comparison, but still significant. Many regulated goods and services are direct inputs into production (gasoline and electricity, e.g.), which leads to second-round effects that can broaden the impact of any price changes. Moreover, price- and wage-indexation perpetuate price shocks and spread their impact across the economy. _____________________________ Estimates based on vector-autoregressive models estimated over two different monthly sample periods. The VARs include the output gap (HP-filtered BCB activity index) and monthly percent changes of: the real effective exchange rate; wholesale prices; regulated prices (IPCA); non-regulated prices (IPCA); and tradable prices (IPCA). Headline IPCA inflation is derived by weighting together each of the three subcomponents of the IPCA index. To identify the shocks, regulated- price inflation is assumed to be the most exogenous variable and the real exchange rate is assumed to be the most endogenous. Source: Staff Estimates. \1 Historical shock decompostion from a VAR estimated over the period 1999-2015. Direct regulated-price contributions are the IPCA-weighted contributions from regulated prices. Indirect contributions capture all other effects from regulated-price changes. Regulated(Indirect) Regulated(Direct) Exchange Rate Other Fiscal policy outcomes have been disappointing. In 2015 the non-financial public sector primary deficit reached 1.9 percent of GDP (a far cry from the original target of a surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP), and the overall deficit was 10.4 percent of GDP. The key driver was a fall of 4.8 percent in real revenue collection, which was partially offset by a decline in real expenditures. Interest payments also increased substantially, including as a result of the FX swap program, which had losses of 1.5 percent of GDP. The targets for the 2016 primary balance were repeatedly revised, with a final large downward revision introduced mid-year. The new government reduced the 2016 federal primary balance target to -170 billion reais , or some -2.7 percent of GDP, reflecting the growth in items indexed to past inflation and the minimum wage and continuing revenue weakness. As of September 2016, meeting this target appeared feasible, but the outcome may depend on the yield of the repatriation tax. The strengthening of the currency has generated profits on the FX swaps in 2016, helping avoid an increase in the overall deficit. Financing the large deficits and falling maturities became significantly more expensive throughout 2015, with the rise in borrowing costs starting ahead of the loss of investment grade which took place between September and December 2015. But no difficulties arose in the placement of new debt, in part owing to the favorable composition of public debt by instrument and creditor (see Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) Annex and the Balance Sheet Analysis (BSA) matrix in Appendix III). Borrowing costs have fallen significantly in the course of 2016 with the change in government and the prospects of fiscal reforms. For The settlement of irregular obligations to public banks carried over from 2014 (the so-called “pedaladas”) contributed as well. The incurrence of these irregular obligations was one of the reasons for the impeachment of President Rousseff. Page 18 example, the yield on the 5-year bond fell from 16.5 percent at end-December 2015 to 11.7 percent at end-September 2016. Many subnational governments have been crippled by a confluence of the recession and unsustainable expenditure mandates. The recession has caused states’ revenues from all sources to fall sharply in 2015 − 16, making financing of their rising mandatory spending, chiefly on salaries and retirement pensions, increasingly difficult (see Selected Issues Paper). Many states have raised tax rates and sold assets to cope with fiscal stress. Since late 2015, several states have been paying salaries late and/or have been using third-party funds held in escrow to make ends meet. Rio de Janeiro defaulted on federally guaranteed loans from IFIs in 2016, and obtained emergency federal transfers that helped it to host the Olympics (Box 4). The dire situation of the states is understated by fiscal statistics, which are compiled on a cash-basis (Table 3) and do not show all extra-budgetary operations and new arrears, and are subject to classification problems (the significance of data problems is illustrated by S&P’s recent decision to stop issuing ratings for Rio de Janeiro’s debt owing to data gaps). To provide states with relief, the federal government (the states’ main creditor) agreed to a temporary standstill in the servicing of federal loans, and many states are lobbying the federal government for additional support. Box 4. Fiscal Crisis in Rio de Janeiro The state of Rio de Janeiro epitomizes the subnational fiscal crisis in Brazil. In July 2016, Rio de Janeiro declared a “state of calamity” over public finances and received a R$2.9 billion transfer from the federal government to guarantee the payment of security forces during the Olympic Games. This episode put the state on the spotlight and increased the media attention towards a subnational fiscal crisis that affects some of the largest states in the country. At the end of 2015, Rio Grande do Sul had already breached the debt limit established by the Fiscal Responsibility Law (at 200 percent of net current revenues) and Rio de Janeiro and Minas Gerais were rapidly approaching the limit. A number of states have been able to avert such rapid deterioration of public finances and find themselves in better fiscal shape. Rio de Janeiro has been running arrears due to cash shortages. In 2015, faced with falling revenues and a federally-imposed tight credit constraint, Rio de Janeiro prioritized its payroll. Like other states, it obtained cash-flow relief from the suspension of debt service payments to the Federal government in 2016, but this was not enough. Cash shortages led Rio to increase payment deferrals and Despesas de Exercicios Anteriores (DEAs), which are exceptional expenditures not included in the budget and postponed to the following year. These payment delays included electricity, water, gas, phone, security and cleaning services. In 2015, 24 states accumulated R$15.4 billion (0.3 percent of Brazil’s GDP) in DEAs (an increase of 44 percent from 2014), and Rio de Janeiro was the state with the largest increase (185 percent). Rio de Janeiro also failed to service debt to international financial institutions, triggering federal guarantees. By August 2016, Rio de Janeiro accumulated a 4-month delay in transferring to commercial banks the amounts withheld from state employees’ paychecks to service their personal loans. In response, banks stopped payroll loans to state government employees in Rio de Janeiro. These are the “judicial deposits” constituted by private parties with disputes against the states (or against other private parties) awaiting resolution by the courts. The temporary use of these resources has been allowed by law, but the funds will need to be made up. Page 19 Box 4. Fiscal Crisis in Rio de Janeiro (Concluded) The fiscal crisis in Rio de Janeiro stems largely from structural fiscal imbalances . The decline in revenues in Rio de Janeiro has both a cyclical component (the recession reduced tax collection, especially from ICMS) and a structural component (the oil price slump which dramatically reduced revenues from royalties and accentuated recessionary conditions in Rio de Janeiro, where Petrobras is headquartered and was building a large petrochemical complex, now cancelled). The increase in expenditures is also structural in nature and has been building up over a long period of time. In 2015, payroll expenditures (R$17 billion) and pensions for inactive workers and retirees (R$11 billion) represented 32 and 20 percent of total primary expenditures respectively. Between 2009 and 2015 these two expenditures increased 70 percent in real terms, driven largely by salary increases, putting Rio de Janeiro in the leading position in this spending category (see Selected Issues Paper). While its economy was growing and oil was booming Rio de Janeiro managed to keep up with this structural increase in spending, but as soon as the downturn hit the region, the decline in revenue made it very hard to finance its spending: in 2016 monthly payments of both salaries and pensions consumed 90 percent of monthly revenues. Structural fiscal reforms are required to solve the fiscal crisis. Despite the savings from the federal debt rescheduling program (equivalent to R$2.5 billion) and a large number of ad-hoc measures, the state still faces a gap in its finances of R$16 billion in 2016 (2.4 percent of the state’s GDP and ¼ percent of Brazil’s GDP). Structural fiscal reforms are urgently needed. The subnational fiscal crisis requires a reform of public employment rules and a pension reform at the national level to alleviate the pressure coming from growing mandatory expenditures. In Rio de Janeiro and possibly some other states, new sources of recurrent revenue also need to be considered. Financial markets have been volatile. Major market movements through the last 12–18 months can often be traced to political and policy shocks, such as the successive loosening of fiscal targets and the impeachment of President Rousseff. The real depreciated by around 50 percent against the U.S. dollar over the year to December 2015, and by around 20 percent in real effective terms. Over the same period, stock prices lost 10 percent of their value and domestic government bond yields rose by more than 300 basis points. Over the course of 2016, these indicators have regained lost ground amid expectations of improved economic policies and growth prospects, and a more generalized reduction in risk aversion among global investors. This has been reflected in a sharp reversal in the FCI in 2016Q2, and in renewed bond placements abroad by corporates. The central bank has intervened in the foreign exchange market less frequently than in the past. Intervention in 2015 was appropriately limited to containing short-term excessive volatility, broadly symmetric, and continued to rely on the use of FX swaps and, to a lesser extent, FX repos. Taking advantage of the market rally that began in March 2016, the central bank has lowered the net notional value of outstanding FX swaps to about US$32 billion (from a high of about US$110 billion) by issuing reverse swaps and not rolling over maturing swaps. The external position has improved (Appendix II). The current account deficit narrowed from 4.3 percent of GDP in 2014 to 3.3 percent in 2015, but Brazil’s external position remained moderately weaker than the level consistent with fundamentals according to the External Balance Assessment (EBA). Due to the depreciation in the second half of 2015, the real effective exchange rate was only slightly overvalued at the beginning of 2016 but given the currency appreciation this Page 20 year, earlier competitiveness gains have been eroded. The real depreciation in 2015 was reflected largely in improvements in the current account in 2016 owing to lagged effects on exports (Appendix III). International reserves remain a source of strength and capital flows are stable, although their composition has changed. At US$365 billion, reserves are above the IMF’s adequacy metric. Over 2015-2016, equity liability flows (both direct investment and portfolio accounts) remained strong as foreign investors pursued private equity deals made attractive by the weaker real. But debt liability flows fell sharply, especially in 2015, reflecting the hardening of market access for Petrobras and other large corporations. Net direct investment fully financed the current account deficit in both 2015 and 2016. After rising sharply over 2014, the share of intercompany loans in direct investment liability flows fell to about 25 percent in 2015 as proceeds from overseas borrowing by foreign incorporated subsidiaries of Brazilian parent companies, notably Petrobras, dropped sharply (Appendix III). Net portfolio debt liabilities fell to close to zero in 2015 from 1 percent of GDP in previous years. So far in 2016, firms have enjoyed greater market access relative to 2015 and FDI has remained strong, including as a result of intercompany loans by foreign companies to their Brazilian subsidiaries, but portfolio flows have remained subdued. Brazil is in the downturn phase of the financial cycle, which warrants enhanced monitoring . Corporates are significantly bank dependent, and the expansion of bank credit for many years contributed to rising leveraging among firms (see Appendix III, where balance sheet matrices for 2007 and 2014 are analyzed). The credit cycle has turned, however, as banks (increasingly including public banks) have been slowing credit supply while leveraged corporations and households face unfavorable income prospects. In fact, contracting domestic demand and a negative output gap have been reflected in a reduction in demand for credit, including for subsidized lending extended by BNDES. Facing withdrawals of savings deposits in 2015, Caixa Economica reduced the supply of mortgages by tightening LTV requirements. The LTVs were reversed in 2016 as the bank compensated for lower deposits with alternative, albeit more expensive, funding sources. Nominal credit growth was negative (-0.6 percent year over year) in August 2016, for the first time since 2002, reflecting a decline in demand, tighter underwriting standards, and the authorities’ decision to reduce the rate of expansion of public banks. Until about Q1-2016, financial conditions (measured by the FCI) had been tightening amid higher foreign funding costs, monetary policy tightening and the depreciation of the real (see Selected Issues Paper). Since March, however, the FCI reversed course with the prospects of government change. Macro-prudential policies have been used appropriately . The central bank relaxed reserve requirements on deposits for small- and medium-sized banks in an effort to support These changes were corporate decisions by Caixa, and thus are not considered macro-prudential policy actions. Caixa is the dominant player in the residential mortgage market. Financial, credit, and business cycles are estimated using a variety of commonly-used statistical methods and a semi-structural model of the Brazilian economy (see Selected Issues Paper). In the model-based approach financial, credit, and business cycles are jointly estimated and can be projected in a consistent way. Staff’s baseline output and credit forecasts benefit from this approach. Page 21 liquidity and bolster certain types of loan (housing, agricultural and infrastructure). This move was consistent with macro-prudential principles, as it helped soften a declining credit cycle and alleviate liquidity risks, and reversed the previous tightening of reserve requirements. After deteriorating in 2015, the health of the banking sector improved in the first half of 2016 as shocks to funding dissipated. In particular: Solvency. The system-wide capital ratios fell in 2015, but have since increased and are well above the regulatory minima. However, capital ratios of public banks, which are much lower than those of private banks, have continued to drop mainly due to higher Basel III deductions from capital. In an effort to bolster capital ratios, the two largest public banks have already cut dividends and are planning to sell assets, including by issuing initial public offerings of part of their operations. The decrease in capital in 2015 largely reflects higher unrealized losses on fixed income securities, an expansion of balance sheets from exchange rate depreciation, and a significant increase in deferred tax assets following an increase in the tax rate. The increase in capital ratios of private banks in 2016 was mainly driven by reduction of balance sheets (also due to exchange rate appreciation) and higher unrealized gains on fixed income securities as government yields plunged following the government change. Liquidity. Liquidity risk increased in 2015 due to withdrawals of funding, especially saving deposits. This partly reflects a search for yield through the purchase of mutual funds shares and banks’ deposits-like instruments. However, the overall funding profile of the system remains strong and improved in the first half of 2016 as banks increased holdings of liquid assets in an environment of low credit supply. External funding exposures are low (at around 12 percent of total funding) and foreign exchange risks are largely hedged. Profitability. While banks’ net income after taxes increased in 2015 reflecting higher tax credits and higher deferred tax assets following the tax change, net income before taxes dropped significantly in 2015, owing to a spike in provisions for loan losses and higher funding costs following the sovereign downgrade. On the other hand, net incomes after taxes fell in the first half of 2016 pushing profitability indicators below 2015 levels. However, profits before taxes surged significantly during the first half of 2016 primarily due to higher spreads as a result of higher credit risk. The poor performance of the stocks, especially Petrobras shares, has impacted BNDES’ equity portfolio with the damage being recognized in its mid-2016 income statement. Asset quality. Banks’ non-performing loans (NPLs) have gradually increased over 2015 and reached 3.6 percent of total loans in July 2016 (4.1 percent if restructured loans are added to the stock of NPLs). To further limit increases in NPLs, banks have been renegotiating the terms of some loans and writing-off delinquent loans. Banks have remained well provisioned with loan loss reserves covering 150 percent of NPLs. Page 22 Nonfinancial corporations are vulnerable. Brazilian firms stand out in the region for their high leverage and interest servicing, and for more pronounced declines in profitability. While the depreciation of the real increased leverage, the impact on profitability and capital has so far been mitigated by widespread hedging and the recent appreciation of the real. The corruption scandal at Petrobras and credit ratings downgrades hampered access to foreign credit for many Brazilian corporates, motivating some large firms, including Petrobras, to develop deleveraging strategies in the last 12-18 months. While market access has improved in 2016 for some firms, many corporations remain under pressure, as revealed, for example, by the rise in bankruptcy protection applications and the rising share of larger firms in these processes. In fact, one of Brazil’s largest telecommunications companies, Oi, filed for bankruptcy protection on US$19 billion of debt in June, contributing to a spike in provisioning. Household debt has begun to edge down, and service costs have stabilized at a high level. Household debt-to-disposable income has fallen over the course of 2016 reflecting both demand and supply factors; the share of mortgage debt has increased to one third, but underwriting standards, including mortgage LTVs, have tightened. The household debt service-to-income ratio has been broadly stable at 22 percent for more than a year, with rising interest costs largely offsetting lower principal payments as a share of income. Brazil: Bankruptcy Protection Applications Index (12-month rolling average; higher means more applications) Medium size Companies Micro and Small Companies Large Companies Sources: Serasa. Nonfinancial Corporates: Brazil and LA4 (Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru) Leverage BRA LA4 BRA LA4 Median Weaker quartile 2010Q3 2015Q3 2016Q1 Liquidity Profitability BRA LA4 BRA LA4 Median Weaker quartile 2010Q3 2015Q3 2016Q1 Interest coverage n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. BRA LA4 BRA LA4 BRA LA4 BRA LA4 Median Weaker quartile 2010Q3 2015Q3 2016Q1 Median Weaker quartile 2010Q3 2015Q3 2016Q1 Sources: Bloomberg and IMF Staff calculations. Approximately 250 firms for Brazil and 350 firms for LA4. Leverage: total debt to total equity (percent); profitability: return on equity (percent, 4-quarter average); interest coverage: EBITDA/total interest (ratio, 4-quarter average); liquidity: cash ratio (cash and equivalents over current liabilities), 4-quarter average). Brazil: Household Indebtedness (in percent of disposable income) Debt Service: Interest Debt Service: Principal Debt-to-Income Ratio, rhs Source: Central Bank of Brazil. The Portuguese term is recuperacão judicial which could also be translated as “court-approved reorganization.” Page 23 The change in government has brought a change in the design and orientation of several key policies. The government has sent to Congress a constitutional amendment limiting the growth in federal noninterest spending to the rate of consumer price inflation of the previous year for the next 20 years, with an opportunity for a revision in the tenth year. This reform seeks to overcome the effect of political fragmentation on Brazil’s budgetary process by imposing a hard budget constraint at the constitutional level. Also, the government has accepted a large primary deficit in 2016, and proposed a primary balance target for 2017 in line with the operation of the expenditure ceiling. The proposed 2017 budget also includes some ½ percent of GDP in one-off revenues from the auctioning of concessions and asset sales. Under these policies, there would still be significant real spending growth in 2017 (if inflation falls, as expected); the harder part of the adjustment would start in 2018, once inflation has broadly stabilized, preventing further real growth in spending. The government has also announced a reform of the social security system, much needed in its own right and also necessary to make the expenditure limit viable. Against the background of a marked drop in interest rate futures, the Central Bank has made a return of inflation to the central target by end-2017 a priority, and indicated that an easing of policies can be considered once visible progress in fiscal reforms has been secured. The BCB has also stepped up its communication practices and the new government announced the intention to grant the central bank operational autonomy through a constitutional amendment that provides immunity to board members from lower-court prosecution, while removing the ministerial status that is now conferred on the BCB governor. The infrastructure concessions program has had difficulties gaining momentum in an environment marked by uncertainty, low growth, and tight financing conditions, especially for large construction companies implicated in the Petrobras corruption scandal. However, a newly announced institutional framework and forthcoming changes in regulatory agencies may stimulate a pick-up in private sector participation (see Appendix III). While recent corruption investigations signal a welcome move towards greater transparency, they have also added to political and economic uncertainty. The authorities have been implementing strong mechanisms to oversee public expenditure and recover losses to the state due to budgetary irregularities. This has been notably achieved through the work of the Federal Court of Accounts, the Federal Public Prosecutors Office, the Financial Intelligence Unit and the ENCCLA . Steps taken to strengthen the anti-corruption (AC) and anti-money laundering (AML) frameworks, such as the revisions to the AML Law in 2012, and the 2013 AC law have provided additional tools to investigate and prosecute corruption. Nevertheless, high-level enforcement The reform, with minor changes, passed its first vote in the lower house on October 10. It still needs another vote in that house and two votes in the Senate. See Appendix III for a general discussion of political fragmentation and its interaction with government finance. Estratégia Nacional de Combate à Corrupção e à Lavagem de Dinheiro (ENCCLA). Page 24 actions have added uncertainty to the existing negative impact that large-scale corruption has on investment, growth, and political stability.