The stance of monetary policy should remain unchanged until inflation is more certain to converge to the central target. In the current context, marked by uncertainty about the output gap, approval of key reforms, and related movements in the exchange rate, maintaining current monetary policy settings would be broadly appropriate. The spike in inflation caused by regulated- price and exchange-rate adjustments over 2015, as well as inflation persistence related to the more recent drought-related food price shock, are expected to wane soon, while the effects of weak demand and the recent exchange rate appreciation are expected to increasingly put downward pressure on inflation. This would allow an easing cycle to begin in 2017. Nevertheless, there is a risk that second-round effects of high inflation in 2015 contribute to an increase in inflation persistence. Monetary policy should, therefore, remain tight until inflation expectations settle closer to the mid- point of the central bank’s tolerance range. In this context, tangible progress in fiscal adjustment and reforms would create space for easing monetary policy. The intention to strengthen the inflation targeting framework by enhancing the autonomy of the central bank and improved central bank communication are welcome. These steps will boost institutional credibility and may contribute to faster disinflation (see Selected Issues Paper). The exchange rate should remain the key external adjustment variable. Intervention should remain limited to episodes of disorderly market conditions. Reserve buffers should be preserved, resisting pressures to use them for ad-hoc purposes or for defending the currency in the event of sustained capital outflows (see RAM). Continuing gradually to reduce the net notional value of FX swaps, including by issuance of reverse FX swaps, is advisable. If improved market sentiment from the swift implementation of structural reforms or more generally as foreign investors search for yield in an environment of low interest rates leads to increased capital inflows with potentially unwarranted appreciation, the options available would be to tighten fiscal policy (as in Staff’s recommended path, for example, provided growth remains positive), issue more reverse FX swaps (involving some fiscal cost), further reserve accumulation (with higher sterilization costs), and an easing of the policy rate while raising the TJLP (with tradeoffs concerning the disinflation effort). While the health of the banking system remains largely sound, the resilience of the banking sector should be bolstered. The health of the banking system remains largely sound, although the recession has affected profitability and asset quality. The mission welcomes the moderation in the growth rate of credit by public banks, their plans to reduce direct financing of large corporations with market access, reducing credit market distortions, and the intention of the two largest public banks to strengthen their capital position. To make the banking sector more resilient to shocks, financial safety nets should be improved by strengthening the procedures for use of the deposit insurance fund (for example, by securing adequate funding for the fund), enhancing the central bank’s emergency liquidity assistance, and modernizing the resolution regime. To strengthen transparency and accountability and reinforce the authorities’ ability to identify and respond to future risks, an explicit mandate with clear responsibilities should be given to a committee comprising all financial regulators, the deposit Guarantee Fund, and the Ministry of finance, for macro-prudential oversight. Also, a mandate should be given to a separate entity that Page 30 should set up a coordination framework to support timely and effective decision-making in a crisis situation, and periodically test the capacity of the authorities to respond to crisis scenarios. The authorities are also urged to follow through on their plans to strengthen private insolvency frameworks, with the aim of expediting the bankruptcy process and reducing default losses incurred by creditors. Risks arising from high private sector leverage underscore the need for continued vigilance and close monitoring of the health of the corporate sector and its links to the banking sector.