Structural reforms targeted at reducing costs of doing business, enhancing efficiency, and fostering investment are essential to strengthen growth over the medium term. While some of these reforms are difficult politically, they come at very little economic cost and would hasten a return to growth and bolster it beyond the current projection of 2 percent over the medium term—although quantifying the precise impact on growth of these reforms is difficult. Key areas to consider are: Infrastructure bottlenecks . The infrastructure concessions program is critical to alleviating supply- side constraints and boosting competitiveness. Following through on recently announced enhancements and regulatory reforms would help make the program more attractive to investors, while maintaining high standards of governance and program design. Tax reform . Brazil’s tax system is complex and burdensome. One important way to reduce the cost of doing business would be to simplify the federal PIS/COFINS and the State Tax on the Circulation of Goods and Services (ICMS). Opening the economy . Tariffs and nontariff-barrier reductions, a revision of the policy on domestic content requirements, and pursuing free-trade negotiations outside Mercosur would help increase competition and efficiency. Efficient allocation of savings . A review of credit earmarking rules and other distortions would be advisable to ensure that national savings go to their most productive uses. Labor reform . Reforms aimed at facilitating productive employment and reducing incentives for informality would promote job-creation, investment, and growth. Reforms should be mindful of first-time entrants in the labor market, a segment composed largely of young people and relatively sensitive to cyclical fluctuations. The moderation of the minimum wage indexation rule, proposed earlier on fiscal grounds, would also contribute to restoring youth employment. The PIS/COFINS is an indirect levy earmarked for the funding of social security, and is thus considered a “contribution” instead of a tax. Page 31 Fiscal statistics should be made more comprehensive. In particular: A full balance sheet for general government should be published. Although balance sheets are published by the federal and other governments, the published balance sheet for general government includes only debt and financial assets. Among the missing items are accounts payable, including floating debt ( restos a pagar ), and liabilities related to civil servants’ pensions. Given the importance of state-owned enterprises and public banks in the analysis of fiscal policy, the government should also publish fiscal statistics for the entire nonfinancial public sector (i.e., including Eletrobras and Petrobras) and for the entire public sector (including BNDES, Caixa Econômica Federal, and Banco do Brasil). However, these entities should not be included in the calculation of fiscal targets (as including them would introduce new distortions). Strengthening fiscal transparency in states’ fiscal reporting (including by adopting standard accounting practices) and timely monitoring and enforcement of fiscal rules are key challenges. The effective implementation of transparency, anti-corruption and AML measures would contribute to enhancing predictability for businesses and ensure a greater perception of fairness. Authorities’ commitments to make data on public procurement open by default, implement the recent legislation on conflict of interest, and strengthen whistleblowing mechanisms should be implemented. To further strengthen the effectiveness of the anti-corruption and AML frameworks, the authorities should eliminate regulations that provide opportunities for bribes. Additionally, the authorities aim to improve access to and sharing of banking and fiscal information, and prevent the abuse of appeal provisions and statutes of limitations in legal proceedings, in line with Supreme Court jurisprudence. Authorities should also strengthen provisional measures and confiscation, effectively pursue a larger number of significant corruption, money laundering and illicit enrichment cases, and enhance the AML/CFT supervision of banks’ obligations regarding politically exposed persons.