Background The financial system remains stable and liquid, although profitability has declined. Liquidity remained plentiful due to rising deposits and low credit demand. At the same time, external liabilities of the banking system declined further to 16 percent of GDP compared to an end-2008 peak of 27 percent, and banks’ net foreign assets reached a small surplus compared to a peak deficit of 18 percent of GDP in 2008. IFRS provisioning for NPLs has affected profits, but capital adequacy remains high with all banks meeting the minimum regulatory requirement of 12 percent and system-wide capital at 16.9 percent of risk-weighted assets as of September 2013. NPLs have stabilized, but remain near their peak. As of September, 17.2 percent of loans were classified as impaired (with most of them in excess of 180 days past due). Some banks have recently been more proactive in resolving NPLs by claiming and removing associated collateral from Page 20 their balance sheets, a process that is made difficult by a number of factors, including a depressed real estate market and an ineffective and unpredictable insolvency framework (see RAM and Box 3). Box 3. Resolving NPLs in Bulgaria A strategy to gradually reduce the stock of NPLs will improve the investment environment and help sustain the recovery while preserving stability. However, a number of constraints have limited progress: With NPLs well provisioned, many banks see benefit in a “wait and see approach.” Banks report that they expect collateral values to improve as the economy recovers and the current political uncertainty is resolved. The foreclosure process is marked by uncertainty about its cost, length, and outcome . This uncertainty also contributes to the wait-and-see approach by banks. Disincentives in the tax system for quick write offs . It is uncertain when losses can be recognized for tax purposes. Limited scope for market-based solutions. Like in many Eastern and Central European countries, the market for distressed assets is underdeveloped, with limited experience with direct sales and securitization. The EU Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV) that becomes effective in 2014 will require supervisory changes . Capital–based (“specific”) provisions will need to be phased out and the minimum capital adequacy requirements adapted to the new framework (Box 4). Policy issues Recent efforts by some banks to address the stock of distressed assets and claim associated collateral are steps in the right direction. Credit risk to regulatory capital is substantially mitigated by the current dual provisioning scheme, and plentiful liquidity implies that credit growth at present is not restricted by supply factors. Reduction of NPLs through asset disposal and release of associated collateral will also be important to reduce the administrative and legal costs to banks associated with managing these assets and, more broadly, to reduce asset price uncertainty and support future investment. Recent improvements to the insolvency framework that limit the backdating of insolvencies are welcome but further reforms are needed. Recommendations in last year’s Staff Report remain valid, including the introduction of a fast-track court approval procedure for pre-agreed reorganization plans and out-of-court debt restructuring guidelines, which in other countries have facilitated speedy, cost-effective, and market-friendly settlements. The treatment of loan losses in the tax system should be adjusted to remove potential disincentives to write offs. Page 21 Box 4. Transition to CRD IV BNB supervisory authorities have maintained conservative capital buffers . Under IFRS, expected losses from future events and forward looking considerations are not taken into account. However, BNB supervisory authorities have complemented IFRS provisions with additional capital cushions (“specific provisions”) calculated on an expected loss model and deducted from regulatory capital. Specific provisions are a segregated part of capital that do not affect reported profits (unlike IFRS provisions) but are excluded when computing regulatory capital. Under CRD IV specific provisions will need to be phased out but the authorities are taking steps to preserve appropriate buffers . In order to promote capital conservation, BNB supervisors plan to use available national discretion under the CRD IV package. Specifically, the authorities will use the flexibility under Pillar 1 of the Basel Accord to impose the maximum capital conservation and systemic capital buffers on all banks. In addition, the BNB will use the national discretion afforded under Pillar 2 to impose higher capital requirements on those institutions exhibiting a higher risk profile. The authorities will maintain their conservative approach to bank supervision under the new European framework. They view existing capital and liquidity buffers as critical to maintaining stability. They intend to use available flexibility to maintain high capital adequacy requirements and ensure conservative collateral valuation, which will be particularly important once specific provisions are eliminated. They view NPLs as adequately provisioned to insulate against risks to the stability of the system and recognize that their gradual reduction would be supported by greater efficiencies in the legal system. The authorities do not intend to participate in the close cooperation framework of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, noting the absence of liquidity and solvency support as well as the lack of voting rights in the Governing Council of the ECB for non euro area participants. They remain fully engaged in the reform process at the European level, however, and emphasized the importance of ensuring equal treatment in the new framework for all EU member states. Corruption Perception in CESEE (Rank in world, 2013) Estonia Poland Slovenia Lithuania Hungary Latvia Turkey Czech Republic Croatia Slovakia FYR Macedonia Montenegro Romania Serbia Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Moldova Kosovo Albania Belarus Russia Ukraine