Adverse investment, population, and productivity developments have weighed on Bulgaria’s growth potential. Bulgaria’s pre- global crisis boost in growth was driven by favorable capital, labor and productivity dynamics. Since the late 2000s investment has slumped, labor contributions turned negative, and productivity growth came to a virtual standstill (Appendix I). The fall in potential growth is in line with that of many other countries in the region although in Bulgaria’s case the potential growth decline was driven by all three factors—labor, capital and total factor productivity—with labor accounting for the largest share. V V K V Z V K K P EE Page 18 Private investment has been subdued for the last five years, notwithstanding a pick-up in public investment supported by EU funds. After the investment boom associated with EU accession in 2007 and supported by foreign capital inflows prior to the financial crisis, private investment contracted sharply on account of a slump in FDI (Appendix I). There remain important constraints to private investment, including red- tape, inefficiency in the provision of public services, and a shortage of skilled labor. Public investment has been growing since 2012, supported by EU funds. The overall investment share has remained largely flat at around 21 percent of GDP since 2011, falling short of the level of around 25 percent typically considered necessary for a catching-up economy. Persistent concerns regarding the rule of law and corruption add to business environment challenges and undermine confidence in the macro-financial system. Corruption is an important business obstacle. Empirically, higher levels of corruption have been shown to be associated with lower per-capita GDP. Corruption weakens the state’s capacity to perform its core functions and affects growth via increased cost of investment, limited build-up of human capital, and productivity-hampering rent- seeking. While the EU’s 2016 Cooperation and Verification Mechanism report acknowledged that some steps in judicial reform and the fight against corruption had been taken, important challenges remain. Emigration has led to a declining working age population and lower productivity. Bulgaria’s population has declined significantly during recent decades, reflecting emigration and aging developments. Country-specific push factors coupled with overall pull factors have induced large migration waves from Bulgaria to Western EU countries. Emigration, notably of the skilled Spence, M. (2008), “The Growth Report Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development”, World Bank. See World Bank Governance Indicators, WEF Global Competitiveness Indicators, Transparency International, EU Eurobarometer, and German Chamber of Commerce in Bulgaria. IMF (2016), “Corruption: Costs and Mitigating Strategies”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/05. nu PPP Page 19 labor force, has weighed on labor productivity and GDP growth via lower investment and consumption as well as higher wages and taxes. Staff analysis shows that many SOEs in infrastructure sectors have become bottlenecks that inhibit higher growth and productivity. Several SOEs, notably in the energy and transport sectors, are loss-making and have accumulated significant debts, accounting for fiscal contingent liabilities of about 14 percent of GDP in 2014. In addition, SOEs tend to be less profitable and less efficient in their allocation of capital and labor resources than their private peers. Ineffective SOE governance, political interference, and poor output quality, notably in the electricity sector, weigh on competitiveness and investment. Decisive structural reform efforts are needed to support short-term growth and to boost Bulgaria’s medium-term growth potential . Specifically, Improving the conditions for investment would help both short-term growth and medium-term potential. The Bulgarian authorities have been working on an action plan to raise investment. Their plans include improving infrastructure, removing regulatory bottlenecks for investment, strengthening vocational educational quality and skill development to improve the employability of workers, and enhancing the consistency and efficiency of administrative procedures. Swift implementation will be key to achieve tangible effects on the investment climate in Bulgaria Ensuring a smooth transition to the new programming period will enable Bulgaria to reap maximum growth benefits from EU-funded public investment in the near and medium terms. It will be important to ensure timely implementation of the laws on EU funds and on public procurement, including enhanced ex-ante control and e-procurement procedures. Training programs to build capacity at the municipal level will help improve EU fund absorption. Fighting corruption and adopting a comprehensive judiciary overhaul would provide better conditions for investment and productivity growth. In particular, the authorities should adopt a comprehensive anti-corruption law, free of amendments that compromise its effectiveness, and establish a single agency with adequate powers and independence, consolidating the anti-corruption work currently being performed in an uncoordinated manner. Stepped-up efforts are also needed to establish a track record of successful Atoyan et al. (2016), “Emigration and Its Economic Impact on Eastern Europe”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/07. See the Selected Issues Paper of “Bulgaria: State-owned Enterprises in Regional Perspective.“ ee z hu Page 20 investigations and prosecutions of alleged high-level corruption. In this regard, BNB’s efforts to ensure that banks apply specific due diligence measures on accounts related to politically exposed persons are welcome and should be strengthened, notably to ensure that the source of wealth is established, when appropriate The impact of emigration on potential growth calls for active labor market policies and institutional reforms. Recent IMF analysis shows that targeted labor market policies can mitigate effects of emigration. Closing half of the gap of labor participation rates between Bulgaria and the EU frontier has the potential to fully offset the harmful effects of emigration on future growth. Active labor market policies can be made more effective by enhancing awareness among potential participants, improving cooperation between employers and social authorities, and better targeting training and education to reduce skill mismatch. Such measures can raise labor participation, as the number of participants in active labor market policy programs relative to the population of long-term unemployed individuals is among the lowest in the EU. Moreover, upgrading Bulgaria’s institutional environment and creating opportunities for reintegration—for example by accelerating recognition of foreign qualifications and deregulating service-sector professions—would promote return migration. Enhancing the governance and performance of state-owned enterprises would help reduce contingent liabilities and improve productivity. Bulgaria would benefit from a comprehensive SOE governance reform, oriented at international best practices as formulated by the OECD. Specifically, defining the scope and mandate of SOEs, ensuring effective oversight of their financial performance and fiscal risks in a dedicated unit in government, establishing clear performance targets and evaluation tools for SOEs, as well as professionalizing SOE boards would significantly improve the coherence and effectiveness of SOE governance. Moreover, deregulation, opening up for foreign investors, and enhancing competition in SOE-dominated industries, in particular the energy sector, have been shown to strengthen productivity across all service-dependent sectors of the economy. These Atoyan et al. (2016), “Emigration and Its Economic Impact on Eastern Europe”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/07. European Commission (2016), “Active Labor Market Policies”, European Semester Thematic Fiche. World Bank (2015), “Productivity in Bulgaria. Trends and Options.” Notes: Results are based on simulations in a semi-structural general equilibrium model using UN migration projections. Black squares denote the estimated GDP impact on real GDP by 2030 (percentage change in the level). Red diamonds indicate the impact on GDP by 2030 if half the labor force participation gap via-à-vis the EU frontier were to be closed. – – – – Z V EE K EE EE X Page 21 measures, combined with a strategy to reduce contingent liabilities, would help enhance SOE performance, lower fiscal risks, and support productivity and growth in the economy. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff recommendations. They stressed their commitment to improve the business environment by implementing their action plan for attracting private investment. Regarding public investment, they intended to further improve EU funds absorption during this programming period, and noted ongoing efforts to improve administrative capacity. The authorities also reiterated their commitment to advance the anti-corruption agenda. Emigration was acknowledged as a key economic challenge and the authorities noted that they are pursuing some active labor market policies to improve labor force participation. The authorities are considering legislation to better monitor SOEs’ financial performance and fiscal risks, and expressed interest in Fund advice in this area.