Output is projected to recover slowly. Domestic demand is projected to recover gradually, and exports and foreign direct investment will benefit from recovery in Europe. Inflation is projected to be positive but subdued in the short term and, given faster tradables sector productivity and wage growth, slightly above that in the EU in the medium term. The current account would return to a modest deficit in the medium term financed by FDI. Convergence to EU income levels over the coming decades requires accelerated growth. In the baseline, GDP growth is projected to increase from ½ percent in 2013 to 3 percent in the medium term, whereas the EU is projected to reach a growth rate of 2 percent by 2018—a difference of 1 percentage point that implies only very gradual income convergence. Even with a sustained growth differential of 2 percentage points, full income convergence would still take four decades to be achieved. Staff’s views on risks are summarized in the Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) On the domestic side, the political situation remains strained, making needed structural reforms all the more difficult, although Bulgaria’s track record suggests the risk of excessive fiscal relaxation is low. In the financial sector, continued high levels of NPLs, while well provisioned, imply a “collateral overhang” (bad loans backed by property that has not yet been seized and sold) that may deter new investment because of the uncertainty this can create about underlying asset values. On the external side, uncertainty regarding the economic situation in Europe or other partners may have adverse implications for trade and investment. External debt remains significant (92.7 percent of GDP at mid 2013) but has been falling and presents limited rollover risks (see Appendix I). In view of the risks, discussed further in the policies section below, it is imperative to move ahead with growth-enhancing reforms and reinforce defenses to support readiness to respond to adverse shocks. The response to sizable adverse shocks would include utilization of automatic stabilizers, as long as financing conditions permit. The authorities’ views on the outlook and risks were close to the staff’s. They saw slightly more upside in the near term, with a stronger recovery in domestic demand; they also noted that their baseline projections do not take into account the “South Stream” gas pipeline, construction of which they expected to begin in 2014. They agreed on potential external downside risks, but also noted that ongoing diversification of exports to emerging markets was helping reduce their vulnerability to European shocks. Regarding the financial sector, they emphasized that buffers were significant and NPLs did not pose stability concerns, but they agreed that various structural constraints—including related to the legal system—had a negative effect on the pace of disposal of seized collateral by banks. Page 15 Bulgaria: Risk Assessment Matrix (as of November 14, 2013) (Scale: high, medium, or low) Source of Risk Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Inadequate implementation of structural reforms to raise productivity and offset impact of emigration and aging (short/medium term). Excess fiscal relaxation (medium term) NPLs leave asset price uncertainty (short/medium term). Protracted period of slower European growth (medium term). Deeper emerging market slowdown (short/medium term). Financial stress in the euro area re-emerges (short term) High High Intensified political and social discord postpones the structural reform agenda, including reforms that would reduce medium-term fiscal risks. Low potential growth and high structural unemployment resulting in a lack of income convergence; increased fiscal pressures. Low High Heightened spending pressures in a context of political and social discord; lack of progress in addressing medium-term fiscal risks. Loss of standout Bulgarian advantage of fiscal prudence; increased vulnerability to shocks. Medium Medium Impediments to releasing collateral associated with NPLs, including judicial bottlenecks and administrative costs. Lower investment reduces growth. High High Direct negative influence through trade and investment channels. Low potential growth, high structural unemployment and low FDI; continued downturn raises fiscal pressures. Medium Medium Negative surprise, mainly through trade channels. Low potential growth, high structural unemployment. Medium Medium Adverse effects from financial stress of parent banks/corporate and through trade and investment channels. Funding pressures; lower exports, employment, FDI, and growth; continued downturn raises fiscal pressures. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relatively likelihoods of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline. The RAM reflects staff’s views on the sources of risk and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Page 16