The Bulgarian economy has been resilient to shocks . Repercussions from the failure of a large domestically-owned bank in 2014 and spillovers on Bulgarian banks from the Greek crisis in 2015 were largely contained and, since then, macroeconomic conditions have been steadily improving. The output gap is narrowing, unemployment continues to decline, and the current account is broadly in line with fundamentals. The fiscal balance improved significantly in 2015 and the outturn through August 2016 points to considerable overperformance in 2016. Public debt, despite a noticeable increase in 2014, is still among the lowest in Europe. Non-financial corporate sector debt remains high, although a significant share consists of inter-company debt. Nevertheless, there are important challenges: solidifying financial stability, raising potential growth, and addressing the fiscal costs of aging and emigration . The failure of a large domestically-owned bank in 2014 triggered a number of welcome steps to strengthen the financial sector. Continuing these efforts is essential to strengthen confidence and support growth. While there has been recent economic momentum, Bulgaria’s per capita income on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis remains less than half of the EU-28 average. Estimates of potential growth have fallen since the global financial crisis, reflecting declining investment, diminishing gains in productivity, and especially adverse demographic trends (Appendices I and II). There is an urgent need to improve infrastructure and accelerate structural reforms, especially in the energy sector and state-owned enterprises. Difficult reforms will also be required to protect long-term fiscal sustainability in the face of the projected rise of health and pension related spending pressures. Against this background, this Article IV report focuses on three key areas:  Financial stability It discusses the recent banking sector assessment (consisting of an asset quality review (AQR) and stress test) and identifies reforms to strengthen the financial system.  Growth prospects It analyzes the key drivers of medium-term growth, including the role played by emigration and state-owned enterprises in key infrastructure sectors.  Long-term fiscal sustainability It assesses recent fiscal developments, the magnitude of long- term demographic-related spending pressures, and discusses options for addressing them. Page 10