The failure of Corporate Commercial Bank (KTB) last summer exposed shortcomings in Bulgaria’s supervision and crisis management frameworks, while also highlighting the link between financial and fiscal risks under the currency board. Decisive action is needed to improve financial sector supervision and secure confidence in the banking system. At the same time, strengthened measures to reduce NPLs and address the corporate debt overhang are needed. Background The banking system has shown substantial resilience to the damage to confidence resulting from the failure of KTB (Appendix IV) Strong system liquidity, along with the state liquidity support scheme introduced by the BNB and government (and extended to the largest domestic bank, First Investment Bank, FIB) helped calm depositors, averting system-wide spillovers. The injection of state funds into the deposit insurance fund (BDIF) also allowed for the payment of KTB insured deposits in December. Significant system liquidity has been maintained subsequent to the KTB failure, with positive year-on-year deposit growth at year-end 2014. The KTB failure highlighted important gaps in financial sector oversight and the crisis management framework. External audits conducted while the bank was under conservatorship identified serious weaknesses in credit underwriting, related-party lending, and adherence to IFRS standards for nonperforming assets and loan-loss provisions, which were not identified by supervisors or KTB’s auditors. Shortcomings in the legal framework for bank resolution also Page 10 narrowed available options and contributed to substantial delays in KTB resolution and the payout of insured deposits. While reported capital buffers in the banking system are adequate in aggregate, balance-sheet repair is advancing only slowly As of 2014Q4, aggregate CT1 and total capital ratios in the banking system were 20 and 22 percent, respectively. System-wide NPLs remained relatively flat at 16.7 percent (9.5 percent, net of reported provisions), with coverage of 58.4 percent. Credit growth remained sluggish, at 1 percent on an annual basis (adjusted for KTB). High non-financial corporate indebtedness remains a key challenge. Bulgaria’s corporate sector is among the most leveraged among new member states (NMS). Liabilities rose sharply during the pre-crisis boom and have declined only modestly since 2008. The high debt overhang heightens the risk of corporate bankruptcies in the event of negative shocks and acts as a drag on corporate profitability and investment. With corporate debt accounting for over 55 percent of banks’ domestic loans, it also weighs on banks’ balance sheets through increasing NPLs. While available data suggest average income coverage ratios are adequate, there is great heterogeneity at the firm level, with a significant number of firms presenting ratios below precautionary levels. Staff’s views Decisive actions are needed to address the weaknesses exposed by the KTB failure, restore supervisory credibility, and strengthen crisis management tools. With the term of the BNB governor expiring and the selection of a new head of banking supervision pending, timely The increase in regulatory capital between 4Q2013 and 1Q2014 reflects the amendments to the regulatory capital framework. In line with the implementation of the new European regulatory framework, effective from January 1, 2014, the deduction of specific provisions for credit risk from the capital base was discontinued. Please refer to the Selected Issue Paper on “Corporate Debt Overhang in Bulgaria” for further analysis. 2010Q42011Q42012Q42013Q42014Q4 1/ Bulgaria: Core FSI NPLs Tier 1 CARsSource: BNB. Notes: Tier 1 CARs= Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets; NPLs = Nonperforming loans to total gross loans.1/ Data for 2014Q3 and2014Q4 exclude KTB. TotalLargeSMEsTradableNon-Tradable Bulgaria: Firms with Debt at Risk by Size and Sector, 2013 (Percent of total firms within each category) ICR<1 1<ICR<2 2<ICR<3 ICR>3Sources: Orbisdatabase; and IMF staff calculations. 020406080100120BGEEHRSIHULVROSKCZPLLTEA Sources: Eurostat (ESA 2010);and IMF staff calculations. New Member States: Non-Financial Corporate Debt (Percent of GDP)NMSMedian Page 11 confirmation of individuals with a clear mandate to support a strong, independent, and accountable BNB is critical. At the same time, while several specific actions have been announced, further details and decisive follow-up is essential to restore confidence in financial system oversight: Improving supervision . The joint IMF/World Bank Basel Core Principles (BCP) Assessment, expected to be completed by midyear, should help identify areas for improvement in the supervisory framework for banks. This should be complemented by a candid, in-depth and independent review by outside banking experts of past supervisory activity, aimed at strengthening supervisory processes and drawing on lessons from the KTB case. An independent expert review of the Financial Supervision Commission’s (FSC) supervisory framework would also be useful to reinforce confidence across the financial system. Strengthening system-wide accountability . Concrete plans should be developed by the Commission of Public Oversight of Statutory Auditors (which also would benefit from independent expert input) to enhance the oversight and accountability of external parties conducting statutory audits. Based on inputs from the reviews noted above, the authorities should also consider strengthening BNB/FSC supervisory powers to investigate related-party lending. In addition, staff recommended specific steps to reinforce the supervisory enforcement culture. In this context, a formal enforcement policy is recommended, linking supervisory findings to specific remedial actions and establishing procedures for appropriate exceptions. Significant increases in sanctions across the oversight framework should also be considered to produce the desired deterrent effect. Strengthening the resolution framework . Last year’s events demonstrated that Bulgaria's legal framework does not give the authorities adequate resolution tools. As such, timely transposition of the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) into national law this summer is critical to address the gaps in the resolution and crisis management toolkit, and to provide for coordinated and timely remedial actions. Ensuring an adequate financial safety net. Staff discussed with the authorities the revised BDIF law to address gaps revealed by the KTB situation, including by facilitating timelier payout of insured deposits and emphasized that the law will need to be harmonized with that implementing the BRRD. Staff also welcomed the authorities’ intention to promptly recapitalize the BDIF following the payout of insured KTB deposits. Assessing banks. The planned AQR is an important step to strengthen confidence in banks. Success will depend in part on establishing a clear timetable and affirming specific modalities for an arms-length and transparent process. Consistent with international practices, the authorities should develop a well-defined communication strategy and contingency plans in case Also in relation to the FSC, the authorities should consider compensation arrangements to support acquiring and retaining the expertise needed to fulfill its mission. Technical assistance by the World Bank, including through their assessment of the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) core principles, is ongoing to assist the authorities in this area. Page 12 recapitalization needs materialize. The review will also provide useful inputs for a comprehensive risk and vulnerability assessment that will be undertaken by the IMF-WB Financial Sector Assessment Program. Enhancing access to information . While the BNB publishes a significant amount of financial data, mechanisms to promote availability and ready access to more bank-level data could facilitate analysis by interested parties and reduce uncertainty. The systemic nature of the high private sector debt overhang and NPL problem in Bulgaria calls for a comprehensive strategy: Proactive steps by the BNB to ensure proper identification of NPLs and promote effective write-offs (and disposal of encumbered collateral) are critical to advance balance sheet clean-up and mitigate asset price uncertainty. Ongoing supervisory initiatives by the BNB to promote phased increases in provisioning in line with the aging of NPLs in selected banks are welcome, but staff noted that a more systematic approach might be warranted, for example, by introducing specific guidelines as done recently in other countries, including Romania. The BNB could complement these efforts with a systematic review—possibly with support from external workout specialists—of banks’ debt recovery and restructuring processes (including workout tools, IT systems, and governance frameworks) to ensure these are adequate to manage NPLs. Staff also stressed the need to complement BNB action with other government-supported initiatives to facilitate an orderly corporate deleveraging process. In this context, guidelines for voluntary out-of-court debt workouts should be considered, along with measures to address judicial bottlenecks to timely and predictable insolvency proceedings. Staff also noted how ongoing work under the Vienna Initiative to foster an effective framework for NPL management in central and south-eastern Europe could provide the Bulgarian authorities with a useful platform to make advances in some of these areas. The mission also sought an update regarding the authorities’ views on close cooperation under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) prior to euro adoption. As recently discussed in the context of the NMS Policy forum, while the decision would need to take into account a range of considerations as well as the evolving financial architecture of the EA/EU, working toward SSM participation could generate reform momentum and act as a credibility anchor. Nonetheless, staff stressed that these efforts should not detract from prompt follow-through on the actions highlighted above, and indeed that such actions could be seen as integral to preparations for SSM participation. The authorities stressed their continued commitment to safeguarding financial stability . The BNB noted how the liquidity measures that followed the KTB closure had successfully supported depositors’ confidence and maintained system-wide stability. They pointed to work See also “Central and Eastern Europe: New Member States Policy Forum, 2014.” Page 13 underway to rebuild confidence in financial sector oversight, including intensified on-site inspections, the external BCP assessment, BRRD implementation, and the forthcoming system-wide AQR. They recognized the importance of the appointment of the new head of supervision to reinforce these efforts and stressed the need for reforms that would reinforce regulatory independence. They saw current efforts to promote a gradual reduction in NPLs as having had some success, but also indicated openness to considering a more systematic approach. The authorities are also currently assessing the best means to recapitalize the BDIF and to ensure readiness for the planned AQR, including through appropriate contingency plans in case recapitalization needs materialize. They also recognized the importance of the timely confirmation of a new BNB governor. While no timeframe has been announced, the authorities reconfirmed their commitment to both Euro adoption and participation in the SSM. With nominal triggers for Euro adoption within reach, they emphasized that movement toward Euro adoption will depend on greater progress in addressing structural rigidities to increase economic flexibility and accelerate income convergence. At the same time, they agreed that preparation for SSM could serve as a useful anchor for reforms.