Composition Background After several years of consolidation, the fiscal deficit is projected to increase to 2 percent of GDP in 2013, and the structural deficit to 1 percent of GDP. About half of the increase results from pension increases (after a three year freeze), while spending related to EU funds, largely offset by EU grants, is set to rise by 1¼ percent of GDP. Administrative improvements raised tax revenues to help contain the deficit. Public financing needs remain low, and the fiscal reserve is stable at about 6 percent of GDP (mostly comprising working balances and pledged funds), compared to a pre-crisis peak of 17 percent of GDP. Sources: Bulgarian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. (Proj.) Capital spending (percent of GDP) EU funds absorption (percent) Actual Budgeted The 2014 budget, consistent with national rules and EU objectives, targets a deficit of 1.8 percent of GDP, leaving the structural deficit little changed. Tax revenues are budgeted to rise by about 1 percent of GDP, mainly through further administrative measures. A reversal of recent pension reforms will take effect in July (Box 1). An increase in social protection spending has been budgeted while operational expenditures are expected to be restrained. The new national Page 17 investment fund (0.6 percent of GDP) is expected to finance municipal investment following a competitive bidding process overseen by the Council of Ministers. The government’s 2014–16 fiscal framework implies a structural deficit of 1 percent of GDP, consistent with national rules and EU objectives, with spending increases concentrated on investment. Box 1. Pension Reform Reversals Balance of the State Social Insurance Budget (Percent of GDP) Recent pension changes worsen pension sustainability. From July 2014, automatic indexation will be implemented based on the “golden Swiss rule” that links pension increases to the average growth of insurable income and CPI inflation. In addition, the gradual increase in the retirement age, part of the 2011 pension reform and started in 2012 (to reach 65 years for men by 2017 and 63 years for women by 2020), has been halted. Thus, the pension deficit by 2040 is now projected to be near 6 percent of GDP instead of 4 percent of GDP. The deficit is financed by the budget and crowds out other spending, which is increasingly coming under pressure as the population ages. 1/ Includes average pension increase of 9.3 percent as of April 1, 2013. Source: NSSI Bulgaria. retirement age freeze for one year + Swiss indexation Retirement age freeze + Swiss Indexation After 2011/2012 pension reforms The new public finance law that enters into force in 2014 (as well as EU legislation) requires the government to set up an independent fiscal body. The fiscal council that is being established consists of 5 members (including a chairperson) that will be elected by parliament, and one administrative staff. Its mandate will include issuing opinions on the draft budget and budget execution, the monitoring of fiscal rules, and the activation of corrective mechanisms and escape clauses. Policy Issues The fiscal impulse in 2013 and the neutral fiscal stance for 2014 are appropriate. Given the unanticipated slowing of the economy in 2013, the discretionary fiscal impulse was fortuitous. The composition of spending was improved through an increase in the share of investment Bulgaria’s maximum structural deficit under the new public finance law and the EU medium-term objective is 1 percent of GDP (given that public debt is under 40 percent of GDP) on an accrual basis. National rules specify a headline cash deficit ceiling of 2 percent of GDP (the annual difference between cash and accrual is small with an average of 0.2 percent of GDP in recent years). Page 18 spending and greater absorption of EU funds, both particularly welcome given their positive long-term growth effects. Increases in social protection spending beyond the pension increases were limited and targeted. In 2014, keeping the structural deficit unchanged strikes an appropriate balance between postponing consolidation given the modest projected growth and maintaining fiscal credibility—particularly important in the context of the currency board—by observing domestic deficit limits and EU objectives. There are, however, implementation risks with the 2014 budget. While the South Stream project provides potential revenue upside, revenues may underperform if domestic demand or administrative reforms disappoint, or, as projected by staff, inflation is subdued. In such a case and with the budgeted deficit already at or near deficit limits, expenditures would need to be restrained and heightened spending pressures carefully managed to meet the deficit target (see RAM). At the same time, it will be important to ensure efficiency and transparency in management of the new public investment fund, and the independence of the new fiscal council should be supported through adequate staff and resources. Fiscal buffers should be rebuilt over time by targeting a balanced structural budget after 2016. This would allow a substantial liquidity buffer to be built up in the fiscal reserve in good times and automatic stabilizers to work in the event of a shock. As discussed in last year’s Staff Report, rebuilding the fiscal reserve by saving fiscal surpluses would bolster the defenses that Bulgaria needs given shallow domestic financial markets, periodic closing of international markets, intervention limitations inherent in its currency board, and prevailing risks. There is scope to improve the targeting and efficiency of social spending. While recent studies suggest that social protection spending helped to mitigate the income effects of the crisis in Bulgaria, they also point to relatively weak results in terms of poverty reduction, as well as substantial inefficiencies, particularly in health-related spending. Given constrained fiscal space, reforms should focus on improving the allocation of existing social protection spending, including to provide room for greater social assistance spending, for which coverage is currently low. Medium-term fiscal risks arise from the reversal of pension reform and from contingent liabilities related to some state-owned enterprises. The recent pension reform reversals, without compensatory measures, add to already substantial budgetary pressures from an aging population, with adverse budgetary implications that are limited in the early years but substantial over the longer term. The weak financial position of firms in the railroad sector and some segments of the energy sector, which staff discussed with the World Bank, could represent significant fiscal risks if not adequately addressed (Box 2). As suggested by the European Commission, details on such contingencies should be provided in budget documents. See “Making the Fiscal Framework and Policy More Supportive of Growth,” 2012 Staff Report, Annex III; and Weber and Muir, “Fiscal Multipliers in Bulgaria: Low but Still Relevant,” IMF, WP/13/49. See “Fiscal Policy and Social Protection,” Selected Issues Papers. Page 19 Box 2. Energy and Railroad Sectors Energy. With the economy highly energy intensive, the state-owned vertically-integrated Bulgaria Energy Holding (BEH) accounts for almost half of Bulgaria’s generating capacity. A large BEH subsidiary, the National Electricity Company (NEK), faces financial difficulties given contractual obligations to high purchase prices coupled with low administered prices. BEH has recently issued an international bond to provide NEK with liquidity and NEK’s energy exports have been expanded. Sustained efforts to address NEK’s situation, such as outlined by the World Bank, are needed to avoid future impact on the government’s budget. Railroads. Traffic has declined about 70 percent since the mid-1990s, and annual subsidies amount to ½ percent of GDP. The state railway operator defaulted in 2010 and is negotiating with its creditors. A reform agreed with the World Bank and privatization efforts for the freight company are currently on hold. ________________________ See http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/05/17776422/republic-bulgaria-power-sector-rapid- assessment. The authorities underlined their continued commitment to fiscal stability . They are committed to remaining within the 2 percent of GDP domestic deficit ceiling in 2014 and maintaining a structural deficit of about 1 percent of GDP through 2016. They agreed that a return to a balanced structural budget over time would be useful to help rebuild buffers. On spending composition, they see the creation of the public investment fund as a way to increase investment at the municipal level. They recognized the importance of pension sustainability and saw the halt in increases to the retirement age as temporary. On social spending, the authorities aim to improve the accessibility and effectiveness of social transfers and services, in particular for children and older people, and acknowledged the need for more efficient health care spending.