Following a large bank (KTB) failure in 2014, the authorities have taken welcome steps to strengthen supervision and confidence in the banking system. First, to strengthen bank supervision and resolution, the authorities undertook the Basel Core Principle (BCP) and the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) assessments and are implementing a detailed reform plan to follow-up on their recommendations (Appendix III). In this regard, a law was passed in Parliament to expand the Bulgarian National Bank’s (BNB) powers for imposing supervisory measures, including dismissing senior management and replacing bank auditors. Second, to reduce uncertainty and enhance transparency, the authorities have recently concluded an AQR and stress test of the banking system (Appendix IV). Third, the authorities have taken steps to strengthen crisis resolution management and rebuild the banking system’s safety net. The transposition of the European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) into Bulgarian law has been a major step forward in this respect but significant work remains for its effective implementation. Another important step was the replenishment of the Bulgarian Deposit Insurance Fund (BDIF), which had been depleted by the 2014 KTB failure. In the first half of 2016, the BDIF secured two government- guaranteed loans from the WB and EBRD of €300 million each to shore up its financial capacity. Finally, the authorities have requested an FSAP, which is expected to be completed in the first half of 2017 and should provide guidance for further reforms. The authorities’ efforts to strengthen the banking system will support growth and help boost the provision of credit to businesses and households. Private sector credit growth has remained tepid since the global financial crisis, although in a large part reflecting weak credit demand with high capital adequacy and high liquidity for most banks. Access to financing is ranked number one among the concerns for business in Bulgaria, based on the World Economic Forum’s (WEF’s) Global Competitiveness Report. While this is a constraint facing all business, it is more binding in the case of innovation and for SMEs in particular. In this context, weaknesses in the legal and institutional framework for debt resolution and restructuring constitute important constraints in improving the lending and investment environment. To better target these obstacles the authorities are interested in setting up a system allowing continuous assessment and monitoring of the developments in the debt resolution processes, with a focus on insolvency. Asset prices have stayed broadly stable over the last year. The pressure from a confluence of macro-financial factors continued to abate, benefiting from improved growth outlook, the strengthened fiscal position, The failure of Corporate Commercial Bank (KTB) was discussed in Appendix VI of the 2015 Article IV consultation staff report. Plan for Reform and Development of Banking Supervision, adopted by the BNB in 2015. World Bank (2015), “Productivity in Bulgaria. Trends and Options.” See the Selected Issues Paper of “Assessing the Efficiency of the Insolvency and Enforcement System in Bulgaria.” Page 15 deleveraging external borrowing, a clearer picture about the banking system health (see para. 14), and improvements in the bank supervision framework. The banking system came under stress in 2015 due to spillovers from Greece but the authorities successfully managed the episode and the system remained stable. Overall, the impact was largely contained, with a smooth redistribution of about 3 percent of the system’s deposits from Greek-affiliated banks to other banks. The authorities’ crisis management measures focused on close monitoring and ex ante steps to forestall spillover channels. They included daily reporting of liquidity and deposits, higher liquidity requirements (30 percent) for Greek affiliate banks, a requirement to reduce cross exposures between parent banks and affiliates, and prohibition of dividend distribution and repayment of subordinated debt. The successful sale of Alpha Bank’s branches in Bulgaria to Eurobank’s Bulgarian subsidiary in March 2016 further enhanced the BNB’s leverage in the event of an adverse shock. The recently completed assessment of the banking system provided needed transparency. The results showed that most of the system remains well-capitalized after the AQR adjustments, particularly the foreign-owned banks, which represent 76 percent of total system assets. In aggregate terms, the AQR adjustments amounted to 1.3 percent of risk-weighted assets, to be reflected in the banks’ end-2016 financial statements. Nevertheless, there were significant differences in the results across banks. First Investment Bank (FIB), the largest domestic bank (with about 10 percent of the banking system assets and a history of problems) and two small banks were found to have shortfalls against capital buffers required by the BNB (Appendix IV). Additional buffers may also be needed to cover Pillar II capital requirements that may arise from extrapolating the AQR findings and from an assessment of banks’ risk profiles highlighted by the Stress Test (ST). Bank recovery strategies should seek to decisively restore credibility in the identified banks . One of the small banks has already raised capital, and the other two banks are pursuing private sector solutions to restore their capital buffers by mid-2017. Sourcing equity from new bona fide investors would help improve credibility and address governance concerns, especially for FIB, which has had protracted connected-lending issues. The BNB will need to be confident that new capital—whether from external or domestic sources—does not rely on borrowed funds. It would As of mid-2014, Greek affiliates accounted for 24 percent of assets and 22 percent of deposits of the banking system. an ng ys ee an ks nu = K ee K dd ud K Page 16 also be important to comply with the stipulated timeline and for the authorities to be ready to intervene if the banks are not able to restore capital buffers to required levels. The authorities need to persevere in their efforts to strengthen the banking system. While a new governance structure at the BNB has been put in place (Appendix III), efforts are still needed in other areas indicated by the IADI and BCP recommendations. The ongoing reforms would usefully be informed by the findings of the FSAP expected in the first half of 2017, but already identified areas for reform are as follows:  Asset quality. The NPL ratio in Bulgaria rose after the global financial crisis and has remained broadly stable in recent years. As of 2016Q1 it stood at 14½ percent (EBA definition), which is more than double the EU average. The AQR has helped to properly identify NPLs and to ensure that banks set aside appropriate provisions against expected losses, which, together with improving public confidence, should help to foster credit growth going forward. Nevertheless, there is a need to strengthen efforts to reduce NPLs, particularly for banks with lower capital ratios. High NPLs could constrain credit provision by such banks and, more generally, pose a threat to banking stability in an adverse scenario. To reduce NPLs, the authorities should take proactive measures to promote effective write-offs within a reasonable time frame. For example, they could require explicit operational targets for banks to engage borrowers in loan restructuring discussions. Further steps are also needed to remove impediments to releasing collateral associated with NPLs, including judicial bottlenecks and the lack of out-of-court workout mechanisms. Reduced concerns about loan and collateral valuation following the AQR should help deepen the market for distressed debt.  Bank governance. Important deficiencies in bank governance have yet to be addressed. They include the need to strengthen the regulatory requirements for transparency of groups’ operational and ownership structures (including through stricter rules on the definition and monitoring of banks’ ultimate beneficial owners and related parties), and to upgrade the Boards’ governance and its involvement in setting the risk appetite framework.  Bank supervision. There is a need to enhance risk-based supervision in the BNB. The recent BCP assessment report pointed out that while the methodologies for the analysis and assessment are sound, the actual implementation is undercut by the scarcity of resources. To bridge this gap significant efforts would be required in terms of organization, staffing, processes and guidelines, in addition to further legislative and regulatory amendments. Particular emphasis needs to be put on implementation of the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process, building on the information collected through the AQR and ST about the banks’ risk profile. It At this stage, neither bank resolution nor public support is envisaged. The increase in the ratio between 2014Q4 and 2015Q1 is in large part due to the adoption of a stricter definition in accordance with EU standards starting from 2015. This ratio increases to about 20 percent if loans to financial sectors are excluded, consistent with the Bulgarian reporting standards to the IMF FSI database. Page 17 would also be important for the BNB to announce a comprehensive set of indicators for early intervention in banks.  Financial safety net. The BDIF’s net asset position remains negative (-1.5 percent of GDP as of July 2016). Given current bank contributions (0.3 percent of GDP each year), it will be years before it can fully repay its debt and reach the targeted funding level of 1 percent of the total amount of covered deposits with banks. The recently-created Bank Resolution Fund started to collect fees from banks in late 2015. To backstop confidence on the banking system, the authorities should consider speeding up the progress in moving towards the targeted coverage ratios, and keep those ratios under periodic reviews against potential needs. Ongoing reviews of the private pension funds and insurance companies will shed light for the first time on this relatively small but increasingly important sector. Concerns about the sector have persisted, including about related party transactions, the quality of supervision, and the adequacy of supervisory resources. The reviews of pension funds’ assets and insurance companies’ balance sheets, overseen by the Financial Supervisory Commission with a newly appointed head, are expected to be completed by year-end. Authorities’ views The authorities stressed their commitment to address issues identified by the AQR and ST in the banking sector . They plan to use the information collected during the assessment process to upgrade banking supervision capacity. The authorities are in the process of developing a new plan on reforms and development of banking supervision and resolution. They plan to wait for the recommendations from the upcoming FSAP before finalizing their reform plan.