Real GDP growth is projected at 3 percent in 2016 and around 2½ percent in the medium term. Private consumption is expected to remain the major contributor to growth, supported by continued strong labor market developments. In light of the transition to the new programming period for use of EU funds, public investment is expected to contract in 2016. Private investment is expected to recover over the near term. In the medium term, staff projects a constrained growth outlook reflecting slow progress in structural reforms and in turn limited productivity growth; modest investment due to weaknesses in the business environment; and a shrinking labor force due to continued emigration and population aging. This projected medium-term growth is considerably below both the average for Central, Eastern, and Southeastern European (CESEE) countries and what is needed to ensure a desirable pace of convergence. Risks to the growth outlook are broadly balanced. On the external front, a protracted slowdown in the euro area or in Turkey would adversely affect Bulgaria’s export performance. While the direct effects of Brexit on Bulgaria appear limited so far, the indirect effects through the impact on the EU and sustained uncertainty could be more significant. On the domestic front, delays in absorption of EU funds would weigh on growth and contingent liabilities pose a threat to the fiscal position. On the upside, ambitious steps to restart structural reforms and faster recovery in Europe could improve Bulgaria’s growth prospects. In particular, strong political will to tackle governance concerns, reduce red-tape and improve the business environment, and enhance SOEs’ governance and competitiveness would accelerate income convergence. Authorities’ Views The authorities expected slightly lower growth in the near-term but higher growth in the medium-term. The authorities’ most recent projections available at the time of the mission were more conservative than staff’s due to lower contributions from consumption and investment. Over the medium-term, the authorities projected slightly higher growth than staff, expecting stronger structural reforms and investment. The authorities agreed that risks were broadly balanced. They highlighted downside risks from potential instability in Turkey, given Bulgaria’s relatively large export exposure and geographic proximity. Page 13 Bulgaria: Risk Assessment Matrix (as of September 28, 2016) (Scale: high, medium, or low) Source of Risk Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Weak progress in structural High/Medium High reforms to raise productivity and mitigate the impact of emigration and aging (short/medium term). Inadequate actions to address weaknesses identified by the AQR and stress test (short term). Lack of political support delays / reverses the structural reform agenda, including reforms that would reduce medium-term fiscal risks. Lower potential growth and higher unemployment resulting in slow income convergence and increased fiscal pressures. Medium/Low High/Medium Identified banks are unable to raise high quality private capital and/or undertake measures to strengthen their business model and reduce/mitigate the risks discovered during the AQR and stress test so as to strengthen confidence in the banking system. Reduced public confidence in the identified banks; increased vulnerability to unanticipated shocks. Protracted period of slower High/Medium High euro-area growth and deflation (short/ medium-term). Instability in Turkey. Direct negative influence through trade and investment channels and negative inflation spillovers. Lower potential growth, higher unemployment, lower FDI; slower process of fiscal consolidation. Medium High Direct negative impact through trade channel and refugee inflow. Protracted uncertainty Medium associated with the timing and negotiating of Brexit arrangements (short/medium-term). Spill-over effects of euro area growth slowdown via heightened uncertainty, reduced export demand, and investment growth. Lower exports, employment, and growth; higher social and fiscal pressure from refugee inflow. Medium Reduced growth outlook. Significant slowdown in Medium Medium large EMs (short/medium-term). Adverse effects through trade and investment channels. Lower exports, employment, FDI, and growth; slower process of fiscal consolidation. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihoods of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline. The RAM reflects staff’s views on the sources of risk and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 14