Notwithstanding significant political and financial turbulence, growth in 2014 was broadly in line with earlier projections. Nevertheless, risks to the outlook have increased, reflecting sustained domestic uncertainty and a weaker external environment. As a result, the EC will carry out specific monitoring of the policies recommended by the Council, including regular reviews of progress in the relevant EU committees. Bulgaria Romania Poland Median of Non-EA NMS GDP per capita in PPP (EU28=100)Source: Eurostat. Page 6 Despite a challenging environment, the economy expanded modestly last year, led by domestic demand. Export-driven recovery in 2013 proved short-lived as growth in European trading partners remained subdued. Nevertheless, sustained political uncertainty and the June bank failure did not prevent an improvement in domestic demand in the latter part of 2014, which was supported by an expansionary fiscal stance and rising absorption of EU funds. Unemployment declined, but remained high. Deflationary pressures have continued. Inflation turned negative in the second half of 2013, driven by declining import prices and administrative price reductions, and deepened in 2014, with low growth in Europe, plunging commodity prices, and timid domestic demand recovery. Headline and core consumer prices both declined by an average 1.6 percent last year, among the sharpest price level contractions in the EU. The current account registered a small surplus in 2014 . Net exports declined with decelerating growth in export partners. Financial flows, mainly FDI, remained modest. External debt increased slightly, to about 90 percent of GDP, but reserves remain comfortable based on standard metrics (Appendix II). Staff’s views Growth is projected to moderate before increasing gradually into the medium-term: For 2015, real GDP is projected to expand by 1¼ percent, supported by continued modest growth in private consumption and continued high EU funds absorption. While the sizable corporate debt overhang and high non-performing loans will continue to weigh on private investment, it is projected to stabilize after a 5-year contraction. Net See the Selected Issues Paper (SM/15/91) on “Inflation Determinants and Implications.” Private demand Public demand External demand GDP growth (staff; %) Bulgaria: Contribution to GDP Growth (Percentage points)Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Core Energy Food, Alcohol and Tobacco Headline Bulgaria: HICP inflation and contributions (Percent, y/y)Sources: National Statistical Institute; and IMF staff calculations. 20132014201520162017201820192020Real GDP (percent change)1.11.71.21.51.82.02.32.5Unemployment rate (ILO, percent)13.011.510.910.39.79.28.68.1Annual average headline HICP inflation (percent)0.4-1.6-1.00.61.21.82.12.1Current account balance (percent of GDP)2.30.00.2-0.8-1.1-1.4-1.7-2.0Output gap-1.6-1.4-1.6-1.5-1.1-0.50.00.0Sources: BNB; NSI; and IMF staff estimate.proj. Bulgaria: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2013–20 Page 7 exports are expected to have a largely neutral effect on growth as the impact of lower oil prices on imports is offset by subdued external demand. While there is no strong evidence of a misalignment in Bulgaria’s external position (Appendix I), lack of structural reforms to improve Bulgaria’s productivity and subdued growth prospects in the region are projected in the baseline to limit net exports’ contribution to growth over the medium term. More broadly, convergence to EU income levels will remain slow, with growth gradually reaching only 2½ percent and unemployment declining to about 8 percent. While year-on-year inflation is expected to turn positive late this year (driven by EU price levels and higher administered prices), it will remain subdued, rising slightly above the EU average in the medium term. A small current account deficit is projected into the medium term, with external debt slowly declining below 80 percent of GDP (Appendix III). Risks to the outlook, as summarized in the Risk Assessment Matrix, have increased On the domestic side , the minority coalition government may face challenges in pushing through the difficult measures needed to reduce macro-financial risks and raise growth. Sustained disinflationary pressures could adversely affect the fiscal accounts. High corporate debt and NPLs (as well as associated encumbered collateral) could act as an additional drag on future investment and growth if not addressed. Alternatively, ambitious steps to restore policy credibility and restart structural reforms would create a more supportive environment for growth. On the external side, a protracted slowdown in Europe would hinder export performance. While inward spillovers from geo-political tensions related to Russia and Ukraine have been limited to date, effects on trade and investment may increase in 2015. Although external debt vulnerabilities remain manageable, risks from renewed financial stress in the euro area could rise. In this context, given the still significant presence of Greek banks in Bulgaria, close monitoring and readiness to mitigate potential contagion from adverse developments in Greece remains key. Faster recovery in Europe, supported, for example, by ECB QE and lower commodity prices, could improve Bulgaria’s growth prospects. While Greek banks’ affiliates in Bulgaria account for nearly 25 percent of total banking assets, since 2009, they have rebalanced their funding toward local depositors, reducing Bulgaria’s foreign banking exposure to parent banks. Page 8 Bulgaria: Risk Assessment Matrix (as of March 12, 2015) (Scale: high, medium, or low) Source of Risk Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Inadequate implementation of structural reforms to raise productivity and mitigate the impact of emigration and aging (short/medium Intensified political and social discord delays the structural reform agenda, including reforms that would reduce medium-term fiscal risks. Low potential growth and high structural unemployment resulting in a lack of income convergence; increased fiscal pressures. Incomplete implementation of fiscal consolidation (short/medium term). Heightened spending pressures and materialization of implicit contingent liabilities; lack of progress in addressing medium-term fiscal risks. Loss of hard-won reputation of fiscal prudence; increased vulnerability to shocks and market reversal. Inadequate actions to address weaknesses in the banking system (short term). Failure to restore confidence in the banking system and adequately identify and address any shortcomings in supervision through an independent asset quality review and a systematic review of the KTB failure. Reduced public confidence in banks; increased vulnerability to unanticipated shocks. NPLs leave asset price uncertainty (short/medium Protracted period of slower European growth and deflation (short/medium Financial stress in emerging markets and/or the euro area re-emerges (short Intensification of geo-political tensions related to Russia and Ukraine. Impediments to releasing collateral associated with NPLs, including judicial bottlenecks and administrative costs. Leave the system vulnerable to further collateral price declines; need for higher provisions lowers profits and capital; investment and growth prospects are in turn weakened. Direct negative influence through trade and investment channels and price levels. Low potential growth, high structural unemployment and low FDI; continued fiscal pressures. Adverse effects from financial stress of parent banks/corporate and through trade and investment channels. Funding pressures; lower exports, employment, FDI, and growth; continued downturn raises fiscal pressures. Negative spillovers from trade and investment channels. Adverse effect on economic activity and social tensions. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relatively likelihoods of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline. The RAM reflects staff’s views on the sources of risk and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Page 9 The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of the outlook. The near-term growth projections underlying the budget are more conservative than staff’s; the authorities noted in this context that envisaged fiscal consolidation was likely to dampen domestic demand. Given encouraging high frequency indicators, however, they raised their projections for 2015–16 following the mission to levels slightly above staff’s. They shared staff’s views on the medium-term outlook and broadly agreed on potential risks. However, they noted several mitigating factors, such as reduced political uncertainty domestically and favorable market conditions externally. They emphasized their commitment to the announced fiscal plan, steps to reinforce confidence in the financial sector, and broader structural reforms, discussed below. The successful Eurobond issuance in March has largely met their external financing needs in 2015. They recognized the importance of close monitoring of developments in Greece, including with relation to the financial sector, and noted the continued, strong liquidity position of the banking system. Finally, they stressed that rapid wage growth in recent years has been largely driven by non-tradable service sectors, thus limiting adverse impacts on competitiveness. POLICY DISCUSSIONS: TACKLING NEAR-TERM RISKS, RESTORING