Real GDP Growth, 1990–2013 Burkina Faso is at a crossroads, its ability to accelerate development hinging upon crowding-in private sector activity and wise use of natural resource revenues. Rolling five-year average (in percent) Standard deviation (5 previous years, in percentage points) 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 Source: CountriesAuthorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 9 Nominal GDP per Capita, PPP, 1990–2012 (in current US$) Burkina Faso WAEMU Sub-Saharan Africa 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25/day (PPP), 1990–2011 (% of population) Burkina Faso Mali Ghana Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2014. Senegal Niger Nigeria Burkina Faso: Millenium Development Goals, 2001–12 2001 2005 2009 2012 Burkina Faso has experienced sustained higher and more stable growth over the past two decades, with progress toward the Millennium Development Goals. Burkina Faso has experienced sustained and higher growth with lower volatility, enabling it to catch up to regional norms (Annex I). Five year average real growth doubled between 1990 and 2012, with a decline in the standard deviation from 3.8 to 2.5 percentage points over the same period, despite numerous shocks. On a purchasing power parity basis, Burkina Faso’s GDP per capita in 2012 (US$1555) had almost reached the WAEMU average (US$1663). Based on the authorities’ official statistics for income poverty (poverty rate of around 44 percent unchanged since mid 1990s, using rising income levels in real US$ terms), there is a perception that poverty reduction has been slow. This perception has been further exacerbated by the recent boom in gold production. However, broader indicators suggest that growth has been relatively inclusive, with progress towards the MDGs in many areas. The share of the population living under the US$1.25 per day threshold (2005 prices) has gone down sharply since the early 90s (from 71 to 44 percent), and the income share held by the wealthiest 10 percent of the population has also decreased. MDG indicators with notable improvements include health for mothers and children under 5, primary school enrollment and access to drinking water. However, the country’s indicators for education lag WAEMU, SSA and LICs averages. Population (in millions) GDP per capita (in 2005 US$) National household survey poverty incidence GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$) Primary school enrollment ratio (% net) Ratio: girls to boys in primary education (%) Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000) Prevelance of HIV, total (% of population aged 15-49) Access to an improved water source (% of population) Unemployment rate, total (modeled ILO estimate) … 46.7 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2014. SSA Burkina Faso has a long track record of strong macroeconomic policy management, supported by consecutive IMF programs. The authorities’ policy decisions have tracked most recommendations of the 2011 Article IV consultation, in the context of two consecutive ECF-support programs (Box 1). Progress has been made in revenue collection, maintaining a prudent fiscal policy stance and keeping debt levels low. Poverty-reducing and food security spending has been increased, although direct transfers to protect the most vulnerable have only been introduced more recently. Notable progress has been made in structural reforms to improve resilience and support incomes in the vitally important cotton sector, which employs or supports a large share of the rural Page 10 population (Annex 2). In addition, Burkina Faso has been at the forefront of inclusive growth innovations through its SCADD (Box 2), such as construction of a “growth pole” around the rural Bagré reservoir, providing irrigation and other support services for diversified crops, ecotourism, fishing and dairy industries, hydropower, among others, to create a synergetic center for local job creation and investment Box 1. Burkina Faso: Status of Policy Recommendations from the 2011 Article IV Consultation Policy Area Staff Recommendations Outcome Fiscal Debt Maintain a prudent fiscal stance and strengthen revenue mobilization. Consolidation of fiscal stance in 2012-2013, despite 2012 weather shock, with program targets respected. Increased spending for investment and social transfers met by an improvement in revenue collection effort, due to policy and administrative reforms. Enhance debt management capacity, and maintain a prudent borrowing policy consistent with debt sustainability. Debt management capacity is ranked as moderate, with scope to improve internal coordination and transparency of implicit support to public enterprises. Regional efforts have shown deepening in regional market for domestic securities. Prudent borrowing policies have lowered risk of debt distress from high to moderate. A non- zero ceiling on non-concessional borrowing was introduced in the program. Structural Promote economic diversification and deepen structural reforms. Social Improve social policies and develop social protection systems for the vulnerable. Authorities have invested in productivity-enhancements (irrigation, GMO seeds, crop rotation, land management) to increase resilience of agriculture. They have also invested in diversification and downstream activities, such as cotton and the Bagre Growth Pole initiative. With development partners, government has invested in energy expansion projects (new thermal plants, interconnections with neighboring countries and solar energy), along with other growth-enhancing public investment spending as laid out in the 5 year development plan. Under the auspices of the SCADD, health, education, and food security spending has led to improvements in social indicators. Authorities are scaling up spending to achieve universal medical insurance coverage in 2016 and universal primary school attendance by 2021. A National Social Protection Plan was established to do targeted cash transfers, but has yet to take off, although spending on social transfers to the most vulnerable increased by 1% of GDP in both 2013 and 2014. Despite this progress, private sector-led growth faces numerous constraints, while spending for development competes with less efficient claims on public resources. Although Burkina Faso’s business indicators are generally equal to or better than those of regional peers, there are well-identified binding constraints to sustaining high and more inclusive growth. Private sector-led growth and job creation are hampered by insufficient access to, among others, reliable power, affordable financial services, an effective judiciary, higher education and vocational training, and transportation and communications infrastructure. At the same time, recent improvements in domestic revenue mobilization have supported continued untargeted energy subsidies and increases in the public wage bill. Doing Business Indicators 2013 (0=best, 200=worst) Enforcing contracts Trading across borders Paying taxes Starting a business Getting credit Dealing with construction permits Getting electricity Registering property BFA WAEMU SSA LIC Page 11 These problems are not unique to Burkina Faso, nor are they more profound in Burkina Faso than elsewhere. But this landlocked and resource poor (until recently) country has set high expectations for itself, with a marked history of outperforming peer countries in the strength of its public policies and public institutions. Burkina Faso’s recent gold boom provides an opportunity to accelerate its development agenda, but the country lacks sufficient architecture to efficiently harness and channel resources to meet multi-year development spending plans. (Annex 3). Although natural resource revenues have not reached a “dependency threshold” of 20 percent of total revenues, they are likely to in the coming years. Initial steps have been taken to improve the transparency of natural resource revenue management, but architecture has not yet been put into place to optimize public sector rent-sharing and to imbed disciplined rules for effective multi-year use of volatile resource revenues for the purposes of development. To the contrary, natural resource revenues have intensified the pressure to direct public resources for current consumption. Box 2. Burkina Faso: Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Durable Development The Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustained Development (SCADD) sets out economic and social policies to support broad-based growth, sustained poverty reduction, and progress towards the MDGs (MEFP ¶19–21). The strategy follows 4 main axes: Development of accelerated growth pillars: in pursuit of a growth target of 10 percent, the SCADD contains measures to improve the business environment, and develop “growth poles” to attract private investment. Consolidation of human capital and promotion of social protection : the SCADD focuses on investment for expansion of health sector primary education, with coordinated expansion of secondary and vocational education. The SCADD also aims to improve the equity of resource allocation. Strengthening of governance : internal and external controls to curb corruption and improve accountability of public institutions. A main challenge is judicial reforms. Crosscutting priorities in development policies: reduce gender inequalities, control population growth, sustainable use of natural resources, capacity building. Two-thirds of 2013 measures or indicators were implemented or met, notably feasibility studies for three new growth poles, implementation of special export zones, and launching of a new household survey. Establishment of a universal health insurance scheme aims to cover 50 percent of the population by 2025, at a cost broadly estimated at 2 percent of GDP. Other health projects in the short run aim to hire health care professionals, establish facilities, and assure free healthcare for children under 5 (20 percent of the population). The 2010–20 education strategy plans to hire 3700 teachers per year, build or renovate existing classrooms and buy textbooks, with a goal of 100 percent primary school enrollment by 2021, at an additional cost of 2 percent of GDP per year. Page 12