Investment Near-Term Fiscal Policy Challenges Total revenue and grants Grants Project Program Expenditure and net lending 4th/5th Review Revised Budget (Proj.) Draft Budget Baseline Scenario Total revenue Tax revenue Nontax revenue Text Table 2. Burkina Faso: Fiscal Framework Current expenditure Wages and salaries Goods and services Interest payments Current transfers (percent of GDP) Sustaining improvements in revenue mobilization and investment execution while containing recurrent spending are critical to attaining the 2016 budget objectives (Text Table 2). The customs administration is committed to registering and processing all manual customs declarations prepared during internet shortages to make up most of the third quarter shortfall by end-year (new SB, MEFP ¶18). Staff noted that the potential revenue shortfall could amount to CFAF 21 billion or about 0.3 percent of GDP. Staff also indicated that specific, short-term measures to contain further wage bill pressures would be important to keep recurrent spending within budget (MEFP ¶35). Finally, staff and the authorities discussed measures to sustain the acceleration in investment execution. The authorities were confident that the procurement reforms adopted in July 2016, in particular the higher thresholds for public procurement contracts, the adoption of streamlined procedures and the elimination of domestic reviews of foreign-financed investments would support full execution of the 2016 investment budget (MEFP ¶20). Delays in budget support disbursements could complicate budget execution toward the end of the year . An amount of up to CFAF 89 billion (1.3 percent of GDP) of budget support is at risk of not being disbursed by the end of the year. In their efforts to ensure adequate liquidity to conclude 2016 and to start implementing the 2017 budget, the authorities have issued T-bills and bonds in the local and regional markets in excess of 2016 financing needs by CFAF 114 billion. This liquidity could compensate for the temporary budget support shortfall, but at a higher interest cost. As a precaution, the authorities are requesting an increase in the program adjuster for net domestic financing from CFAF 65 billion to CFAF 90 billion so that this key performance criterion would not be missed if the programmed budget support doesn’t materialize. Sources: Burkinabè authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Investment expenditure Domestically financed Externally financed Overall balance Financing Foreign financing Amortization (excl. IMF) Domestic financing Drawings Project loans Program loans Financing gap Of which: IMF disbursements The 2017 budget reflects the authorities’ goal to expand fiscal space for priority investments. Page 18 Domestic revenues are projected to reach Text Table 3. Burkina Faso: Projected Yield of Revenue Standardized VAT invoicing for large and medium firms Measures in 2017 (in percent of GDP) 18.9 percent of GDP, a 1.2 percentage point of GDP increase compared with 2016 (excluding one-off dividends) . The full-year implementation of the new tax policy measures, standardized VAT invoicing, and further modernization of the tax and customs administration would support the recovery of revenue to its 2013 level (Text Table 3). In particular, on- time implementation of standardized VAT invoicing for large and medium enterprises by January 1 st , 2017 is key to support higher VAT revenue. Progress on the operationalization of the single tax identification number via banking operations, and continued cross-checks of taxpayer information between the tax and customs administrations, helped by the interconnection of the tax and customs databases (new SB) are also critical. Regarding customs, greater computerization of procedures, together with new efforts to fight smuggling, would support higher revenue collection (MEFP ¶18, 23-24). Increased risk-based controls at the Tax Investigations and Intelligence Directorate Consolidation of segmentation process for medium-sized enterprises Reducing fraud through electronic sharing of taxpayer database information between DGI and DGD Introduction of requirement to use unique Tax Identification Number on banking transactions New policy measures: (i) reduction in certain tax exemptions; (ii) new stamp duties; (iii) increased tax rate for certain alcoholic beverages and tobacco Supervision of taxpayers using the single taxpayer identification number to cross-check information between tax offices Virtual Liaison System for Import and Export operations (SYLVIE) Addressing fraud in the market for motorcycles imports GPS tracking system and customs scanners Additional revenues from tolls Total Sources: Burkinabè authorities and IMF staff estimates. Recurrent spending would decline somewhat on account of measures to streamline transfers and contain pressures on the wage bill . The authorities intend to continue to rationalize payroll and recruitment management and to conduct regular payroll audits to eliminate ghost workers. Expenditure on goods and services would decline slightly owing to measures to limit utility and transport bills of State bodies. Transfers would benefit from a reduction in energy subsidies driven by low world prices and ongoing energy sector reforms, as well as a reduction in other categories of transfers (MEFP ¶26). Staff cautioned that more specific measures to contain the wage bill would be needed to overcome the permanent base effects associated with the 2016 wage increases. The 2017 fiscal program could however accommodate a larger investment plan than envisaged in the baseline scenario, provided additional budget support financing becomes available. Staff noted that existing budget support commitments amounted to only 1.4 percent of GDP, less than half of their 2010-13 average of 3 percent of GDP (Text Table 4). On this basis, domestically-financed investment would be limited to about 7.3 percent of GDP. However, provided budget support financing increases back to historical averages and the measures taken to increase The authorities already completed an administrative census in 2012, and adopted biometric enrolment since 2013. Efforts to reconcile biometric and payroll databases took place in 2013 and again in 2015, which allowed to identify ghost workers and other undue payments. Page 19 BURKINA FASO Total (CFAF Billions) Text Table 4. Burkina Faso: Budget Support World Bank EU AfDB Others Commitments Disbursed 1/ Commitments absorption capacity are resolutely implemented, staff considers that the authorities could execute at least an additional 1½-2 percentage points of GDP in investment, as described in staff’s alternative scenario, while maintaining medium-term debt sustainability (see Debt Sustainability Analysis). Staff analyzed a preliminary list of priority projects covering about 80 percent of planned investment spending to be executed in 2017 (Box 3). Provided careful prioritization, sequencing and monitoring, staff agreed that investment execution rates could be higher. In particular, the authorities should focus on the largest infrastructure projects, which comprise the majority of planned investment spending and are most likely to have a positive impact on growth. They could also review whether some related projects (large and small) could be consolidated to reduce the strain on limited resources and capacity. Further improvements in budget and Treasury management are warranted to prevent the recurrence of domestic arrears. Cash management has improved, with reported domestic arrears stemming from pending payments eliminated by March 2016. Nonetheless, the full 2015 annual audit report (June SB) identified non-trivial domestic arrears of about 1.1 percent of GDP. These include amounts due on mostly valid contracts and procurement procedures (about 0.5 percent of GDP) but which were not executed within the fiscal year, and another category of “irregular” arrears, where not all procedures have been followed (about 0.6 percent of GDP). The authorities noted that they aim at gradually regularizing legitimate arrears and have allocated an amount of about CFAF 18 billion in the 2016 budget to that effect. They will conduct a careful review of “irregular” arrears and decide on their treatment on a case-by-case basis (new SB), and are committed to implementing the remaining audit recommendations (MEFP ¶37). Sources: Burkinabè authorities and donor agencies. 1/ As of September 30, 2016. Structural Policies to Unlock Fiscal Space Boosting Domestic Revenue The authorities are considering options to maximize domestic revenue mobilization over the medium term, including the establishment of a semi-autonomous revenue authority (SARA). Drawing on regional experience, the authorities hope to obtain efficiency gains by merging the customs and tax administrations into a single entity with greater management autonomy. Staff noted that the experience with SARAs appeared to have been most positive when existing institutional structures were deficient, for example due to political capture, low staff morale or a lack of information exchange between tax and customs administrations. However, in Burkina Faso’s case, the customs and tax administration are making significant progress in recovering the ground lost during the transition and are in the midst of comprehensive reforms, including plans to establish a land registry to optimize property tax collection, the review of the tax code in 2017, and the interconnection of SYDONIA with neighboring countries. Given the ambitious revenue objectives for 2017 onwards, it would be important to maintain this momentum before considering deeper Page 20 structural changes. Staff also cautioned that such a reform entails significant costs, and that careful preparation would be essential to successfully transition to a new administrative structure. Box 3. Burkina Faso: The 2017 Budget’s Investment Program The PNDES sets forth an ambitious scaling up of public investment in Burkina Faso between 2016 and This box provides an analysis of investment projects financed with domestic resources. The analysis is based on a list of 258 priority investment projects identified by the authorities and included in the 2017 proposed budget law. Box 3 Table 1. Burkina Faso: Domestically-Financed Priority Public By Sector Number of Projects Investment, 2017-2019 of which: physical infrastructure of which: physical infrastructure Total Project Amount (in billion CFAF) 2017 2018 2019 The majority of investment projects concern physical infrastructure, and the most represented sectors are roads (35 percent), water and agriculture (18 percent) and education and IT (15 percent). Over three-quarters of public investment by project amount target the construction or renovation of physical infrastructure, and thus can be expected to have a rapid impact on growth. The remaining projects would be more readily classified as current expenditure (e.g., youth employment programs) or as intergovernmental transfers, even if they could be construed as increasing capital in a broad sense. Despite some projects targeting dams or solar panel installations in government buildings, large energy infrastructure projects are notably absent from this list, as they tend to be financed with external resources (see Box 1). Road infrastructure (rural roads, highways, …) 35% 32% 34% Water and agriculture (dams, irrigation, water systems, …) 18% 17% 19% Education and IT (classrooms, university buildings, …) 15% 16% 18% 5% 4% 4% 4% 11% 4% Energy (solar panels, electrification) Airport infrastructure Sources: IMF, Burkinabè authorities, and IMF staff calculations. i i ) o b C ( 20% 40% 60% Box 3 Figure 1. Burkina Faso: Cumulative Distribution of Project Amount in 2017 Budget The 15 largest projects account for half of 2017 domestically-financed investment. Box 3 Figure 1 shows the cumulative distribution of investment projects after sorting them from largest to smallest. A few large projects account for most of planned domestic public investment. At the same time, there are many smaller projects that collectively represent only a small fraction of planned investment. Number of Projects, Sorted from Largest to Smallest Sources: IMF, Burkinabè authorities, and IMF staff calculations. o m c o P v i m C j Page 21 BURKINA FASO If managed efficiently, natural resource revenue can be an important source of investment financing. A recent FAD technical assistance mission on transfer pricing policy identified a series of measures designed to increase the mining tax base. The authorities are considering these recommendations as they draft the implementing regulations to the 2015 Mining Code, the 2017 budget law, and consequential amendments to the general tax code (Text Table 5). Text Table 5. Burkina Faso: Transfer Pricing Policy Measures Adopted by Authorities The mining code requires the publication of mining conventions in the official journal. Ensure effective implementation of publication requirement for listed companies and their subsidiaries. To be considered in new tax code project (to be adopted in 2017). Pricing rules for of primary / intermediate goods are part of the 2017 budget law. The other measures will be considered in new tax code. Key TA Recommendations Improving transparency: Publish mining feasibility studies and conventions with mining companies Publish balance sheets and financial statements of all domestic companies. Implement transfer pricing documentation requirements for the multinational group (“master file”) and local entities (“local file”). Strengthening the arm’s length principle: Define the notion of related enterprises and extend the application of the arm’s length principle to domestic transactions and transactions involving a tax haven/non- cooperative jurisdiction. Strengthening the tax base, e.g.: Use the comparable uncontrolled price method for commodities and the cost-plus method for intermediary goods and services. Limiting financial charges to 30% of gross operating income. Imposing a limit on the deductibility of carry-over losses (e.g. to 50-60 percent of current-year income). Limiting deductibility of brand royalties to 5 percent of turnover. Authorities’ views The authorities are fully committed to creating additional fiscal space for investment spending through higher domestic revenue mobilization. In this regard, they will carefully weigh the costs and benefits of establishing a single revenue authority. They also agreed that ongoing reforms, in particular those aiming at strengthening the organization and systems of the tax administration ought to be fully implemented before a new organizational structure could be considered. They welcomed the Fund’s technical assistance on transfer pricing, noting that they Page 22 intented to implement most of the recommendations in 2017, and looked forward to forward to further Fund support in the context of the tax code revision. Tilting Spending Composition towards Investment Scaling-up public investment while maintaining project quality and debt sustainability will require sustained efforts to strengthen project planning and implementation capacity. Staff’s model-based analysis of the investment scaling up envisaged in the PNDES shows that the size of the increase in investment could lead to a significant drop in efficiency as absorption capacity constraints become binding. Furthermore, with limited availability of concessional financing, the additional investment would have to be financed by resorting to higher domestic and non- concessional external borrowing, which would not be consistent with medium-term debt sustainability (Box 4, and Selected Issues Paper). In this context, reforms to address remaining bottlenecks in the capacity to design, budget and execute investment projects are paramount to ensuring that higher volumes of investment could be implemented without compromising quality and cost-effectiveness. The authorities should however be mindful of the risks related to fast-track procedures adopted to accelerate execution of public investment, particularly as regards complex PPP projects. The resort to exceptional procurement procedures such as single sourcing should also be discouraged as it could lead to poor project quality and/or high cost. The authorities should design a medium-term strategy to contain the wage bill, while addressing short-term pressures . Staff noted that, while the size of the civil service was below that of other LICs, the wage bill was on par or slightly higher (Text Figure 4 and Box 5). Overall, this correlates with the generally high quality of public employees and a well- functioning administration. Nonetheless, given future pressures on public employment related to planned investments, notably in health and education, staff noted that it would be important to contain wage bill growth by considering structural reforms targeting employment. These could include encouraging mobility within the administration, rationalizing hiring and eliminating sectoral overlap. Aligning public sector pay with productivity would also be important, for example through performance-based salary components or rationalizing allowances. As a first step, job audits could be conducted to provide a basis for future recruitments/retrenchments, as well as for aligning pay with performance. Dark bars are the LIDC average, and grey bars are the 10-90 percentile Source: Burkinabè authorities, and IMF staff estimations Text Figure 4. Burkina Faso: Wage Bill, 2016 Public Employment, % Working-Age Pop Wage bill, % Total Expenditure (right) i d x o o i o P g g i k o W o P G Burkina Faso Wage bill, % GDP Page 23 BURKINA FASO Enhancing Debt Management Capacity. A key priority would be for the government to provide additional resources to the debt office to develop its capacity to effectively manage simultaneous increases in external and domestic borrowing, as well as the contingent liabilities arising from public-private partnerships (MEFP ¶32). The authorities should also seek assistance in preparing an integrated medium-term debt strategy to support PNDES implementation. Authorities’ views The authorities recognize the importance of rebalancing expenditure in favor of the capital budget and are taking steps to enhance investment efficiency and contain the wage bill . The authorities have started to implement the recommendations from a recent FAD mission, including the preparation of a new procurement code with World Bank support, and the reorganization of the budget calendar to better integrate the investment plan in the overall budget (new SB, MEFP ¶34). They noted that the move to program budgeting would support implementation of multi-year investment projects. In addition, they are requesting a Public Investment Management Assessment (PIMA) for early 2017, in order to prepare a detailed action plan to further improve project selection and monitor their implementation, as well as a framework for managing PPPs (MEFP ¶33). On procurement, they noted their commitment to respecting the WAEMU standard of limiting the resort to exceptional procedures to no more than 15 percent of the total value of public contracts (MEFP ¶34). They also reiterated a separate request for capacity building in managing contingent liabilities arising from PPPs, and noted that they would be preparing a standard PPP contract ahead of the donor roundtable. They welcomed staff’s suggestions to contain the wage bill and indicated their openness to considering further medium term reforms along these lines (MEFP ¶35). Page 24 Box 4. Burkina Faso: Scaling Up Public Investment and Investment Efficiency This box presents key implications of a large and rapid increase in public investment on public debt, in the presence of absorption capacity constraints, using a general equilibrium model (DIGNAR). The analysis compared staff’s baseline scenario with a scenario associated with full implementation of the PNDES’ investment objectives for 2017-19. Given the size of the envisaged investment scaling up in the PNDES, which is about twice as large for 2017 as under staff’s more optimistic alternative scenario, investment efficiency (initially calibrated at 50 percent based on the average for LICs) is assumed to drop in the PNDES scenario as a result of capacity constraints relating to the lack of complementary infrastructure, insufficient provision for maintenance and supply bottlenecks. GDP growth is consequently lower than in the baseline due to lower productivity in both the traded and nontraded sectors resulting from the relatively lower increments to the public capital stock. Given limited availability of external concessional financing, residual financing for the PNDES scaling up is assumed by the model to occur on non-concessional terms, which results in a marked increase in total public debt, beyond the WAEMU ceiling of 70 percent of GDP by 2030. This is different from staff’s baseline and alternative scenarios, where the higher investment is financed by additional budget support, and where efficiency remains at about 50 percent supported by the implementation of measures to address absorption capacity constraints. The scaling-up scenario is also characterized by lower welfare levels (proxied by the growth rate of private consumption) and lower private investment, as the public investment crowds out available resources. Box 4 Figure 1. Burkina Faso: DIGNAR Model Simulation Results Panel 1. Public Investment (% of GDP) Panel 2. Public investment efficiency (%) Panel 3. Non-resource output (% change from steady-state) Panel 4. Domestic debt (% of GDP) Panel 5. External commercial debt (% of Panel 6. Total public debt (% of GDP) GDP) Baseline Scenario Aggressive Scenario Source: IMF staff estimates. 1. The model is described in Melina, G. and Y. Xiong (2013) ‘Natural Gas, Public Investment and Debt Sustainability in Mozambique’, IMF Working Paper 13/261. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund. The DIGNAR simulation results described here were generated in collaboration with the IMF Research Department. The DIGNAR model has been developed at the IMF with support from DFID. Page 25 BURKINA FASO Box 5. Burkina Faso: Evolution of the Wage Bill Box 5 Figure 1. Burkina Faso: Trends in the Public Wage Bill and Employment The public wage bill has grown faster than nominal GDP since 2000, driven by a large increase in public employment. The public wage bill grew from 4.7 percent of GDP in 2000 to 7.4 percent of GDP in 2016. This increase was matched by a steady increase in public employment from 0.9 to 1.7 percent in the working-age population over the same period, which was most pronounced in the education, security and health sectors. The increase in public employment contributed to increase the wage bill ratio by 3.6 percent of GDP over the period, while the average level of public sector compensation declined by -0.9 percent of GDP. Nonetheless, public sector compensation remains somewhat higher than in peer countries. Wage Bill, % GDP (left) Public Employment, % Working-Age Population (right) Sources:IMF, Burkinabè authorities, and IMF staff calculations P G o i o P g g i k o W Wage bill sustainability indicators worsened during the transition years due to slow revenue growth and pressures to increase public sector wages, but are now beginning to recover. The wage bill as a share of total tax revenue worsened from 35.8 percent in 2013 to 50.4 percent in 2015, as tax collections slowed down due to lower output growth and political disruption. Furthermore, the new civil service code adopted in November 2015 (Law 81) introduced a revised wage grid, and incorporated contractual staff as permanent civil servants. The implementation of the new code, and of other sector-specific wage agreements (e.g., with the judiciary), permanently increased the wage bill by an estimated 0.4 percent of GDP in Box 5 Figure 2. Burkina Faso: Wage bill in the WAEMU criterion: 35% v x f o WAEMU Burkina Faso Sources:IMF, and IMF staff calculations Public employment is likely to continue growing due to strong public investment in education and health, and political pressures to tackle urban youth underemployment . At current levels of public compensation, an increase in the ratio of public employment to working-age population to 2.4%, which is likely to be attained within the next 10 years based on historical trend, would increase the wage bill ratio to 10.3 percent of GDP, far above the 6.5 percent criterion adopted by the WAEMU countries. Implementation of measures to moderate wage bill growth, stronger output growth and efforts to boost revenue mobilization would improve sustainability indicators gradually, and bring them in line with the WAEMU convergence criteria. The Selected Issues Paper also discusses selected country experiences with public employment and compensation reforms for Burkina Faso and policy options. Page 26