A revised mining taxation code had been submitted to the National Assembly last fall, but has been withdrawn for further revision. Mining companies have been lobbying to make certain provisions of the draft code more generous, with the justification that lower international gold prices have caused a slowdown in exploration activities. The authorities are currently consulting with the companies concerning the requested revisions, and a revised draft is expected to be submitted to the National Assembly in the fall. The authorities have committed to consult with staff to help ensure that the draft submitted to National Assembly reflects key aspects of staff recommendations, and is broadly comparable to the mining codes of peer countries in the sub-region (MEFP ¶36). The mission met with members of the mining sector, the National Assembly, the WAEMU commission, and the government to emphasize the importance of a mining taxation regime which optimizes rent-sharing so that this non-renewable one-time windfall is effectively channeled to investments to meet development needs of the country. The mission advocated, both at the national and regional level, consideration of a fiscal rule to guide the use of natural resource revenues . Although natural resource revenues are still below the “dependency” threshold of 20 percent of total revenues (16 percent in 2013), recent new discoveries and/or a recovery of international gold prices could easily push revenues to a higher level. The main channel by which gold production impacts the economy is through fiscal revenues, as the contribution to real activity and external sector balances is limited. In terms of the type of fiscal rule, key considerations are immediate development needs, execution capacity constraints, weak institutional capacity to deal with volatile commodity prices, and the need for a relatively simple rule that can garner broad ownership. Thus, rather than relying on longer term fiscal anchors based on permanent income hypothesis or some derivation thereof, staff would recommend a shorter term fiscal anchor as appropriate. An illustrative simulation of an expenditure growth rule is contained in Annex 1. For their part, the authorities’ primary concern is that discussions about a fiscal rule should be held within a regional context, and that revised WAEMU fiscal rules (currently under revision) should be homogeneous for all countries. However, both in Burkina-specific and regional consultations, staff have encouraged the authorities and other domestic stakeholders to consider country-specific fiscal rules, as long as they are consistent with WAEMU rules.