Outlook The recovery is expected to gather strength in the near term, with growth reaching 6.1 percent in 2017 and remaining at potential at about 6.5 percent over the medium term Favorable agricultural prospects, the coming on stream of two new mining projects and higher construction and services activity linked to the public investment program would consolidate the recovery in 2017. Going forward, medium-term growth projections in the range of 6½ percent are supported by the expected improvements in energy supply and new mining operations including, gradually, the Tambao manganese project (Text Table 1, MEFP ¶14). The baseline fiscal framework envisages a moderate widening of the deficit to about 3.5 percent of GDP over the medium term to support a gradual scaling up of investment . For 2017, staff’s baseline is aligned with the draft budget’s revenue, recurrent spending and externally-financed investment projections. However, the draft budget also envisages a nearly 2½- fold increase in domestically-financed investment, from 5.2 to 12.4 percent of GDP, predicated on optimistic assumptions about budget support, and implies a 1½ percent of GDP financing gap. Staff noted that, based on discussions with development partners, current budget support commitments for 2017 were about a third of the budgeted amount (CFAF 110 billion compared with Text Figure 3. Burkina Faso: Government Revenue and Expenses, Government Revenues (in percent of GDP) +0.3% +1.3% +1.4% +1.2% Nontax Revenues International Trade Taxes Income and Profit Taxes Other Tax Revenues Domestic Goods and Services (incl. VAT) Government Expenditure (in percent of GDP) +1.9% +3.4% +0.4% +0.1% Wages and salaries Domestically financed investment Other current expenditure Externally financed investment Sources: Burkinabè authorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 14 CFAF 336 billion in the budget). This constrains domestically-financed investment to about 7.3 percent of GDP, still a 2 percentage points increase from 2016. In this baseline scenario, the overall deficit would widen to 3.6 percent of GDP in 2017. Over the medium term, efforts to raise domestic revenue and contain recurrent spending would open up fiscal space for public investment, which would reach 13 percent of GDP by 2019 (Text Figure 3). At the authorities’ request, staff prepared an alternative scenario including higher investment based on additional donor financing and measures to enhance execution capacity. The authorities indicated that they expected new official and private commitments to fund the PNDES in the context of the December 7-8 donor round table in Paris and of the new IDA18 envelope. Staff and the authorities also agreed that higher public investment execution rates should be possible based on measures already taken, including the timely adoption of the 2017 budget, the announcement of all public tenders by November and the careful selection and close monitoring of key infrastructure projects (MEFP ¶34). The alternative scenario thus assumes that investment would return to its 2013 level and increase by an additional 2 percentage points, financed by higher budget support (mostly grants) in line with historical averages of about 3 percent of GDP. In this scenario, the overall deficit would widen to about 4 percent of GDP in 2017 with a small remaining financing gap, but would converge to the WAEMU convergence criterion of 3 percent of GDP by 2019. Boosted by higher infrastructure investment, real GDP growth would increase to 6.8 percent in 2017 and about 7 percent in the medium term (Text Table 1, Table 1a). Text Table 1. Burkina Faso: Baseline and Alternative Scenarios (2016–19) Proj. Baseline Scen. Baseline Scen. Baseline Scen. (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) GDP at constant prices Consumer prices (annual average) Credit to the private sector Terms of trade Current Account Overall fiscal balance, incl. grants (commitments) Total public debt (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Sources: Burkinabè authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Both scenarios would be consistent with medium-term debt sustainability. Debt sustainability analysis (DSA) results indicate that public debt would remain sustainable, with the public external debt-to-GDP ratio increasing by less than 2 percentage points of GDP between 2015 The investment scaling up included in staff’s alternative scenario is an increase of about 5 percentage points of GDP in 2017, compared with an increase of 7.6 percentage points in the authorities’ PNDES. The implications of the full investment scaling up envisaged in the PNDES are discussed in Box 4. Page 15 BURKINA FASO and 2019. The risk of debt distress would remain moderate as the debt-to-GDP ratio would breach the threshold under the historical scenario and most extreme shock in 2033. Under the alternative scenario, Burkina Faso’s debt sustainability improves slightly as increases in GDP, revenues, and exports offset additional borrowing over the medium term. The risk of debt distress would remain moderate as the breaches of relevant thresholds occur at similar points than under the baseline scenario. Nonetheless, the favorable outcome in the alternative scenario depends on several assumptions for which there are downside risks. Specifically, the scenario depends on success in mobilizing additional domestic revenues, access to significant new grant financing, and a high growth impact from infrastructure spending. Results would be less positive with use of costly domestic or external non-concessional debt financing and if capacity bottlenecks were to undercut the growth impact of new infrastructure spending. Like the rest of the region, Burkina Faso is benefiting from the confluence of favorable external conditions, but risks of reversal are high The exceptional alignment of low oil prices, firmer gold and cotton prices, easy ECB monetary policy and the euro depreciation, together with abundant rainfall, support the positive short-term outlook. Since the end of the political crisis there, rapid growth in Côte d’Ivoire is also generating positive spillovers given strong trade, FDI and remittance linkages (Box 2). Given Burkina Faso’s narrow production and export base, the impact of a reversal of any of these positive external factors would be magnified. Further terrorist attacks would undermine confidence and investment. In addition, a crowding out of the regional debt market by larger issuances from Côte d’Ivoire and/or Senegal could make it more difficult and expensive for the government to issue domestic debt. Domestic risks are also significant. Social pressures could lead to higher wages and transfers at the expense of investment, and inadequate resource mobilization or absorption capacity could hamper execution of the public investment program (Table 6). Authorities’ views Given existing budget support commitments, the authorities agreed that domestically- financed investment would be limited to the amounts presented in staff’s baseline scenario, implying an overall deficit of 3.6 percent of GDP in 2017 . They also indicated that they would pursue investment in amounts larger than programmed only if additional concessional financing could be identified, along the lines of the alternative scenario with the deficit expanding to no more than 4 percent of GDP in 2017, but returning to 3 percent by 2019 (MEFP ¶28). They however emphasized that new investments financed under Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) could bring growth closer to the rates envisaged in the PNDES (see Box 1) with moderate budgetary implications. They took note of the external risks associated with reversals in the favorable terms of trade and financing conditions (MEFP ¶29). They also indicated that they have taken a number of measures to mitigate domestic risks, including improving security and intelligence systems, enhancing social cohesion and making the justice system work for all. Moreover, they are determined to continue Burkina Faso owes a small amount of pre-HIPC Initiative arrears to non-Paris Club creditors which continue to be deemed away under the revised arrears policy for official creditors, as the underlying Paris Club agreement was adequately representative and the authorities make best efforts to resolve the arrears. Page 16 efforts aimed at mobilizing domestic resources and containing recurrent spending, diversifying the economy primarily through transformation of agricultural products, and establishing a solid institutional mechanism to track implementation of the PNDES (MEFP ¶16). Box 2. Burkina Faso: Spillovers from Côte d'Ivoire Box 2 Figure 1. Burkina Faso: Linkages with Côte d’Ivoire, 2009-15 Bilateral Trade with Cote d'Ivoire, (millions of USD) Bilateral trade with CIV Bilateral Trade as a share of GDP Foreign Direct Investment from Cote d'Ivoire, (millions of USD) FDI from CIV Share of total FDI Remittances from Cote d'Ivoire, (millions of USD) 2014 2015* Rem ittances from CIV Rem ittances as a share of GDP *Preliminary estimate Sources: Direction of Trade Statistics, Conseil Burkinabè de Chargeurs (CBC), Coordinated Direct Investment Survey (CDIS), World Bank Migration and Remittances Data; and IMF staff calculations. Burkina Faso has significant economic linkages with Côte d'Ivoire. Bilateral trade represented about 15 percent of total trade flows in 2015, and remittances from Côte d’Ivoire between 60 and 80 percent of the total in 2010-15. Electricity imports from Côte d'Ivoire already constitute 30-35 percent of Burkina Faso’s consumption, with plans for further expansion in the context of the West Africa Power Pool project. Bilateral trade has been growing in recent years. Most of Burkina Faso’s imports and exports also transit through the port of Abidjan, with goods transported via road and railroad. FDI from Cote d’Ivoire has also been increasing. With about 3 million Burkinabè residing in Côte d'Ivoire, remittances flows are significant. Remittance flows from Côte d'Ivoire have grown steadily since 2009 and represented over 2 percent of GDP in 2015. Official statistics likely underestimate the actual size of flows between Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire . Informal trade and remittance flows are also likely to be significant but are not captured in official data. The Fund is implementing a WAEMU-wide project to enhance external sector statistics, funded by Japan, which should help enhance the accuracy of official data. Page 17 BURKINA FASO