To challenge the robustness of the macroeconomic framework projections and the DSA results, staff constructed an alternative scenario . Since a gold price shock was explored in the 2012 and 2013 DSAs and is embodied in the standard stress tests, in this case staff explored a near term growth shock due to drought, with no additional response from donors. The growth slowdown starts in 2014, peaks in 2015, and has residual effects over the next five years. The main impact of the shock would be on grain production, creating resulting food security needs. Due to higher food prices, inflation increases to reach an average of 4 percent in 2015. The current account deteriorates only marginally relative to the baseline, as exports are assumed unchanged (with mining unaffected and cotton affected only marginally due to irrigation and GMO seeds) and lower growth and investment is assumed to have a dampening effect on import demand. Impact on Main Macroeconomic Aggregates of Weather Related Exogenous Shock Real GDP Growth Downside Scenario Fiscal Deficit (including grants) Downside Scenario Current Account Balance Downside Scenario Debt/GDP Ratio Downside Scenario (Percent of GDP) In this scenario, the fiscal deficit rises above 5 percent in 2015 and 2016, and investment spending adjustment has an impact on growth in the medium term. The deficit increases sharply due to lower revenues and spending needs associated with food security and other transfers aimed at mitigating the impact of the shock. Investment spending adjustment is assumed to avoid an even larger increase in the deficit, and this has the effect of dampening growth over the next five years. Page 24 DSA results under this scenario show a higher risk of debt distress, albeit with the risk rating remaining “moderate”. The impact of the shock is to increase long-term debt levels as the increase in the fiscal deficit is assumed to be financed mostly by increased external borrowing on non-concessional terms. On its own this scenario causes a near breach in the PV of debt-to-exports and in combining it with standardized stress tests, both PV of debt-to-exports and debt-to-GDP thresholds are breached. The results of this alternative scenario reinforce maintaining the risk of debt distress as “moderate.” However, all DSA results should be interpreted with caution, particularly given uncertain assumptions about the investment-growth nexus, outdated national account statistics, and balance of payments data still under revision.