Despite uncertainties associated with the transition of political power, the security situation in Burkina Faso remains calm . After 25 years in office, President Compaoré is seeking to amend the constitution to enable him to seek another term. Early in 2014, there were several high profile resignations from his party, the Congress for Democracy and Progress (CDP). A new party was formed, and joined forces with the opposition party to stage a series of peaceful protests against the constitutional amendment. A public referendum on the constitutional amendment is possible in the second half of this year. Growth remained robust in 2013, but was revised downward slightly from 6.8 to 6.6 percent (Figures 1 and 2). Erratic rains in 2013 affected grain production, although food stocks appear adequate. Lower international gold prices constrained growth in mining production, with a more pronounced impact on exports and fiscal revenues. Strong construction activity and cotton production—the latter having become more resilient to rain patterns—partly compensated. Food prices have been kept down due to price controls and government subsidized sales of basic food products in special rural shops. Inflation has remained around zero for the past several months. The 2013 fiscal deficit was 0.2 percent of GDP higher than programmed, due to lower revenues and higher spending, partly offset by higher grants . Revenue collection was affected by, among other things, gold prices and foregone fuel excise taxes. Higher expenditures were primarily due to capital transfers to public enterprises. Domestically-financed investment spending was otherwise roughly on target, thanks to accelerated spending in the second half of the year. Grants were larger than expected since the share of project grants to project loans was unusually high—80 percent compared to 50 percent historically. The overall deficit reached 3.5 percent of GDP (commitment basis). Deficit financing was skewed largely toward domestic financing: a bond issuance late in the year was oversubscribed two fold, a large World Bank budget support disbursement was delayed into the first few days of 2014, and external project financing was skewed away from loans. In the first quarter of 2014, weaker than expected revenue performance continued with large under-execution of spending. Revenue collection in the first quarter was about 88 percent and spending was 63 percent of programmed levels, leading to a temporary budget surplus. Investment budget execution was 55 percent of program levels. In March 2014, the government reversed its decision from a year ago to forego part of its take of fuel excise taxes, which should compensate for one-half of the shortfall in revenue collection going forward (MEFP ¶31). Page 7 The current account balance deteriorated sharply due to lower gold prices (Figure 2, Table 4). International gold prices caused reduced exports, and imports remained strong due to demand for intermediate investment goods in conjunction with expansion of some mining projects and growing public investment. Due to a retroactive change in official gold production statistics, the current account deficits for 2012 and 2013 are 3.5 percentage points of GDP higher than in the th review. This change affects current account projections going forward, but balance of payments projections are not yet finalized and there still may be offsetting revisions. (% y/y) Source: BCEAO. Central Bank NFA (LHS) (CFAF billions) Jan-12 May-12 Sep-12 Jan-13 May-13 Sep-13 Jan-14 Commercial Bank NFA (LHS) Dec. 2011–Mar. 2014 Money Supply Monthly Growth, Net Foreign Assets, Jan. 2012–Mar. 2014 M2 Net foreign assets Credit to government Credit to private sector Imputed central bank international reserves dropped sharply, due to one-off factors, while private sector credit remained robust. As of end-December, imputed central bank reserves dropped 40 percent against the previous year. End-March monetary data indicate that the sharp drop in imputed central bank reserves continued, with net reserves going negative (reflected only in the share of reserves imputed to Burkina Faso, rather than overall common reserves), while commercial banks’ reserves grew. The authorities explained that this was due to non-observance by some commercial banks of surrender requirements for foreign exchange, combined with large import needs connected with Millennium Challenge Account and other investment projects, as well as delays in anticipated external grants and financing (MEFP ¶7). A committee has been established to monitor repatriation requirements for gold mining companies and surrender requirements for commercial banks, and observed that as of April, reserves imputed to Burkina Faso began to accumulate. Discrepancies in official statistics for gold production have been resolved (end-March structural benchmark), with the authorities finding that some production had been recorded in the wrong units (kilograms vs. tons). Thus, official statistics for gold production in 2012 and 2013 were corrected from 42.4 to 35.6 tons and 42.8 to 38.9 tons, respectively. The revised production statistics have not yet been incorporated into the authorities’ real and external sector statistics. However, since the correction implies an important change in the relationship between gold production/exports and fiscal revenues, staff and the authorities agreed to incorporate the correction into the external sector of the program framework. The change in production and exports in 2012 implies a very large upward revision to the current account deficit, from 0.8 percent of GDP, at the time of the 7 th review under the previous ECF arrangement, to 4.5 percent currently. Once the national directorate of the BCEAO finalizes official BOP statistics, there may be offsetting revisions to other aspects of the BOP. Meanwhile, staff and the authorities have agreed to keep overall GDP growth estimates for 2012 and 2013 unchanged until the national accounts can be revised and finalized, since the contribution of the mining sector to growth is modest and other possible revisions leave the net effect on growth unclear. However, for the demand side, the higher current account deficit implies a reduction in private sector savings relative to earlier projections. Dec-11 Mar-12 Jun-12 Sep-12 Dec-12 Mar-13 Jun-13 Sep-13 Dec-13 Mar-14 Source: BCEAO Page 8 Private sector credit growth has remained robust, with an uptick in growth of banking sector credit to the general government. However, reflecting the drop in imputed NFA for most of 2013, broad money growth (M2) slowed markedly, well below projected nominal GDP growth. Although the trend is worth noting, in a monetary union and ample liquidity context, this does not necessarily imply a constraint on growth.