Growth (CFAF billions) SONABHY SONABEL Text Table 6. Burkina Faso: Financial Interlinkages in the Energy Sector, 2016 Profit and Loss 2016 Net Transfers to the State Owned Enterprises In percentage of government expenditure Continuing with Energy Sector Reforms to Boost Electricity Supply Pursuing ongoing reforms to improve transparency in the energy sector and eliminate the build-up of contingent liabilities would create fiscal space for higher investment in electricity supply. The financial positions of both SONABHY and SONABEL have benefitted respectively from recent developments in international oil price trends, the clearing of two- thirds of SONABEL’s arrears to SONABHY, and supply price reforms agreed in the context of the 4 ECF reviews (MEFP ¶5,38). However, cross-liabilities between the state and both companies remain significant (Text Table 6). Staff thus made a number of recommendations to ensure the sustainability of reforms in the sector. The tripartite committee that was recently put in place should assess options to clear Investment subsidies Income taxes and others Dividends Memo Items: Outstanding Payments as of end-2016 Central Government n.a. Hydrocarbon and Electricity Bills Subsidies Explicit subsidies Market oriented (Oil and Gas) Sources: Burkinabè authorities; SONABHY, SONABEL and IMF staff estimates. remaining balances including unpaid subsidies External committees to monitor implementation of both companies’ performance contracts should be promptly established, as recommended by the 2014 audit (MEFP ¶39-42). Some flexibility in domestic pump prices would help minimize future subsidies . Domestic pump prices are currently slightly above average production cost, and no immediate adjustment in prices is foreseen (Text Figure 5). However, a small increase in oil prices (expected in the current WEO projection) would again trigger the need for a state subsidy at the current sale price. Staff emphasized that the adjustment Text Figure 5. Burkina Faso: Current and Projected Retail Gasoline Cost, 2015-2020 (including transport costs, taxes, and distribution and retailer margins) 95 percent confidence interval 86 percent confidence interval 68 percent confidence interval Central Forecast Retail Price i C Source: WEO October 2016, Burkinabèauthorities and IMF staff calculations. Ougadougou Super 91 retail gas price taken as reference. Page 27 BURKINA FASO mechanism should ensure that tariffs remain consistent with cost-recovery in order to maintain the financial viability of the energy sector and to reduce future outlays on subsidies. The PNDES should prioritize critical energy production projects and seek donor support to Text Figure 6. Burkina Faso: Energy Mix (Gigawatts), help cover the energy deficit The authorities’ strategy to expand electricity supply while reducing production costs relies on three main pillars, for which they are seeking external official and private funding: (i) increase domestic thermal generation and move from diesel to less costly heavy fuel oil; (ii) significantly scale up renewable energy generation, with the first solar power plant set to start operating in mid-2017; and (iii) expand cheaper energy imports from neighboring countries in the context of the West African Power Pool (Text Figure 6). It would be important for the government to ensure adequate resources to fund the national counterpart to these projects, to enhance SONABEL’s capacity to implement the new projects. Given the lack of expertise in structuring and managing contractual arrangements with independent power producers (IPPs), the immediate priority should be to develop a unified, transparent framework which limits state contingent liabilities. Imports and purchases of energy Thermal power plants Sources: SONABEL, Burkinabè authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Hydropower plants Solar power plants Authorities’ views The authorities reiterated that improving energy supply lies at the core of their development strategy. They noted that the external monitoring committees for SONABHY and SONABEL would be operational shortly, and that they are working towards activating the automatic fuel price adjustment mechanism that had been approved in 2013. At the time, its implementation had been frozen in the context of high oil prices and social tensions. They noted that the success of this measure hinged on social acceptance and understanding of increased price flexibility, and that they would prepare a communication plan by the end of the year (new SB, MEFP ¶44). Increasing the reliance on solar power would help to gradually lower SONABEL’s production costs, and they planned to establish a new renewable energies’ agency to help set standards and regulations for the sector (MEFP ¶45). Boosting competitiveness to support economic diversification Although price competitiveness has improved, serious structural obstacles stand in the way of economic diversification and private sector development . Price competitiveness developments have been relatively favorable in light of recent trends in the real effective exchange rate and commodity prices. The real effective exchange rate depreciated by 18 percent between March 2014 and October 2016, mostly driven by the depreciation of the euro against major currencies, in the context of low inflation in Burkina Faso and trading partners. The external stability Page 28 assessment using EBA-lite methodologies finds that the current account and real effective exchange rates are broadly in line with fundamentals (Annex 1). The overall business environment and governance compare favorably with peers, but inadequate energy supply, poor contract enforcement, and the lack of access to credit, mostly in the informal and rural sectors, remain among the most binding growth constraints. A medium-term strategy to increase value-added in cotton production while also moving to other high-value agricultural products is urgently needed to protect rural incomes and reduce future calls on the budget . The cotton sector is the main source of agricultural employment, and the agricultural sector accounts for 15 percent of GDP. However, staff noted that long-term world price trends remain unfavorable, in spite of the recent uptick. Already the cotton price stabilization fund has practically run out of resources and, while withdrawals are not foreseen for the current or subsequent campaign, the authorities and cotton producers ought to agree on a strategy to recapitalize the fund over the medium term. The size of producer subsidies would continue to grow rapidly (CFAF 20 billion in the 2017 budget). Thus, staff noted that implementing a strategy to increase value-added in the sector and, ultimately, branch out to other high-value agricultural exports was a matter of urgency. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that lack of economic diversification was a source of external vulnerability and an obstacle to inclusive and sustainable growth. They pointed out that the PNDES emphasizes investments in water management projects, fertilizers, insurance mechanisms, to boost agricultural productivity and support diversification toward high potential agricultural products such as soy, sesame, shea butter, etc. They also noted that the PNDES has defined specific objectives in terms of electricity supply, access to credit, and improvements in transport and telecommunication infrastructures, as well as in the area of governance and quality of institutions. Boosting credit to the private sector and expanding access to financial services While there are no concerns about financial stability, weak credit growth and high lending concentration raise questions regarding the ability of the financial sector to support private sector development . Private credit growth is projected to reach 9.4 percent in 2016 and to average only about 14 percent in 2017-19, well below historical rates of 20-25 percent. The banking system is sound, relatively profitable and well-capitalized, but credit is highly concentrated to a small number of clients and a few sectors of the economy (Table 5). Going forward, in terms of macro- financial linkages, staff sees risks that the macroeconomic context could continue to affect both the quality and the quantity of credit to the economy. Specifically, the planned investment scaling up could lead to further concentration and crowd out availability of loanable funds through two channels: (i) the financing of contracts to implement public investment projects remains a major driver of the demand for credit (lending for construction and public works already accounts for over a quarter of total lending); and (ii) continued accumulation of government bonds given the PNDES’ objective to increasing domestic financing. Page 29 BURKINA FASO To mitigate these risks, staff recommended to urgently address the underlying structural, cost and information barriers to deeper and broader access to credit (Box 6). Easier access by financial institutions to credit information, which currently still requires clients’ consent, as well as the establishment of a collateral registry, vertical integration of more agricultural sub-sectors following the model of the cotton industry, and developing rural insurance schemes would all help lower banks’ perceptions of credit risk for small and medium enterprises and agriculture. The authorities should also look to successful examples in East Africa to develop a regulatory framework that would allow the development of mobile banking services to their full potential. Box 6. Burkina Faso: Financial Inclusion Lack of financial access is an important bottleneck to growth and poverty reduction. Only about 15 percent of the population has a bank account and a much smaller share is using that account to save or borrow from a financial institution. Similarly, utilization of mobile banking services remains very low, despite the large number of cell phone subscribers. As in the rest of the WAEMU and SSA, individuals’ access to credit varies according to key demographic characteristics. Women are almost 30 percent less likely than men to hold a bank account, and differences in access based on education or income are much larger. Nearly three-quarters of respondents indicated their lack of bank account was involuntary so there seems to be considerable unmet demand, mainly due to structural barriers such as lack of income but also cost, distance, documentation requirements, etc. Given low access to formal bank credit, the use of informal arrangements such as reliance on borrowing from family and friends remains predominant. The regional and national authorities are making efforts to enhance financial inclusion. Recent initiatives include the following: Regionally, the Council of Ministers for the WAEMU adopted a financial inclusion strategy for 2016-20. The strategy revolves around five pillars, including promoting effective regulatory and legal frameworks, strengthening the microfinance sector, and strengthening financial literacy. Identifying adequate financing for the strategy and effective monitoring will be the key ingredients to its success. The authorities will finalize a national financial inclusion strategy in 2017. This will be an opportunity to consolidate the various financial inclusion and microfinance initiatives and to prioritize the key reforms that will facilitate improved financial access. Page 30 Box 6. Figure 1. Burkina Faso: Financial Inclusion, 2011–14 Financial inclusion (% of population) Used an account to make a transaction through a mobile phone (% of population), 2014 Burkina Faso WAEMU Have a bank account (2011) Borrowed from a FI (2011) Borrowed from a FI (2014) SSA Saved at a FI (2011) Have a bank account (2014) Saved at a FI (2014) Share of population with bank account (by gender) Burkina Faso WAEMU SSA Female (2011) Female (2014) Male (2011) Male (2014) Share of population with bank account (by income) Burkina Faso WAEMU SSA 0 - 40% (2011) 0 - 40% (2014) 60 - 100% (2011) 60 - 100% (2014) Burkina Faso WAEMU SSA Share of population with bank account (by education level) Burkina Faso WAEMU SSA Primary or less (2011) Primary or less (2014) Secondary or more (2011) Secondary or more (2014) Sources of borrowing Burkina Faso WAEMU SSA Financial Institution(2011) Informal Lender(2011) Family or Friend(2011) Reasons for not having a bank account, 2014 Involuntar y Too far Too expensive Can't obtain one Lack of money Page 31 BURKINA FASO Authorities’ views The authorities had a more sanguine view than staff regarding the pick-up of credit growth and highlighted that their new financial inclusion strategies would address a number of staff’s recommendations . They noted that credit tended to lag growth in the region and did not see potential private sector crowding out given the low base. The authorities also indicated that the recent establishment of commercial courts could help facilitate settlements of claims and realization of guarantees, which would also promote credit. They highlighted efforts already made to reduce the documentation requirements, costs and fees related to banking services, including the elimination of fees to open an account. The new regional and national financial inclusion strategies envisage financial literacy and education programs to promote access to financial services broadly defined, also including microfinance institutions. They were not considering establishing a collateral registry at the moment, and indicated that the current mobile banking regulations requiring ownership of a bank account to use mobile services were intended to protect users.