The Cabinet approved a large package of new inclusive growth spending measures in March, and a 0.6 percent of GDP public wage bill increase, but committed to find offsets to maintain the program deficit (MEFP ¶27-29). The authorities stressed that revenue gains in recent years and strong growth had led to mounting social pressure for more redistribution of public resources, with two key outlets: the public wage bill and ad hoc social transfers. Negotiations for a wage bill increase had been ongoing for 18 months as a quid pro quo for reducing the number of categories of allowances. In early 2014, public sector labor unions joined together and began a series of small scale strikes to force a conclusion of negotiations. By March, the government felt that agreement was necessary to head off collective action and potential social turmoil. New social transfers had been introduced in September 2013, and the authorities explained that continuation and extension of these measures required new spending authority of 0.6 percent of GDP. The Cabinet approved the spending increases in late March, along with another 0.3 percent of GDP needed for voter registration and security spending and 0.8 percent of GDP in priority investment spending. At the same time, the authorities identified preliminary categories of non-priority spending to be “frozen” pending a mid-term budget review in July. At staff’s urging, the authorities agreed to formalize the new spending authority and their financing by embedding them in a supplemental budget submitted to the National Assembly on June 6. Staff also requested that the supplemental budget reflect additional spending authority based on more realistic estimates of budgetary transfer needs of public enterprises, for which the authorities added 0.3 percent of GDP. Total new spending authority of 2.6 percent of GDP is to be financed by a combination of spending offsets and additional budget support grants. Against the existing program framework, this implies a net increase in current spending by 1.3 percent of GDP, financed by reduced domestically-financed investment spending of 0.9 percent of GDP and new resources of 0.4 percent of GDP. Additional budget support grants result from agreement that a World Bank budget support operation delayed from 2013 into early 2014 could be incorporated into the program framework as additional resources to be used in 2014 (maintaining an original assumption for another disbursement later in 2014), thus reducing part of the need for spending offsets. Page 13 Summary of changes to Supplementary Budget vis-à-vis Program Approval Macroeconomic Framework Additional Spending Authority CFA billions % GDP Total Current Spending Wages and Salaries Transfers - Social spending - Elections - SONABEL - SONABHY Investment Spending Priority projects Refugee/Security related Spending offsets/New Resources Total Spending offsets Goods and Services Transfers Interest Investment New Resources Grants - o/w World Bank Domestic Revenues CFA billions % GDP The authorities explained that recomposition of spending would not jeopardize program objectives for more inclusive growth, since higher social spending replaced lower priority investment spending. They observed that the additional social spending addresses specific, already-identified impediments to inclusive growth laid out in the National Social Protection Plan and the SCADD, notably better support to the most vulnerable segments of the population and job creation schemes (MEFP ¶24, 28-30). These include: targeted transfers for vulnerable groups (orphans, street children, elderly, handicapped); creation of additional labor-intensive rural jobs; increased use of “ boutiques témoins ” (small public grocery stores selling staple goods at subsidized prices); credit lines/loan guarantees for small entrepreneurs; and expanding university funding to facilitate more student participation and enrollment. At the same time, in finding offsetting adjustments, the authorities were forced to carefully review investment spending in order to safeguard the highest priority investment spending and delay lower priority spending (MEFP ¶29). New identified priority spending is directed towards energy infrastructure. Thus, while spending may be lower than originally planned, the quality and execution rate of spending should be higher, with “readiness” of projects given more prominence in project selection. In considering WAEMU fiscal rules, even with the recomposition, Burkina Faso meets the WAEMU floor for minimum domestically- financed investment spending by a large margin. The authorities acknowledged the mission’s concerns about the size of the wage bill increase and its sustainability, but explained that the circumstances were unique . Staff noted that the program already had incorporated a 10 percent increase in the wage bill over 2013, to accommodate hiring of new teachers and health workers. Thus, the wage bill settlement implies a 25 percent increase over 2013, with Burkina Faso’s wage bill increasing from 6.0 to 6.9 percent of GDP, and 35.8 to 39.9 percent of revenues. The authorities noted that the wage bill increase (in percent of Tax Revenue) Wages k u u G u s s l g o v d g o g o o s t ô C l W Page 14 was unavoidable after almost a year and a half of negotiations to streamline allowances. Staff expressed concern about the sustainability of the large increase in the wage bill over the medium term, noting the change over time using various indicators. The authorities expressed their commitment to revert the wage bill back to the WAEMU ceiling (35 percent of tax revenues) over the medium term, and discussed with staff various options that might be incorporated into program design at a later stage. Burkina Faso does not have inflation-indexing, and the public sector does not serve as a basis for wage negotiations in other sectors. Thus, the most realistic option for bringing the wage bill back in line with the WAEMU ceiling is keeping a cap on multi-year wage negotiations, since there are already significant further increases in the number of teachers and health workers planned for 2015–16. Wages (in percent of Current Expenditure) k u o s t ô C o v d l g l g u G u s s o g o W Wages (in percent of GDP) k u o s t ô C o v d l g l g u G u s s o g o W Burkina Faso: WAEMU Convergence Criteria, 2012–14 Objective First-order criteria Basic fiscal balance/GDP Inflation Rate Total debt/GDP Change in payments arrears: Domestic External ≥ ≤ ≤ ≤ ≤ Second-order criteria Wages and salaries/tax revenue Capital expenditure domestically financed/tax revenue Current account deficit excluding grants/GDP Tax revenue/GDP Sources: Burkinabè authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Total revenue (excl. grants) - current -dom-financed investment spending (incl capital transfers). Including revised gold production data. ≤ ≥ ≤ ≥ The authorities also outlined measures to support program revenue projections to address the mission’s concerns about weak first quarter results. They outlined numerous measures to support the revenue projections in the program framework, including restoration of fuel excise taxes, administrative measures to review past tax liabilities of mining companies, integration of tax databases between Customs and Internal Revenues, and numerous other Customs measures, including satellite tracking of import shipments and a new system of valuation for used vehicles. (MEFP ¶13, 31) The authorities agreed with the mission that revenue projections in the budget, having been increased by the National Assembly, could be overly ambitious and that the program should retain more cautious projections. Page 15