Investment for development: Financing the SCADD requires not only more spending on human and infrastructure development, but also a redoubled focus on the quality of spending, through careful project selection and results-monitoring. Under the auspices of the SCADD, the authorities are working to identify critical infrastructure bottlenecks, and seeking to address them with large infrastructure projects (MEFP ¶19–21, 24). However, the authorities are aware that if the expected growth payoff is to be captured, the effectiveness of spending is critical. Average execution of investment spending has been below targeted levels, and the Public Investment Management Index suggests there may Page 18 be weaknesses in the area of project selection. Last year, the authorities implemented some immediate measures to improve the rate of execution of investment spending—although execution of domestically-financed investment accelerated somewhat, donors do not report seeing much difference in the rate of externally-financed investment project execution. The authorities have launched numerous initiatives to improve spending execution and multi-year budget planning. Based on a diagnostic to identify expenditure approval bottlenecks, they are in the process of rationalizing expenditure approval procedures and computerizing them (MEFP ¶18, 32, 44, 46), as well as revising thresholds for public procurement. They are receiving technical assistance to improve budget planning and program budgeting, and integrating the multi-year planning processes with annual budgeting. Investment execution rates have started to respond, but it will take time and monitoring to assess the quality and coherence of spending—on the margin—against objectives of the development strategy. Addressing energy constraints: Improving the supply of energy is critical to sustain inclusive growth, but also for putting the sector on a more financially-sustainable basis. Business climate surveys consistently indicate that, despite very high energy costs, consumers would be willing to pay more for reliable and sufficient provision of electricity, as this would reduce interruptions of service and the need for expensive backup systems. Thus, the question of financial sustainability is integrally linked to that of supply. Numerous projects are in the pipeline to meet demand that is growing more than 10 percent per year, while at the same time broadening access to energy for the rural population. There are concerns that plans to expand domestic capacity may not be enough to meet energy needs, and serve as an increasingly binding constraint on growth (Box 5). To meet these needs, the authorities are accessing a combination of sources: expanding imported energy (less expensive, but limited supply); expanding domestic thermal capacity (more expensive but more reliable); and developing alternative sources as much as possible (e.g. solar energy) (MEFP ¶49). Box 4. Burkina Faso: Electricity Supply: a Long Way to Close the Gap Improvement of electricity supply is critical for eliminating a growth bottleneck and ensuring financial sustainability of the sector. Key sector challenges include: (i) high supply costs, tariffs, and subsidies; (ii) fast growing demand and limited supply; and (iii) a low electrification rate, especially in rural zones ― only 14 percent of households are connected. Demand is estimated to grow at above 10 percent a year, faster than the real GDP, while domestic capacity ― still below 300 MW ― grows at a much slower pace, with new electricity projects taking longer than anticipated. Recent studies financed by donors suggest that over the period 2015–30, domestic capacity should increase to 750 MW and imported energy should increase by an additional 400 MW. Increase of power supply: The increase of power generation is supported by donors, with a focus on renewable resources. The lack of natural resources in Burkina Faso is a major impediment: solar electricity cannot exceed 25 percent of the total grid capacity due to technical constraints, and other natural assets either do not exist or are already used to the maximum possible (hydro). Therefore, imports from neighboring countries constitute an important element of the medium term strategy. The new interconnection with Ghana, planned for 2016, should supply the domestic grid with a minimum supply of 100 MW by 2016. Most of the cost is supported by the EU (US$31 million), AfDB (US$23 million), France (US$22 million) and the WB (US$16 million). Page 19 Box 4. Burkina Faso: Electricity Supply: a Long Way to Close the Gap (concluded) Capacity 30 MW A few MW 30 MW 15 MV 20 MW 100 MW 20 MW Date Ongoing Project ZAGTOULI – solar plant. US$ 90 M (with the AFD) Micro-generation in remote areas: solar, bio-fuels ZAGTOULI – solar plant. US$ 90 M (with the EU) Thermal generation in Fada and Ouahigouya. US$30M Solar: IFC assist government to select an IPP Thermal: assist government to select an IPP Increase thermal capacity at Bobo II – US$ 30M Increase thermal capacity at Komsilga III – US$ 20M Increase thermal capacity at Komsilga III – US$ 30M WINDINGA – solar plant (for mines only) Donor European Union France (AFD) World Bank IFC BOAD AfDB Identifying the export capacity of neighboring countries remains a challenge: Cote d’Ivoire aims to double generation capacity by 2020. In Ghana, 110 MW additional capacity (IFC) came on line in 2013, several other IPPs are in the pipeline, and the Ghana Power System Reinforcement Project (AfDB) aims to reduce losses to the grid. The AfDB is also financing hydro-plants in Niger (Kandadji–130 MW) and Togo (Adjarala–147 MW). However, accessing these sources may not be straightforward: competition from other countries to import power from Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana: e.g. Côte d’Ivoire has fast growing domestic demand in Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana; already committed to supplying 83MW to Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea from 2015 onwards; export prices will likely increase to reflect increasing generation costs : while Burkina Faso has, until now, been able to secure attractive prices from Côte d’Ivoire, implicit subsidies may not be sustainable due to Côte d’Ivoire own budget constraints. The same will likely also be true for Ghana, meaning that imported energy may cost more than historically. Page 20 Financial sector stability/access: Despite heightened risks for pan-African banks emphasized in WAEMU surveillance, most commercial banks in Burkina Faso appear to be in a sound position. Burkinabè affiliates of large regional banks remain profitable and stable. Capital adequacy ratios have dropped somewhat, on the basis of robust new lending, with private credit growth at 26 percent as of December 2013. The sustained high growth of lending has also affected the ratio of deposits to loans. On the other hand, due to higher lending volume and a relatively low level of non-performing loans, there has been a significant increase in return to capital. All but one bank are above the 8 percent minimum capital threshold; the remaining bank is in the process of undergoing reform with a new administrator and is not a systemic threat. As in the rest of the region, asset concentration is high, with 5 banks (out of 12) holding more than 72 percent of assets. Loans are concentrated among certain large borrowers, among them SOFITEX, SONABHY, a large construction firm, and food importers. The central bank explained that concentration risks are controllable since banks engage in mainly short-term lending (almost 2/3) and have a good mastery of the borrowing profiles. As with other WAEMU countries, smaller financial institutions are supervised by national authorities. Pension and insurance institutions are not supervised, but there are regional efforts to remedy this. Selected Financial Soundness Indicators Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets Non-performing loans After-tax return on total capital Total deposits to total loans Source: BCEAO Jun-13 Dec-13 Access to financial services remains limited in Burkina Faso, with typical structural impediments and a lack of incentives for innovation. As of 2012, about 16 percent of the population had access to some form of financial services. Due to prohibitive costs, only 5 percent of the population had access to commercial banking services. In the 2013 World Bank Doing Business indicators, Burkina Faso ranked 130 (out of 181) for access to credit, down from 126 the previous year. Commercial banks are introducing new products to broaden access for the informal sector, but the regional regulatory and national legal environments represent serious obstacles, as do undeveloped credit registries and use of collateral. For example, in West Africa, there has been very little development of mobile banking since few institutions have received authorization to cooperate with telecommunications entities to enable mobile banking. At the same time, telecommunications service is quite poor, with limited infrastructure and competition, although the number of subscribers has accelerated sharply. Also, commercial banks report that the judicial system does not support enforcement of contracts, and sometimes may penalize the creditor. The authorities have an action plan to strengthen management and supervision of microfinance institutions, and enhance the provision of basic financial services by the state-owned postal company. Under the microfinance strategy, the objective is to rationalize Page 21 institutions and provide more reliable service by those that remain. Additional supervisors have been added, with introduction of monthly reporting of prudential ratios and stress testing for some larger institutions. Risk mapping has been added to leverage on-site inspections. For SONAPOST, the plan is to use its geographical range to provide broader access to basic financial services for rural populations. A first draft of a five year strategy has been finalized that envisages providing more diverse and better quality products and services, including through computerizing SONAPOST’s operations (MEFP ¶18). Structural transformation: In spite of higher and more stable growth, there appears to be relatively limited progress in structural transformation. Real GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent over the past decade, and 7 percent over the past 5 years. At the same time, growth has become less volatile, despite repeated droughts and floods. Better resilience against weather shocks is the result of investment in irrigation, crop rotation and land management, and increased use of genetically modified drought and pest resistant cotton seeds. However, concurrent structural transformation has been limited—despite the emergence of industrial gold production, the secondary sector share of GDP growth has remained around 20 percent since 1995, reflecting limited capacity to generate higher value added activities. As discussed in the report for the approval of the current ECF arrangement, there are efforts underway to establish value chains, notably in cotton. An updated base year for the national accounts is needed to identify evolving sources of growth. The current base year is 1999. While the weight of various sectors has been adjusted in the intervening years, the underlying survey techniques have not kept pace. In particular, the statistical agency is concerned about estimates of informal sector activity. A first step in the process is launching a new informal sector survey which could, among other things, correct estimations of informal artisanal mining activity, which may be significantly understated. The statistical agency noted that impediments to updating the base year are resources and TA. AFRITAC West has reprogrammed TA planning to provide support, including to develop an action plan by year’s end (structural benchmark).