The growth outlook for the next two years has been revised slightly downward, mainly based on weaker terms of trade. The growth rate is forecast to be 6.7 and 6.8 percent in 2014 and 2015, respectively, reverting back to the past five year mean of 7 percent in 2016. Depending on weather, commodity prices, and the pace and quality of investment spending, growth could be higher, continuing its upward trend. Inflation is a function of imported prices and local food and fuel prices—which are partly controlled or subsidized—and is expected to remain low at around 2 percent. Page 22 Domestic Revenue Grants Total Expenditure o/w mining Revenue (Percent of GDP) Medium-Term Fiscal Framework Over the program period, the fiscal deficit is expected to remain relatively stable at around 3.0 percent of GDP. Compared to the time of the approval of the arrangement in December 2013, both spending and revenue projections are somewhat higher. Importantly, however, recent decisions imply that of the larger envelope, a larger share is allocated to meet needs created by new recurrent spending obligations. For revenues, the authorities are continuing to focus on increasing domestic revenue mobilization, with numerous measures to improve customs administration and build on interconnections for tax information sharing (MEFP ¶8, 13, 47). Baseline projections take these improvements into account (as well as resumption of full collection of fuel excise taxes), but cautiously do not take into account any production or tax policy changes for natural resource revenues. Projections for residual financing needs in 2015 and 2016 are somewhat higher due to more cautious assumptions for external financing partly compensated by higher projections for domestic financing. Current Capital o/w transfers Net Lending External Financing Domestic Financing Residual Financing Need Overall Balance The framework projects less deterioration in the revised current account deficit in 2014, partly due to larger deterioration than expected in 2013. The deficit is expected to improve only gradually through 2016, in light of projected terms of trade and continued high import demand. Because the revision of 2012 gold production data caused a 3.7 percentage point of GDP increase in the base for the current account deficit, with no offsetting adjustments in the rest of the balance of payments, this implies a continued but modest use of international reserves over the medium term due to conservative assumptions for gold exports based on WEO terms of trade projections. However, it is important to note that these projections will most likely change once balance of payments statistics for 2012 have been finalized, given likely other revisions in the pipeline. Staff analysis does not suggest real effective exchange rate (REER) misalignment (Annex IV). The nominal effective exchange rate appreciated by about 9 percent since the beginning of 2013, following the appreciation of the euro against other major currencies. Low inflation pressure in the WAEMU region meant that the REER, however, appreciated only moderately by about 4 percent and remained close to its historical average. Various model-based estimates suggest that there is no significant misalignment of the REER at end-2013. Assessments of the current account indicate that it also remains broadly in line with the country’s fundamentals and the capital account is expected to remain stable over the medium term, composed of concessional financing and FDI. Imputed reserves coverage has dropped due to one-off factors (as explained in ¶6). The 2014 DSA results are broadly unchanged from the 2013 exercise, reflecting a moderate risk of debt distress (Annex V). More pessimistic external (and fiscal) balances as well as Page 23 more conservative assumptions on the terms of financing are offset by the higher discount rate, lower starting nominal external debt levels than had been assumed in the 2013 exercise, and assumptions about a higher share of domestic financing. In the baseline scenario, all debt ratios continue to remain below the risk thresholds, with the risk threshold for the PV of debt to exports breached only in the case of one of the standardized stress tests. On this basis, the risk rating is maintained at “moderate,” albeit on the cusp towards “low.” The authorities and Bank and Fund staff continue to discuss technical assistance that can help address debt management capacity constraints that have been identified in various diagnostic reports.