Staff explored in more depth budgetary transfers to the largest public enterprises (Box 4). The enterprises’ imbalances are subject to fixed retail and volatile commodity pricing structures which are unlikely to change significantly in the coming period. An automatic price adjustment mechanism for fuel prices exists, but is not used in practice, and electricity tariffs—which are already very high—have not been changed since 2006. Despite ad-hoc increases in retail fuel prices—most recently for butane—explicit and implicit transfers to cover SONABEL and SONABHY operational losses have grown substantially. Support took the form of explicit recurrent and investment subsidies regularly appropriated in the budget, but also through tax and debt forgiveness. In 2013, net transfers to SONABHY and SONABEL (implicit + explicit subsidies—enterprises’ returns) reached a peak of CFAF 172 billion—9.5 percent of government’s expenditure or 2.9 percent of GDP. It should be noted that this snapshot, however, covered both losses in 2013 and some accrued losses from earlier years. Staff again stressed that untargeted retail fuel subsidies are inefficient, and encouraged adjustment to avoid subsidizing cross-border fuel purchases at a minimum. Following the 2011 protests and the reports of large revenue improvements in recent years, the authorities remain concerned about the social consequences of larger adjustments in retail prices. The more profound fiscal liabilities, however, are the operational losses of SONABEL. The scope for maneuver on electricity tariffs is more limited still: sectoral experts stressed that it would be difficult for the authorities to introduce tariff increases absent the provision of a more reliable supply of power. The authorities have updated transfer needs for 2014 and proposed an external audit to estimate a range of needs for 2015–17 (MEFP ¶34–35). The mission encouraged the authorities to update 2014 transfer needs and include these in the supplemental budget, and to consider whether there is any scope for retail price adjustments at this stage. The authorities proposed an external audit (program benchmark for the 2 nd review) to estimate a range of needs for 2015–17, which would provide a basis for more concrete measures going forward. The audit will be carried out by the Burkina external control agency (ASCE) and will assess: effective transfers to enterprises; enterprises’ balance sheets; possible adjustments to costs and prices; and measures to contain costs in the medium term. Page 16 Box 3. Burkina Faso: Implicit Subsidies to the Energy Sector, A Stock Taking of Actual Costs in 2013 Electricity and fuel are provided by state-owned enterprises. Energy in Burkina Faso is provided by two state-owned companies, the electricity company (SONABEL) and the fuel importer (SONABHY). SONABEL has a distribution monopoly for electricity but not production, however, private operators have shown limited interest so far. SONABHY has a legal import and storage monopoly for fuel products. Electricity tariffs are set up according to a 2006 tariff grid for households, industry, tertiary business and residential three- phases power lines. The grid slightly increased in 2008 and has been unchanged since. Retail prices for butane, gasoline and diesel are supposed to be automatically adjusted with international prices, but in practice there have only been ad-hoc hikes, most recently in March 2012 and May 2013. Fixed retail prices and volatile input prices have caused operational losses. Both public companies face fixed retail prices, whereas the price of imported fuel is volatile. With international price increases in recent years, tariffs and prices have gone below actual costs , leading to financial losses for both companies since 2011 and causing larger fiscal risks and at some points threatening the loss of creditors and supplies. The government has had to provide additional liquidity to the enterprises to sustain fuel and power supplies. In 2013, explicit and implicit transfers to rescue SONABEL and SONABHY totaled almost one tenth of the central government budget. Transfers to the companies from the government, were implemented in the form of explicit recurrent and investment subsidies regularly appropriated in the budget. Besides these, the government responded through tax and debt forgiveness operations. Tax exemptions were granted to facilitate power imports from suppliers in neighboring countries; SONABHY was allowed to retain excise tax on oil products for a 9-month period in 2013; and the government supported part of both companies’ liabilities through a mix of debt forgiveness and recapitalization to cover historical operational losses. Given the companies’ poor profitability, they returned very limited amounts of taxes and dividends (VAT, taxes on oil, revenue and property). In 2013, net transfers {implicit + explicit subsidies—enterprises return}, reached a peak of CFAF billion 172—9.5 percent of government’s expenditure. This equates to 2.9 percent of GDP: while an increase for Burkina Faso, it is consistent with averages for sub-Saharan African countries. Transfers to SONABEL and SONABHY in 2013 1/ CFA F Millions SONABHY Central Government SONABEL Donors (unless otherwise specified) Net Transfers to the State Owned Enterprises In percentage of energy sales In percentage of government expenditure Explicit subsidies Recurrent Market oriented (oil, and Gas) Externally funded Investment Investment subsidies (from government) Investment projects (from donors) Recapitalization (carried out in 2013) Tax rebates (on VAT and Oil excise) Government Revenue collection VAT and income taxes Dividends Sources: Government and enterprises' financial statements (2013) 1/ Accrued on FY 2013 (enterprise ledger) and on FY 2014 (government ledger) Page 17