IMPLEMENTATION pending determination of whether the President will run for a third term. On the social front, unions are pressuring the government for wage increases ahead of the May 2015 presidential elections. The social and political situation is punctuated by uncertainty, in part owing to the MEFP ¶ 2 The pace of economic recovery picked up, but with increased risks to the outlook (Tables 1–5). Growth and inflation. Real GDP growth is projected to improve slightly to 4.7 percent in 2014 supported by agriculture, particularly a rebound in coffee production and construction of major infrastructure projects. Headline inflation decelerated to 3.5 percent (y-o-y) in May and the outlook remains favorable owing to lower projected international food and fuel prices. Preliminary trade data through end-May indicate buoyant growth of export and imports in volume terms. Fiscal performance in the first quarter of 2014 was challenging. This in part reflected the non-disbursement of one tranche of budget support in late 2013 that led to outstanding obligations (0.4 percent of GDP), but which were subsequently paid in early 2014. In addition, the combined effects of the alignment of corporate income tax rates with those of the East African Community (EAC) and the elimination of the one percent minimum tax in the event of corporate losses, led to revenue shortfalls of about one percent of GDP on an annual basis. A number of large tax payers (about a third, or 70 companies) reported losses. Monetary conditions remain stable. With the improvement in liquidity conditions, the central bank reduced its policy rate by about 200 basis points since December 2013 to 10.5 percent in March 2014. Declining inflation contributed to driving real interest rates into positive territory. Growth in broad money decelerated to 9.2 percent (y-o-y) at end-March 2014, while growth in credit to the private sector remained subdued but is projected to grow at about 11 percent in the year. The banking sector remains adequately capitalized and profitable although non- performing loans (NPLs) have picked up (Table 8). Greater exchange rate flexibility helped the economy adjust to external shocks . The Burundi franc depreciated by a cumulative 22 percent against the US dollar since 2011 but has remained broadly stable since early 2013. Gross international reserves stood at 3.5 months of imports at end-2013. The real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by about 8 percent in the first quarter of 2014 relative to the first quarter of 2013. The law reduced the corporate tax rate (from 35 percent to 30 percent), eliminated the previously levied 1 percent minimum tax on companies’ sales revenues in the event of losses, and the withholding tax on imports (4 percent). Page 6 T he response to past IMF advice has been broadly satisfactory Under the authorities’ program, Burundi has maintained macroeconomic stability. Fiscal adjustment in the face of declining budget support and tighter monetary policy in response to the food and fuel shocks have reduced inflation to single digits and stabilized the exchange rate. Macrocritical reforms in the coffee and electricity sectors have progressed, while improvements in the business climate have been noteworthy. However, weaknesses in revenue mobilization persist and warrant a redoubling of efforts. The Fund continues to support the authorities’ reform efforts through policy advice and technical assistance. MEFP Tables I.1 and I.2 Program implementation has been challenging. Most end-December indicative targets were met except domestic assets of the central bank, domestic financing of the government, and reserve money. At end-March, all performance criteria and indicative targets were observed, except the indicative targets on fiscal revenues and that on reserve money. The latter was missed on account of the bunching of donor disbursements in the first quarter of the year, which led to higher-than- programmed net foreign assets of the central bank. Fiscal revenue underperformed relative to the program due to the impact of the 2013 income law (¶2). Satisfactory progress was made in the implementation of structural reforms albeit with delays based on technical reasons (Text Table 1). The structural benchmark related to the debt law was rescheduled owing to delays in identifying a consultant, who has prepared a draft law for the authorities’ consideration in early June. The benchmark related to the audit of arrears on extra-budgetary spending proved to be more resource-intensive than anticipated; additional resources have been allocated to the Audit Court to complete it by end-November. Page 7 Text Table 1. Structural Measures: Fifth Review Under the ECF Measures Status Date Review Rationale Public Financial Management Prepare an audit of arrears on extra- budgetary expenditures (not committed and without payment order) in prior years (to be performed by an independent auditor, for example the Audit Office or IGE [State Inspectorate General]); and adopt a payment plan. Put in place a rationalized spending chain with pilots in the ministries of agriculture, education, and health, and nominate 10 expenditure controllers in 10 ministries. Debt Management Submit a new law on debt management to parliament. Sources: Burundi authorities; and IMF staff. 30-Mar-14 5th Identify and verify the amounts actually due and disputed invoices. Delayed and rescheduling proposed to end- November. The Audit Court has assigned a team of magistrates to process files dating back to 2004. Budget to cover audit in place. 30-Jun-14 5th Ensure timely and accurate reconciliation between government accounts and the accuracy of revenues collected. 30-Mar-14 5th Establish a legal framework governing public debt. Rescheduling proposed to end- September. Delays related to recruiting legal consultant. Draft law presented to the authorities in early June. Page 8 The macroeconomic outlook remains difficult. Real GDP growth is expected to improve