The authorities adopted swift corrective measures to ad dress revenue shortfalls that emerged during the first quarter (¶2) . These measures were geared towards offsetting revenue losses associated with the alignment of corporate tax rates in the EAC and to bolster the medium- term fiscal framework in light of the erosion of the revenue base. The measures comprised dividends, the reintroduction of the one percent minimum turnover tax, tax on telecoms and withholding taxes on imports, petroleum products and beverages, and eliminating exemptions of VAT on imports. Staff encouraged the authorities to build additional fiscal space through the recovery of arrears from large taxpayers, additional telecoms licenses, and better control of exemptions. While one-off telecoms receipts have helped mitigate some of the shortfalls, fiscal revenues remain structurally weak over the medium term. The authorities underscored that the measures would help them respond to contingences going forward and that Fund TA on the excise tax law will help harmonize tax policies within the EAC. A comprehensive excise tax law is envisaged later this year (end- December benchmark) in addition to measures to enhance the reconciliation of revenues (end- December benchmark). Fiscal slippages Corporate Tax Minimum Tax Revenue Measures Elimination of VAT exemption on imports Dividends Witholding, Telecoms, and other taxes Sources: Burundi authorities; and IMF Staff estimates. Text Table 3. Fiscal Slippages and Corrective Measures, 2014 BIF billion Percent of GDP The adoption of measures required a rethinking of the authorities’ “Doing Business” strategy . Tensions have emerged in balancing the medium-term objectives of growth and employment through providing incentives to the private sector with those of revenue mobilization. The exemption of VAT on imports, poor follow-up on firms to whom incentives were accorded, and the misuse of certificates granted through the investment regime to procure goods and services locally without paying VAT, have eroded the tax base (Country Report 13/288). Staff underscored that while simplifying Doing Business procedures were necessary to attract investors, a recent survey by the International Finance Corporation on EAC countries, highlighted that investors ranked, rule of law, reliable electricity supply, access to credit and to markets more highly than exemptions. Preserving medium-term fiscal and debt sustainability remain key objectives under the program. To this end, the fiscal anchor comprises a zero limit on non concessional external public borrowing and a gradually declining path for the domestic-debt-to-GDP ratio. An update of the debt sustainability analysis (DSA) in January 2014 shows some improvements, but confirms that Burundi remains at high risk of Recoverable arrears amount to 0.5 percent of GDP and three telecoms licenses are pending renewal. The authorities received $10 million from renewal of one during the first quarter. A LEG TA mission on an excise tax law is planned for mid-July, 2014. Excises will be raised in the context of the 2015 budget. MEFP ¶20, ¶25 Page 10 debt distress. The DSA suggests that Burundi has limited borrowing space, and that loans should continue to be highly concessional given its narrow export base. Moreover, the heavy reliance on donor support (50 percent of the budget), aid volatility, reduced fiscal space resulting from a declining tax-to-GDP ratio and demographic pressures are key sources of fiscal risks (Box 1). Risks arising from the wage bill appear to be moderate and further measures are envisaged to strengthen controls (September benchmark). The recent repatriation of refugees (48,000) from neighboring countries in addition to a rapid population growth of 3 percent per annum continue to place sizable pressures on the delivery of public services. The authorities shared the staff’s assessment, committed to ensure that the revenue authority is adequately resourced, and have undertaken a number of reforms to ensure that the health care program is better targeted and funded. Staff reiterated the importance of developing an overarching legal framework dovetailed with enhanced technical capacity before resorting to PPPs to address infrastructure gaps. Spending is projected to be higher than programmed, reflecting increasing transfers to hospitals to mitigate the emergence of payment arrears, reconstruction and relief efforts in the wake of the floods, and additional transfers to the revenue authority. Staff welcomed additional pledges by donors to assist with the reconstruction efforts in the wake of the early 2014 flood damages (¶5). Sources: Burundi authorities, and IMF staff estimates Text Figure 1. Burundi: Domestic Debt (percent of GDP) Domestic Debt (percent of GDP) Domestic Debt (percent of GDP, 1st ECF Review) 11.7 11.4 Projection (p ) MEFP ¶22, ¶23, ¶32 Sound public financial management (PFM) remains a cornerstone of the program that aims to improve financial accountability, transparency, and the efficient delivery of public services . Significant progress has been achieved in implementing the PFM roadmap with a view to strengthen institutional capacity through technical assistance (TA) and the reorganization of administrative functions (end- December benchmark). Main progress areas include: (i) the nomination of expenditure commitment controllers for key ministries representing nearly 80 percent of government expenditures; (ii) the timely production of the monthly and annual aggregate balance of accounts, with quality improving progressively; (iii) strengthening the institutional framework of cash management and the treasury single account at the central bank; and (iv) the training of more than 15 trainers and 175 staff in the main areas of PFM. Nevertheless, further TA will address remaining weaknesses in migration to the new system of delegating payment orders to the ministry level, strengthening the capacity of staff in accounting, and improving the functioning of the information system (September benchmark). The Burundi: Fourth Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility—Debt Sustainability Analysis Update, January 2014. Coffee and tea account for about 80 percent of exports. Page 11 authorities also reiterated their commitment to preserve pro-poor spending and to ensure the continued success of key safety-net programs ( Box 4 ). The authorities agreed to continue to gear monetary policy toward B. Improving the Transmission of Monetary Policy and Allowing Greater