agenda . At about 15 percent of GDP, credit to the private sector remains well below the average for LICs and Sub-Saharan Africa. This reflects a broad range of factors, including weaknesses in the legal and institutional framework, the fragile security situation, and limited competition among banks. Recent encouraging developments include, the increasing penetration of EAC banks, which augurs well for boosting competition, financial innovation, and access to finance, with positive effects on growth and poverty reduction. Staff encouraged the central bank to focus on creating an enabling infrastructure and environment for banks to lend. The authorities indicated that reforms such as the establishment of a credit bureau, collateral registry, enhancing the supervision of microfinance institutions, and implementing regulatory changes to facilitate leasing, should improve financial intermediation (Annex III). MEFP ¶10, ¶11, ¶28 The banking sector remains stable, but NPLs have picked up in recent months (Table 8). Banks are adequately capitalized, profitable, and liquid. The repatriation of coffee export revenues in 2013, donor inflows, and the entry of regional banks with access to cross-border financing, The current account widened by 4.5 percentage points to 23 percent of GDP in 2013. Using the Fund reserve adequacy framework, staff estimates the minimum level of adequate reserves for Burundi at the equivalent of 3.5–4 months of imports. Page 14 contributed to an improvement in liquidity conditions. The pickup in NPLs in part reflects the harmonization of the definition of NPLs in line with international standards, extra-budgetary arrears that are currently being audited (end-November benchmark), and the inefficient recovery of collateral that is constrained by lengthy legal procedures and weak judicial enforcement of creditor rights. While banks appear to be relatively well-provisioned, the increase in NPLs has adversely affected both their profitability and their ability to extend credit. Staff underscored the importance of strictly monitoring capital and liquidity, and the need to intensify efforts to arrest the deterioration in asset quality. Staff also expressed the view that: (i) supervisors should be vigilant to ensure that banks continue to proactively recognize and provision against NPLs and ensure that capital and liquidity levels provide appropriate buffers; and (ii) concrete actions are needed to ease collateral execution, reduce delays in the legal process, and timely payment of suppliers are also essential. The authorities concurred with staff regarding the underlying causes of rising NPLs and the need to reduce their level. Notwithstanding, they stressed that the banking system was well capitalized but recognized the scope for more aggressive recovery of collateral despite social sensitivities associated with foreclosures. In 2012 two of the East African Community’s largest banks, Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB) and Tanzania's CRDB, opened their first branches in the capital, Bujumbura. Page 15 Box 2: Burundi External Competitiveness Assessment, 2013 REER EREER － Deviations (2000=100 ) Figure 2.2 : Real per capita GDP relative to that of trading partners Figure 2.1 . Burundi : Real and Equilibrium Exchange Rate, Source : Burundi authorities; and IMF staff calculations and projections . Burundi gradually adjusted to the 2011- 12 food and fuel shock. The nominal exchange rate depreciated by some 22 percent since 2011 to adjust to a cumulative 41 percent deterioration in the terms of trade. The current level of the exchange rate appears to be slightly overvalued by about 8 percent (Figure2.1). An initial assessment of reserve adequacy showed that ideal coverage ranges between 3.5–4 months of imports but this is about one month’s less coverage prior to the food and fuel shocks. Absent greater exchange rate flexibility, Burundi may need to raise reserve coverage given its risks to large external shocks. Productivity vis-à-vis trading partners fell sharply in the last decade. Burundi’s relative productivity fell further by a cumulative 2.5 percent during 2011–13 (Figure 2.2). This in part reflects a trend decline in coffee production linked to poor husbandry, land fragmentation, high population density. The country steadily improved its business environment in recent years, but more needs to be done. High transport costs (Figure 2.3), poor access to electricity and financial services continue to impact the country’s ability to compete in global markets. Increasing domestic revenue mobilization could also help reduce dependency on volatile donor assistance while the diversification of the country’s narrow export base could help reduce the trade deficit Assessment was done following the methodology used by Cashin et al (2004) “Keynes, Cocoa and Copper: In Search of Commodity Currencies” , IMF WP 02/223. Real coffee prices were computed using U.S. CPI as the deflator. Source : World Bank Doing Business indicators 2013. Figure 2.3: Cost to import (exc. shipping) 20 feet container in EAC Source: Burundi authorities; and IMF staff estimates. countries, 2013 (in U.S. dollars) Tanzania Rwanda Kenya Uganda Burundi Page 16 The central bank took appropriate measures to safeguard the MEFP ¶13 soundness of the financial system. Based on recommendations from recent IMF technical assistance missions, the authorities took measures including: (i) more frequent reporting to the central bank on rolled-over loans ; (ii) the harmonization of the definition of NPLs in line with international standards; (iii) calculation of liquidity ratios based on local currency deposits (currently the ratio includes foreign deposits); and (iv) a change in the legal framework to allow the central bank to swiftly intervene in troubled banks to prevent and to contain emerging crises. The central bank has stepped up surveillance of pan-African banks through the conduct of joint inspections with home-country supervisors. MEFP Table I.1, ¶32 E. Other Structural Reforms: Achieving Inclusive Broad-Based Growth and