Cabo Verde has a robust democracy and has enjoyed prolonged political stability. After 15 years in opposition, the center-right Movimento para Democracia (MpD) won an absolute majority in the parliamentary elections of March 2016 and landslide victories in subsequent municipal and presidential elections. The transfer of power was smooth, testifying to the country’s institutional strength and maturity. Cabo Verde has made impressive progress in economic development and poverty reduction over the last two decades. Cabo Verde’s rapid economic growth has allowed the country to triple per capita GDP and graduate to middle-income country status. Living standards have risen, and great strides have been made in reducing poverty. However, growth stalled in the aftermath of the global financial and the euro crises, despite a substantial scaling up of public infrastructure investment (Figure 1). Starting in 2008, the previous government scaled up public investment to build much needed infrastructure while concessional resources were still available, providing a boost to the stuttering economy. Despite this, growth over 2009–15 averaged only about 1.3 percent. Furthermore, over 2009–15 Cabo Verde’s growth trailed that of peer Small Middle Income Countries (SMICs), owing to higher exposure to Europe (Figure 3). The public investment scaling up combined with lower than expected growth, declining inflation and a strengthening U.S. dollar has pushed up public debt to GDP ratios. Public debt reached 125.8 percent of GDP at end-2015. However, debt service remains manageable owing to the high concessionality of external debt. With fiscal consolidation key to ensuring debt sustainability, the focus should be on enabling the private sector to take on a stronger role in sustaining growth. As the authorities wind down public investment and reduce financing needs, it is important to crowd in the private sector to take advantage of the improved infrastructure. Policies should aim at devolving the activities of public companies, ensuring a strong and competitive business environment, and improving private access to finance. The new government which came into office in April 2016 has a comprehensive agenda. Policy priorities include (i) fiscal consolidation to reduce public debt, in particular external debt; (ii) containing or resolving contingent liabilities related to SOEs, in particular the national housing company and airline; (iii) crowding in the private sector through improving the business environment, increasing access to financing for SMEs, attracting FDI and promoting exports, accelerating the privatization of SOEs, and connecting the local economy with the tourism sector; and (iv) encouraging formalization of the informal sector. Page 10