While financial stability risks have increased with the economic downturn, the BCV has acted on various fronts to address these risks. The central bank has adopted a more stringent definition of NPLs (using IAS/IFRS standards), has undertaken an asset impairment review for the top 100 clients of systemic banks, and has issued guidance to banks to suspend dividend payments (which was done for 2012, and may also be done for 2013) . The BCV also issued new regulations that harmonize asset quality classification and provisioning standards, which are in effect as of December 2013. Cabo Verde is supported by MCM TA aimed at strengthening the financial stability framework (including bank supervision, crisis management and contingency planning; see Informational Annex). Progress continues to be made in implementing the recommendations of the 2009 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), especially in the areas of bank supervision and the legal and regulatory framework (Table 6). An important achievement was the recent enactment of the Basic Banking Law and the Financial Institutions Law, which will enhance the BCV’s powers to strengthen oversight (including of the offshore sector) and implement regulatory reforms. The new financial laws will also strengthen the framework for insolvency, by enabling the use of progressive enforcement measures, early intervention and a broad range of resolution and liquidation tools. The next step is to draw up implementing regulations, which will also provide the opportunity to address some recommendations provided by MCM on the new laws. Staff encouraged the BCV to press ahead with efforts to address remaining priorities from the FSAP agenda. Amongst these, staff considers enhancing banking supervision and putting in place robust policies for crisis management as particularly important. The BCV should step up further its supervision of banks (to ensure proper classification of NPLs and proper provisioning), and reach understandings with bank owners on how to deal with possible liquidity and/or solvency threats. In particular, it should work closely with the bank whose CAR has fallen just below the 10 percent minimum, to ensure that it rebuilds its capital quickly. Strengthening collaboration between the BCV and the Ministry of Finance—in particular by making the Financial Stability Committee fully operational—remains essential to enhance crisis preparedness at the institutional level. The BCV's Financial Stability Report, which compares favorably with its peers, could be strengthened further by linking assessments over time (to clarify where the principal changes have taken place), strengthening the forward-looking orientation of the report by using early warning tools and qualitative surveys, and including more analytical topics (Box 3). LEG had provided extensive TA to the BCV when the financial laws were drafted, and stands ready to provide further support as implementing regulations are drawn up. Page 19 Box 3. Cabo Verde’s Financial Stability Report The Banco de Cabo Verde (BCV) began publishing a Financial Stability Report (FSR) in 2008. The BCV’s FSR compares well with FSRs issued by peer countries, in particular with regards to the consistency of covering key stability risks, and also its increasing use of more sophisticated assessment tools like stress tests. Some suggestions for further enhancements are provided below, drawing on international best practices. Over the last 20 years, Financial Stability Reports (FSRs) have come to play a key role as a financial sector surveillance tool. Since they are published on a regular basis, FSRs provide a good perspective on emerging risks and adverse trends that might threaten the financial system. By alerting financial institutions and market participants to the possible collective impact of their actions, FSRs can help prepare the ground for a collaborative and informed approach when confronted with a crisis. Publishing FSRs subjects the analysis of central banks to public scrutiny, which improves accountability and transparency. FSRs can also help encourage greater cooperation between central banks and ministries of finance, in particular if they are a regular agenda item of joint committees that focus on stability, crisis preparedness and management. Most central banks are publishing FSRs. The first FSRs were issued in Europe in 1995; the first FSR in sub- Saharan Africa (SSA) was issued in 2004, by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). The BCV launched its FSR in 2008 with the goal of identifying, analyzing and monitoring current and potential risks to the financial system. Like most central banks, the BCV publishes its FSR on a semi-annual basis, to capture in a timely manner emerging risks to financial stability. To assess the risks, most FSRs utilizes indicators related to macroeconomic aggregates, financial soundness, early warning, and market based and qualitative indicators. The BCV’s FSR compares well to FSRs issued by peers in SSA. The BCV started publishing its FSR relatively early (about four years after the SARB), and in the absence of a financial crisis (unlike most peers). Using an approach based on the “CCC” framework (assessing the report’s clarity, consistency and coverage) FSRs published by the BCV (2008–13) were compared with those published by peer central banks of Ghana, Mauritius, Namibia and South Africa. As the BCV has gained more experience, the content of the report has been strengthened, and more data is being provided. Over time, there has been good consistency in covering key stability risks, as well as sectors like the insurance markets, payment systems and the regulatory framework. The use of more sophisticated tools like stress tests (adopted in 2009 after Cabo Verde’s FSAP) has increased over time, and has enhanced the forward-looking orientation of the report. Drawing on international best practices, the BCV’s FSR could be strengthened further as follows: strengthening forward orientation, by using early warning tools and surveys (e.g., Bank Lending Survey); improving the linkages between assessments over time, to clarify main changes in the assessment; focusing more on the interconnectedness of banks, to avoid missing risks to financial stability; exploring the introduction of a non-core part of the report where issues for follow up, selected articles, collaborative studies or papers on topical issues are discussed; and including the BCV’s definition of financial stability and the aims of the FSR in each report, to improve users’ understanding of the purpose of the report. Martin Č ihák (2006) “How Do Central Banks Write on Financial Stability?” IMF Working Paper WP/06/163 Page 20 Authorities' views The BCV explained the recent steps they have taken to shore up financial stability. Banks have been required to strengthen their provisions and, in cases of insufficiency, they must register these insufficiencies immediately in their financial statements. The BCV is also monitoring write-offs of fully provisioned NPLs very closely, and explained that a new BCV regulation requires banks to regularly report all impaired loans to the BCV. The BCV noted that the coverage ratio of provisions is actually higher than indicated by headline measures. All banks were asked to harmonize their accounting provisions by end- December 2013. Where relevant, the BCV identified underprovisioning in banks’ financial reports and deducted the estimated underprovisioning from bank capital, reporting this as “adjusted” capital. Based on the harmonization exercise, if the value of the provisions recorded in the financial statements is included, the coverage ratio of provisions improves to 55 percent for credits more than 30 days overdue, and 70 percent for credits more than 90 days overdue.