In 2015, budget execution was managed carefully and fiscal consolidation was achieved on account of higher than expected revenue. Tax revenue increased strongly by about See IMF Policy Paper “Methodological Note on EBA-Lite”, February 2016. Page 14 12 percent in 2015. While this reflects the revenue administration reforms of recent years, it also includes one-off effects which should not be carried over into the revenue projections for the outer years. Capital spending was reprogrammed downward during the year, and the fiscal deficit decreased to 4.1 percent of GDP, about 3.4 percent of GDP lower than in 2014. Overall financing needs including onlending to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) declined from 10.6 percent of GDP in 2014 to 8.3 percent of GDP in 2015. The main challenge for fiscal policy is to contain public debt and secure debt sustainability without stifling the emerging growth recovery. Tax revenue is expected to increase by about 1 percent of GDP over 2015–19, reflecting the economic recovery and recent FAD-supported tax administration reforms, compensating for the decline in grants. Current spending is predominantly funded by tax revenue and domestic financing, which is capped at 3 percent of GDP annually. In contrast, the public investment program (PIP) that the new government inherited is predominantly externally financed. To rein in debt without unduly endangering the prospects for economic recovery, fiscal consolidation should focus on reducing externally financed capital spending (which has a much lower multiplier of about 0.15 than current spending due to high import content), while rationalizing current expenditure in line with past practice. The 2016 budget and mid-2016 medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) envisioned an expansionary fiscal policy stance for 2016–17 before embarking on a fiscal consolidation in the outer years (Text Table 2, Authorities’ mid-2016 MTFF and PIP ). Broadly in line with previous Fund advice, the MTFF envisioned reducing total financing needs to about 4 percent of GDP by 2019 by rationalizing current spending and curtailing onlending. However, the consolidation path was back-loaded and financing needs for 2016–17 were high. In light of the discussions, the authorities revised their 2016 budget, the MTFF, and the associated externally financed PIP broadly in line with IMF staff advice (Text Table 2, Authorities’ Current MTFF and PIP ). In line with their commitment to fiscal consolidation, the authorities agreed with staff advice that a stronger and more frontloaded fiscal consolidation charting out a clear path toward debt reduction would send a strong signal of fiscal responsibility to donors and investors. They implemented contingent containment measures already included in the budget. The MTFF and PIP were revised by cutting domestically financed capital spending, including to make space for sudden financial demands on the budget for a recapitalization of the loss-making national airline TACV ( Text Table 2 ); and by postponing several externally financed projects to 2018–19, thus reducing the external debt build-up in 2016. These measures are quite significant, especially in light of the abrupt need of TACV for financial support, and taking into One-off effects result from the switch to intra-year collection of corporate income tax for 2015 in parallel to ex-post collection for 2014, and collection of tax arrears. Tax arrears amounted to about 5 percent of GDP at end-2015, with offsets due to pending VAT and income tax refunds of about 0.6 percent of GDP. The authorities are receiving technical assistance from the Fund and bilateral donors in estimating the outstanding amounts and expedite the clearing process. Page 15 account that the country operated on a pro-rated budget for the first half of the year. Growth projections were revised down in line with the fiscal consolidation path. Text Table 2. Cabo Verde: Medium-Term Fiscal Adjustment Scenarios, 2015–19 ( Percent of GDP) Authorities' mid-2016 MTFF and PIP Authorities' current MTFF and PIP Revenue Of which : Tax revenue Expenditure Current spending Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Overall balance Net other liabilities (incl. onlending) Onlending Capitalization Errors and emissions Total financing (incl. onlending) Net domestic credit Net external borrowing Memorandum items: Total financing excluding capitalization Real GDP growth Sources: Cape Verdean authorities and IMF staff estimates. Includes anticipated capitalization needs for SOEs. Budget execution is sufficiently flexible to reach the fiscal targets. Rather than a commitment, current spending as approved by parliament represents a maximum amount of authorized spending and can be cut by up to 30 percent in case revenue underperforms. Similarly, the government can reduce capital spending. Efforts to enhance domestic revenue mobilization continued in 2014–15. In 2014 Cabo Verde completed an overhaul of the tax administration system by restructuring the revenue administration, which became operational in September 2014. Staff welcomes the accelerated efforts to collect the considerable VAT and corporate income tax arrears of about 5 percent of GDP. In addition, tax declaration is now fully digitalized and conducted by the taxpayers themselves. While this should help expedite tax payments and free human resources, its success will require careful monitoring and the capacity to conduct targeted audits. Strengthening the capacity, technical skills and IT of the national revenue administration (DNRI) remains a key priority. Structural fiscal reforms remain important to strengthen public finances. In the medium term as concessional financing phases out, revenue mobilization efforts should continue. Furthermore, the authorities will eventually also need to think about alternative domestic and external financing options (see Selected Issues paper). Good management and maintenance of infrastructure remains important. With reduced public investment, strengthening project evaluation In an election year budget execution is based on the pro-rated budget of the previous year until the new government approves a budget. Page 16 and implementation capacity is even more critical as is the selection of those projects that will deliver the highest return on growth within the next few years. Staff welcomes the authorities’ ongoing efforts to strengthen the investment cycle by building a National Investment System and enhancing the results based management of budget programs and projects, encompassing the entire cycle from project formulation to selection, implementation and ex post evaluation. Swift and decisive action is needed with regard to two loss-making public enterprises (SOEs) The situation of the national airline TACV—a longstanding problem which had already worsened in 2015—continued to deteriorate in 2016 with operating losses requiring capital increases from the budget to allow continuation of service. The financial situation of the housing company (IFH) also deteriorated related to risks from its largest social housing project (€187 million), requiring intervention and close monitoring. For these and other obligations for SOEs the authorities have set aside CVE 2.5 billion (1.5 percent of GDP) in 2016 and CVE 1.1 billion annually through Without urgent intervention, capital needs for TACV alone could rise to around 3.0 percent of GDP in 2017, diverting much needed resources from growth enhancing expenditure. Further reform of other SOEs remains crucial to increase efficiency and reduce contingent liabilities. SOEs account for about one third of the country’s GDP. According to preliminary data for 2015, the aggregate result of all SOEs amounted to a loss of CVE 1.1 billion (0.7 percent of GDP) on account of TACV, whereas contingent liabilities increased to CVE 41.4 billion or 25.8 percent of GDP, from about 9 percent of GDP in 2014, primarily on account of loans contracted by the IFH and the water and electricity (ELECTRA) company. Structural reforms, recapitalization, and performance-based management contracts have generated encouraging results at ELECTRA. Staff welcomes that mandatory performance contracts were extended in 2014 to the remaining four SOEs which the authorities consider strategic. However, staff notes with concern that customers have accumulated arrears to ELECTRA in the amount of CVE9.1 billion (5.5 percent of GDP) and urges the authorities to step up collection efforts. Authorities’ views The authorities pointed out that they are more optimistic for growth than staff. Their growth forecast for 2016 is 3.5–4.5 percent, with a further acceleration in the following years. The authorities added that despite the high debt-to–GDP ratio, the debt is almost exclusively concessional and debt service indicators continue to be comfortable. This highlights Cabo Verde’s ability to service its debt. The authorities emphasized that they are fully committed to fiscal consolidation to reduce debt risks, as evidenced by the adjustments in their MTFF. In tandem with this, the authorities are stepping up their efforts to crowd in the private sector by accelerating privatization (Section D). Actual recapitalization payments for TACV from January to early September 2016 amounted to CVE 1.3 billion. Page 17 The authorities noted that further reducing the externally financed PIP would be very costly. All loans in the PIP pipeline had been contracted by the previous government. While the authorities had made best efforts to stretch out and postpone projects to the extent possible, cancellation of ongoing projects would be costly in terms of penalties and counterproductive.