While the external position has improved somewhat, Cabo Verde remains vulnerable due to its increasing external debt and challenges to competitiveness (Box 1). International reserves have recovered to about 4½ months of prospective imports, and are projected to remain around this level over the medium term. This reflects a healthy outlook for goods and services exports, and significant official financing flows (already committed). The exchange rate is assessed as broadly in line with fundamentals, as found in the last assessment (undertaken in March 2013). However, Cabo Verde’s high dependence on tourism and remittances points to significant external vulnerabilities. In addition, business sector surveys indicate that competitiveness remains a challenge. Cabo Verde is ranked 122 nd out of 148 countries on global competitiveness by the World Economic Forum, with labor market efficiency, financial market development, and macroeconomic environment found to be particular challenges. Page 8 Box 1. External Stability Assessment An external stability analysis suggests that the real effective exchange rate (REER) is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals. However, competitiveness remains weak, on account of inefficiencies in the labor market and access to financing. Improving the business environment and increasing the productivity of human and physical capital remain critical for bolstering medium-term growth. Over the last decade, Cabo Verde’s balance of payments has been characterized by a relatively stable current account deficit (of about 16 percent of GDP), mostly used to finance investment. As grants and FDI have declined, the deficit has been financed increasingly by government borrowing, leading to a rise in external public debt from 39 percent of GDP in 2008 to 74 percent of GDP in 2013. After decreasing to 3.4 months of imports in 2011, at end-2013 international reserves had recovered to 4.4 months of imports—within the estimated optimal range of 3.7–5 months —where they are projected to remain in the medium term. Exports of goods and services have increased steadily over 2003–12 (from about 30 to 45 percent of GDP), but remain heavily dependent on tourism and related travel, which represent about two thirds of the total. Cabo Verde: Global Competitiveness Indicators, 2013–14 2013–14 (Out of 148) Efficiency enhancers (50%) Higher education and training Goods market efficiency Labor market efficiency Financial market development Technological readiness Market size Basic requirements (40%) Institutions Infrastructure Macroeconomic environment Health and primary education Innovation and sophistication factors (10%) Business sophistication Innovation Overall Rank 2012–13 (Out of 144) Change 122 No change Source: World Economic Forum. Negative sign indicates worsening score; otherwise indicates improvement. Cabo Verde still does relatively poorly on competitiveness . Based on the World Economic Forum (WEF), Cabo Verde ranks 122 nd out of 148 countries on global competitiveness, with market size, labor market efficiency, macroeconomic environment, and financial market development found to be particularly weak (see Table). In WEF business surveys, access to financing, labor market issues (cited under several factors), and inadequate supply of infrastructure feature among the most problematic factors for doing business (see Chart). Structural reforms aimed at improving the business climate therefore remain critical for bolstering competitiveness and attracting private investment. Cabo Verde: The Most Problematic Factors for Doing Business Access to financing…………....……...…….…....….22.9 Tax rates………………………………………….…...…13.8 Inefficient government bureaucracy………...11.6 Inadequately educated workforce……….…..…9.3 Inadequate supply of infrastructure………..….8.9 Tax regulations…………………………………………..8.1 Restrictive labor regulations………….…....……..5.4 Insufficient capacity to innovate………….…..….4.6 Poor work ethic in national labor force…….....4.4 Crime and theft………………………...….……..….…..3.4 Corruption………………………………………….……...3.2 Inflation……………………………….…..…..……………2.1 Poor public health………………………..…..….…….0.9 Policy instability……..……………….……………..….0.6 Foreign currency regulations……………………..0.5 Government instability/coups…………..………..0.3 Percent of responses Source: World Economic Forum. A more detailed assessment of Cabo Verde’s external balance was presented in Appendix 1 of the 2012 Article IV Staff Report. Marcio Ronci, “Cape Verde: Assessing International Reserve Adequacy” (2012 Article IV Staff Report). Page 9 Box 1. Cabo Verde: External Stability Assessment (concluded) Turning to the exchange rate , all three approaches based on Consultative Group on Exchange Rates (CGER)-type methodologies indicate that Cabo Verde’s real exchange rate is broadly in line with its fundamentals. Even though all three measures indicate possible undervaluation, the results are below the 10 percent threshold required for the assessment to be deemed statistically significant. The assessment has changed little since the 2012 Article IV assessment. Cabo Verde: Quantitative Exchange Rate Assessment Results Current Account (Percent of GDP) Norm Underlying CA Elasticity 1, 2 REER misalignment Equilibrium Real Effective Exchange Rate Macroeconomic Balance External Sustainability Source: IMF staff estimates. CA elasticity = [Export elasticity * Share of exports in GDP]-[(Import elasticity-1) * Share of imports in GDP]. Tokarick (2010) estimates Cape Verde's export and import elasticities of 0.36 and 1.41, respectively. In percentage, "+" = overvaluation.