With spillovers from the global financial and euro crises having subsided, Cabo Verde’s economy is expected to resume its higher growth trajectory driven mainly by tourism and FDI In 2016, growth is forecast to recover to 3.2 percent supported by FDI, domestic demand, agriculture, and tourism, which should benefit from the mild upswing in Europe. Tourism-related FDI worth €625 million (42 percent of 2016 GDP) from signed projects is expected over the medium term, and further projects worth some €700 million are under discussion. Domestic demand is expected to improve, reflecting the reversal of the long-term decline in confidence indicators, the resumption of growth in private sector credit, and robust remittances. Average inflation is projected to remain negative at about -1.6 percent in 2016. While growth prior to the recent slowdown averaged 6.8 percent during 2001–08, recent experience and the global low-growth environment suggest that such a growth pace may be difficult to attain. Over the medium term, trend growth of about 4 percent seems achievable, drawing on peer experience and expected returns on large-scale public investment in past years. Inflation is expected to return to positive territory but remain benign over the medium term. Tourism should continue growing at a strong pace, reflecting ongoing FDI and the resulting The IMF Country Report 14/296 estimates potential growth at 3.5–4 percent. Page 12 increase in capacity, and goods exports are also projected to grow robustly. Domestic demand is projected to pick up, supported by rising credit growth and continued strong remittances. Gross international reserves are forecast to remain above 5 months of prospective imports, supported by tourism, FDI and remittances. The outlook remains subject to external and domestic downside risks (Table 6). Externally, Cabo Verde’s high dependence on tourism and remittances makes it vulnerable to adverse developments in Europe, including risks related to Brexit—about 20 percent of the country’s tourists come from the UK. Global financial market volatility and sovereign stress could impede FDI and be transmitted via the banking sector linkages to Portugal. Domestic risks are primarily fiscal, as public debt has risen to uncomfortably high levels. The elevated level of NPLs indicates risks in the financial sector, and continued weakness in credit creation could depress consumption and investment. Over the longer term, economic growth will depend critically on increasing productivity and strengthening the private sector. The implementation of productivity- enhancing structural reforms—in particular in the areas of access to financing, labor market efficiency, and human capital development—is crucial for increasing Cabo Verde’s long-term growth potential. With the public investment program winding down, it will be important to crowd in the private sector to take over as the engine of growth and reap the returns from improved infrastructure.