Staff forecasts a modest economic recovery in 2014, with GDP growth of 3 percent. The improving outlook for the euro area bodes well for remittances, FDI, and tourism (although competition from destinations in North Africa could increase in 2014). Better external conditions and continued strength in tourism are expected to help consumer and business sentiment recover. There are also encouraging signs that a number of stalled FDI projects in tourism will resume in 2014. As monetary conditions have eased and NPLs are gradually being resolved, banks should also be in a stronger position to increase credit to the private sector. Over the medium term, and drawing on the experience of other small middle-income countries, staff sees growth of about 4 percent as consistent with a lower middle-income economy that still faces challenges on the competitiveness front (Appendix Table 1). The balance of payments is forecast to again reach a small surplus in 2014. While imports are expected to rebound, reflecting a recovery in consumer sentiment and investment, strong remittances and public capital flows (as well as an uptick in FDI) should allow international reserves to cover about 4½ months of prospective imports. The outlook remains subject to both upside and downside risks (Table 7). On the upside, a more rapid resumption of FDI in both stalled and new projects could bolster growth. And over the longer term, the public investment program and the successful implementation of the government’s wide-ranging structural reform program could increase productivity and raise potential growth. On the downside, Cabo Verde faces both external and domestic risks. Externally, its high dependence on tourism and remittances makes it vulnerable to a further delay in the European Page 10 recovery. In addition, its strong financial ties to Portugal—three of the four largest banks in Cabo Verde are owned by Portuguese groups—make it vulnerable to a resurfacing of financial stress in the euro area. Domestic risks are primarily fiscal in nature, given high public debt. Risks in the financial sector have increased with the economic downturn, and NPLs could aggravate the cycle through their adverse effect on growth (Box 2). Box 2. NPLs and Economic Growth The economic downturn in Cabo Verde has led to a significant increase in non-performing loans (NPLs). The experience of other countries shows that high NPLs can exert a drag on economic growth. To mitigate this impact, the central bank should take action to help arrest the rise in NPLs, and ideally also resolve them. Since the onset of the global financial crisis, Cabo Verde has experienced a sharp increase in NPLs. Since 2009, the ratio of NPLs to total loans has increased significantly, peaking at 20 percent in September 2013 (though easing to 16 percent by December 2013). Corporates account for about two-thirds of the NPL stock, with NPLs concentrated in tourism, transport, business and construction. Households account for the remaining third of the NPL stock, with the impaired portfolio concentrated in mortgages. Economic studies have found a link between high NPLs and economic growth, with intermediation declining as impaired assets rein in bank profitability. A number of empirical studies have established a strong, albeit short-lived feedback effect from bank losses on economic activity. To cite a few results, Espinoza and Prasad (2010) found an elasticity of 0.4 for NPLs on non-oil growth in the Gulf Cooperation Council (1995–2008). Nkusu (2011) found an elasticity of 0.6 over three years looking at the experience of 26 advanced countries (1999–2009). And Klein (2013) found an elasticity of 0.6 over two years in a group of Central Eastern and South Eastern Europe (1998–2011). While caution is warranted in applying these results to Cabo Verde, they do suggest that the recent increase in NPLs entails risks for growth. The BCV has taken an active role in addressing the NPL situation in Cabo Verde. Following the sharp run- up in NPLs in 2012, the BCV conducted a detailed review of the quality of assets for the top clients of the largest banks, with the aim of assessing their provisioning and NPL disclosure practices. The BCV established that procedures were not standard across the banks and asked all banks to adopt stringent IFRS compliant definitions. They developed a credit impairment index to encourage transparency on NPLs and asked banks to cease dividend payments in 2013. The BCV also undertakes post-balance sheet submission adjustments to enforce provisioning standards. The pace of write-offs has been slow so far, reflecting the weak economic situation, lengthy foreclosure processes, and underdeveloped markets for distressed real estate assets. While speeding up the reduction of NPLs is desirable, the capacity of banks to absorb further losses is limited. High NPLs are exerting pressure on banks’ balance sheets, with profitability, as proxied by return on equity, declining to 2.3 percent in 2013 from 9.1 percent in 2010. Capital adequacy dropped from a comfortable cushion of 15.6 percent in 2010 to 12.1 percent in 2012, before recovering to 13.3 percent in 2013. The BCV is encouraged to take the following steps to support the resolution of the NPL overhang: encourage banks to strengthen and enforce loss recognition and provisioning standards; provide proper guidance on loan restructuring, collateral valuation and asset classification; align current accounting and disclosure practices on loan quality and provisioning to best practices; and study backlogged cases and develop an action plan to tackle delays in judicial processes. continue to monitor banks closely, and intervene preemptively to reinforce resilience of their positions; Page 11