The challenge for fiscal policy is to strike the right balance between supporting growth and preserving macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability. The IMF has supported Cabo Verde’s strategy to use concessional resources to finance public investment that boosts the country’s long-term growth potential. It has also seen a role for public investment to cushion the impact of the global downturn. However, as noted in the 2012 Article IV consultation, ambitious medium-term fiscal consolidation is essential to secure debt sustainability and rebuild fiscal positions. With public debt now approaching 100 percent of GDP, ambitious fiscal adjustment has become even more urgent (Text Figure 1). This view is shared by the World Bank and other members of the Budget Support Group. It is also shared by rating agencies. In March 2014, Fitch downgraded Cabo Verde's long-term foreign and local currency ratings from B+ to B, citing a significant deterioration in the fiscal outlook and a weaker outlook for economic growth. Text Figure 1. Cabo Verde: Revenue, Expenditure and Public Debt Grants Fiscal revenue Revenue Capital spending Current spending Revenue has fallen while government spending remains elevated... G Sources: Cabo Verdean authorities and IMF staff. ... leading to large financing needs and sharply higher public debt. G Onlending Fiscal deficit Public debt (rhs) The other members of the Budget Support Group are the African Development Bank, the EU, the Luxembourg Agency for Development Cooperation, Portugal, and the Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation. Page 12 The authorities' 2014 budget entails an increase in the deficit and total financing needs, while their medium-term fiscal plans set out a relatively small consolidation effort. For 2014, the budget entails a deficit of about 9 percent of GDP, over 1 percentage point higher than in 2013 (Text Table 1). Including onlending, total financing needs would reach 13 ½ percent of GDP. For 2015–17, the MTFF’s expenditure plans (including onlending) would cause public debt to exceed 110 percent of GDP by 2017. Staff recommended more ambitious fiscal consolidation to reduce the risk of debt distress, support investor confidence, and bolster international reserves. By reducing the need for domestic financing, there would be more room for credit to the economy, which would support the shift to private-sector led growth. In addition, by winding down the public investment program more quickly, external debt would grow less rapidly, thereby reducing external vulnerabilities and bolstering investor confidence. The impact on the balance of payments would likely be positive, with private capital flows picking up as external risk declines. Staff’s recommendations would deliver steady deficit reduction over the coming years, thereby demonstrating the authorities’ commitment to fiscal consolidation. For 2014, staff recommended expenditure cuts of about 1 percentage point of GDP, and a similar reduction in public investment financed by onlending. Staff also recommended that major new public investment projects meet stringent tests of value-for-money. With current expenditure budgeted to increase by 4 percentage points of GDP, staff saw scope to contain spending, especially in the area of goods and services. For 2015–17, staff recommended a more cautious public investment plan and slower growth in some current expenditure items (while protecting social spending). Staff’s proposed path would reduce the fiscal deficit by over 5 percentage points of GDP between 2013 and 2017, and total financing by 9½ percentage points—about 4½ percentage points more than envisaged in the authorities’ plans. Public debt would be considerably lower in the adjustment scenario, falling below 100 percent of GDP by 2017. In light of the weaker growth outlook, the consolidation path recommended by staff is more gradual than had been proposed in the last Article IV Consultation. The authorities’ fiscal plans are set out in the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF), which covers 2014–17. Staff’s projection for 2014 is based on the MTFF’s expenditure plans, with the exception of debt service, for which staff use the projections agreed by the World Bank and the Ministry of Finance’s Debt Directorate, in the context of the Medium-Term Debt Strategy exercise (MTDS). The latter exclude an “exchange rate buffer”, included in the budget to cover unexpected exchange rate swings, which averages about 0.4 percent of GDP for 2014–16. The budget deficit target is 8 percent of GDP. However, staff sees downside revenue risks of over 1 percent of GDP. Page 13 Text Table 1. Cabo Verde: Medium-Term Fiscal Adjustment (Percent of GDP) Revenue (incl. grants) Of which: tax revenue Total expenditure Current Capital Overall balance Onlending Total financing (incl. onlending) Total nominal public debt PV of external public debt Memorandum item: Public investment (incl. onlending) Budget Est. MTFF Staff Adj. MTFF Staff Adj. Fiscal Adj: 2013–17 MTFF Staff Adj. Sources: Cabo Verdean authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Budget projections as presented in the 2012 Article IV Staff Report. Uses staff projections for revenue, and the authorities’ MTFF projections for spending, with the exception of interest payments on debt. Further efforts to enhance domestic resource mobilization will be critical to support consolidation, and also to prepare Cabo Verde for the phasing out of concessional financing. Staff welcomed the many important achievements during 2013, including the harmonization and streamlining of VAT rates, the passage of three new tax codes, and the launch of a large taxpayer office. The authorities have also focused on enhancing the efficiency of tax administration, by reforming the Directorate of Contributions and Taxes (DCI). Further improvements in taxpayer services and a smooth merger of customs and revenue administration remain important priorities. Staff welcomed plans to resolve sizeable tax arrears (about 4 percent of GDP), as well as outstanding claims for tax refunds (about 1½ percent of GDP). With regards to public financial management, the authorities have also made considerable progress. They have developed sound fiscal forecasting tools, introduced a medium- term fiscal framework, aligned their budget and planning processes, and introduced program-based budgeting. As recommended by FAD, more prioritization amongst the ongoing reforms, as well as detailed implementation arrangements, would contribute towards their success. Strengthening the coordination unit at the Ministry of Finance and Planning would also help. FAD has noted that under current procurement practices, which devolve such responsibilities to line ministries, there is a risk of unmonitored arrears. For this reason, they have recommended introducing robust commitment controls and improving the monitoring of arrears. To encourage payment of tax arrears, the Ministry of Finance has offered to waive overdue interest on amounts due. With regard to claims for tax refunds, the 2014 budget allocates 0.6 percent of GDP towards settling such claims and other refunds. The authorities are also preparing a full database of tax refunds due. Page 14 The performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) is improving, but further reforms are needed to increase efficiency and reduce contingent financial liabilities for the government. In 2012, the six largest SOEs registered total losses of 0.7 percent of GDP and debt of 27 percent of GDP. Preliminary estimates indicate that performance in 2013 was better. The national electricity and water provider (ELECTRA) has adopted a cost-based pricing mechanism and a results- based management contract—the first amongst the SOEs. The national airline (TACV) aims to complete the sale of its baggage handling branch by end-2014, but needs further urgent reforms to reduce losses and resolve sizeable domestic arrears. At the housing agency IFH, potential contingent fiscal liabilities arising from the social housing program “Casa Para Todos” (with a total program cost of €170 million over 2011–17, or 11 percent of 2014 GDP) require careful monitoring. In light of the potential financial risks of the program, the authorities should take a careful, phased approach to its development. Authorities' views and recent measures The authorities underscored their commitment to preserving macroeconomic stability. As noted in their Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper III (GPRSP-III), Cabo Verde would not have been so successful if it had not prioritized macroeconomic stability as the core factor of good governance. Now, in the face of the country’s reduced capacity to borrow, it has become critical to bolster domestic revenue mobilization in order to ensure macroeconomic stability. A broad set of reforms has already been implemented to streamline and rationalize tax policies in line with international best practice, and efforts are underway to increase the efficiency of tax administration. The authorities emphasized that as in previous years, expenditure containment measures would be taken if revenue underperformed. A budget re-programming exercise— covering 2014 and the medium term—will take place in the second quarter of this year, once revenue performance in the first quarter is known. After the mission, the authorities informed staff that they had already decided on preliminary expenditure containment measures for 2014–17 that will lower expenditure by about 1½ percentage points of GDP per year. About half of the reduction would be in goods and services, with the rest split evenly between other current expenditure and capital expenditure. The authorities also noted that further cuts could be taken, if needed. With regards to capital expenditure, the authorities highlighted the window of opportunity Cabo Verde still had to draw on concessional resources to finance critical infrastructure projects. By addressing key bottlenecks, the PIP is boosting the country’s long-term growth potential and has helped protect the economy from the global downturn. The authorities The program entails building affordable housing units financed by external funds, which will be sold by the government to private individuals. The program is subject to financial risks, given that purchasers will need to be able to obtain a mortgage to purchase a property. Following parliamentary approval of the budget, the government can cut expenditure without obtaining additional parliamentary approval, since the original budget already entailed freezing certain amounts of expenditure pending satisfactory revenue performance. Page 15 underscored that they are working closely with the World Bank to adopt a national investment review board, to ensure that approved projects meet stringent rate-of-return criteria. Staff evaluation and debt sustainability analysis While staff welcomes the authorities’ initial package of expenditure containment measures, a considerably greater consolidation effort will be needed to put public debt on a faster downward trajectory and reduce significant external vulnerabilities (Text Figure 2). The revised MTFF projections are based on the authorities’ revised nominal expenditure projections, including the containment measures, but using the Medium-Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) projections for debt service (Tables 3a and 3b). The baseline projections for GDP growth and revenue are those of staff; both are somewhat below those of the authorities. While this revised spending path does bring down financing needs, public debt would still peak at 108 percent of GDP in 2016–17. In staff’s recommended adjustment scenario, public debt would peak at 103 percent of GDP, and fall below 100 percent of GDP by 2017. Text Figure 2. Cabo Verde: Financing Needs and Public Debt Under Different Consolidation Scenarios G Total financing needs (incl. onlending) MTFF Revised MTFF Staff Adjustment Sources: Cabo Verdean authorities and IMF staff. G Total nominal public debt MTFF Revised MTFF Staff Adjustment Based on the authorities’ revised expenditure projections, Cabo Verde’s external debt risk rating is assessed as “moderate” (Debt Sustainability Analysis Annex). While no threshold is breached under the baseline, both debt-to-GDP and debt service-to-revenue thresholds are breached in the one-time depreciation shock scenario. However, risks to overall debt sustainability remain high. The fact that the NPV of external debt peaks at 49 percent—just shy of the 50 percent threshold in the baseline—points to significant vulnerabilities. Cabo Verde is also vulnerable to contingent liabilities from the debt of SOEs. As discussed in the DSA Annex, having to take on even part of these liabilities through external loans (given legal constraints on domestic financing) would cause Cabo Verde’s risk rating to increase to “high”. Reducing the risk of debt distress will therefore depend critically on accelerating fiscal consolidation and advancing structural reforms to boost growth and enhance the efficiency of the public sector. Page 16