With muted inflation and robust international reserves, the BCV has taken an appropriately accommodative monetary policy stance and measures to facilitate the resolution of NPLs. In 2014, the BCV policy rate was cut by 200 basis points to 3.75 percent by August 2014. In February 2015, the BCV further reduced the policy rate by 25 basis points to 3.5 percent, lowered the minimum reserve requirement ratio (MRR) from 18 percent to 15 percent, and cut the remuneration rate of excess reserves from 0.5 to 0.25 percent. Lending rates did not respond much, reflecting the corporate debt overhang and banks’ risk aversion, but private sector credit started to grow again. Credit to the private sector remained shy in 2015, with much of the 2.8 percent increase on account of SOEs. The BCV absorbed excess liquidity to stabilize the monetary transmission mechanism, encourage the development of the interbank market and discourage excessive risk-taking. However, with excess liquidity hovering around 5 percent of deposits, the transmission mechanism remains weak and activity in the interbank market is rare. The BCV pointed out that the cost of absorbing the full amount of excess liquidity would be prohibitive. Credit growth is expected to accelerate . Confidence indicators suggest a gradual improvement in the business climate and anecdotal evidence suggests that banks are cautiously optimistic. Strong capital buffers combined with the NPL-resolution measures, low government yields and the improved prospects of a sustained economic recovery should help credit extension pick up in 2016. Box 1. Cabo Verde: Financial Sector — Challenges and Opportunities The financial benchmarking exercise in the attached Special Issues Paper shows that financial sector performance is broadly in line with the estimated benchmarks, but a few issues deserve attention. There is little financial sector activity outside of banking. Furthermore, asset concentration is high, and lending activity is firmly concentrated in the top three banks (out of 8). While access to the banking sector —measured by the number of branches per 100,000 adults— is high relative to expectations, profitability is rather low, with returns from assets and equity significantly below the expected median. Viewed together with the high asset concentration, this could suggest that the banking sector is overcrowded. Page 18 Box 1. Cabo Verde: Financial Sector — Challenges and Opportunities (concluded) Furthermore, the paper examines whether the recent slowdown in private sector credit growth is demand or supply driven. Using a disequilibrium model (Maddala and Nelson, 1974), staff estimates show that, while demand factors have been the main drivers in Cabo Verde’s credit market in the late 2000s, supply factors’ role has increased in recent years. Accordingly, for Cabo Verde to promote more sustainable private-sector led growth, reforms aiming at strengthening both credit demand and supply will be essential. Policies that aim at tackling demand-side obstacles could include increasing productivity by improving the business environment for the private sector, and providing financial and business literacy training to small businesses. Supply-side policies, on the other hand, could focus on: (i) strengthening the financial sector through continued prudent banking supervision, (ii) reducing credit risks by resolving the non-performing loan (NPL) overhang, and (iii) facilitating the reallocation of liquidity across banks by developing the interbank market. Authorities’ views The authorities were in broad agreement with staff’s views and analysis on the monetary sector . They noted that credit growth in 2016 has shown signs of recovery, and agreed that the monetary policy stance needs to remain accommodating provided that international reserves remain strong.