Cabo Verde’s monetary policy is geared towards maintaining a level of foreign exchange reserves that is consistent with safeguarding the peg. Following a 150 basis points policy rate increase in January 2012, international reserves recovered from minimally adequate levels in 2012, to about 4¼ months of prospective imports at end-2013—within the range estimated as adequate by staff research. They also cover 70 percent of emigrant deposits (which account for 40 percent of total deposits) and 25 percent of M2. The peg has served the economy well, given Cabo Verde's strong trade and financial ties to the euro area. An assessment using CGER-type methodologies indicates that the real exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 1). Given weak economic growth, low inflation, and the stabilization of international reserves, staff saw scope for a cautious loosening of the monetary policy stance. A cut in the policy rate would send an important signal about the direction of monetary policy, even if weaknesses in the transmission mechanism would limit its impact on market rates. With regards to a possible negative impact on capital flows, staff noted that the very high spread between rates in Cabo Verde and in advanced economy markets made this unlikely. On the contrary, if a rate cut was seen as supporting a recovery in credit and growth, it could actually lead to higher inflows. Staff also recommended reducing the 18 percent minimum reserve requirement, which is relatively high compared to peers. This would free up liquidity and could support credit creation. Having said this, staff stressed the importance of close monitoring of liquidity conditions, and advised readiness to step up sterilization if international reserves came under pressure. Strengthening the transmission mechanism remains an important objective to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. The policy rate is currently not playing the role of a reference rate. Strengthening the BCV’s liquidity management could help to align the policy rate with market rates. Reforms to develop the government securities market, with the aim of developing a (non-segmented) market-based term structure of interest rates, are also needed. In this regard, particular care should be taken so that large public institutions do not distort pricing when investing in this market. More broadly, reforms that enhance the framework for monetary operations would also contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy (Table 6) With regards to international reserves, the BCV sought to explore options to shore up Cabo Verde’s resilience to capital outflows. While emigrant deposits have shown welcome stability over many years, a confidence shock could result in significant emigrant capital flight and present risks to the financial system. One possible mechanism to shore up international reserves would be to make the foreign assets held by the “International Support for Cape Verde Trust Fund” accessible to the BCV, when needed. This is an avenue worth exploring further, and on which MCM stands ready to provide guidance. Remittances have been found to be positively correlated with Cabo Verde’s GDP growth (A. Shanghavi, Country Report No. 08/243). The impact of interest rate differentials was weaker. Page 17 Authorities' views and recent measures The BCV agreed with the staff’s recommendation to lower the policy rate, given less favorable economic conditions, and in the absence of imminent pressures on the balance of payments or consumer prices. The policy rate was cut by 150 basis points—to 4.25 percent—on March 1, 2014. The rediscount rate and the BCV’s lending facility rate were cut by the same amount, to 8.25 percent and 7.25 percent, respectively. The aim of these measures is to help stimulate financing for viable investment projects, and thereby support the recovery. The BCV emphasized that the impact of these measures will be enhanced if they are combined with structural measures that help reduce risks and bolster potential growth. The BCV noted that the impact of a rate cut on lending rates was unlikely to be significant, given weaknesses in the transmission mechanism. In discussing the recent disappointing performance of the interbank market (with no trades since 2012), the BCV explained that this was due to the fact that all banks have excess liquidity. The BCV requested further TA on liquidity management, in particular for retaining control over the monetary base (and international reserves) when the BCV intervenes to help banks facing a short-term liquidity need. With regards to the minimum reserve requirement (MRR), the BCV was of the view that it should be maintained at 18 percent. The BCV considers the MRR an important prudential tool, whose level should be determined by the stage of development and potential fragilities of the financial sector. They also noted that it was not a good idea to change the MRR too frequently (and it had only just been increased 2 years ago). Viewed from a historical context, the BCV considers the current level of the MRR—at 18 percent—as not very high (though the BCV acknowledged that it is high compared to peers). Furthermore, the BCV noted the constraints that the fixed exchange rate regime places on monetary policy, in particular given that about 40 percent of the funding of banks consists of emigrant deposits. Staff evaluation With the recent cut in the policy rate, staff assesses the stance of monetary policy as appropriate. Over time, this lower policy rate should help bring down market rates, which in turn would catalyze credit creation and support growth. In addition, if banks are successful in reducing the NPL overhang and with improving growth prospects, risk aversion may come down, which could reduce the need for precautionary excess liquidity. Given the weak transmission of monetary policy (either through changes in the policy rate or by releasing required reserves) and existing excess liquidity, financial sector reforms that address this weakness remain urgent. An MCM TA mission on liquidity management took place in April 2014. Page 18