During 2013, the economy continued to face significant headwinds from the anemic recovery in Europe and weak domestic confidence (Table 1 and Figure 1). Real GDP growth is estimated at 0.5 percent for 2013, a further slowdown from the 1.2 percent growth registered in 2012 and 4 percent in 2011. While tourism—which accounts for about a fifth of the economy—continued to do well, private consumption and investment remained very weak, and credit to the economy grew by only 1 percent. Unemployment was 16½ percent at end-2013 (about the same as in 2012, and up from 12 percent in 2011), with youth unemployment double that rate. Average inflation fell to 1½ percent, reflecting weak economic conditions and contained global price developments. The balance of payments was once again in small surplus (Table 2). The current account deficit narrowed considerably, to about 4½ percent of GDP, reflecting in particular a sharp decline in capital goods imports as investment declined. In the capital account, private flows continued to Cabo Verde was part of a recent IMF study of total factor productivity in small Middle Income Countries in Sub- Saharan Africa (Country Report No. 14/41). Results from this analytical work were presented during the mission. Concessional financing is typically available to a country for an additional five years after graduating to Middle- Income Country (MIC) status. However, due to the global downturn and to Cabo Verde’s status as a small island country, donors decided to extend access to concessional financing for a few additional years. Page 6 decline, reflecting a further contraction in FDI and in particular a reversal of capital flows to commercial banks and of other private debt-related flows. International reserves recovered to about 4½ months of prospective imports. As a result of the authorities’ budget reprogramming exercise, fiscal performance in 2013 was less expansionary than originally budgeted (Text Table 1, page 12; and Table 3b). This was in line with the Fund’s policy advice. Total revenue increased by about ¾ percentage point of GDP, considerably less than originally budgeted. While tax revenue edged down about ¼ percentage point, grants increased by ½ percentage point. Other non-tax revenue increased by the same amount, bolstered by additional resources from other state agencies that have been brought into the central budget through the creation of the Single Treasury Account. Current expenditure and public investment were reduced significantly during the mid-year budget reprogramming exercise, in light of revenue shortfalls and delays in some external financing. Current expenditure is estimated as 1½ percentage points of GDP lower than budgeted, while public investment (including onlending) was 4 percentage points of GDP lower. The authorities were able to safeguard social spending from these containment measures. The fiscal deficit fell by about 2 percentage points of GDP, to 7¾ percent. Including onlending, total financing was 13.2 percent of GDP—about ½ percentage point less than in 2012. Monetary conditions eased over the course of the year, as reflected in the build-up of excess liquidity in banks (Table 4a and Figure 2). Since May 2013, when the BCV adopted a market-based process for placing central bank bills, rates on these instruments (and also on short- term government securities) have fallen below 1 percent—significantly below the 5.75 percent policy rate. Other interest rates have been relatively sticky at higher levels. For deposits, higher rates partly reflect ongoing competition between banks to secure emigrant funds. And for loans, higher rates are related to continued risk aversion by banks, against the backdrop of high NPLs. Looking at liquidity conditions, while banks overall are in a situation of excess, this has not yet translated into credit growth. In the absence of a functioning interbank market and given the relatively high cost of BCV overdraft facilities, banks do not want to risk getting caught short. In addition, given the sharp rise in NPLs, banks have become more risk averse in the extension of new credit. Financial stabili t y has been weakened by the slowdown in growth (Table 5). The NPL ratio peaked at 20 percent in September 2013, though fell back to 16 percent by year-end. In recent years, the procedure for approving the operating budget has included “freezing” 30 percent of expenditure on goods and services (except for medication, food, security, and a few other items), which can only be spent if revenue performs as budgeted. The “freezing” also affects nonfinancial assets, namely the purchase of administrative equipment and cargo transport equipment (except purchases of sovereign entities). For the investment budget, a minimum of 30 percent (and in some cases up to 50 percent) of expenditure is similarly frozen. The BCV noted that based on their NPL definitions (Circular 150, rather than IAS/IFRS), Cabo Verde’s financial stability indicators are stronger. Their NPL ratio (which includes only installments that are 90 days or more past due, except where the cumulative past due installments exceed 25 percent of the loan balance) was only 13 percent in December 2013, and the ratio of provisions to NPLs was 60 percent (rather than 48 percent). Page 7 Capital adequacy appears to remain solid for the banking system as a whole, with the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets (CAR) reaching 13 percent at end-2013, comfortably above the 10 percent regulatory minimum. However, in one bank the CAR has fallen just below the regulatory minimum. In addition, given that provisioning has not kept up with the rise in NPLs (the coverage ratio is 48 percent, down from 52 percent a year ago), there is a risk that actual capital (if impaired loans are properly provisioned) could be lower. Policy implementation in 2013 was broadly in line with the Fund’s policy advice. As recommended in the last Article IV, capital and current spending was curtailed compared to the original budget. However, the Fund’s recommendation to adopt an ambitious medium-term fiscal consolidation plan was not adopted. The Fund had also recommended a neutral monetary policy stance to support a rebuilding of reserves. The BCV kept rates on hold through 2013. There has also been further progress in strengthening supervision, as called for by the Fund in order to enhance Cabo Verde’s financial stability framework. On the political front, the next parliamentary and presidential elections are expected in 2016. Prime Minister Jose Maria Neves, who began his third consecutive term in February 2011, represents the PAICV ( Partido Africano da Independência de Cabo Verde ). President Jorge Carlos Fonseca, in power since August 2011, is from the main opposition party, the MpD ( Movimento para a Democracia ). These two parties have been central in Cabo Verdean politics since independence in 1975, with each party having ruled for about a decade and now alternating power regularly.