Context . Cambodia is a fast-growing, highly open economy, and attained lower-middle income status this year. Over the last two decades, Cambodia grew rapidly (average real GDP growth of around 8 percent) and its integration with the global economy increased sharply, accompanied by an impressive decline in poverty. Going forward, Cambodia’s strategic location, China’s changing trade patterns, and ongoing regional integration provide further opportunities. Important steps have been taken by the government that will help Cambodia capitalize on these opportunities, including energy-related investments to help reduce the cost of doing business and measures to facilitate trade, payments and business registration. Nonetheless, further measures are needed to support sustained growth, including reforms to improve the business climate and policies to mitigate rising financial sector vulnerabilities. Past Fund advice. Policies have generally been in line with past Fund advice, but implementation should be accelerated in key areas. Consistent with past Fund recommendations, the authorities are implementing the Revenue Mobilization Strategy (RMS) and improving revenue administration, and strengthening public financial management. The National Bank of Cambodia (NBC) recently introduced the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) to improve liquidity regulation, and raised minimum capital requirements to build capital buffers. Going forward, the key policy focus should be to secure sustained growth and mitigate growing financial sector vulnerabilities, along with continuing efforts to meet the sustainable development goals and promote inclusion. DEVELOPMENTS, OUTLOOK, AND RISKS Growth and inflation . The economy grew at 7 percent in 2015, supported by strong garments exports, real estate and construction activity, as well as the reduction in oil prices, notwithstanding weaker agricultural and tourism growth. Growth is projected to remain robust at 7 percent for 2016–17. Medium-term growth is projected to decline to around 6¼ percent by 2021, due to a moderation in the credit cycle and challenges in economic diversification. To sustain growth at around 7 percent and above (through 2021), expeditious implementation of business climate reforms coupled with targeted investments, particularly in agriculture and transportation infrastructure, as well as measures to protect financial stability are needed (Box 1). Inflation unexpectedly picked up at end-2015 to 2.8 percent due to higher food prices resulting from extreme weather, and is projected to rise modestly to 3.2 percent by end 2016. See “China and the CLMV: Integration, Evolution, and Implications” (IMF, 2016). Garment exports, accounting for 74 percent of exports, grew at around 15 percent (y/y) in 2015, which was above expectations, despite exchange rate appreciation and weak trading partner growth (particularly in the EU). Page 10 Credit cycle . Credit growth has been rapid, leading to one of the fastest financial deepening episodes by historical cross-country standards. Private sector credit growth has averaged nearly 30 percent (year-on-year) over the past three years, doubling the credit-to-GDP ratio to 62 percent by end-2015, which exceeds the median emerging market level and is double the median low-income country (LIC) level. While credit to the manufacturing and agricultural sectors slowed, real estate and mortgage lending continue to grow rapidly, averaging 50 percent in 2015 and H1 2016. Broad money growth slowed as deposit growth fell to 19 percent in the first half of 2016, from 25 percent in the first half of 2015. Banks are relying more on foreign borrowing to maintain credit growth, and the average loan-to-deposit (LTD) ratio reached 108.5 percent in June 2016, from 79 percent in 2010. The financial system remains highly dollarized, with foreign currency deposits constituting 95 percent of total deposits. Credit Growth at Similar GDP Levels (PPP per capita, Five-year average) V ) ( ) ( P ) ( ) ( ) ( B ) ( ) ( P ) ( External sector outlook. The current account deficit (CAD) is projected to narrow to 10.2 percent of GDP in 2016, from 10.6 percent in 2015, due to reduced imports following the completion of major hydro projects, low commodity prices and growing remittances. Over the medium-term, the CAD is forecast to decline to around 8½ percent of GDP, as major power projects are completed (and related imports decline), exports and tourism grow (aided by an expansion of US GSP access for specific travel-related items) with some product diversification amid ASEAN Economic Community integration. Indeed, recent FDI trends point to early signs of diversification into other manufacturing products as regional producers attempt to diversify their supply chains. FDI and official sector flows are expected to continue financing the CAD over the medium-term. Gross official reserves are projected to increase to US$6.3 billion as of end-2016 (around 4½ months of total imports) and to continue rising over the medium term. External sector assessment and policies . Based on the IMF’s External Balance Assessment- lite methodology, the external position is assessed to be moderately weaker than suggested by fundamentals and desirable policies (Box 2). The moderate overvaluation of the real effective exchange rate (REER), in the absence of an independent exchange rate regime, calls for policies to improve productivity and competitiveness. Measured against traditional metrics, reserves appear to The de jure exchange rate arrangement is a managed float. The de facto exchange rate arrangement is a “other managed” arrangement. Page 11 be adequate; however, there are benefits to building reserves further given high dollarization and elevated financial vulnerabilities. The current exchange rate regime, based on keeping the riel broadly stable against the U.S. dollar, is appropriate given high dollarization and a concentration in U.S. dollar-invoiced exports (primarily garments). Over time, as dollarization declines, capacity improves, and the economy diversifies, gradually introducing greater exchange rate flexibility is recommended to better absorb external shocks and enable implementation of an independent monetary policy. Risks . The outlook is subject to downside risks: External risks: A significant slowdown in China would spill over through the FDI, banking and tourism channels (Box 3). A surge in the US dollar and/or weaker growth in Europe could constrain garments exports, particularly amid stiff competition from other low-cost producers (see Appendix I, Risk Assessment Matrix). In the near term, the Brexit referendum result is not expected to have a large direct impact on Cambodian exports (despite Cambodia's trade export exposure to the UK being the highest in the ASEAN at close to 6 percent of GDP) due to UK-bound Cambodian exports being relatively income inelastic. A more important headwind for Cambodian exports could be the increasing redirection of new garment orders to Vietnam as a result of the TPP agreement, which would lead to declining FDI growth in the Cambodian garment sector. Also, sharper-than-anticipated tightening in global financial conditions could raise funding costs and heighten liquidity risks for Cambodian banks and MFIs, which have become increasingly reliant on foreign funding. Macro-financial risks. Rising financial sector vulnerabilities amid a credit boom pose significant risks to macro-financial stability. Several macroeconomic shocks may adversely affect the financial system.  Macroeconomic shocks could potentially lead to a funding squeeze and result in a credit crunch. Possible shocks include a sharper-than-anticipated global liquidity tightening, and a significant slowdown in China.  A sharp slowdown in economic growth could lead to an increase in bad loans in specific sectors (e.g. slower-than-expected growth in the EU and China can affect garments exports and construction). Vulnerabilities in certain banks or MFIs and in the real estate market may lead to a financial system-wide shock, which could spill over to the macro economy. Page 12  Growing oversupply in the real-estate sector could trigger a disorderly price correction. This in turn could lead to rising defaults (as collateral values fall) and a spike in NPLs, which would pose a drag on credit growth and economic activity. Other domestic risks include fiscal pressures and the erosion of competitiveness from wage hikes potentially outstripping productivity increases. Upside risks . Faster structural reforms and efforts to slow credit and channel it to more productive sectors will lead to faster and more durable growth over the medium term (Box 1). Policy response . Policy options in case financial sector risks materialize are limited in view of high dollarization and a lack of monetary instruments, as well as the projected lack of fiscal space over the medium term. There is a need to build up the crisis management framework by bolstering the financial safety net, including instituting deposit insurance, putting in place a robust bank resolution framework, and strengthening the lender of last resort function of the NBC. Macro-Financial Links in Cambodia Second-round Effects to Macro-economy (1) Individual Risks Banks Credit risk Liquidity risk Non-Banks (MFIs/MDIs, Real-estate developers) Credit risk Liquidity risk Macro to Financial = Risks = Channels = Interlinkages Financial to Macro (2) Systemic Risks & Interconnectedness Banks MFIs/MDIs Real-estate developers (3) Cross-country Financial Linkages/Contagion According to a report by the real estate company, Knight Frank, while the supply of retail and office space will approximately double by 2018, the supply of condominiums will increase more than six fold. Page 13 Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment of the outlook and risks. Over the medium term, they also project growth to fall absent further diversification. They had a similar assessment of macro-financial risks and emphasized their plans to mitigate them, while closely monitoring the impact on growth. They expressed concerns regarding spillovers from EU growth on garment exports, while noting that Brexit and Vietnam’s inclusion in the TPP agreement were unlikely to hurt exports (and FDI) significantly over the next few years, but could weigh on medium-term prospects. To support exports, a short-term priority for the government is to expand US GSP access to other garments. The authorities considered minimum wage negotiations, rather than further appreciation of the U.S. dollar, as the biggest near-term risk to competitiveness. Reserve accumulation in 2016 thus far has exceeded the authorities’ expectations, and is projected to remain strong for the rest of the year. KEY POLICY ISSUES The key policy challenges are to secure sustained growth and mitigate growing financial sector vulnerabilities . Along with building resilience, efforts are needed to meet the sustainable development goals and promote inclusion. Policy efforts should focus on: (i) containing growing macro-financial risks, (ii) maintaining fiscal sustainability, (iii) boosting competitiveness and diversification, and (iv) expediting financial market development. Policy strategy. In view of rising financial sector vulnerabilities and elevated external risks, macroeconomic policies should be tightened to secure buffers, notwithstanding low debt levels. Fiscal policy should continue focusing on boosting revenues and rationalizing expenditure to maintain fiscal sustainability, amid rising wage pressures and needed capital and development spending, and to ensure sufficient fiscal buffers. Financial sector policies should focus on securing a soft landing of the credit cycle and building capital and liquidity buffers, using a well-coordinated and sequenced set of micro- and macroprudential policy tools, as well as upgrading regulation and supervision. Finally, structural reforms should be geared towards promoting diversification, enhancing competitiveness, and improving the business climate, to secure inclusive and sustained growth.