Excessive credit growth. The duration of the current credit boom, which began at around end-2011, significantly exceeds the average length of past credit booms, leading to the buildup of financial stability risks. Credit growth is projected to remain high at around 25 percent over 2016–17, moderating only slightly due to tightening global financial conditions and the imposition of tighter liquidity regulations and higher capital requirements. This would result in an already-high credit/GDP ratio to continue rising sharply (to over 80 percent by 2017). The credit-to-GDP gap (a widely used Page 14 cross-country indicator of potential crises/banking stress), which by end 2015 had already exceeded the pre-crisis peak reached in 2008, is projected to breach the 10-percent threshold by end 2017. Credit intensity of growth has trended up to 3.8 in 2015 from 3 in 2011–14 (average), implying that credit is becoming less efficient in generating growth and investment. Over the medium term, sustaining high economic growth and avoiding financial instability will require decisively moderating the pace of credit growth. Credit Intensity and Domestic Private Investment Growth 1/ P ) w ( KHM 2009 KHM 2013 Asia EM 2009 Asia EM 2014 Asia LIC 2014 Asia EM 2013 Asia LIC 2009 Asia LIC 2013 KHM 2014 Credit Intensity (nominal credit growth / nominal GDP growth) Sources: Data from Cambodian authorities; and IMF staff caluclation. 1/ Asia LIC include Bangladesh, Myanmar, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam. Asia EM include India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. Intensifying credit risk in real estate. Real estate market expansion has continued unabated, with new construction permits continuing to rise. While credit growth has been broad-based, there is growing concentration in the real estate sector, leading to rising credit risk linked to asset prices. Rapid construction could eventually lead to an over- supply in the real estate market (especially for condominiums), which risks precipitating a large disorderly adjustment in real estate prices, adversely impacting the banking sector and economic activity. Credit Gap, 1996–2016 Source: IMF staff estimates. The cre dit-to-GDP gap fan chart i s based on a one-sided HP fi lter estimated using a Ka lman fi l ter, with multiple smoothing parameters to account for uncertainty re garding the extent of fi nancial deepening. Credit-to-GDP gap is considered a leading indicator for financial sector stress or crises or a sharp growth slowdown. Following the BIS methodology, a threshold of 10 percent is considered a strong signal of an impending crisis (Drehman and others, 2010). The credit gap discussed here is based on the HP filter, and is at the lower bound of the range of estimates. Credit intensity is defined as nominal credit growth divided by nominal GDP growth. Dell’Ariccia and others (2012) found that while it is difficult to tell “bad” from “good” credit booms, bad booms tend to be larger and last longer. Roughly half of the booms lasting longer than six years ended in a severe financial downturn. There is currently no official housing data, which poses serious challenges to analyzing the link between housing boom and credit boom. There is also limited data on household balance sheets and leverage. Data from a real estate agency suggests that Phnom Penh’s land price for residential and office space increased 26 percent and 19 percent, respectively, year-on-year in 2015; the highest growth among Asian cities. Since 95 percent of loans in Cambodia are collateralized against land, a negative shock in the real estate sector could put more debtors in negative equity, which in turn could prompt rising defaults and fire sales. (continued) Page 15 Increasing reliance on foreign funding. The banking sector has increased its reliance on foreign borrowing, further raising structurally high liquidity risks. The average LTD ratio reached 108.5 percent in June 2016 (20 banks with LTD ratios over 100 percent, and 14 banks over 200 percent). Rising risks from the nonbank sector. Microfinance institutions (MFIs) are now playing a systemic role, with credit stock and flows from MFIs at 20 and 25 percent, respectively, of those in the banking system. A number of MFIs are now larger than some mid-sized commercial banks and accept deposits, thereby competing for the same client base while being subject to looser regulations. Moreover, large deposit-taking MFIs are heavily reliant on foreign funding, even more so than banks. (In percent) Capital Adequacy Asset Quality Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets Selected Financial Soundness Indicators (FSIs), 2011–15 Financial Soundness Indicators. Financial soundness indicators (FSIs) appear healthy, suggesting adequate capitalization levels, low nonperforming loans (NPLs), and high profitability. However, healthy FSIs may mask the build-up of credit risk in individual banks given the lack of clarity in the classification of restructured loans. While the system NPL ratio is under 2 percent—suggesting robust asset quality— lack of detailed guidance on the treatment of restructured loans could possibly underestimate the NPL ratio and overstate capital adequacy. While the aggregate capital adequacy ratio is above 20 percent, the solvency ratio of many banks, including large ones, may be vulnerable to higher loan losses should defaults unexpectedly increase. Furthermore, liquid assets relative to total assets or short-term liabilities appear to be low, rendering many banks vulnerable to liquidity risks. Earnings and Profitability Return on equity 1/ Return on assets 1/ Interest margin to gross income Liquid assets to total assets Liquid assets to short-term liabilities Source: National Bank of Cambodia. 1/ Annualized. Nonperforming loans to total gross loans Liquidity Containing growing financial risks. Cognizant of growing financial risks, the NBC has recently taken a number of pre-emptive steps to enhance the resilience of the financial system. Liquidity regulations have been strengthened by introducing a Basel-III compliant Liquidity Coverage Ratio (to be met by September 2016), and while it is too early to assess the impact, this regulation is expected to dent credit momentum and help build buffers against liquidity shocks. The MFIs are expanding loans at a faster pace to maintain growth targets and average loan size has risen sharply. Also, more than 20 percent of MFI customers have multiple loans, which is partly due to the highly-saturated MFI industry and the ensuing competition. (continued) Page 16 NBC has also raised minimum capital requirements in March 2016 (to be in full effect in two years). The NBC’s plans to impose bank-specific prudential measures on institutions deemed to be engaged in excessive risk-taking is welcome. While these efforts are to be commended, further measures are needed to ensure financial stability. Therefore, the NBC should follow through on their plans to adopt a liquidity risk management framework in 2016, improve regulations on asset classification and provisioning, and refine the solvency ratio during 2017. Also, while supervisory capacity has improved, further efforts are required to close gaps in financial supervision. The government has recently tightened licensing and supervision on real estate developers, and improved the efficiency and expanded the coverage of stamp duty on real estate transactions. These measures are welcome and should be used more actively going forward as an additional counter- cyclical policy tool to help manage the real estate cycle. Policy recommendations. The following policy measures are recommended to encourage financial institutions to build resilience and engineer a soft landing of the credit cycle. To this end, a range of tools should be implemented and coordinated among multiple government agencies in a well-designed and sequenced way. The recommended sequencing of specific measures is contained in the table on page 12. Raise reserve requirements (RR). RR should be raised, particularly on short-term foreign currency deposits and foreign borrowing. This would also increase the size of NBC’s liquidity buffer that can be promptly released should liquidity conditions unexpectedly tighten. Strengthen microprudential policies. The NBC should revisit loan classification, align provisioning rules with international best practices, improve asset classification regulation, and ensure that rules are consistently enforced by banks, particularly focusing on sound underwriting standards and prudent valuations. Capital adequacy regulations, which are based on Basel I, need to be upgraded to ensure financial institutions have adequate buffers commensurate with their risk profiles. Put in place a comprehensive crisis management framework . First, the NBC should strengthen the existing prompt corrective action framework to enable it to take early action. Second, building on the memorandum of understanding (MOU) signed by the NBC, the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), and the Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia (SECC) in 2014, the crisis Minimum capital requirements for commercial banks were raised from $37.5 million to $75 million, and for deposit-taking MFIs from $2.5 million to $30 million. The discrepancies are attributable to both the limited number and technical capabilities of supervisors. Capacity building efforts are thus crucial, and the NBC has requested IMF assistance in a number of areas. The regulations should provide more detailed guidance on the treatment of restructured loans. For instance, a bank should be required to limit the number of times an individual loan may be restructured, formally agree on new terms of agreement with borrowers, and have in place policies and procedures approved by the Board. Restructured loans should also attract a higher risk weight under the capital adequacy framework reflecting a higher probability of default. Many of these minimum standards did not appear to be in place or observed by the banks. As a first step, the NBC should consider introducing triggers for domestic systematically important banks with regard to asset quality and liquidity position, in addition to existing legal triggers on the regulatory minimum for solvency ratio, for prompt corrective action. Page 17 management framework should provide a sound institutional arrangement with more explicit inter- agency coordination mechanisms, including the exchange of information, contingency planning, and reforms to the legal framework in line with 2010 FSAP recommendations. Introduce macroprudential policies. (i) Sectoral tools: imposing sectoral concentration limits and/or higher risk weights for real-estate loans should be considered. Collection of real-estate data and household balance sheets should be expedited to enable the introduction of limits on debt-to-income ratio and loan-to-value ratios; (ii) Liquidity tools : funding requirements such as limits on LTD ratios would ensure that banks hold more internal and stable liabilities, and can also serve as an effective brake on excessive credit growth; (iii) Capital tools : counter cyclical capital requirements (tailored to Cambodia) could be implemented to build buffers in the financial system, which can be drawn upon in a downturn. Strengthen non-bank regulation. The growing systemic relevance of large MFIs calls for strengthening regulation to prevent regulatory arbitrage (Box 4). Specifically, (i) revising the capital adequacy regulations, (ii) standardizing asset classification in line with banks, (iii) raising RR, and (iv) better monitoring of systemic linkages between MFIs and banks. Implement complementary prudential measures . A coordinated policy response across government agencies, complementing actions taken by the NBC, is recommended to moderate rapid credit growth and contain rising financial stability risks. Well-designed and targeted fiscal measures, such as stamp duties and a capital gains tax, to augment the monetary prudential measures taken by the NBC, could be deployed to more decisively dampen excessive real estate price inflation. Such measures are especially useful when the real estate cycle is being driven by capital inflows that bypass the domestic banking system. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment and highlighted their efforts to incorporate staff’s previous recommendations. They agreed that there is a need to engineer a soft landing of the credit cycle, including by focusing on strengthening regulation and improving institutional capacity. They noted that in addition to the speed of credit growth, they are closely monitoring the quality of credit and the sectoral allocation of credit with the objective of increasing credit to productive sectors. The authorities also broadly agreed with staff’s proposed sequencing of financial sector policy recommendations, though they noted that the exact timing of additional measures would be contingent upon the assessment of past measures and the impact on credit growth and economic activity. The NBC has implemented microprudential and macroprudential measures such as reserve requirements on non-resident borrowings, liquidity coverage ratio and increase in minimum registered capital. The NBC has already started working on revising regulations on asset classification and provisioning, as well as on the prompt corrective action framework, and plans to upgrade solvency regulation. To curb credit, it is considering introducing targeted bank-by- bank level regulation. The NBC has launched a Financial Literacy Program to help support financial stability. Finally, the authorities highlighted progress in strengthening crisis preparedness, as the MEF and SECC have recently established financial stability working groups to improve information sharing, and have committed to set up, together with the NBC, a national financial stability committee that will establish a crisis management framework and strengthen financial stability oversight. Page 18 f f w f j P K f f q w f f f q w f ( f ) f f f q q ) ( w F V V w F G P P G ) P P ( q f w B Page 19 B. Maintaining Fiscal Sustainability Wage Spending, 2015 (In percent ) Fiscal outlook in 2016. The fiscal deficit is projected to widen to 2.6 percent of GDP (but remain below the budget target) from 1.6 percent of GDP in 2015 as rising current expenditure is expected to more than offset revenue mobilization efforts. Strong revenue performance, following the 2014 adoption of the government’s RMS, is expected to continue as the result of improvements in tax administration, and is projected to raise tax revenues by 0.3 percent of GDP (following 0.9 percent of GDP increase in 2015). However, wage pressures persist, and current expenditure is projected to rise by about 1.2 percent of GDP driven by an increase in the wage bill of about 0.2 percent of GDP and non-wage current expenditure by another 1 percent of GDP. Government deposits are projected to be 9.3 percent of GDP, a level that is considered adequate. In view of impending spending pressures over the medium term, any revenue over- performance should be saved and non-development current expenditure curtailed, by continuing to enhance spending efficiency. In percent of current expenditure In percent of domestic revenue In percent of GDP Other Asian LICs Cambodia Lao P.D.R ASEAN-4 2017 Preliminary budget . In the preliminary 2017 budget, the government plans to target a budget deficit of 2.6 percent of GDP. On the revenue side, the budget envisages a 0.5 percent of GDP increase in tax revenues owing to improvements in tax administration and compliance. On the spending side, the budget includes a 0.4 percent of GDP increase in the wage bill to 7.4 percent of GDP. Spending on social protection and pensions will also rise (by about 1 percent of GDP). Plans to increase social spending and growth-enhancing capital spending are welcome. However, revenue projections appear optimistic, and staff projects lower revenue growth and a higher fiscal deficit. Medium-term fiscal pressures . Over the medium term, strong revenue administration efforts (based on RMS implementation) are expected to continue to boost revenues, but the pace of The 2015 fiscal deficit (-1.6 percent of GDP) was much smaller than the budget target of -4.2 percent of GDP, due to robust revenue growth, following the implementation of the RMS. Initiated in late 2012, the RMS focuses on strengthening revenue administration, revenue policy and the institutional framework in order to continue raising domestic revenue by at least ½ percent of GDP annually over the medium term. Improved tax administration includes enhanced taxpayer registration, filing support, auditing, and arrears management. For customs, the focus is on strengthening clearance processes (customs declaration, risk management, and audit) and cross border control (smuggling, valuation). On revenue policy, the RMS focuses on excises, VAT, widening the tax base, rationalizing tax incentives and holidays, and imposing property taxes. In late 2014, the government pledged to raise the civil servants’ minimum monthly wage to US$250 by 2018 from about US$100 in 2013/14, matching the opposition’s campaign promise. (continued) Page 20 revenue gains is expected to moderate. Recent revenue increases relied heavily on strengthened auditing, which while welcome, should be accompanied by institutional improvements to sustain revenue performance. Furthermore, revenue performance could disappoint if there are delays in deeper and broader tax reforms, or if the economy weakens. At the same time, public wages are projected to continue rising, while the government is facing mounting social spending pressures (Cambodia’s development spending remains lower than that of peers). Reflecting these trends, the fiscal deficit is projected to widen to around 3½-4 percent of GDP and government deposits are projected to fall to 3.7 percent of GDP by 2021, below comfortable levels. In the absence of a government debt market, maintaining adequate government deposits (the main source of financing to conduct countercyclical fiscal policy) will be essential for maintaining macroeconomic stability as they act as a buffer in the event of shocks. Staff analysis suggests that a government deposit level of about 5.5 percent of GDP is adequate to withstand a major shock. This will necessitate consolidation over the medium term, even though the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) indicates a low risk of debt distress (see DSA). Policy Recommendations. Development Expenditures--Comparatives 1/ Public expenditures on education, health, and social assistance P Continued revenue increases are needed in view of rising spending pressures and to maintain an adequate fiscal buffer . The government’s target of raising domestic revenues by about 0.5 percent of GDP annually is welcome. However, achieving this goal will require continued improvements in revenue administration and a modernization of tax policy. To continue improving tax administration, the authorities should systematically implement the RMS and continue with the reforms to improve institutional capacity (Box 5). Tax policy reforms should initially focus on rationalizing tax Sources: IMF staff estimates; World Bank. 1/ Dashline is the average of EMAsia Cambodia EMAsia LIDCs Social Assistance Spending Education Health Staff has estimated the revenue to GDP norm for Cambodia, and the results indicate that Cambodia has scope to increase revenues by about 2-2.5 percent of GDP. However, between 2013-2015, the revenue-to-GDP ratio increased by 2.8 pp of GDP. Given the higher base and the authorities’ plans to focus only on strengthening revenue administration (in line with the RMS) without introducing any new taxes until 2018, the pace of revenue gains in the near term is likely to moderate. In particular, progress in other key areas of the RMS, such as return filing management, arrears collection, transparent and simplified tax accounting and performance monitoring, is needed. Relative to the last Article IV Consultation, medium-term projections assume higher concessional project loans which finance increased development (education) and capital expenditures. Project loans are below the line, and the commensurate increases in expenditures have widened the fiscal deficit modestly over the medium term. Notwithstanding the low risk of debt distress, debt sustainability continues to be vulnerable to the materialization of contingent liabilities related to financial sector risks and PPPs. The average level of government deposits for 2000–15 was 4.6 percent of GDP. In the baseline (including gains from RMS reforms), their level is projected to decline below 4 percent of GDP by 2021. Furthermore, if the revenue- to-GDP ratio remains flat and concessional borrowing does not materialize, the fiscal deficit will widen while government deposits will be depleted. Thus, continued revenue efforts are needed to maintain adequate government deposits (estimated at about 5.5 percent of GDP). Page 21 incentives and excise taxes, and over the medium term aim at reforming VAT and personal income taxes, and increasing property taxes. Development spending should be prioritized as revenue gains are secured. Recent plans to boost social protection spending are welcome. However, public expenditure on education and health will still remain below low-income and emerging Asia country averages. Wage increases should be fiscally sustainable and accompanied by continued efforts to Lao P.D.R Myanmar Cambodia Other Asian LICs Wage Spending accelerate civil service reforms. Further wage increases should be contingent on meeting revenue targets and maintaining adequate fiscal buffers. The ongoing efforts to reform Cambodia’s civil service sector, especially to strengthen the monitoring of work attendance and compensation systems through the adoption of IT systems, are welcome. Commendable efforts are also being made to strengthen human resource planning and recruitment across sectors. These efforts should continue, including to increase skills and efficiency of civil servants at all levels including management, and to enhance the transparency of public sector operations. In particular, balancing the goals of fiscal sustainability and competitive civil service salaries will require careful targeting of incentives and higher pay increases to priority functions and good performers. ASEAN-4 Domestically-financed public investment should be increased, while raising its efficiency and limiting contingent liabilities from Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). Specific recommendations include: (i) increasing domestically-financed public investment to maintain public investment at about 8.5 percent of GDP financed by boosting revenues (to prepare for an eventual decline in external concessional financing as Cambodia’s per capita income rises further); (ii) improving efficiency in all stages of the public investment process including planning, allocation and implementation, and (iii) developing an appropriately structured institutional framework for PPPs to reduce risks from contingent liabilities. In June 2016, the MEF adopted a policy on PPPs outlining legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks. In addition, a central PPP unit for risk management is being established in the MEF. Going forward, the preparation and selection of PPPs should be integrated with the overall investment strategy and the budget cycle, with clear procedures in place for budgeting, reporting, and accounting. A Medium Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) should be developed to systematically allocate expenditure and improve efficiency. A MTFF will also integrate capital expenditure into the budgetary process, and allow for a better assessment of the trade-offs between various types of expenditures and their medium-term impact. Page 22 Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment and key policy recommendations. On the revenue side, they agreed with the need to continue to boost revenues to maintain fiscal sustainability, but noted the need to strike a balance and meet other objectives such as promoting job creation and efficiency. They remained committed to continue implementing the RMS, along with improving the institutional framework for revenue administration. They plan to implement tax policy reforms over the medium term. On expenditures, they agreed on the importance of developing a MTFF to improve expenditure allocation efficiency and are currently reviewing the public expenditure framework. They are also planning to continue with civil service reforms to improve public services, but noted constraints to speedy implementation. They highlighted significant progress in increasing development spending, especially in health, primary education, and social assistance. They plan to use PPPs to enhance infrastructure and social spending, and acknowledged the need to develop a well-designed PPP framework.