Economic growth accelerated in 2013, but was not inclusive. Growth prospects hinge on a change in the fiscal stance and a shift to a broad-based, private-sector-led development. The advent of private-sector takeoff is hindered by unproductive spending, rising public debt, and an unpropitious business environment. Cameroon’s growth was robust in 2013. At 5.5 percent, it was fuelled by strong performance in the services sector and by a public investment program of more than 7 percent of GDP (Text Table 1; Figures 1A 2, Tables 1 and 8–9; Selected Issues Paper—SIP—Infrastructure Road Map). The public investment program reflects strong progress in the commissioning of new dams and thermal plants to improve the quantity and quality of electric power. However, linkages to the broader economy (e.g., port facilities, power lines, roads) still need to be put in place for the infrastructure projects to contribute to growth. Annual inflation, at 2.1 percent, was under the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) convergence criterion of 3 percent, but was higher than the CEMAC weighted average of 1.7 percent (excluding Cameroon). Figure 1A. Cameroon: Nominal GDP by Sector, 2013 Figure 1B. Cameroon: Electricity Production Capacity, 2009–18 (Megawatts) 20092010201120122013Primary sector0.61.30.70.60.7Secondary sector (excl. oil)0.10.70.71.01.4Oil -0.8-0.6-0.30.10.1Tertiary sector2.01.83.02.93.3 government0.70.41.00.81.0 Real GDP growth1.93.34.14.65.5 Text Table 1. Cameroon: Contributions to GDP Growth, 2009–13 Government17.5% TertiarySector (non-government)37.5% Primary Sector21.4% Secondary Sector (excl.oil) 20.2%Oil 3.5% Sources:Cameroonian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. D I N w y K y k L P v l Sources : Cameroonian authorities; and IMF staff projections.Sources : Cameroonian authorities; and IMF staff projections. Page 7 Figure 2. Cameroon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2009–19 A stable macroeconomic environment evidenced by low inflation… which has been underpinned by increasing public investment. … and the fiscal deficit, … has allowed for stronger growth, Higher public investment has weighed on the current account… resulting in a rapid accumulation of debt, albeit from a low level. Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. CPI Change (Percent change) Real GDP Growth Capital Expenditure External Current Account Overall Fiscal Balance Public Debt Page 8 The level and pattern of growth have not been pro-poor. The population growth rate stymies progress in per capita income growth. Agriculture, which provides a livelihood to most of the poor, has not expanded enough to reduce poverty and inequality. Poverty remains broadly unchanged at close to 40 percent of the population, social indicators are weak, and inequality has likely increased (Text Table 2; Table 13; SIP—Poverty, Inclusiveness, and the Budget). The 2013 budget did not support social policies. Fuel subsidies remained substantial at 2.8 percent of GDP in 2013, and crowded out more effective expenditure. Public spending on health and education was significantly lower than in comparable countries (Figure 3). According to the World Development Indicators, Ghana, Senegal, and Tanzania consistently spend more than of 5 percent of GDP on education. The same countries allocate a minimum of 2.8 percent of GDP to spending on health, more than twice the amount of Cameroon. Figure 3. Cameroon: Public Expenditure by Function 2008–12 (Percent of GDP) Sources: Cameroonian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The fiscal outcome has weakened because difficult expenditure rollbacks have been postponed and tax and tariff exemptions remain in place. The fiscal deficit, on a cash basis, exceeded 4 percent of GDP in 2013. Total revenue increased slightly to 17.8 percent of GDP, but masked a fall in oil revenue because of higher production costs that are slated to absorb a significant part of the higher export proceeds (Figure 4; SIP—Fiscal Regime of the Oil Sector). Tax deductions, special regimes, and tariff exemptions on basic foodstuffs cost more than 2.7 percent of GDP in The poverty threshold is the adult-equivalent, per person income of CFAF 738, which corresponds to the 2007 price of a basic basket of goods. 20072011Poverty39.938.7Urban poverty 12.210.8Rural poverty 55.059.2Population growth (annual percentage change)2.62.5Life expectancy at birth (years)5254Maternal mortality ratio (per 100.000 live births)720690Youth literacy rate8381 Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators; and World Bank staff estimates. Text Table 2. Cameroon: Selected Social Indicators, 2007–11 (Percent, unless otherwise indicated) Health Security Education Other allocated expenditure Page 9 forgone revenue. The stock of arrears and other payment obligations rose to 4.6 percent of GDP, inter alia because the government could not pay fuel subsidies in full (Tables 6–7). Figure 4. Cameroon: Selected Oil Production Indicators, 2009–19 (CFAF billions) Reform inertia continued in 2013. The IMF’s advice got mixed traction (Box 1). In spite of extensive discussions within the government and civil society, retail fuel prices remained frozen at their 2009 level. Conversely, several technical recommendations in fiscal administration and public financial management were implemented. The spate of nationwide elections in 2013 offers an opportunity for economic reforms. Growth in 2014 is projected at 5.5 percent, below the authorities’ projection of 6 percent. Over the medium term, staff projects growth at about that same level. Growth will be driven by growing oil production and the public investment program, expected to yield larger electricity and natural gas supplies. Barring fuel price adjustments, inflation is slated to remain low because of stable food prices supported by a growing supply; it would however exceed the very low inflation in the euro area, possibly inducing declining competitiveness. The fiscal situation is projected to become increasingly fragile, as a result of recurrent budget deficits. Revenue is projected to fall by up to 1 percentage point of GDP between 2014 and 2019, reflecting generous investment incentives, pervasive tariff exemptions, and weak value- added tax (VAT) collection from ailing public enterprises. Oil revenue will decrease, because rising costs are expected to offset growing output, with international prices trending downward. Expenditure will drop by almost 2 percentage points of GDP by 2019, as the externally financed investment program is scaled back. The wage bill will track GDP growth on the back of hiring trends (SIP—Public Wage Bill A new Senate was elected in May 2013, and a National Assembly and municipal councils were elected in September 2013. A law was adopted in 2013 to provide investment incentives through generous tax exemptions, without restricting these exemptions to new investments of strategic importance. Oil revenue Oil exports Sources: SNH; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 10 Determinants). The non-oil primary deficit (NOPD) is projected to remain at 8–9 percent of non-oil GDP, while financing gaps averaging 3 percent of GDP would persist. Box 1. Cameroon: Response to Past IMF Staff Advice Policy Area IMF Staff Advice Response Fiscal policy and public Address the risks to the The fuel subsidy mechanism was not financial management 2013 budget through fuel reformed; the broad tax and custom (PFM) subsidy reform and a exemptions were not tightened; reduction in tax and custom expenditure and revenue offsets exemptions. continued unabated; and treasury management became tenser. Private sector-led Improve the business Measures, such as the new growth climate by limiting the investment incentives law, add administrative hindrances complexity rather than simplicity to identified in the Doing the business environment, and raise Business report. fiscal sustainability concerns. Financial sector Improve the frequency and There were significant improvements quality of bank supervision in the banking sector: the balance by the regional supervisor, sheets of two banks were COBAC, and strengthen the restructured and are now deemed monitoring of the sound; and the COBAC, has been soundness of the financial more active in its supervision. sector. Concerns about the systemic importance of the largest obligor remain. The real effective exchange rate (REER) is estimated to be somewhat overvalued (Annex I). The REER has held broadly constant since 2005, with a slight appreciation in 2005–09 offset by similar depreciation since then, in line with the depreciation of the euro relative to the US dollar. Model-based estimates are consistent with the finding of the last Article IV consultation with the CEMAC, which suggested an overvaluation of 6 to 18 percent. Cameroon’s performance in non-price competitiveness is lagging. Encouragingly, Cameroon became compliant with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) in 2013. However, its rankings under various doing business indicators deteriorated. External debt remains sustainable, but the associated risk of distress has become “moderate” because of the fast pace of nonconcessional debt accumulation. External financing is The exchange arrangement of the CEMAC countries is a conventional pegged arrangement of the CFA franc vis-à-vis the euro. Page 11 currently projected to decrease as percent of GDP in the medium term. A higher sustained share of external financing, preserving or exceeding levels observed in 2013 and expected for 2014, would further increase this risk. The current debt burden is low, compared to that of sub-Saharan African (SSA) peers, but it is projected to accelerate (Figure 5). High fiscal deficits together with weak PFM, as evidenced by recurrent domestic arrears, are important factors for risk of debt distress in the medium and long terms. The companion debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that another salient threat to sustainability comes from the limited export base, which will be compounded by a relative decline in oil production over time. Figure 5. Selected African Countries: Gross Government Debt, 2010-19 (Percent of GDP) There are risks to the outlook (Annex II). The spillover risks from civil strife in neighboring countries are significant and potentially harmful to the economy. The authorities believed that UN peacekeeping efforts—in which Cameroon participates—would help stabilize the situation. Domestic risks include a banking sector crisis brought on by a default of a large single public borrower. Data provision to the IMF is broadly adequate for surveillance. The timeliness has improved, but important qualitative gaps remain in fiscal, debt, and external sector information because of lack of capacity. Information on financial operations on a commitment basis is not available, and debt reporting on externally financed projects is neither regular nor timely. C oo Z C D R p B u k F li S l T z z q u G 2019Sources: IMF's World Economic Outlook (WEO); and African Department Database. Page 12