Staff emphasized the need for reforms in the business environment to leverage the public investment program. Staff noted that PPPs could help fill the infrastructure gap under the right budgeting, institutional, accounting, and reporting frameworks. However, although Cameroon became compliant with the EITI, its ranking under the Global Competitiveness Index deteriorated marginally (by 3 places); and its ranking under the World Bank’s Doing Business indicators fell more sharply (by 6 places). Although Cameroon’s ranking improved marginally with respect to registering property, its rating deteriorated significantly regarding construction permits, starting a business, getting credit, and enforcing contracts. Staff pointed out that the new investment incentives law does not address these binding constraints on private sector activity, and may even undermine some reforms by increasing discretion in various permitting processes. Staff encouraged the narrowing of the scope of this law to strategic sectors and the requirement of systematic skill transfers, in exchange for fiscal exemptions. Staff urged the authorities to rekindle regional economic integration and re-establish the effectiveness of regional institutions in light of the new challenges to CEMAC arising from the EPA. Challenges include a potential diversion of intra-CEMAC trade, as a result of different tariff regimes, and a setback for the harmonization of CEMAC external tariffs. The authorities noted the need to accelerate the pace of reforms that will help the formal private sector flourish. They were comforted by the improving execution rate of public investment, which they saw as the backbone for future private sector development. They noted that an economic “emergency program” being finalized would energize pubic administration and help to make new infrastructure operational. They expressed hope that the investment incentives law would attract new investors, and that the new public bank for small and medium enterprises (SMEs), to be launched soon, would help to finance such enterprises. The authorities considered the ratification of the interim EPA as an important measure to safeguard their access to European markets (50 percent of exports). They viewed the EPA as an opportunity to strengthen their productive sectors, with financial support from the EU. They also thought the EPA may spur a new round of regional integration within the CEMAC.