The strain on public expenditure is exacerbating dysfunctions in public financial management (PFM). The treasury is working in practice through both the state’s single treasury account and the national hydrocarbon company’s (SNH) “advances” account, contrary to IMF staff advice. Increasing recourse to cash outlays by the treasury, which are not covered by appropriations in the budget, and direct expenditures by SNH make ex post regularization in the budget increasingly difficult, even though SNH’s payments on behalf of the government are periodically reconciled with the budget accounts. The prospects for more rational budget execution were also undermined by the extension of the “complementary period” for closing public accounts in 2014 by more than three months, which allowed commitments on the 2014 budget to be made in 2015. The treasury has, however, made notable progress in winding down undisbursed balances in subaccounts used to hold public entities’ expended subsidies. The budget has ceased to be an instrument to guide and control the public finances. This hinders progress toward the authorities’ efforts to implement program budgeting. The budget also suffers from the continuing practice of registering only the net result of offsetting transactions between the budget and public entities (e.g., subsidies canceled against taxes due). This undermines budget analysis, transparency, and is a potential source of errors. Moreover, parts of the investment budget financed from external sources are recorded in the budget with delays of up to two years. Page 21 Staff encouraged the authorities to restore fiscal discipline by reinforcing expenditure control through the ex ante verification of budget allocations and the availability of adequate liquidity. Specific recommendations included: Accounting for all revenue and expenditure flows on a gross basis. Limiting the complementary period to one month, and starting to use “carry forwards” for unspent budget allocations. Compiling the backlog of pending payments (including toward SONARA) and proceeding to clear this backlog with cash payments or formal debt obligations. Ceasing to use SNH as an off-budget, advance expenditure mechanism. Eliminating various tax expenditures, including by winding down the large number of preferential agreements—this could yield annual revenues of more than one percent of GDP. Narrowing the scope of the 2013 investment incentives law to a few strategic sectors. The authorities agreed with the need for better monitoring and more comprehensive accounting and reporting of public spending. They noted that expenditure reallocations were always formally approved by the Prime Minister, with a view to regularizing all spending and communicating a full account of the use of resources to Parliament. They also agreed to consider IMF staff recommendations to improve commitment controls and to reassert control over public expenditure. In particular, they pointed to their implementation of a new information technology architecture that will connect the civil service register to the payroll. However, they did not see a need to reconsider externally financed public investment plans, as these were deemed essential for accelerated growth and were in any case fully financed.