The budget for 2014 targets a decline in revenue and an unrealistic retrenchment in expenditure. Revenue projections are disappointing, as they target a fall over the 2013 outturn by 1 percentage point of GDP on account of lower oil revenue, customs and VAT receipts, and the impact of investment incentives. Expenditure is projected to contract by 2.5 percentage points of GDP, although it is not clear how this will be achieved. The overall budget deficit would be 2.6 percent of GDP, and is expected to be financed by borrowing. Staff projects a deficit of 5.6 percent of GDP, based on a current expenditure forecast in line with the 2013 outcome and higher public investment. As in previous years, the budget incorporates only about half of the expected cost of fuel subsidies and transfers to public enterprises, and does not include a provision for fuel subsidy arrears. The Ministry of Finance lacks the tools to weigh on fiscal sustainability. Revenue performance remains weak compared to SSA peer countries, because of a narrow tax base and generous tax exemptions. The budget does not set a clear anchor for fiscal policy, such as a downward path for the NOPD. Loans for projects and public-private partnerships (PPPs) proceed with little oversight by the Ministry of Finance and their financing terms are not framed in a comprehensive debt policy. Staff encouraged the authorities to follow a tighter fiscal stance in 2014 and close the projected financing gap. The tense treasury position—illustrated by shrinking government deposits— and the need to clear deferred payments will require a significant revenue mobilization effort. Staff made the following recommendations to alleviate the fiscal constraints: Adopt the NOPD as a fiscal anchor, and set a path that takes into account public investment needs while preserving fiscal sustainability. Staff’s analysis suggests that a gradual reduction of the NOPD from the projected 10.3 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to about 4 percent by 2034 would help cap total public debt to less than 30 percent of GDP over the long term. Improve non-oil revenue by broadening the tax base, adjusting selected tax rates, limiting tax exemptions, and curtailing the application of the investment incentives law. With the expected ratification of the Economic Partnership Agreement (Box 2) and the gradual decline of oil proceeds over the longer term, there is a need to mobilize additional revenue through: (i) lowering the corporate income tax rate while increasing the minimum rate on the turnover tax to reduce Ten enterprises paid 55 percent of all corporate taxes in 2013. For an analysis of fiscal sustainability predicated on the NOPD, see Appendix III to IMF Country Report 12/237. Page 13 incentives for evasion; (ii) switching to a dual income tax approach and improving the progressivity of the personal income tax; and (iii) lowering the VAT rate while removing the exemptions granted in 2008 on basic foodstuffs—these exemptions have not achieved their intended social impact. Box 2. Cameroon: Revenue Impact of the Economic Partnership Agreement An economic partnership agreement (EPA) is being negotiated between the CEMAC and the European Union (EU). Cameroon signed an interim EPA in 2009, which is expected to be ratified in October 2014. The agreement envisages mutual trade liberalization—duty and quota-free EU access for all exports from Cameroon and a gradual removal of duties and quotas over 15 years on up to 80 percent of EU exports to Cameroon. The pace of tariff reduction varies by category of goods (Table). The medium-term impact of the EPA is uncertain, except on government revenue, which is reviewed below. The short to medium-term impact on Cameroon’s revenue is expected to be modest. The impact on tax revenue until 2020 will be negligible (less than 0.1 percent of GDP) for two reasons: (i) the dismantling will begin in 2017 at the earliest and will affect imports that are already partly or totally exempted or moderately taxed (capital goods under Categories I and II); and (ii) tariff losses could be dampened in the short-term if an increase in import volumes partially offsets reductions in tariff rates. The long-run effects—with phasing-in over 15 years—will be more substantial under an unchanged policy scenario. Abundant literature estimates the potential long-term revenue impact of regional trade agreements, such as the EPA. Revenue loss will come through two channels: (i) the direct channel whereby a zero tariff rate would apply to imports from the EU; and (ii) the indirect channel arising from diversion of trade from taxed non-EU imports to non-taxed EU imports. In 2012, 34 percent of Cameroon’s imports came from the EU suggesting that about one third of current tariff revenues would be lost from the liberalization of 80 percent of EU imports over the long term. This would be equivalent of 0.5–0.6 percent of GDP from the direct channel, consistent with estimates in the government’s growth and employment strategy paper. The revenue loss could be higher if trade diversion from the rest of the world in favor of exempted EU imports happened. The fiscal challenge for Cameroon is to reorganize its tax base and develop alternative forms of taxation. Some positive impacts can be expected from the EPA, such as the widening of the tax base, as incomes rise. The long-term effect will ultimately depend on the authorities’ capacity to offset a reduction in custom revenue by receipts from other sources, such as VAT, excises, and reductions in tax exemptions. Other CEMAC countries are also negotiating the possible signing of EPAs, but they lag Cameroon. Products which will not be liberalized include milk, meat, motor vehicles, textiles, and tobacco. Category ICategory IICategory IIIYear 1000Year 2000Year 32500Year 450150Year 575300Year 6100450Year 76010Year 87520Year 99030Year 1010040Year 1150Year 1260Year 1370Year 1480Year 1590Year 16100 Source: Article 21 of the Cameroon Interim EPA. Table. Cameroon: Calendar of tariff dismantlement Page 14 Strengthen tax administration by finalizing the restructuring of the network of small taxpayer offices, creating additional medium taxpayer offices, and allocating adequate resources to implement reforms. Phase out of fuel subsidies gradually and reprioritize expenditure toward social services. Elaborate a communication strategy and develop well-targeted programs to limit the impact of higher fuel prices on the most vulnerable groups. Take preparatory steps to improve transparency, such as removing the producer mark-up from the fuel pricing formula. Issue regional bonds in amounts and at a pace consistent with market absorptive capacity and the expected growth impact of concerned projects. Rethink the public investment program to improve its efficiency and enhance the complementarity of a limited set of projects with a high impact on growth and poverty reduction. Lower debt vulnerabilities by renegotiating the least concessional undisbursed loans; implement a medium-term debt strategy in line with recommendations of joint World Bank-IMF technical assistance, including the consolidation of the authority to contract external debt under the Minister of Finance. Monitor contingent liabilities from public enterprises, PPPs, and the banking system. Produce an annual evaluation report on the financial health of all public enterprises, PPPs, and banks, and adopt a payment plan to settle liabilities stemming from situations that have been conclusively addressed. The authorities were confident that they would be able to finance the 2014 budget. They expected no problem in raising their targeted domestic financing through securities issues on the regional market, as evinced by a largely oversubscribed issue in December 2013. They acknowledged that fuel subsidies were likely to exceed their appropriation, but drew comfort from what they viewed as the tested financing solution of cross-cancellation of mutual debts with the SONARA. The authorities agreed that current fiscal and debt policies need to be improved to contain the risk of debt distress. They committed to improving non-oil revenue mobilization, in line with the recommendations of recent FAD technical assistance. They recognized that fuel subsidies are straining the budget, and supported the principle of gradual adjustments in retail prices. They agreed that fuel subsidy reform needs to be well prepared and accompanied by appropriate mitigating measures to preserve social peace. However, they were not in a position to provide a specific timeline for this reform. They noted the need to improve the efficiency of public spending in infrastructure investments and in social sectors. They agreed with the need for better analysis to inform external debt contracting, and believed that the national public debt committee (CNDP), chaired by the Minister of Finance, would fulfill this role. The authorities saw little merit in a strict fiscal rule anchored on the NOPD given the large infrastructure gap. For a discussion of fuel subsidy reform, see Appendix I to IMF Country Report 13/279. Page 15