The 2015 budget execution has been thrown into disarray by the fall in oil revenue, unexpected security spending, and the supplemental investment program. Revenue performance is expected to deteriorate in terms of GDP compared with 2014. This reflects the steep decline in oil revenue, which has only been partially offset by stronger-than-expected non-oil revenue performance, stemming from tax administration reforms and one-off sales of mobile phone licenses. Total expenditure, in terms of GDP, will remain at the same level as in 2014; however its composition will change significantly, with current expenditure contracting by 0.7 percentage point of GDP, on account of lower subsidies, and capital expenditure increasing by the same amount because of expanding public investment. The overall budget deficit is thus expected to widen to 5.4 percent of GDP. It is expected to be financed by a mix of domestic and external borrowing and deferred payments. High capital expenditure is also expected to increase imports of investment-related goods and push the current account deficit above 5 percent of GDP in the medium term. The authorities are preparing to issue a US$1.5 billion Eurobond to pay arrears to SONARA and finance the supplemental investment program. The three-year program (“ plan d’urgence ”) of infrastructure projects (including hospitals, secondary roads, agricultural projects) is equivalent to some 1.7 percent of GDP annually. Page 18 Box 2. Cameroon: Total Factor Productivity and Structural Competitiveness Total factor productivity (TFP) in Cameroon has been lagging that of peers. A growth accounting exercise for 49 African and Asian countries from 1991 to 2012 analyzed the average contribution of capital, labor, and TFP to growth. It showed that TFP made a negative contribution to growth in Cameroon. Moreover the Box Figure shows that among five groups (WAEMU, African frontier economies, African emerging markets, Asian benchmark peers, and sub-Saharan African countries) only Cameroon and WAEMU had negative TFP contributions to growth. The figure also shows that Cameroon had the lowest contribution of capital to growth (about one percent). Cameroon’s week structural competitiveness could explain the disappointing contribution of TFP to growth. The external sustainability assessment (Annex II) shows that Cameroon has a challenging business environment and governance, which could explain the negative contribution of TFP. In African frontier economies, which had made considerable progress in improving competitiveness, the contribution of TFP to growth was significant, despite similarly low levels of contribution of labor and capital to growth. See the CEMAC 2015 regional consultation’s selected issues paper, entitled “CEMAC: Why Is Economic Growth Lagging and What Can Be Done About It? ” (IMF Country Report 15/222). Rapid growth in non-concessional external debt has become the most important threat to fiscal sustainability. The sharp and persistent decline in oil revenue and the rapid increase in public debt require equally decisive and firm measures to ensure fiscal sustainability. On the expenditure side, most investment projects in the supplemental program are at an early conceptual stage and far from the financing stage. There are capacity constraints for properly implementing numerous, large, and complex infrastructure projects simultaneously. There are also long delays between the coming on stream of new infrastructure and related government revenue generation. All this calls for a consolidation and rationalization of the authorities’ investment plans and their full incorporation into the budget. Rather than surging ahead with additional externally financed projects, at a time of fiscal stress, a commitment to a medium-term fiscal anchor, such as the NOPD, seems warranted, as are measures to exert better control over capital and security expenditures. 6CameroonWAEMU 1/AFR Frontier 2/AFR EM 3/Asia Benchmarks 4/SSA Cameroon and Peers: Growth Decomposition 1991–2012 TFP Labor Capital WAEMU: Benin BurkinaFaso, Guinea Buissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo. AFR Frontier: Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. AFR EM: Botswana, Cape Verde, Namibia,Seychelles and South Africa. Asian Benchmark: Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Lao, Nepal and Vietnam.Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 19 Staff encouraged the authorities to tighten the fiscal stance in the absence of additional revenue or concessional financing. Given the limited prospects of mobilizing large amounts of additional revenue in the short term, staff made the following recommendations: Adopt a NOPD that that does not jeopardize fiscal sustainability, with a downward path to below 4 percent of non-oil GDP in the medium term. Expand the tax base further by creating more decentralized tax offices to facilitate tax payments; phase out tax and customs exemptions; eliminate the fuel-subsidy scheme; and restore normal taxation of fuel products. Narrow eligibility under the investment incentives law to new external investments with a clearly demonstrable impact on growth. Finalize single taxpayer identification by interconnecting relevant databases in the tax and customs administrations. Restore the budget to its role as an effective expenditure control mechanism by adopting a supplemental budget for 2015 and a realistic budget for 2016 to (i) unify, rationalize, and scale down multiple investment programs and bring them into the budget, while focusing on projects with a high impact on growth and poverty; (ii) phase in gradually projects for which debt has been contracted but whose implementation has not yet started; and (iii) bring the full extent of security expenditures onto the budget. Focus on projects nearing completion; and allocate appropriate resources for maintenance. Call a moratorium on new infrastructure projects, in light of the more than US$4 billion contracted but undisbursed project loans, unless the financing is concessional. Improve the implementation of the medium-term debt strategy by vesting sole authority for contracting debt in the Minister of Finance. Issue regional bonds in local currency in amounts and at a pace consistent with market absorptive capacity. Postpone the issuance of the proposed Eurobond, which is likely to be onerous under current market conditions, because the projects it is intended to finance are insufficiently mature. Implement the new information technology system under consideration to reconcile the civil service payroll with the treasury payment system. Elaborate wage bill projections to better inform the schedule for the proposed hiring of new civil servants. Strengthen the monitoring of the performance of SOEs, especially SONARA, with particular focus on contingent liabilities. An annual report should be produced on the financial health of all SOEs and state-owned banks, and efforts made to clear SONARA’s arrears, including its overdue supplier credits. This recommendation was made at the time of the consultation in September 2015 when preparations for a supplemental budget were at an advanced stage at the technical level. Page 20 The authorities were undecided on the need for a supplemental budget. They noted that they could accommodate deviations from budget allocations without necessarily resorting to a supplemental budget. They also noted that the supplemental investment program had been approved by Parliament earlier in 2015, including its external financing. They also thought that by reallocating unspent money (e.g., fuel subsidies) they could largely meet unforeseen expenditure (e.g., security expenditure). They considered that unforeseen economic and fiscal developments in 2015 can be fully addressed in the 2016 budget. The authorities did not agree that Cameroon had reached a high risk of debt distress. They pointed out that (i) the value of exports could rebound with a possible rise in commodity prices; (ii) SONARA’s large external arrears should not be counted toward the total public and publicly guaranteed debt, because they are suppliers’ credit pending payment; and (iii) the rating of external debt distress was the result of a breach under only one test among the five standard tests. They nonetheless agreed that Cameroon’s fiscal sustainability had deteriorated, and thus recognized the need to improve the cost-effectiveness of public spending. They also committed to improving non-oil revenue mobilization, in line with the recommendations of FAD technical assistance. As in previous years, the authorities saw limited merit in a fiscal rule anchored on the NOPD, if only because oil is expected to fade as a contributor to GDP. They were open to considering the elimination of the fuel- subsidy scheme, but were mindful of the social impact in the event that prices rise too sharply and considered that this reform was not a priority in times of low oil prices.