The private sector has the potential to overtake the public sector as the engine of growth. There is strong potential beyond government in key sectors underpinning the economy, such as energy and construction. The capacity of cement production has more than doubled since the last consultation, with the arrival of new foreign investors, which is a testimony to the private sector’s readiness to grow. Lack of structural competitiveness continues to be a critical issue. Total factor productivity made a negative contribution to growth in Cameroon (Box 2). The government has taken initiatives to improve the business environment. However, its initiatives have not led to a significant decrease in the number of public interventions and discretion by public officials in the conduct of business. Cameroon’s ranking in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” indicators have deteriorated: it ranks 158 in 2015, versus in 2014. Cameroon’s performance deteriorated in five of ten indicators, stagnated in four, and improved in one. The most ground was lost in dealing with construction permits and starting a business. The 2013 law on investment incentives has generated almost 100 agreements, but mostly with firms already present in Cameroon, rather than with new foreign firms. Regional integration and the promise of a single CEMAC market remain elusive. Given the challenges faced by the CEMAC Commission in resuming work in its headquarters in Bangui, Central African Republic, staff urged the authorities, representing the largest economy in the Community, to lead a reinvigoration of regional integration by: Ensuring adequate human and financial resources for the CEMAC Commission. Pushing for a common external tariff across all product categories for the CEMAC customs union, mindful of the bilateral Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Union and Cameroon. Harmonizing economic and technical standards, such as sanitary standards for perishable products. Addressing other non tariff barriers, such as burdensome customs procedures stemming from limited cooperation between national administrations. For example, there is no applicable agreement for Cameroonian customs to collect import tariffs for merchandise transiting through the region’s main sea port in Douala and redistribute the proceeds according to the country of final destination. Page 17 The authorities expressed confidence in the contribution of large public investment projects to growth and economic diversification. They felt that the large infrastructure projects throughout the country that are nearing completion would lift the rate of economic growth sustainably. Moreover, they were confident that an additional, nation-wide, supplemental investment program would further boost economic growth and return the country to the path towards achieving emerging economy status by 2035. They concurred with staff’s recommendation to focus on first- generation projects nearing completion. They recognized the need to enhance the ability of the private sector to contribute more to growth and opined that filling the infrastructure and energy gaps was the best way to achieve this. The authorities agreed with the need to strengthen competitiveness and remove obstacles to trade. They shared staff’s views on regional integration, as one of the great opportunities for growth, especially given the less favorable global economic outlook. As the largest and most diversified economy in CEMAC, they recognized that they were expected to show leadership in regional cooperation and integration. However, they noted the generally difficult process of coming to agreement with other CEMAC partners.