Despite the oil price slump and the security crisis, the banking sector appears relatively sound (Table 13). By end-June 2015, total bank assets grew by 6.2 percent year-on-year, while deposits and credits increased by 6.1 percent and 13.0 percent, respectively. This performance reflected strong domestic demand, linked to investment growth. However, banks’ non-performing loans (NPLs) increased from 10.2 percent in June 2014 to 13.1 percent a year later, as did those of micro-finance institutions (MFIs). The somewhat improved financial situation of SONARA also lessened the banking system’s credit risk. Excess liquidity in the banking system ebbed, but remained significant at almost 5 percent of GDP, although the situation varied across institutions. The issue of three small problem banks remained unresolved and continues to hinder financial intermediation. The new government- sponsored bank for small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) started operations in July 2015 with two agencies (in Yaoundé and Douala), but has yet to extend significant amounts of credit. Page 22 After a long period of gestation, mobile transfers almost doubled in 2014. Staff encouraged the authorities to promote financial inclusion through this modern medium. It noted that mobile banking has a strong financial development potential, if adequately regulated. Staff recommended updating the mobile banking legal framework, in coordination with the appropriate regional authorities, to better meet the business needs of the various market stakeholders (mobile operators, financial institutions). Bank supervision at national and regional levels has improved. At the national level, the deployment of the central information database on banks and large MFIs by the national directorate of the central bank (BEAC) should boost financial intermediation. This tool will also allow the eventual creation of a credit bureau and of a repository of the balance sheets of credit institutions and major MFIs. Staff recommended the full implementation of this tool, which could help control financial risks and improve the performance of the most vulnerable institutions. At the community level, the institutional capacity of the regional supervisor (COBAC) has strengthened through the doubling in the number of inspectors and the deployment of a new on-line financial reporting tool. This has improved the quality of bank supervision in Cameroon as well. However, the slow process of adopting new regulation delays the modernization of the prudential framework and prevents progression toward a more efficient supervisory system. COBAC continued to monitor developments in the financial sector. Its representatives noted that in spite of an increase in NPLs in the banking sector, the situation remained broadly satisfactory, but there were some vulnerabilities in three small troubled banks. The Cameroonian authorities continued to explore options to address the troubled banks, which entailed, inter alia, reaching agreements with shareholders. One key issue was how much the state should contribute to the banks’ recapitalization. They noted that banks’ NPLs increased because of stricter loan portfolio management in a problem bank and more stringent risk management in another. They also noted that provisions had increased to reflect this. They further noted that the increased level of MFIs’ NPLs may reflect better reporting within their new financial reporting system, rather than an actual increase thereof. They were working on integrating the reporting of MFIs’ NPLs into the overall financial sector reporting. COBAC is developing regional regulations to consolidate the MFI sector, including higher minimum capital requirements and new corporate governance rules. The authorities expressed concern about possible spillovers from the twin shocks to other CEMAC countries’ financial systems. They worried about potential inbound financial spillovers from Equatorial Guinea and the Republic of the Congo, also affected by the oil price shock, through the subsidiaries of Cameroonian banks in those countries, which could experience a rise in NPLs. They considered most financial institutions in Cameroon sound, but admitted that the persistence of low oil prices could put some institutions under stress. They recognized that the fall in oil revenues and the scaling up of public investment had reduced systemic liquidity, but noted that banks still had ample excess deposits at the BEAC. The COBAC regretted the delays in the adoption of community-wide banking regulations, which it thought required better coordination with the BEAC, and a more effective CEMAC Commission to publish all CEMAC-wide regulations on a timely basis. Page 23