Despite some progress, problems encountered in the shift to program budgeting in 2013 have not been fully resolved. The transition to new information technology (IT) systems to administer public expenditure with better oversight of commitments and payments has not been completed. In particular, delays in capital expenditure on 2013 appropriations have led the authorities to extend the fiscal year by three months, which blurs the utility of the budget as a strategic financial management tool. The implementation of the development strategy has been hampered by inadequate monitoring of, and controls over, the public investment program and its financing. Little progress has been made in project screening, appraisal, and implementation, with a further accumulation of arrears to private companies (e.g., VAT reimbursements). At end-2013, nonconcessional loan agreements totaling up to 15 percent of GDP were contracted, and are disbursed without real-time monitoring. Staff encouraged the authorities to persevere in implementing the key components of their financial management reforms to improve the effectiveness of public spending. Improve reliability of budgetary and accounting data and improve fiscal transparency by: (i) limiting the reliance on exceptional procedures, such as the extension of the fiscal year—replacing it with credit reports from one year to the next; (ii) reconciling information from different data systems by putting in place the required IT systems to track the flow of funds throughout the expenditure chain; (iii) respecting the single treasury account rule and avoiding spending outside normal budget procedures; (iv) regularizing spending on an exceptional basis at the end of the fiscal year (e.g., cash advances); (v) budgeting and reporting taxes and subsidies on a gross basis; and (vi) avoiding cross- cancellations of taxes against payments due by the government. Address the issue of domestic arrears by (i) building a multiyear plan to eliminate audited arrears; (ii) appropriating fuel subsidies and transfers to public enterprises fully; (iii) settling past commitments toward SONARA and oil importers through cash payments to ensure continued refined oil product supplies. The authorities agreed that improving public financial management will be critical to increasing the effectiveness of public expenditure . They emphasized that progress in this area involved complex reform processes that required strong ownership at all levels to be successful, especially in a context of a tight treasury position. They recognized the adverse impact of belated payments on private sector activity, as companies turned to banks for costly borrowing for working capital. They expressed hope that the resolution of obstacles to the implementation of improved IT systems would lead to an accelerated roll-out of reforms. Page 16