Staff noted an improvement in the health of the banking system, which accounts for about half of bank assets in the CEMAC. The recapitalization of two troubled banks in the past year has reduced systemic risk, although the consolidated data veil frailty in some smaller banks that do not pose a systemic risk (SIP—Financial System Overview). The quality of assets, underscored by a nonperforming loan (NPL) ratio of 13.9 percent, is rather unsatisfactory; and so are provisions for NPLs, at 60 percent. The creation of a specialized public bank to cater to SMEs poses a new NPL risk that the regional supervisory body (COBAC) needs to monitor closely. Excessive exposure by most banks to a financially fragile SONARA is a source of systemic concern. Page 17 Staff encouraged the authorities to pursue initiatives to promote financial intermediation. Despite a jump of almost 15 percent of credit to the private sector in 2013, financial intermediation remains low. Given the already high level of commissions and fees, which account for about 40 percent of the income of the banking sector, profit growth for banks is more likely to come from transforming the prevalent high liquidity into investments. Initiatives to facilitate lending include a pooling of data on debtors, and closer monitoring of microfinance institutions. However, little progress has been made in enforcing contracts through the judicial system and in using real property as collateral. Staff noted the ongoing efforts to strengthen supervision through better staffing of the COBAC, and progress in articulating crisis prevention and resolution frameworks at the regional level. Key objectives include a lowering of the time that a bank can spend under provisional administration, so that decisions on restructuring or closing can be expedited; the imposition of management guidelines stressing asset conservation; and the inclusion of the full cost of a bank’s resolution in the budget. Staff proposed that a memorandum of understanding be drawn between the COBAC and the Ministry of Finance to enhance information sharing and set a division of labor in microfinance supervision. The authorities recognized the risk posed by the concentration of bank credit on ailing public enterprises. They opined that liquidity problems of large debtors would be resolved through a progressive clearing of government obligations. They also noted that the ongoing expansion of SONARA’s refining capacity would improve its financial situation. The authorities committed to limiting the risks linked to the new bank for SMEs. They pointed out the active supervision of COBAC, and added that new tools by the national branch of the regional central bank (BEAC), such as maintaining a real-time credit registry, would help the bank to make informed decisions.