(As of November 30, 2013) Membership Status: Joined 12/27/1945; Article VIII General Resources Account: Percent of Quota Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve Tranche Position Lending to the Fund New Arrangements to Borrow SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Percent of Allocation Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Latest Financial Arrangements: Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Charges/Interest Total Forthcoming Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI): Implementation of Post-Catastrophe Debt Relief (PCDR): Exchange Rate Arrangements : The authorities maintain a “free floating” exchange rate regime. The exchange rate regime is free from exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices. The Canadian authorities do not maintain margins with respect to exchange transactions. However, the authorities may intervene to maintain orderly conditions in the exchange market. There are Page 60 no taxes or subsidies on purchases or sales of foreign exchange. Canada has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 (a), and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Canada maintains exchange restrictions for security reasons, based on UN Security Council Resolutions, that have been notified to the Fund for approval (most recently in June 2013) under the procedures set forth in Executive Board Decision No. 144-(52/51). Last Article IV Consultation : The Staff Report for the 2012 consultation with Canada was considered by the Executive Board on February 11, 2013 (IMF Country Report No. 13/40). Canada is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The 2013 Article IV discussions were conducted in Toronto, Calgary, and Ottawa from November 12–26, 2013, by Roberto Cardarelli (head), Lusine Lusinyan, Julien Reynaud (all WHD), Ivo Krznar (MCM), and Minsuk Kim (SPR). Messrs. Alejandro Werner and Gian Maria Milesi- Ferretti (both WHD) and Simon Gray (MCM) joined the mission for the concluding meetings with Minister of Finance Flaherty and Bank of Canada Governor Poloz in Ottawa on November 26. Mr. Antoine Brunelle-Cote (Senior Advisor) attended the meetings, and Mr. Thomas Hockin (Executive Director) participated in some of the meetings. A press conference was held on November 27 in Toronto. Outreach activities included discussions with private sector and trade union representatives and think tanks. FSSA Participation and ROSC Assessments Canada–Financial System Stability Assessment– Volume II: Report on Observance of Standards in www.imf.org June 30, 2000 the Financial System : The FSSA report concluded that Canada has a stable and highly advanced financial system, which is among the soundest in the world. It is supported by a well- developed regulatory system that shows a high degree of compliance with major international standards. The FSSA report made a few recommendations to further strengthen the regulatory framework and financial system’s resilience, most of which have already been addressed, including: Introducing capital requirements for the guarantees in life insurance segregated fund (completed by end-2001); Tabling legislation granting the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI) powers to remove a financial institution’s director or senior officer if the person is deemed not suitable to hold that office based on a number of criteria. The latter legislation brought Canada into broad compliance with the Basel Core Principles; Making significant progress in harmonizing securities regulation and improving coordination among provincial securities regulators, including through a newly Page 61 created association of securities regulators, the Canadian Securities Administrators. Although there remain multiple regulators at the provincial level, a Senate commission was created to develop specific recommendations on further harmonization and streamlining of securities regulation. and Codes—Fiscal Transparency Module No. 02/51, 03/12/02 : The report found that fiscal management in Canada meets the requirements of the fiscal transparency code, and in a number of instances represents best practice. In particular, it highlighted the use of private sector economic forecasts. Fiscal management was also commended for its statistical integrity, impartial tax administration, open procurement, and a transparent regulatory process. The report found several areas where further improvements would be desirable, including: (i) the preparation of timely, current year estimates of federal and provincial budgets on a comparable basis, (ii) a comprehensive account of the procedures for the budget cycle and expenditure management system, (iii) systematic reporting of the use of reserves for non-economic contingencies, (iv) resumption of publication of reconciled national and public accounts forecasts of major aggregates over the forecast horizon, and (v) publication by all governments of quasi-fiscal activities. Many of these issues have been addressed, including: (i) the release by Statistics Canada of consolidated data for federal and provincial budgets for 2001–02 (on a Financial Management System basis); (ii) the publication of comprehensive descriptions of budget and expenditure management procedures, including a joint document entitled “Budgeting in Canada” by the Government and the OECD, detailed accounts of policies and procedures on expenditure management at the website of the Treasury Board Secretariat, and the explanation of the budget cycle and process in Budget and Update documents; and (iii) publication of reconciled national and public accounts forecasting. and Codes—Data Module No. 03/328, 10/23/03 : Canada’s macroeconomic statistics are comprehensive, timely, and accurate and thus adequate to conduct effective surveillance of economic and financial policies. Official institutions responsible for the compilation and dissemination of the macroeconomic datasets are supported by adequate legal and institutional frameworks. These frameworks protect confidentiality and ensure that statistical work is conducted within a quality assurance program and with sufficient resources. Integrity is ensured by the professionalism of the staff, transparency in statistical policies and practices, and the provision of ethical guidelines for staff. Compilers generally follow internationally accepted guidelines in the production of the macroeconomic statistics, which is well- Page 62 supported by excellent efforts to develop source data that facilitate a high degree of accuracy and reliability. Statistics are generally relevant, well documented, available with good frequency on a timely basis, and readily accessible to users, who trust them as objective. While recognizing the high quality of the macroeconomic data, the report makes recommendations to further strengthen the statistical system, most of which are already being addressed, including these priorities: Articulate the roles of Statistics Canada and the Bank of Canada in producing financial sector statistics and explore possibilities for more data sharing of monetary and financial statistics; Estimate consumption of fixed capital at replacement cost rather than historic costs now used for the corporate sector in the Canadian System of National Accounts (CSNA); Disseminate information on the sources and methods used in compiling quarterly public sector statistics for the quarterly CSNA; and Reclassify certain transactions that are not recorded in line with the 5 edition of the Balance of Payments Manual ( BPM5 ). and Codes––FATF Recommendations for Anti- No. 08/372, 12/11/08 Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism : Canada underwent a detailed FATF evaluation of its anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework in 2007. Shortcomings were identified with respect to the scope of customer due diligence, AML/CFT supervision, and the Canadian financial intelligence unit. Since then, a number of steps have been taken to strengthen the framework in these three areas, resulting in significant improvements. No. 08/59, 02/13/08 : The FSSA update concluded that Canada’s financial system is mature, sophisticated, and well-managed. Financial stability was underpinned by sound macroeconomic policies and strong prudential regulation and supervision, and well- designed deposit insurance and arrangements for crisis management and failure resolution. The banking system appeared sound, with stress tests showing that the major banks could withstand sizeable shocks, although they did faces some challenges related to the global financial turmoil that started in mid-2007. Also, there were some concerns Page 63 CANADA about bank attempts to build on their secure domestic position, to enter highly competitive foreign markets or complex activities. The update reiterated the advantages of moving towards a single securities regulator, including the streamlining of policy development, reductions in compliance costs, and improved enforcement. However, it also recognized the significant improvements to the regulatory system from the creation of the Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA), and the implementation of the passport system. No. 14/XX, 01/29/14 : The FSSA Update found that Canada’s financial system successfully navigated the global financial crisis, and stress tests suggest that major Canadian financial institutions are resilient to credit, liquidity, and contagion risks arising from a severe stress scenario. Elevated house prices and high household debt remain an area of concern (despite the substantial level of government-guaranteed mortgage insurance), though targeted prudential and macroprudential measures are proving to be effective. The regulatory and supervisory framework demonstrates strong compliance with international standards. Nevertheless, the Update called for more clarity around the legal independence of OSFI and for assigning stronger prudential responsibilities to this regulator. In the securities markets, provincial regulators and the federal government have made significant progress in implementing a robust and harmonized framework, but challenges remain in enforcement, risk identification, and timely policy making. The FSSA Update argued that the federal system of safety nets is credible, although there is no single body with an explicit mandate to take a comprehensive view of systemic risks or to undertake crisis preparedness. Improving cooperation between federal and provincial authorities would further reinforce system-wide oversight arrangements. Technical Assistance : Not Applicable. Resident Representative : Not Applicable.