Banking sector performance improved over the past year (Figure 6, Chart). Canadian banks are profitable and well capitalized. Canadian banks reported record profits despite stable interest rate margins as non-interest income increased. Loan quality has remained favorable, with nonperforming loans (NPLs) below ½ percent of total loans and falling. D-SIBs are well capitalized but report CET1 ratios below the average capital ratios of G-SIB (by 1 percentage point). Banks are well positioned to meet the new Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and leverage requirements in advance of their implementation. Financial stability risks appear contained. Given Canadian banks’ strong capital position and stable funding sources as well as extensive government-guaranteed mortgage insurance, the impact on financial stability of a tail risk shock characterized by the worst three-year recession in the last 35 years would be limited, as reported in stress tests conducted for the 2013 FSAP Update. The stress test scenario also includes a 50 percent decline in oil prices, in line with recent market developments, though banks’ exposures to the energy sector and foreign exchange are small. However, risks from operations abroad where Canadian banks have less competitive advantage and increasing reliance on capital markets and wealth management that are more volatile sources of income warrant close attention, including through conducting a possible cross-sectoral review of banks with exposure to tax haven countries and money laundering risks. Risks outside of standard banking activity appear limited . Performance of life insurance and pension funds has improved noticeably. Life insurance companies have reported higher capital NHA MBSs are securities that are backed by distinct pools of insured mortgages. The timely payment of NHA MBS principal and interest is guaranteed by the CMHC backed by the Government of Canada. The CMHC also guarantees non-amortizing CMBs issued by a special-purpose trust, the Canada Housing Trust (CHT). CHT uses the proceeds of its bond issuance to finance the purchase of NHA MBSs. Inward spillover risksBanking sector performancePension funds and Insurance sector peformanceRisk appetiteMonetary and financial conditionsMacroeconomic risks 2014Q2 2013Q2 Source: IMF staff estimates.Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. Canada:Financial StabilityMap Page 23 and profits due to insurance sales and wealth management activities. The average defined benefit pension fund has become fully funded for the first time since 2007 mainly due to strong equity returns. Financial intermediation in terms of “shadow banking” activity remains relatively limited, with banks (and other regulated institutions) playing the prominent role in all major segments. Overall, Canada’s robust financial regulatory and supervisory framework, together with a credible system of federal safety nets, adds to financial system strength. Steady progress has been achieved on key parts of the financial reform agenda since the last Article IV consultation (Text Table). Progress has been made on implementing the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio and leverage standards. Resolution and recovery frameworks would be enhanced if the proposed bail-in regime is implemented. The harmonized rules for reporting certain derivatives data to trade repositories will enhance transparency in the OTC derivatives market, and help detect possible systemic risks. Staff welcomed OSFI’s draft guideline for derivatives sound practices which will strengthen the OTC derivatives markets. A new market transaction reporting system for debt securities, including all repo transactions, will allow the BOC to monitor activity and potential financial stability risks in the repo market. According to the BOC’s activity-based definition (different from the Financial Stability Board’s entity-based definition), “shadow-banking” is estimated at 40 percent of GDP and includes government-insured mortgage securitization, private-label securitization (ABCP and ABS), repos (predominantly in government securities), money market mutual funds (MMMFs), bankers’ acceptances, and commercial paper (IMF Country Report No. 14/29). Canadian banks have already adopted Basel III capital adequacy standards in 2013. For the 6 designated D-SIBs, a capital surcharge will also be coming into effect from January 2016. The minimum LCR requirement for Canadian institutions is set at 100% beginning January 1, 2015, without any phase-in period. While there is a deterioration in the share of liquid assets to total assets since 2011 (Table 4), the LCR numbers for D-SIBs remain robust and above the supervisory threshold that came into force on January 1, 2015. Federally regulated deposit-taking institutions will be expected to have Basel III leverage ratios that exceed three per cent. The capital measure used for the leverage ratio is the all-in Tier 1 capital of the institution. OSFI will continue to set authorized leverage ratios on an institution- by-institution basis and will update their guideline on liquidity adequacy requirements with Basel III regulations on Net Stable Funding Ratios based on the final guidance issued by the Basel Committee for Banking Stability. Page 24 Canada: Progress on Financial Reform Agenda Progress has been made on some FSAP recommendations (Annex II) . Welcome progress has been made on reducing government exposure to mortgage insurance; the federal authorities’ stress-testing framework for banks; and to identify financial sector data gaps, as well as toward enhancing the cooperative capital markets system. Moreover, the OSFI has increased contact with provincial regulators to harmonize regulation and improve supervisory cooperation. The OSFI and the BOC have also started discussions with some provincial regulators to help the latter enhance their stress testing capabilities. Addressing financial sector data gaps will improve the BOC’s research, analyses, and systemic risk monitoring capacity for the financial system. The recent memorandum of agreement among five provinces and the federal government setting out the terms and conditions to establish a cooperative capital markets system could prove a useful step in harmonizing provincial capital markets legislation, enhancing systemic risk monitoring, and enforcement. Addressing other key FSAP recommendations would further strengthen the resilience of the Canadian financial sector . Most FSAP recommendations on financial sector oversight, safety nets, and macro-prudential framework are outstanding. In particular: Enhanced supervisory cooperation across federal and provincial authorities and harmonized stress- testing are important to bolster financial system soundness. Subjecting all systemic federally- and provincially-regulated entities to common stress-testing frameworks would involve a heightened degree of collaboration. While discussions on supervisory cooperation between federal and AreaProgress on implementation Basel standardsBasel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and leverage standards have been implemented and will take effect in January 2015. Resolution and recovery of D-SIBsThird generation resolution plans for the D-SIBs are expected to be completed by the end-FY2014, and the fifth generations of recovery plans are expected to be submitted in 2016. The government has also concluded public consultations on the proposed bail-in regime. This regime will help ensure bank shareholders and creditors bear losses (rather than taxpayers) when a bank fails, thereby giving them stronger incentives to monitor the bank’s risk-taking activities and addressing moral hazard.OTC derivativesThe largest provincial securities regulators have implemented harmonized rules for reporting certain derivatives data to trade repositories. OSFI’s draft guideline for derivatives sound practices sets OSFI’s expectations for central clearing of OTC derivatives and reporting to a trade repository and OSFI’s plans to establish margin requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives in the near future. OSFI implemented credit valuation adjustment (CVA) capital charge for bilateral (not applying to centrally-cleared) OTC derivatives in January 2014, which should encourage central clearing of OTC derivatives. Financial market infrastructures The BOC, jointly with largest provincial regulators, published a list of the Canadian-domiciled central counterparties (CCPs) that can be considered qualifying CCPs under the Basel III capital standards. The authorities also published draft guidelines on risk management standards for designated financial market infrastructures. The guidelines will provide clarity on certain aspects of most international standards related to the risk-management, efficiency and transparency of systemically important FMIs in the Canadian context.Repo marketsA new market transaction reporting system for debt securities, including all repo transactions. The authorities are encouraging some of the largest and most active pension funds in the repo market to become direct clearing members of the central counterparty. Page 25 some provincial authorities have started, two-way communication and protocols to share supervisory information on regulated entities (especially for the financial groups spanning federal and provincial regulatory boundaries) and planned guidelines should be enhanced within respective mandates, including to reduce possible regulatory fragmentation and ensure that supervision remains intensive and effective across all systemic institutions. Strengthening macro-prudential and crisis management frameworks will increase the resilience of the financial system. Staff argued that providing a mandate for macro-prudential oversight to a single entity would strengthen accountability and the capacity and willingness to act, as well as reinforce Canada’s ability to identify and respond to future crises. Such an entity should have participation broad enough to allow for a complete and integrated view of systemic risks, and powers to collect all necessary data for systemic risk analysis. To this end, staff welcomed the authorities’ recent efforts to identify financial sector data gaps. For crisis preparedness, a mandate should be given to an entity that could operationalize a coordination framework to support timely and effective decision-making in a crisis situation and test the capacity of the authorities (federal and provincial) to respond to crisis scenarios. Other recommendations include: (i) providing more clarity around the legal independence of the OSFI, (ii) formalizing banks’ reporting and notification obligations in some areas (such as on the acquisition and ownership of banks and related-party transactions and large exposures), (iii) adopting a transparent and consistent regulatory regime for group-wide insurance supervision, (iv) extending the scope of OSFI’s oversight of the CMHC; and (v) expanding financial sector data collection and dissemination.