Growth has decelerated but inflation expectations remain well anchored. Real GDP growth decelerated to 1.2 percent in 2015, down from 2.5 percent in 2014 (Table 1). Headline and core inflation were within the BOC’s target range (1–3 percent). Two opposing factors were at play with respect to consumer prices: pass- through from a weaker Canadian dollar was adding to inflationary pressures, while lower energy prices and slack in the economy were placing downward pressures Notwithstanding the magnitude of the oil shock, a terms-of-trade decline of 8 percent in one year, the labor market has held up relatively well, with the unemployment rate rising slightly above 7 percent (Figure 3). j GG z pp Page 10 Box 1. Canada: Macro-Financial Linkages from Oil Shock Structural reallocation of resources from oil to non-oil sectors Non-Energy Corporate Sector Limited Impact Canadian Oil Industry Profitability down Investment down Funding costs up Jobs cut Real Economy Significant Impact Banks Oil Price Shock Significant Impact Limited Resource Provinces Moderate Impact Limited Impact Federal and Provincial Governments Potentially significant Impact Government Securitization market House price declines Government guarantees Adverse wealth effects Adverse feedback loops Banks Households Deterioration in asset quality Government guarantees through mortgage insurance Second Round Effects on Housing Markets First Round Effects on the Economy and Banking System Page 11 Slowing growth in 2015 reflected: Substantially weaker business investment, as oil companies cut investment spending by 40 percent in the face of declining profits. Canadian oil sands producers have high “all-in break-even” costs and their long-term viability is at stake. Those companies involved in upstream activities, in particular, face higher solvency risk and difficulties in raising new financing. The market for high yield debt has been frozen since early 2015 and banks have become more cautious in extending credit. Corporate bond spreads rose by 40 basis points (bp). A slowdown in private consumption, owing to the impact of the oil shock on employment and house prices in resource-rich provinces. For the country as a whole, growth in real disposable income declined and in early 2016 consumer sentiment with respect to making big-ticket purchases, like a home or a car, fell to its worst level since the 2008–09 recession. An uninspiring performance of non-energy exports, which grew well below what would have been expected given the more competitive Canadian dollar and recovery in the U.S. This reflects the erosion of manufacturing capacity during the oil boom years (2002–12), when the real effective exchange rate appreciated by 57 percent, and Canada lost market share in the U.S. (75 percent of Canada’s exports go to the United States) to Mexico and China. Weak external demand, beyond the nascent U.S. recovery, was also a factor. With the slowdown in growth, the output gap has re-opened. The output gap narrowed from over 3½ percent of GDP in 2009 to almost zero in 2014. However, with rising slack in the economy, the output gap widened to 1 percent of GDP at the end of 2015. The latest Business Outlook Survey indicates the incidence of labor shortages remains low and the share of involuntary part-time workers remains elevated at 4.5 percent of the labor force. There are no signs of wage pressures. So far in 2016, economic performance has been mixed . While better than expected housing expenditure and exports at the beginning of the year has boosted first quarter growth, they have since slowed suggesting that the growth momentum is unlikely to be sustained in the 2012Q12012Q42013Q32014Q22015Q12015Q4 Canada: Output Gap (Percent of potential GDP) Output Gap BoC Output Gap (Multivariate filter) BoC Output Gap (Intergrated Framework)Sources: Bank of Canada and IMF staff estimates. z K z Page 12 second quarter. The Fort McMurray fires could also dampen second quarter growth although the overall impact for the year is likely to be limited. The banking system remains sound but exposure to the oil and gas sector will require higher provisions against expected losses (Figure 4 and Table 6). Canada’s banking system is dominated by six banks accounting for 93 percent of bank assets. These banks are among the most profitable in the world, averaging 16 percent return on equity. They have stepped up the pace of business lending in recent years, but household credit which grew by double digits in 2010–11 has slowed to 5 percent today. The expansion in business credit and increase in non-interest income have offset declining interest income margins. As a result, the big six banks have continued to build up capital, with their common equity Tier 1 ratios rising above 10 percent, while non-performing loans (NPLs) remain below ½ percent. The banks’ mortgage book is also secured by government guarantees on high risk mortgage loans (those with loan-to-value (LTV) ratios above 80 percent) some of which are pooled to raise financing in the securitization market. Insured mortgage loans account for 50 percent of banks’ mortgage loan portfolio. In terms of these banks’ exposure to the oil and gas sector: Direct lending is limited to 2 percent of total loans on average, with another 2 percent in undrawn credit lines, but the indirect exposure through household and business lending in resource-rich provinces is a more substantial 13–15 percent. Credit quality has deteriorated since 2014. Oil companies’ stock prices have fallen by 35 percent, their operating margin has declined by almost 15 percentage points, and their median probability of default has increased sharply (Box 2). Loan delinquencies are gradually rising, albeit from low levels. Liquidity constrained companies are struggling to find buyers for their assets, as a result of a substantial decline in mergers and acquisitions activity. Banks are reviewing covenant breaches as part of their “borrowing base re-determination” and may be forced to take provisions for higher credit It is too early to assess the impact on growth of the Fort McMurray fires. Reconstruction efforts are likely to offset the negative impact on oil production and economic activity. Media reports also suggest that most of the oil sands facilities were not damaged. The data is taken from the 2014 IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program. There are a few large provincially- regulated deposit takers with assets equivalent to 5 percent of banking sector assets. The big six banks account for 39 percent of total financial system assets. BB V CANUSAUKFRAOther G-SIBS and Canada D-SIBs: Return on Equity (As of February 2016, in percent) Sources: Bloomberg and IMF staff estimates. Page 13 losses. Overall, the estimated increase in provisions is likely to be substantial, but it is from a low base, and will thus hit banks’ earnings rather than capital. The gradual increase in the overall NPL ratio probably reflects the cushion provided by severance packages, which could last more than a year, and the extension of unemployment benefits provided in the 2016 Budget. So far, the number of insolvencies filed by consumers in Alberta has increased by almost 40 percent from a year ago (Figure 5). More broadly, vulnerabilities in the financial system are rising in the context of the oil shock and elevated household debt. With an economy weakened by the oil shock and historically high household debt (165 percent of disposable income), vulnerabilities in the housing market have increased (Figure 5). Low interest rates keep debt servicing costs manageable but there are important reasons for heightened vigilance: Although house prices in Alberta and other resource provinces are declining, they are rapidly rising in British Columbia and Ontario (Box 3 and Table 7). Staff estimates national house prices to be about 10–30 percent above their fundamental values. The proportion of debt held by highly indebted households (those with debt to income of 350 percent or more) has risen from 13 percent to 21 percent. The bulk of this debt is mortgages held by younger and low- to middle-income households, who have fewer savings to cushion an employment shock in an economic downturn. The business and housing cycles are beginning to diverge, and while the gap is smaller than during 2008–09, it is occurring in the context of much higher household debt. The BOC estimates that higher debt, under a stress scenario, leads to 27 percent greater mortgage loan arrears after three years. Every spring and fall the Canadian banks review the credit lines to their corporate customers to determine whether these should be changed to reflect changing credit conditions. As a result of the reviews, banks may increase or decrease credit lines and change loan covenants. In the case of energy companies, an important part of the review is to value the underlying collateral (especially oil in the ground), as well as inventory, machinery and equipment. Canadian banks are subject to IAS 39 accounting rules which means provisions are taken only if losses have been incurred. Canada will move to IFRS9 in 2018 which will require more timely recognition of expected losses. The BOC’s stress scenario assumes that (i) the unemployment rate will rise by three percentage points; and (ii) the household borrowing rate will rise by 200 basis points, with both staying at this elevated level for three years. z z z Page 14 Box 2. Canada: Bank Exposure to Solvency Risk of Oil and Gas Sector The solvency risk of the Canadian corporate sector, and specifically of oil and gas companies, is estimated using a new corporate default database and a Bottom-up Default Analysis (BuDA) tool developed by Duan et al (2015). BuDA forecasts the median probability of default (PD) by incorporating economy-wide effects, firm-specific balance sheet information, and market-based factors. The model is estimated directly with default and other exit data for the U.S. and Canada. Staff prefers to use the BuDA model to assess corporate solvency risk since the default database and calibration methodology is made available and such hybrid models add predictive power to the pure contingent claims approach derived from the Merton (1973, 1974) model. With the projected PDs, the impact of higher credit risk on bank balance sheets can be assessed using the one-factor Vasicek (1991) model. Higher PDs require banks to raise new provisions to cushion against higher expected losses. Baseline macroeconomic scenario Under the baseline scenario for 108 oil and gas companies, projected PDs will increase and stay elevated through most of 2016, but subsequently subside owing to a rebound in external demand and a gradual recovery in oil prices. For a sample of 72 companies involved in oil exploration and production, the median PD is projected to peak at about 1.2 percent in the first half of 2016. This implies a credit rating deterioration of about four notches, from Ba1 to B2, compared to the second half of 2014. PDs of the overall nonfinancial corporate sector are, however, projected to rise to only 0.3 percent, indicating limited spillover from the oil to the non-oil sector. BuDA versus Moody’s Expected Default Frequency (EDF) Market analysts typically use Moody’s EDFs to assess risks in individual sectors of the economy. For roughly the same sample of 70 companies involved in oil exploration and production (as used in BuDA), Moody’s EDF suggests an increase in the median 12-month EDF to an average of 4.5 percent in the first half of 2016, which is larger than projected by BuDA. The difference in PDs and EDFs can be explained by two main factors. First, Moody’s EDFs are based on a mapping between the distance-to-default (DtD), which is derived from equity prices and not default data, and the observed default rate of firms with similar DtD “buckets”. In general, the EDF curve overestimates the default risk of low- and medium- risk firms. Second, Moody’s has on average higher frequency of default observations. Hence, for a given sample, EDFs are likely to be 2 to 4 times as large as BuDA PDs. Impact on provisions As an illustrative scenario, the projected increase in BuDA PDs suggests that banks may need to at least double provisions against energy loans compared to the average 2015 level. Given the level of provisions at end-2015, the potential impact on earnings could range between 1 to 3 percent of annual net income, therefore leaving capital unaffected. 2016H12016H22017H12017H2 Domestic Macro Factors /2 External Macro factors /3 Nominal FX Oil Prices Residual Total Contributions to Changes in Projected Corporate PDs /1(basis points) 1/ Changes compared to the scenario where the values of the macrovariables are fixed at their December 2015 levels.2/ Include domestic GDP and unemployment.3/ Include US growth, short-term and long-term interest rates. Sources: IMF staff estimates based on BuDA. Baa2 Baa3 Ba1 Ba2Ba3B1B2 Nonfinancial Sector Oil and Gas: Service&Equipment Oil and Gas: Exploration&Production Oil and Gas: Midstream Median Probability of Default (Percent) Sources: IMF staff estimates based on BuDA and Moody's rating grades. Page 15 Box 3. Canada: A Spotlight on Regional Housing Markets The oil shock has caused housing market trends to “trifurcate” (see heat maps in Table 7). So far, there has been no contagion risk between the diverging markets. Resource provinces (Alberta and Saskatchewan, accounting for 23 percent of national GDP) Alberta’s economy has contracted by an estimated 4 percent in 2015 and is projected to shrink by another 1.6 percent in 2016. House prices in Calgary and Regina have fallen by 3– 4 percent from their peak in 2014 and rental vacancies have quadrupled within the span of one year (October 2014–2015). The decline in house prices followed a massive housing market boom in the mid-2000s when house prices soared by 200 percent (2004–07). With little prospect for a quick recovery in oil prices in the near term, house prices in these regions are likely to continue to trend downward. Alberta and Saskatchewan account for 21 percent of total household debt (2012–14) and uninsured mortgages are non-recourse loans. So far, strategic defaults have not occurred in any significant way. Consumer insolvencies have increased by 40 percent over the past year but remain small as a share of total loans (Figure 5). Non-resource provinces (British Columbia and Ontario, accounting for 49 percent of national GDP) British Columbia and Ontario are expected to grow by 2–3 percent this year. House prices have been growing by 10–20 percent year-on-year, fueled by cheap borrowing costs, demographic pressures, land supply constraints and foreign demand. Ad hoc survey data suggest that in 2015 Chinese investors accounted for 14 percent of total sales volume ($9 billion) in Toronto and 33 percent of total sales ($12.7 billion) in Vancouver. Both British Columbia and Ontario account for 55 percent of total housing debt. Rest of Canada (accounting for 28 percent of national GDP) In Quebec where the economy has been growing at about 1 percent, house prices (Montreal) have been rising at a more moderate pace of 1–2 percent. Quebec and the Atlantic provinces account for 24 percent of total household debt. Financial System Review, December 2015, Bank of Canada. In the event of default, the bank is not able to go after the other assets of the borrower if the house sells for less than what the borrower owes. Routledge, Fini and Poon, National Bank of Canada, 2016. 2005-072012-14British Columbia and Ontario8.613.1Alberta and Saskatchewan1.74.4Quebec and Atlantic provinces2.43.2Share of total household debt (percent) Incidence of Highly Indebted Households 1/ Region Sources: Bank of Canada's Financial System Review 2015, Ipsos Reid and IMF staff estimates.1/ Households with a debt-to-income ratio of 350 percent and above. V tt Page 16 The external position is moderately weaker than implied by fundamentals. Despite the depreciated Canadian dollar, the current account has deteriorated. Mimicking the oil price descent, the Canadian dollar has fallen 33 percent against the U.S. dollar since the beginning of 2014. In real effective terms, the exchange rate is now about 20 percent lower than its 2010-peak. Nevertheless, lower export prices of oil and other commodities pushed the trade balance further into negative territory and the current account deficit rose from 2.3 percent of GDP in 2014 to 3.3 percent of GDP in 2015 (Figure 6 and Tables 2–3). With foreign direct investment recording a net outflow, the current account deficit was mostly financed by portfolio inflows and other investment. Staff estimates the current account gap to be between -2 and -1 percent of GDP, smaller than the External Balance Assessment estimate, when supply constraints are taken into account (Annex II). The real effective exchange rate is estimated to be overvalued by 0 to 5 percent relative to medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The slowdown in the economy has weakened public finances, with performance at the provincial level diverging along the lines of their resource dependence. In recent years, both the federal and provincial governments have undertaken consolidation measures enabling a narrowing of the general government overall deficit from 4¾ percent of GDP in 2010 to 0.5 percent of GDP in 2014 (Table 5). This was undone by the oil shock, however, and the general government deficit widened again to 1.7 percent in 2015. The federal government delivered a surplus (¼ percent of GDP) in 2014 (the first time since 2008), but slipped into a small deficit (¼ percent of GDP) in 2015. Revenue collections performed as expected, with solid personal income and corporate tax revenues, but were offset by higher than expected spending on most expenditure categories. Alberta has been hit hard by the lower oil price, due to its heavy dependence on oil royalty revenues (20 percent of total revenues in 2014), and is expecting an operational deficit of 2¾ percent of GDP in FY2015–16 after two consecutive years of surpluses. In contrast, British Columbia and Quebec are expected to maintain operational balance, and Ontario is expected to narrow its operational deficit to 2 percent in FY2015–16, on the back of buoyant revenues and cuts in public wages and administrative costs. The operational balance numbers are based on provincial accounting that exclude capital spending. Page 17