Canada’s recent growth performance has been solid alongside a stronger U.S. recovery. The awaited pickup in exports is encouraging although it has yet to translate into strong investment and hiring. Thus, the composition of growth has not yet rebalanced away from private consumption and residential investment to generate a broader, more durable recovery. Substantially lower crude oil prices will be a drag on activity, mainly through weaker investment in the energy sector. Risks to the outlook are modestly tilted to the downside, mainly reflecting external risks including weaker global growth and still-unfolding effects from the unusually large fall in oil prices. Domestic vulnerabilities in housing markets and the household sector remain elevated but contained from a financial stability perspective. Risks of faster-than-expected tightening in financial conditions associated with U.S. monetary normalization or weaker terms of trade could also interact with domestic risks and vulnerabilities—mainly, elevated house prices and high indebtedness of Canadian households. The Canadian economy has been expanding at a solid pace since 2013 (Figure 1). Growth remained slightly above potential, averaging 2½ percent in the first three quarters of 2014. Regionally, a multi-speed recovery was led by resource-rich Alberta, while the pickup in activity was more modest in other large provinces, driven in part by non-energy exports. CPI inflation has been running over 2 percent since April 2014, up from very low readings in 2013, reflecting largely temporary factors and the effects of exchange rate pass-through, despite a still-negative output gap and pressures from retail competition (Figure 2). Despite the welcome pickup in exports, rebalancing of growth remains incomplete— owing mainly to weak investment (Chart, Figure 1). Stronger exports . U.S. recovery momentum, exchange rate depreciation (about 10 percent in real terms since early 2013), and high energy demand in early 2014 have provided a needed push to Canada’s exports. In real terms, exports expanded on average 4½ percent (y/y) over the last four quarters, led by non-energy exports. Although the rebound in most sectors remains modest, a 2010–20142010–20142010–20142010–20142010–2014Sources: Statistics Canada; and IMF staff estimates.1/ Data for 2014 are based on staff's estimates of 2014:Q4. Canada: GDP Growth and Contributions from Main Components (Percentage change) Private consumptionResidentialinvestmentBusinessinvestmentGDPExports Page 6 few (including the transportation sector) are performing strongly relative to external demand growth. Energy exports (in volume terms) have also been strong, and Canadian crude oil continued gaining market share in the United States amid some easing in infrastructure bottlenecks associated with transporting crude oil to U.S. Midwest to Gulf Coast refineries. Weaker-than-expected investment Business nonresidential investment has slowed in recent years (following a strong rebound initially after the crisis). The slowdown has been widespread— including both the energy sector and broader spending on machinery and equipment (Charts). Companies focused on upgrading or replacing existing capital, in part owing to uncertain future demand, despite higher corporate profits since mid-2013, resilient domestic consumption, and strengthening external demand. Moreover, there are indications that lower oil prices will dampen investment in the energy sector. However, business investment outside the energy sector could provide some offset, especially in the sectors benefiting most from the U.S. recovery, and given rising capacity utilization rates. Resilient private consumption amid a steady labor market . Consumers—benefiting from rising household wealth and disposable income and exceptionally easy financial conditions—increased their spending on housing-related goods and automobiles. Labor markets have been relatively Staff analysis suggests that about one-third of non-energy exports (including passenger cars) outperformed their model benchmarks over 2009–2013. However, large sectors such as industrial machinery/equipment and intermediate metal products grew slower and/or remained below their model-predicted levels by end-2013 (Selected Issues). The analysis suggests that the recent pick-up in non-energy exports is predominantly driven by U.S. business investment, with some industries (like passenger cars) benefiting also from recent Canadian dollar depreciation. For energy exports, despite declining U.S. oil imports, Canadian crude oil exports to the U.S. continued steadily rising (reaching about 2.8 million barrels per day on average in January–October 2014 and recording all-time highs in recent months), reflecting gains in U.S. market share (from 22 percent in 2009 to about 40 percent in 2014). Intellectual property Nonresidential structures Machinery&equipment Total RealPrivate Nonresidential Fixed Investment (Percentagechange, q/q saar) Contributionsto GDP growth Sources: Statistics Canada; and IMF staff estimates.1/ Estimates are derived from a regression model where the changes in real private nonresidential fixed investment are explainedby lagged changes in real private consumption, lagged changes in real goods exports, and a lag of profit rate. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. The negative constant term is subtracted from the reported coefficient estimates. Exports Profit Consumption Model 1/ Actual Real Private Nonresidential Fixed Investment (Percentagechange, q/q saar) Drivers of investment Page 7 static until recently. Echoing tentativeness in business investment, the pace of hiring has been modest with a composition focused on adding temporary capacity (e.g., half of jobs added in 2014 were part-time—a share above its historical average). The unemployment rate had been hovering around 7 percent since end-2012, before edging down to a post-2008 low in recent months (about 6½ percent in October-December). The unemployment gap persisted while labor force participation rate has been largely flat, unlike the declining trend in the United States (Figure 3). Housing markets strong with signs of overvaluation to differing degrees. After a brief pause, Canada’s housing market rebounded in 2014, fueled by low and declining interest rates (Figure 4). House prices have been rising at 5–6 percent (y/y) nominally through most of 2014 (almost twice the average pace in 2013). Most of the appreciation has been driven by Calgary’s housing market and single-family homes in Toronto and Vancouver (Charts). Since 2001, house prices have risen significantly—similar to other Commonwealth commodity-exporter countries— though Canada’s cycle seems to be lagging and relatively smoother. Staff analysis suggests a national real house price overvaluation (relative to levels justified by long-run fundamentals) between 7–20 percent, although with significant differences across regions and market segments. Regionally, Calgary and Toronto recorded the fastest price gains followed by Vancouver, while Montreal and Ottawa registered near zero growth over the last four quarters. Housing starts though appear to have settled down close to their 2013 average and below 2012 levels. Home sales have not been particularly strong suggesting that price increases may be due to supply constraints rather than demand factors (Figure 4). Research by the Bank of Canada staff suggests estimates for overvaluation in Canadian housing markets range from 10–30 percent ( Financial System Review , December 2014). Australia New Zealand U.S. U.K. Real House Price Indices (Index, 2000:Q1=100) Sources: Haver Analytics; CREA; and IMF staff calculations. Regina Montreal Ottawa Saskatoon Victoria Vancouver Toronto Calgary Composite index Single-family home Apartment/condo CREA House Price Index Across MSAs (Percentage change, Nov 2014 vs. Nov 2013) Page 8 Stable household debt, albeit at high levels. Total mortgage borrowing and household indebtedness have broadly stabilized in recent quarters—albeit the latter at record high levels (over 150 percent of disposable income), while household net worth continued rising on the back of rising housing and equity market valuations (Chart). Public finances continued improving in 2014, reflecting federal and some provincial consolidation efforts (Figure 5). The general government fiscal deficit is expected to narrow from about 2¾ percent of GDP in 2013 to 1½ percent in 2014, representing a ¾ percent of GDP improvement in structural terms. The federal government is essentially on track to achieving its balanced budget target in FY2015/16 . This reflects better-than-expected revenue because of stronger-than-projected growth, one-off measures (including ¼ percent of GDP from an auction of broadband spectrum license), and lower spending ahead of planned restraint initiatives. Recently introduced income tax cuts and enhanced child care benefits, as well as lower oil prices that will affect nominal tax revenues, are not expected to materially delay reaching budgetary balance in FY2015/16. Provinces, while remaining committed to their balanced budget targets, continue struggling with consolidation . Headline and cyclically-adjusted deficits at the provincial level are expected to improve in 2014 by about ½ percent of GDP (given the outturn in the first three quarters of 2014). Fiscal situations vary across provinces. Ontario and Québec are facing challenges with consolidation while expecting to return to balanced budget by FY2017/18 and FY2015/16, respectively (Box 1). Fiscal positions in Western provinces are relatively strong, but a sharp and persistent drop in the crude oil prices will impact public finances, especially in Alberta, directly through lower royalties and lower corporate profits and household incomes. On October 30, 2014, a number of fiscal measures were announced, including (i) the Family Tax Cut, a federal tax credit (capped at Can$2,000) that will allow a transfer of up to Can$50,000 of taxable income to a spouse in a lower tax bracket, for couples with children under the age of 18, effective for the 2014 tax year; (ii) increasing the Child Care Expense Deduction limits effective for the 2015 tax year; (iii) increasing the Universal Child Care Benefit (UCCB) for children under the age of 6, from Can$100 to Can$160 per month starting from January 1, 2015; and (iv) expanding the UCCB by introducing a new benefit of Can$60 per month for children aged 6–17 from January 1, 2015, while repealing the existing Child Tax Credit for children under the age of 18 years. These measures have been incorporated in the fall budget update, and are estimated to cost about 0.2 percent of GDP per year in FY2014/15 and over the medium term. A further significant decline in oil prices relative to staff’s baseline may keep the fiscal balance in a slightly negative territory in CY2015. For Alberta, non-renewable resource revenue, mostly from bitumen and crude oil royalties, represents about 20 percent of total provincial revenue. Household Net Worth and Debt (Percent of disposable income) Canada net worth U.S. net worth Canada household debt (RHS) U.S. household debt (RHS) Sources: Haver Analytics; StatisticsCanada; and IMF staff estimates. Page 9 Gross public debt ratio remains high but should continue declining after 2015. General government gross debt, as a share of GDP, has risen from 67 percent in 2007 to nearly 90 percent of GDP in 2012–13, but is expected to decline after 2015. Canada’s external position has improved and is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Annex I). The trade balance has tended to improve and the currency has weakened since 2013. Based on staff’s External Balance Assessments (EBA), the cyclically-adjusted current account (CA) balance in 2014 is estimated at -1.8 percent of GDP, implying a narrower CA gap of 1.6 percent of GDP according to the latest EBA CA approach (against 3.4 percent CA gap for 2013). Staff assesses the 2014 CA gap to be smaller than the EBA estimate, ranging between 0 to 1 percent of GDP, closing which would require policy actions aimed at boosting productivity and addressing energy infrastructure bottlenecks (see below). Reflecting exchange rate depreciation over the past year (up to end-October 2014 ), the Canadian dollar is estimated at 0–5 percent above the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings in 2014 (compared to 5–10 percent REER gap for 2013). In the last two months of 2014, the exchange rate depreciated further by an estimated one percent in real effective terms, less than what would be implied by its past relationship with real energy prices. The real effective exchange rate (REER) assessment refers to its average level over January–October 2014. Real energy prices fell by an estimated about 30 percent in November–December 2014. Staff estimates of a long- run equilibrium relationship between the Canadian REER and commodity prices suggest that a one-percent decrease in the real price of energy would lead to about 0.1 percent real depreciation (see, IMF Country Report 13/41). This is broadly consistent with the EBA methodology on the relation between real exchange rates and the terms of trade. Page 10 Box 1. Fiscal Consolidation Challenges at the Provincial Level: Ontario and Québec Ontario and Québec—the two largest provinces in Canada—face important fiscal challenges Combined, they account for about two-thirds of Canada’s population, near 60 percent of its GDP, and over half of its exports given a large presence in manufacturing. At the same time, Ontario and Québec are the most challenged provinces when it comes to their public finances—with Québec having the highest stock of public debt and Ontario the highest budgetary deficit among all Canadian provinces. This box describes provincial authorities’ recent efforts to place public finances on a sounder footing and the prospects over the short and medium term. Fiscal consequences of the Great Recession The 2008–09 recession abruptly interrupted healthy debt reduction that started in the mid-1990s Loss of fiscal revenues, automatic stabilizers, and higher discretionary spending led to wide budgetary deficits and higher public debt. Ontario was hit harder by the global recession with its GDP falling cumulatively between 2007 and 2009, about 5 percent more than Québec’s. A rapid deterioration of the fiscal balance is mainly accounted by a large discretionary increase in program spending (beyond health care and education) in FY2009/10 and lower revenues (revenues returned to pre-crisis levels only in FY2011/12). After an initial rapid improvement in the fiscal position, the progress slowed, and in 2013–14 the deficit is estimated to stand at about Can$10.5 billion (1½ percent of Ontario’s GDP). The loss of tax revenues in Québec was milder with revenues reaching pre-crisis levels already in FY2010/11. Similarly, the increase of program spending was mainly driven by structural factors such as health care spending (growing at almost 7 percent between FY2007/08 and FY2009/10). In FY2013/14, the deficit is estimated to stand at Can$1.7 billion (½ percent of Québec’s GDP). As a consequence, gross-debt-to-GDP ratio increased in these provinces. The bond yield spread between the two provinces and federal government has widened and remained around 100 basis points, twice the level before the crisis. Ontario: Fiscal Balance Projections (Billions Can$) Actual 2010 Budget 2011 Budget 2012 Budget 2013 Budget 2014 Budget Québec: Fiscal Balance Projections (Billions Can$) Actual 2010 Budget 2011 Budget 2012 Budget 2013 Budget 2014 Budget Sources: Ontario and Québecbudget reports. Page 11 Box 1. Fiscal Consolidation Challenges at the Provincial Level: Ontario and Québec (concluded) Policy commitments and prospects for balanced budgets 1/ The Ontario government is committed to balancing the budget in FY2017/18 Provincial authorities also aim to reduce net debt to its pre-recession level of 27 percent of GDP (though without a specific date). After increasing to Can$11.8 billion in FY2014/15, the deficit is projected to gradually narrow before reaching a surplus in FY2017/18.2/ Overall, an improved economic outlook and health care cost containment seem crucial for Ontario to meet its fiscal targets. The burden of the adjustment will be mainly on program spending which is projected to grow well below CPI inflation.3/ Since the two-year wage freeze for public servants will have only modest impact on spending, much will depend on the ability to further contain health care costs.4/ In addition, steps are being taken to improve provincial asset management, including by considering options to divest non-core assets. Such actions, as identified by the Premier’s Advisory Council on Government Assets, could yield Can$2–3 billion for potential investments in Ontario’s infrastructure. The Council’s final recommendations are expected to help inform Ontario’s 2015 budget. The Québec government is committed to balancing the budget in FY2015/16 Over a longer horizon, authorities aim to reduce gross debt and accumulated deficits to 45 percent and 17 percent of GDP in 2025–2026, respectively. The return to budget balance, however, has been postponed for the last two years, and fiscal outturns have consistently disappointed over the last four years. The slippages were related to lower-than-expected revenues and especially higher-than-expected spending. According to the Fall 2014 budget update, the government has identified about 85 percent measures (from the total of Can$7.3 billion) needed for FY2015/16 to meet the balanced budget target. Most of the effort is focused on restraining expenditure growth, by increasing savings from ministries and government organizations, freezing public service hiring for two years, and reducing tax expenditures and subsidies. In comparison to Ontario, Québec’s fiscal challenges appear more structural, related to slower potential economic growth, a greater role of the government, and structurally higher health care spending growth (in part related to demographic differences despite Québec’s lower health expenditure in per capita terms). __________________ Ontario’s fiscal framework is legislated in the “Fiscal Transparency and Accountability Act” (2004), which prohibits forecasting ex ante deficits in each of the 3-year ahead budget planning horizon. Québec’s “Balanced Budget Act” (2009) prohibits ex post deficits but it has been amended to allow temporary deficits in specific years. 2/ The budget figures are before accounting for the contingency reserve and, thus, represent the most likely scenario. The government’s objective is, however, expressed with prudence taking into account the use of the contingency reserves. 3/ It is worthwhile noting that in Ontario’s program spending already declined from 18 percent of Ontario’s GDP in FY2009/10 to almost 16½ percent in FY2013/14. This makes Ontario the province with the lowest program spending per capita. 4/ For discussion of trends in health care spending, see IMF Country Report, No. 14/27. Gross debt Net debt Accum.deficit Ontario: Debt and Accumulated Deficit Objective Gross debt Net debt Accum.deficit Objectives Québec: Debt and Accumulated Deficit Sources: Ontario and Québecbudget reports. Page 12