Fiscal consolidation should proceed at the general government level . The general government deficit is expected to gradually narrow from an estimated 1½ percent of GDP in 2014 to near balance over the medium term, with gross debt declining and remaining relatively resilient to a series of macro and fiscal shocks (Annex III). After nearly complete removal of earlier stimulus, the federal government is still projected to provide some contribution to fiscal adjustment at the general government level in 2015–17 (Chart). However, with key fiscal challenges concentrated at the provincial level, particularly arising from looming aging-related spending 2008–102011–142015–172018–20 Federal Provincial From Fiscal Stimulusto Consolidation 1/ (Percent of potential GDP) Source: IMF staff estimates.1/ Change in structural balance: improvement/deterioration=consolidation/stimulus. Stimulus Consolidation Page 26 pressures, it is critical that the composition of fiscal adjustment shifts more substantially towards the provinces. Federal government Federal authorities should consider adopting a neutral stance going forward . Given the strong deficit reduction achieved in recent years (about 2 percent of GDP cumulative improvement in structural balances in 2011–14), the federal authorities should consider a slower pace of adjustment after 2014. Adopting a cyclically-neutral stance would imply a small fiscal easing in the near term but still be consistent with achieving their low public debt objectives by 2021. As the economy gradually approaches potential, this would still allow automatic stabilizers to operate fully if growth were to weaken should further downside risks materialize. Moreover, in terms of the policy mix, a neutral fiscal stance would help monetary policy to rebuild policy space further as the recovery proceeds. Available fiscal resources could be used for targeted growth-friendly measures . Against the backdrop of lackluster business investment (despite very low interest rates) and productivity, such measures could focus on providing further support for R&D, SMEs, venture capital, and strategic infrastructure projects, with little risk of crowding out private investment. Reducing federal taxes could provide more space to raise revenue at the provincial level, given that federal and provincial governments ’co-occupy’ the same tax base. Fiscal policy at the federal level can benefit from a stronger medium-term anchor . To lock in the gains from consolidation and increase effectiveness of fiscal policy, a medium-term fiscal framework at the federal level can be beneficial. This would be broadly in line with the authorities’ intention to introduce balanced budget legislation. If the federal authorities were to introduce balanced budget legislation, it would be important for a new rules- based framework to be transparent, easy- to-communicate, and ensure convergence towards the authorities’ medium-term For a discussion of long-term fiscal sustainability and aging-related challenges, see Annex III of IMF Country Report No. 14/27. Relative to current policies, maintaining a cyclically-adjusted primary surplus (at the federal level) broadly constant at its 2014 level would amount to some 0.3 percent of GDP fiscal impulse over 2015–17, but would still be consistent with the authorities’ debt reduction target of 25 percent debt-to-GDP ratio by 2021. Discussions center on a federal balanced budget legislation that will “require balanced budgets during normal economic times and concrete timelines for returning to balance in the event of an economic crisis.” Annual balanced budget Budget balance over three years Budget balance over seven years Baseline Boom-bust cycle Pro-cyclicalCounter-cyclical Pro-cyclicalityof Fiscal Rules (Fiscal impulse,percentof GDP) Source:IMF staff estimates. Page 27 objectives, while allowing for flexibility in the face of shocks to avoid pro-cyclicality (Selected Issues). Implications for pro-cyclical fiscal policy vary depending on how the balanced budget rule is defined (Chart). In addition, key design features for an effective fiscal rules framework would also include a legal basis to buttress the credibility of the new rules, and well-defined escape clauses to deal with exceptional events. The Parliamentary Budget Office could play a role in monitoring implementation of the new rule. Provincial governments Fiscal space is much more limited at the provincial level, in light of mixed progress on consolidation and long-term sustainability challenges . Provincial consolidation plans would need to proceed, and efforts stepped up, especially in the provinces with the highest levels of public debt (Québec and Ontario). For the adjustment plans to deliver, in a sustainable manner, a balanced budget, spending measures may need to be supplemented with additional measures on the revenue side, especially if the fiscal stance turns more neutral at the federal level. Progress in containing health care spending should continue to ensure long-term sustainability of provincial public finances The growth rate in health care spending has slowed in the last few years relative to historical trends and it is currently below nominal GDP growth. Part of this slowdown, however, is driven by temporary cost compression though more permanent structural adjustments are taking place in some provinces. Demographic factors, however, are still expected to exert a strong upward pressure on costs, and even under optimistic scenarios, health spending is projected to rise from 8 percent to almost 12 of GDP by 2050. Fiscal frameworks at the provincial level should also be strengthened . Regular spending reviews should become an integral part of provincial budgetary frameworks, with a possible role for independent fiscal agencies. A permanent framework for strategic spending reviews could particularly support provinces in delivering on their consolidation needs and feed into binding medium-term ceilings that could be designed to support the implementation of balanced budget rules currently in place in most provinces. Ontario’s plan last year to establish a budget office (Financial Accountability Office) was a positive step, and it would be important for the office to become operational soon. Recent decline in oil prices once again underscores the need for the energy-abundant provinces, but also at the federal level, to revisit their fiscal frameworks (as was done in Alberta in 2013) to better manage the volatility associated with commodity prices. There is scope for improving coordination of fiscal policy between different levels of government . Long-term challenges to contain aging-related spending call for extending long-term Recent reforms to move away from global budgeting (based on historical levels) toward more patient- or activity- based funding models for hospitals, increasing out-of-hospital care, and consolidating purchases of drugs, medical supplies, and equipment are helping contain health care costs and increasing efficiency on a sustainable basis, but further effort would be needed to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability of provincial debt (see, IMF Country Report, No. 14/27). Page 28 fiscal forecasts at the provincial level and publishing consolidated general government fiscal forecasts in consultation with provinces. This would help raise the public awareness of the challenges ahead and help build the necessary consensus behind the efforts needed to contain aging-related spending. To this end, a useful step could include a data sharing mechanism for long- term fiscal assumptions and forecasts.