Monetary policy remains accommodative given slack in the economy and stable inflation outlook . The policy rate has been on hold at 1 percent since September 2010. Overall financial conditions have been easing until recently, with interest rates across maturities declining since end-2013 and business credit growth picking up (Figure 6). Staff estimates of the (time- varying) neutral rate of interest suggest that monetary policy has been supportive throughout the recovery, and currently, with a negative interest rate gap (i.e., actual policy rate below the neutral rate) (Chart, Selected Issues). Monetary normalization is expected to begin later in 2015 . Looking forward, the short- term neutral rate should eventually rise from current low levels reflecting the normalization in the U.S. monetary policy and solid economic activity in Canada driven by external factors (mainly, the U.S. recovery) and domestic factors (pickup in non-energy business investment). In this setting, a gradual increase in policy rates starting in the second half of 2015 is suggested by staff analysis toward a medium-term neutral rate estimated to be between 3 and 4 percent over the medium Cyclical conditions (both domestic and external) may make the short-term neutral rate deviate from the longer- term neutral rate. The short-term neutral rate is useful to help assess the appropriateness of the current policy rate as well as the adjustment path to the neutral rate over the medium term. Specifically, the interest rate gap provides a measure of policy accommodation (tightness). Neutral Interest Rate Estimates and Projections (Percent, nominal 3-month T-bill rate) Sources:Bank of Canada; and IMF staff estimates.Medium-termneutral rate bandActual and forecast interest rateForecast(conditional onU.S.forecast)Short-termneutral rate (with confidence band) Page 20 term. Market expectations of policy tightening more towards the end of 2015 have increased recently. Monetary policy can afford to stay accommodative for now . With well-anchored inflation expectations and downside external risks to growth, the Bank of Canada (BOC) can embark on policy tightening after firmer signs emerge of a more balanced and durable recovery led by stronger investment. Also, a negative impact on domestic growth and inflation from the recent decline in oil prices provides additional room for maintaining monetary accommodation. Moreover, given the strong co-movement between Canadian and U.S. long-term interest rates, an expected gradual increase in U.S. rates around mid-2015 along with terms-of-trade deterioration should help cool down the housing sector.