Further macro-prudential policy action may be needed if household balance sheet and housing market vulnerabilities resume rising Evolving risks to the financial system and the ability of macro-prudential tools to influence these developments need to be monitored closely. Measures introduced over the past few years have been effective in significantly lowering growth of insured mortgage loans (Chart). At the same time, however, uninsured mortgages—loans with the maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of 80 percent—which recently comprise more than two-thirds of mortgage originations have been rising noticeably (on average, 10 percent per year since mid-2010) alongside house price increases, especially in high-end, single-family housing markets (Chart). With some of this new lending, particularly by smaller and less regulated financial institutions, going to non-prime borrowers, it may partly reflect greater use of borrowed funds for larger down payments to avoid insurance premiums or tighter conditions on insured mortgages. As an initial step to address evolving risks in mortgage markets, low-LTV mortgage loans to be insured on a portfolio basis could be subject to the same mortgage insurance rules applied to 2005Q32007Q12008Q32010Q12011Q32013Q12014Q3 Insured mortgages Uninsured mortgages Insured and Uninsured Mortgage Loans (Y/Y percentage change) 1/ Sources: OSFI;and CREA.1/ Forinsured mortgages over the period of 2011Q4–2012Q4, four-quarter rolling average Q/Q growth rates are used to adjust for a structural break in 2011Q4 due to classification of securitized mortgages. Jan 2006Jan 2008Jan 2010Jan 2012Jan 2014 Apartment Single-family House Price Index (Y/Y percentage change) Page 21 high-LTV mortgage loans, especially since the largest proportion of uninsured low-LTV loans have LTVs in the upper range between 75–80 percent and given the fact that down payments can be borrowed. Data on borrowed down payments would help assess possible avoidance from tighter mortgage insurance rules. Additional actions targeted at uninsured mortgages to consider may include tighter amortization and lower LTV limits for market segments where they remain relatively high and caps on debt-service-to-income (DSTI) ratios that would also address the issue of borrowed down payments. These measures would also have a particularly dampening effect on the most overheated regional markets. Policies should aim at further limiting exposure of taxpayers to the housing market and encouraging appropriate risk retention by the private sector, as recommended by the 2013 FSAP . Staff welcomes the tightening mortgage insurance measures implemented by the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) over the past year, CMHC’s plans to increase capital, and a new guideline issued by the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI) to strengthen mortgage insurance underwriting practices. The elimination of some CMHC’s mortgage insurance products will marginally limit the federal government’s exposure to the housing market since they represent a small proportion of CMCH’s business and can still be insured by private mortgage insurers. In the near term, the authorities will need to implement current plans to prohibit the use of government-backed insured mortgages in non-CMHC securitization programs and gradually limit portfolio insurance that will be tied to CMHC securitization. Further reduction of portfolio insurance for both CMHC and private mortgage insurers and changes to introduce more risk- sharing should also be considered, which would complement current prudential measures in cooling off the housing market. To help encourage market alternatives to insured mortgage related instruments, the 4 percent threshold on covered bonds’ share in total assets (one of the lowest among Canada’s peers), could be increased as the issuance of National Housing Act Mortgage-Backed Securities (NHA These measures have been used by many jurisdictions to address risks stemming from housing and mortgage credit markets. While some countries have used a single instrument to deal with the risks (e.g., India and Indonesia used LTVs), many other countries have used them in combination (e.g., Israel used amortization periods and LTVs; Korea, Malaysia, Netherlands used LTVs in combination with DSTI ratios whereas Hong Kong and Singapore used all three instruments). In past consultations, staff raised the issue of considering differentiated macro-prudential measures across provinces to target areas with more buoyant housing sectors (see, IMF Country Report 13/40), however such policies come under the jurisdiction of provincial or municipal authorities (e.g., property taxes and transaction fees). This is broadly in line with recommendations of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The federal government guarantees 100 percent of CMHC’s insured loans and 90 percent of those insured by private companies. Page 22 MBSs) and Canada Mortgage Bonds (CMBs) is further reduced. More broadly, re-examining the dimensions of extensive government-backed mortgage insurance should remain on the authorities’ longer-term agenda, including managing a transition from financial market reliance on government-backed instruments as the public sector role recedes.