There are potential outward spillovers from Canada to the Caribbean Canadian banks have had a long historical connection to the region, but low returns and bad debts have led to banks scaling back operations, including closing branches. A materialization of downside risks could exacerbate Canadian banks’ ongoing rationalization of their operations in the region. Tourism revenues may also suffer as Canada is a major source of tourist traffic to the region, second only to the U.S. A recent World Bank perception survey of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs) indicated pressure on CBRs of local/regional banks in the Caribbean, but did not indicate any material reduction in Canadian banks’ CBRs in the region. The Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI) does not at present collect data on this trend. While it is challenging to gather reliable and conclusive evidence of withdrawal of CBRs, OSFI should take steps to actively monitor the trends in CBRs provided by Canadian banks. Canadian banks are choosing not to step into the gap left behind by retreating global banks, partly because higher regulatory compliance costs have made the risk-reward equation challenging. In this context, Canadian banks are looking for greater clarity in national and international standards, including with respect to regulations to counter money laundering and offshore tax evasion and avoidance (Box 4). bb 201420152014201520142015CIBCRBCScotiabank Caribbean credit in total credit Caribbean NPLs in total NPLs (rhs) Selected Bank Caribbean Exposures and NPLs (Percent) Sources: Bank of Canada and IMF staff estimates. Page 21 Canada: Risk Assessment Matrix (Scale―low, medium, and high) Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Impact Policy Response Persistently lower energy prices, reversing only gradually Sharp asset price decline and decompression of credit spreads Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies Globally-sourced risks High Oil companies would be forced to cut not only High investment and jobs, but also production as companies become unviable. Loan delinquencies would spike and banks may curtail lending as asset quality suffers, putting a further dampening effect on the housing market and the economy. Monetary and fiscal policy should be expansionary. At the provincial level, allow automatic stabilizers to operate fully. The BOC can step in to provide liquidity as needed. Low/Medium Higher interest rates ─ due to higher risk premiums ─ Medium would raise debt servicing costs for highly indebted /High households, while higher funding costs for corporates would lead to a reduction in business investment. Financial institutions, relying on wholesale funding, would also be adversely affected. Medium/High Medium Canada is an open economy with total trade accounting for 65 percent of GDP. A structural /High slowdown in the U.S. and other advanced and emerging economies would reduce demand for Canadian exports and lower potential growth. Domestically-sourced risks Ensure adequate loss absorbing buffers in the banking system and conduct regular stress testing. Structural reform policies should be accelerated to facilitate the reallocation of resources to the manufacturing and services sectors. Measures should focus on raising productivity, which would improve external competitiveness, and enhancing long-term growth. High Homeownership is the single most important source of wealth for households. A sharp reduction in net wealth The impact on the banking system would be severe but mitigated by mortgage insurance, and CMHC and private insurers own loss absorbing would hit domestic demand and trigger negative capacity. feedback loops in the economy. Non-performing loans in the banking system would increase significantly. Macroprudential policy may need to be eased as a counter-cyclical measure. Sharp house price correction Medium The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The matrix reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non- mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 22 Box 4. Canada: Correspondent Banking Relationships with the Caribbean A long history Canadian banks have been in the Caribbean since the 19th century, when Royal Bank of Canada (as Merchants Bank of Halifax) and Scotiabank first set up shop in Bermuda and Jamaica. Today, the two banks and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce have numerous branches spread across the archipelago and account for 75–80 percent of all banking assets in Barbados, Grenada and the Bahamas, and 60 percent of the assets of the ECCU banking system. Scotiabank has the largest footprint with C$32 billion in total loans to the region. Recent trends. Global banks have recently been terminating or restricting their corresponding banking relationships (CBRs) with local/regional banks across the world. In particular, the Caribbean has been potentially affected by declining CBRs, with even central banks not being immune. While it has been challenging to gather conclusive data on these trends, a recent World Bank perception survey indicated pressure on CBRs of local/regional banks in the Caribbean. The potential drivers behind the withdrawal of CBRs are multiple and may relate to business strategy and/or cost/benefit analysis, including in the context of implementation of regulatory obligations, such as capital and liquidity rules, AML/CFT, economic and trade sanctions, and tax transparency. In some instances, withdrawals of CBRs can result from unclear, poorly communicated, or conflicting regulatory expectations. So far, there is no evidence of a macroeconomic impact from the withdrawals of CBRs, and it seems most institutions have found replacements for lost CBRs with varying degrees of difficulty. Concerns have been expressed that pressure from withdrawal of CBRs may be leading to higher costs for remittances and related services, but supporting evidence is still lacking. Risk-reward equation . While Canadian banks have no immediate plans to significantly cut CBRs, they are taking a hard look at the risk-return tradeoffs. On the one hand, the cost of regulatory compliance has increased, notably as U.S. regulators have taken a more concerted approach to enforcing AML/CFT regulations and bilateral initiatives like the 2010 U.S. Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act to combat tax evasion. On the other hand, Caribbean consumer businesses have low profit margins and the target consumer population in the region could not bear higher fees, so boosting profit margins through the re- pricing of bank services is not a feasible option. At the present time, Canadian banks see little scope for expanding their presence to fill the gap left by retreating global banks. Withdrawal from Correspondent Banking: Where, Why, and What To Do About It? World Bank, November 2015. Page 23 Box 5. Canada: The Estimated Impact of Lower Oil Prices and Risk Scenarios Factors driving the decline in oil prices Relative to 2014, oil prices fell, in annual average terms, by roughly 50 percent in 2015. Futures markets prices suggest a further decline in 2016 and only a very gradual recovery afterwards. As detailed in Arezki and others (2016) and shown in the Chart, changes in oil price projections since the April 2014 WEO can be decomposed into three key factors: increases in oil supply, weaker global activity (as proxied by global real GDP growth), and improved energy efficiency. This decomposition is done using historical and forecast data on oil supply from the International Energy Agency’s (IEA) World Energy Outlook and the oil model described in Benes and others (2015). Higher oil supply is estimated to account for almost the entire decline in oil prices in 2015, but its importance will diminish over time; weaker global activity and improved energy efficiency would become more important drivers of changes in oil prices after 2016. The IMF model G20MOD is used to illustrate how these individual factors affect Canada’s medium-term growth path. Estimating the net impact of lower oil prices on Canada’s economy The factors that drive the decline in oil prices matter for Canada’s medium-term economic outlook. If only supply factors were at play, Canada’s GDP level would be lower by 0.5 percent compared to 2014 projections. In this case, the positive impact on the global economy and the U.S. economy in particular, accrue over time and generate demand for Canadian exports, which partially offsets the negative effects on investment and consumption from lower oil prices. A demand-induced decline in oil prices would have the largest effect on economic growth in the medium term. The demand and supply factors together (Scenario 2) would lower Canada’s GDP in the medium term by 4 percent compared to what was projected in 2014. pp World Real GDP Canada: Estimated Impact of Lower Oil Prices Percent difference from baseline scenario Scenario 1: Increase in Global Oil SupplyScenario 2: Scenario 1 + Decline in Global GrowthScenario 3: Scenario 2 + Improvement in Energy Efficiency Real Oil Price Canada: Consumption Canada: Real Investment Source: IMF Staff estimates. Canada: Real GDP Canada: Current Account Page 24 Box 5. Canada: The Estimated Impact of Lower Oil Prices and Risk Scenarios (concluded) The transmission effects work as follows: similar to Scenario 1, lower oil prices would significantly reduce investment and weaker domestic income would lower private consumption. However, the decline in global aggregate demand added to Scenario 2 (represented by the red-shaded share of the fall in oil prices in the Chart above) would weigh on Canada’s exports. As a result, under Scenario 2, global aggregate demand would not be able to offset the negative effects on investment and consumption from lower oil prices. Changes in the oil price caused by improvements in energy efficiency are estimated to have a small effect on Canada’s GDP. Risk scenarios Four scenarios are considered, drawing on the G20MOD simulation exercises elaborated in recent WEOs. In the first scenario, lower-than-expected private investment and higher-than-expected private saving lead to secular stagnation and weaker domestic demand in advanced economies (AEs). In the second scenario, investors’ expectations of lower future growth results in lower investment and weaker domestic demand in the emerging market economies (EMs). The third scenario combines the first two scenarios. The fourth scenario illustrates the impact on Canada’s growth if G20 countries implement their Brisbane Growth Strategy commitments in terms of product and labor market reforms. Secular stagnation in AEs has a larger negative effect on Canadian growth compared with a structural slowdown in EMs, even though the latter triggers a larger decline of oil prices. Under the AE secular stagnation scenario, Canada’s GDP level by 2021 would be about 1.5 percent lower than currently projected, while an EM structural slowdown would reduce Canada’s GDP by about 0.8 percent by 2021. The two scenarios combined would significantly dent Canada’s outlook through both weaker U.S. demand and lower commodity prices. In this case, Canada’s GDP level by 2021 would be about 2.3 percent lower than currently projected. Finally, if G20 countries press ahead with product and labor market reform commitments, losses in medium-term output would narrow by 0.4 percentage points compared to Scenario 3. ba + + Page 25