Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside (Risk Assessment Matrix and Box 5). Persistently low energy prices pose an important risk to the economy. Oil companies have already cut cost significantly. A protracted period of low oil prices could force some firms to permanently shut down production, as room for generating additional cost savings or productivity gains would be limited. This would trigger second round effects on investment and growth, as banks shed bad loans and curtail lending. Over the long term, deep industry cutbacks on investment will affect the ability of the oil industry to ramp up production once oil markets start to rebalance. Higher uncertainty about global growth prospects and a lack of effective policy response to offset headwinds could lead to persistent weakness in global trade and investment. The U.S. economy is Canada’s dominant trading partner, but other economies (Asia and Europe) are still important export markets. Spillovers from China to Canada would mostly be felt through a slowdown in trade and weaker commodity prices since there is little direct exposure of Canadian banks to China. According to BOC estimates, if Chinese growth slows by one percentage point Canadian growth would slip one-tenth of a percentage point. By comparison, if the same decline happened to the U.S., the impact on Canada's GDP would be six times greater. Tighter global financial conditions due to higher risk aversion and pressure on banks in Europe, or a significant and sudden depreciation of the renminbi could be disruptive to the global financial system, with implications for financial conditions in Canada. A disorderly U.S. monetary policy normalization could also raise Canada’s long-term government bond yields China accounts for 17 percent of Canada’s total trade and 4 percent of Canada’s exports. China accounts for roughly 7 percent of U.S. exports of value added. IMF staff analysis suggests that a 1 percentage point investment-driven drop in China’s output growth would reduce Group of Twenty (G20) growth by ¼ percentage point (Chapter 1, April 2016 WEO). Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins, in a speech to the Greater Vancouver Board of Trade, April 5, 2016. Page 19 as they have generally moved in line with those in the U.S. Shorter yields are likely to rise by less, reflecting perceived differences in monetary policy prospects. The key domestic risk is a sharp correction in the housing market. A severe recession that triggers a sharp rise in the unemployment rate could destabilize housing markets, setting off adverse feedback loops in the economy, and leading to greater financial stability risks. Given extensive government-backed mortgage insurance, the impact of a severe housing downturn on the federal fiscal position could be considerable and potentially limit the room for fiscal stimulus down the road (Annex III). In a tail risk scenario, all these risks could occur concurrently and intertwine, aggravating macro-financial spillover channels. The probability of such an event occurring is low, but the impact obviously would be very significant. The stress tests of the 2014 FSAP show that the banking system would be able to withstand a major recession scenario that includes a 50 percent drop in oil prices, an increase in the unemployment rate to a peak of 13.2 percent, and a 34 percent decline over 3 years (22 percent in the first year) in house prices. All banks would fall below the supervisory threshold, but the recapitalization needs would be manageable. Furthermore, since the time of the FSAP, banks have improved their capital position. Finally, the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) and the private mortgage insurers own earnings and loss absorption capacity provide another layer of cushion between losses on mortgage insurance and the fiscal impact on the government. There is also upside potential to the medium-term outlook. A better than expected recovery in Canadian exports would strengthen business investment and facilitate a faster reallocation of resources from the energy to the non-energy sectors. Furthermore, Canada’s strong fundamentals will help mitigate the impact if downside risks materialize. Canada has strong institutions and a track record of consistent policies. Its growth performance has been among the strongest in major advanced economies post-2008. Furthermore, despite rising short-term external debt, Canada enjoys a positive net international investment position because it owns substantial assets overseas. This provides a natural hedge to currency risk on aggregate debt. Its flexible exchange rate is also an important shock absorber. However, an increase in U.S. interest rates predicated on higher growth and inflation in the U.S., could actually be positive for Canada. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar and higher U.S. domestic demand would boost non-energy exports. All else equal, the Canadian dollar price of oil would also increase as the U.S. dollar appreciates, which would then imply an increase in the value of Canada’s oil exports. Households are also susceptive to interest rate risks, as about 40 percent of mortgage loans are with variable rates. However, to mitigate this vulnerability, banks require borrowers to qualify for their mortgages at a rate that is the greater of the contractual mortgage rate or the five-year benchmark rate published by the Bank of Canada when taking out a variable-rate mortgage or a mortgage with a fixed term of less than 5 years. Page 20