The federal government has the fiscal space to support the economy. Canada’s overall fiscal position remains strong (Table 5). Although the general government’s gross debt is relatively high at about 90 percent of GDP, the gross debt of the federal government is considerably lower at 40 percent of GDP. Including financial assets would further reduce the federal government (net) debt to 23 percent of GDP. Page 26 The federal government’s pro-growth 2016 budget is appropriate. Low interest rates and the low debt burden provide fiscal space without undermining the outlook for medium- term debt sustainability (Annex III). Against this backdrop, the stimulus measures in the 2016 Budget are welcome since they will also help alleviate the burden on monetary policy in providing near-term demand support. A more active role for fiscal policy will strengthen the overall policy mix by reducing the need for further monetary easing and thus limit the scope for excessive risk taking in a low interest rate environment. The stimulus package includes discretionary measures totaling 1¼ percent of GDP spread over FY2016–17 and FY2017–18, more than 40 percent of which are allocated to mostly shovel-ready infrastructure projects. Staff estimates that the measures would boost annual growth by ½ percentage point of GDP in each of the next two fiscal years, based on a conservative fiscal multiplier. In line with this, the overall deficit will increase from ¼ percent of GDP in 2015 to around 1 percent of GDP in 2016 and Expenditure measures include: (i) increasing investment in infrastructure (Box 6); (ii) increasing transfers to families with children; and (iii) environmental protection and support for indigenous-communities, and (iv) research development and innovation. Total new infrastructure spending will amount to $60 billion (2½ percent of GDP) over 10 years as part of a commitment to improve productivity capacity. On the revenue side, measures include reducing the personal income tax rate for the second tax bracket from The growth impact of the fiscal measures is calculated for each discretionary measure in the text table (with relatively high multipliers assigned to infrastructure and housing measures, and low multipliers to tax measures). Staff estimates the average size of the fiscal multiplier is 0.7 for the first year and 0.9 for the total of the two years. The estimated multipliers are broadly consistent with those for an open economy at a cyclical downturn position, suggested in IMF’s guidance note on fiscal multipliers (November 2013). Staff’s estimates are also broadly in the range of estimates calculated by DOF, BOC, and the Parliamentary Budget Officer. Federal Budget 2016 Measures 1/Fiscal Multiplier Assumptions FY2016/17FY2017/18BillionsPercentBillionsPercentof C$of GDPof C$of GDPHousing1.40.11.00.0Infrastructure4.00.27.30.3Personal income tax-1.3-0.1-2.4-0.1Middle class tax cut1.30.11.20.1Increasing taxes for couples with children-1.9-0.1-2.0-0.1Others-0.70.0-1.6-0.1Measures for households5.60.36.40.3Canada child benefit4.50.25.40.3 Employment insurance0.50.00.70.0Others0.60.00.40.0Others spending measures2.10.13.20.1Corporate income tax-0.10.0-0.60.0 Total11.60.614.90.7 1/ Measures with a negative sign contribute to the budget balance. GG NN Z GG Page 27 22 percent to 20.5 percent. To cover the loss in tax revenue, the budget includes revenue enhancing measures, including (i) a hike in the top marginal personal tax rate from 29 percent to 33 percent; (ii) abolishing the tax advantage for couples with children filing tax returns together; and (iii) strengthening tax compliance. Increasing public infrastructure investment during periods of economic slack and monetary policy accommodation could deliver significant growth dividends. Given uncertainty about demand conditions and the highly complementary nature of infrastructure services, it could help “crowd in” private business investment, which has been weak even before the oil shock. If the economy takes a turn for the worse, additional fiscal easing should be considered, for which there is room. The additional fiscal easing should be temporary and could be achieved by bringing forward planned infrastructure spending or by temporarily cutting personal and corporate income taxes. At the provincial level, greater caution is needed. Among the larger provinces, Quebec has relatively high debt, while Ontario has a relatively high deficit. In these provinces, fiscal consolidation should proceed, but at a gradual pace in order not to offset the federal government stimulus and to support the continuing recovery. Due to its heavy dependence on oil royalties, Alberta’s operational balance has turned negative (deficit of 3 percent of GDP), but it still has very low debt. Given that its economy is also significantly weaker than the rest of the country, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully. Over the medium-term, Alberta should draw on both revenue and expenditure- side measures to close its fiscal gap. Strengthening the medium-term fiscal framework will be important to bolster fiscal credibility. Any stimulus package should be accompanied by a credible medium-term consolidation plan. Medium-term consolidation will also help improve the external position. The federal government’s commitment to putting the debt to GDP ratio on a downward path is appropriate. In this context, the current balanced budget rule, which is too rigid, should be replaced by a new fiscal rule that is transparent, easy to communicate, and sufficiently flexible to avoid pro-cyclicality (possible options elaborated in the 2014 Article IV Staff Report remain valid). The new rule should be embedded in a multi-year fiscal framework that details measures consistent with the revenue and expenditure projections. In a sample of advanced economies, a 1 percentage point of GDP increase in investment spending increases the level of output by about 1.5 percent four years after the increase, Chapter 3, October 2014 WEO. NN K cc Page 28 At the provincial level, fiscal rules should be modified to target the overall balance that includes capital spending, rather than the operational balance. This would clearly establish a link between deficit and debt targets and enhance the credibility of provinces where debt reduction is a medium-term fiscal objective (e.g. Quebec and Ontario). It is essential that the authorities follow through with “Phase 2” of the infrastructure initiative to achieve productivity goals. This will require close cooperation and coordination between federal and provincial authorities. The federal government should take the lead in developing a nation-wide infrastructure plan that identifies infrastructure gaps and prioritizes projects that enhance the economy’s productive capacity. Priority projects could include those that reduce urban transportation congestion, and improve and expand trade corridors. As a first step, a forum to bring together and engage all relevant stakeholders should be established. Furthermore, new and innovative sources of funding are needed to support the infrastructure plan to limit the impact on debt at the provincial and municipal level. We welcome the financing options elaborated in the 2016 Budget that include greater involvement of public pension plans, user fees, and more creative use of public private partnerships. As a longer-term reform agenda, the authorities should consider the impact of escalating health care costs and aging pressures on provincial finances . Fiscal gaps at the provincial level could emerge and widen over time, with material implications on provincial debt burdens within a 15–20 year time frame. This puts the onus first and foremost on provinces to adjust their spending priorities. Page 29 Box 6. Canada: New Infrastructure Investment Initiative In the 2016 Budget, the Federal government announced a new infrastructure plan, totaling $60 billion (2¼ percent of GDP) over 10 years. The plan will be implemented in two phases. The baseline medium-term projections incorporate only Phase 1 spending plans. Phase 1 To address immediate needs and boost short- term growth, the first phase focuses on shovel ready infrastructure projects, amounting to $12 billion over the 2–3 years. The main objectives of this phase are: (i) to upgrade and improve public transit; (ii) to modernize water, and wastewater systems, and address climate change (“Green Infrastructure”); and (iii) to provide affordable housing (including for seniors and the homeless) and to improve housing conditions in First Nations’ communities (“Social Infrastructure”). Phase 2 The second phase will be launched over the medium term. The government will aim to invest in larger-scale infrastructure projects that would improve productivity growth and boost potential output. Specifically, the second phase will attempt to expand trade corridors, a system of connecting highways and rail routes that links major commercial centers in the Canada and the U.S. to transport people and goods; and to improve transportation networks in urban areas to reduce congestion and commute time; and lastly, to reduce the carbon footprint of the national energy system. The details of the second phase will be announced next year. Financing The government is looking for new innovative financing arrangements to reduce the cost of infrastructure projects at local government levels. It is considering actively engaging public pension funds and global institutional investors to take the lead in planning, building, and operating infrastructure projects but that would still allow the government to be involved. This would reduce the government’s direct financial costs. mm j pp mm illi ub illi dd dg Page 30