The authorities have been vigilant to housing-related risks, which is the most significant macro-financial vulnerability for Canada. The federal government, CMHC, and OSFI have introduced a host of measures over the past several years, including most recently in December 2015, to reduce risk taking and limit taxpayer exposure to the housing sector (Annex V and text table). These measures have been broadly effective, slowing the pace of mortgage credit expansion from above 10 percent in 2010– 2011 to about 5 percent in 2015 and improving the risk profile of new mortgage loans. More than 75 percent of new mortgage originations are uninsured mortgages, those with maximum loan- to-value ratio (LTV) of 80 percent. These loans have a less risky profile, both because of the lower LTV cap and because banks must hold capital against uninsured mortgages. Canada: Recent Macroprudential Policies, April 2015–2016 Macroprudential Measures Stated Primary Objectives April 2015. CMHC raised mortgage insurance premiums for homebuyers with less than a 10 percent down payment by about 15 percent (effective June 1, 2015) Strengthen CMHC’s capital position May 2015. The DOF prohibited substitution (replacing an insured mortgage loan with another mortgage loan under existing coverage) or adding new loans into a portfolio insurance pool one year after insurance commitment Reduce taxpayer exposure by reducing portfolio mortgage insurance and enhance market discipline December 2015. CMHC announced an increase in guarantee fees under the NHA MBS and CMB programs and a restructuring of the CMB program (effective July 1, 2016) Encourage the development of private market funding alternatives by narrowing the funding cost difference between government sponsored and private market funding sources February 2016. The DOF raised the minimum down payment for new insured mortgages for the portion of the house price above Can$ 500,000 from 5 percent to 10 percent Contain risks in the housing market, reduce taxpayer exposure, and support long-term stability February 2016. The DOF required that portfolio-insured loans be funded only through CMHC securitization programs (effective July 1, 2016) Restore portfolio insurance to its original purpose of supporting mortgage funding through CMHC securitization programs Nevertheless, further macroprudential measures will be needed if housing sector vulnerabilities intensify. The mission welcomes OSFI’s initiative to introduce a risk-based floor for banks’ internal capital models for uninsured mortgages. Beyond this, the authorities could consider introducing a cap on LTI (loan-to-income). This measure would be superior to debt service-to-income limits which become less binding in a low interest rate environment. If national illi Page 31 measures prove inadequate to contain risks, measures that target specific imbalances in regional housing markets would be warranted. Government-backed mortgage insurance has played an important countercyclical role during times of stress, but this benefit needs to be weighed against the potential cost to taxpayers . Government guarantees of insured mortgages are still a sizable 36 percent of GDP as of 2015, even though the government receives premium income from CMHC and private insurers. One option to further reduce the size of the government’s contingent liability is to narrow the scope of providing government guarantees more strictly to low and middle-income households. Other options to shrink the government’s footprint in the mortgage insurance space could include lender risk sharing by introducing higher deductibles for insured mortgages, and further fine-tuning insurance premiums and securitization fees. Nevertheless, any reform should proceed gradually to preserve the countercyclical role and social objective of facilitating access to housing finance. Prudential policies have strengthened banks’ balance sheets and helped ensure system stability. OSFI introduced a three percent leverage ratio in 2015 and a one percent capital surcharge for domestic systemically important banks in January 2016. Quebec Authorite des Marches Financiers also started applying an equivalent capital surcharge to Desjardins, a large cooperative credit union. The capital conservation buffer will be phased in gradually by 2019. On liquidity, OSFI required banks to fully meet the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and plans to introduce the Net Stable Funding Ratio by 2018. Systemically important financial institutions are also required to participate in regular macroeconomic stress test exercises led by OSFI and the BOC to assess the resilience of the financial system to systemic shocks. Important progress has been made in implementing the 2014 FSAP recommendations (Annex VI). The new Capital Markets Regulatory Authority, which brings together the federal regulator and six provincial regulators to strengthen Canada’s capacity to identify and manage systemic risk on a national basis, is a bold step toward enhancing the cooperation between federal and provincial regulators. Other measures have also been taken to engage with provincial regulators, including the BOC providing technical assistance on macro stress testing and model design. Also, CMHC has taken the lead in publishing the results of its stress test, and the BOC is considering how best to integrate quantitative analysis into its For example, capping the amount of mortgage loans (eligible for insurance) at $400,000 would reduce CMHC’s insurance guarantees by about 7 percent of GDP. Page 32 financial stability assessment presented in the Financial System Review. This would enhance both the transparency and credibility of financial sector policies. However, concerted efforts are needed to address several major recommendations that remain outstanding The FSAP called for giving clear regulatory mandates to monitor systemic risk to facilitate macro-prudential oversight and carry out system-wide crisis preparedness. The Senior Advisory Committee (SAC) plays these roles on a de facto basis. However, the SAC does not have a mandate for crisis management nor are the members given an explicit financial stability mandate for macroprudential oversight. Furthermore, consistent with Basel Core Principles, legislation should be amended to give OSFI sole decision-making authority on prudential criteria. It is important for a prudential authority to make prudential decisions for safety and soundness reasons without the potential for ministerial discretion. While this has not been a problem in practice, ministerial power to override supervisory judgment impinges on operational independence, which is a critical input to supervisory effectiveness. Finally, the ability to conduct group-wide supervision is a key component of the Insurance Core principles to promote a consolidated view of risks and prevent arbitrage across differently regulated structures in the group. Legislation should be amended to give OSFI the authority to take supervisory measures at the level of the holding company.