Recovery momentum is expected to continue, gradually reabsorbing remaining slack in the economy . Above-potential GDP growth is envisaged for 2014 and 2015, as exports and non- energy investment benefit from the U.S. recovery where growth momentum remains strong (Chart). As a drag on growth, the adverse impact of significantly lower oil prices will especially dampen near-term investment in the energy sector. Headline CPI inflation is expected to decelerate in 2015 as a result of lower oil prices, but core CPI inflation will likely remain close to the Bank of Canada’s target rate of 2 percent (y/y) as output and unemployment gaps gradually close. Growth is expected to become more balanced going forward, along with a cooling housing market Spurred by the stronger U.S. recovery, which is expected to continue, stronger exports and non-energy investment should mostly offset an expected moderation of private consumption and residential and energy investment with rising interest rates, much lower oil prices, and high household indebtedness. Looking beyond the recent strength and overvaluation in Canada’s housing market, staff continues to expect a “soft-landing” (Chart) as higher interest rates and weaker terms-of-trade prospects would temper housing demand, especially in those markets where signs of overvaluations are stronger and where the regional economy is more reliant on the energy sector. A transition to more balanced and sustainable growth is not without risks (Risk Assessment Matrix, Box 2). Risks to growth are modestly tilted to the downside—led by external risks that could also interact with domestic risks and vulnerabilities. Key external risks facing Canada’s economy involve tighter global financial conditions and effects from substantially weaker oil prices . Moreover, external risks—e.g., tighter-than-expected global financial conditions or weaker terms of trade on a sustained basis—could further harm domestic demand by interacting with vulnerabilities in the housing sector and high household indebtedness. In the energy sector, substantially lower global oil prices, if they persist, and 10th 50th 90th Estimates of House Price Overvaluation (Real price, logarithmic scale) 1/ Actual priceForecastOvervaluationSource: IMF staff estimates.1/ 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of estimates and residuals (overvaluation) from reverse recursive regressions. Canada: Contributions to GDP Growth (Percentage change) Net exports Business investment Private consumption Residential investment Government C&I Canada GDP U.S. GDP Sources: Statistics Canada; and IMF staff estimates.ProjectionProjectedquarterly path Page 13 concerns about still-unresolved prospects for major infrastructure projects would pose risks for domestic investment and energy production (Box 3). Given house price overvaluation, the housing sector is the main domestic risk—alongside high household debt . A sharper-than-expected correction of house prices would have an adverse impact on household wealth and access to finance, reducing domestic demand and output, but risks to financial stability are likely to be limited. It remains, however, unlikely that a sharp house price correction could take place in the absence of external demand triggers. Downside risks could occur in unison. A deeper downside scenario would have key external risks and a housing market correction occurring together. On the upside , external demand (U.S. investment and housing) may be stronger than expected, and a faster resolution of infrastructure bottlenecks could support energy exports and investment. Both monetary and fiscal policy have space to respond if adverse shocks materialize or intensify . The federal government and some provinces have fiscal space for automatic stabilizers to operate fully. A further fiscal loosening for these governments could be considered in the event of a larger and/or more persistent adverse shock, complemented by greater reform efforts aimed at improving productivity and addressing energy infrastructure bottlenecks over the medium term. Monetary policy has room to ease if downside risks materialize or intensify. Canada is heading towards general elections in 2015 . The general election to elect members to the House of Commons of the Canadian Parliament is tentatively scheduled for October 19, 2015. At the provincial level, with most elections over, including the 2014 elections in Ontario and Québec, some policy uncertainty remains especially in Québec relating to potential fiscal policy changes as a result of (needed) ongoing expenditure and tax system reviews. Compared to the October 2014 WEO, in the January 2015 WEO baseline, the projected oil prices are about 43 percent lower in 2015 (down from US$100 per barrel to below US$ 57 per barrel) and 30 percent lower over 2015–19. Projections for partner-country demand growth remain largely unchanged, however, mainly reflecting stronger U.S. growth. Page 14 Canada: Risk Assessment Matrix 1/ 1/ The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. RelativeLikelihoodMedium/High Potential triggers could include market displacement from asynchronous policy normalization (e.g., QE exit, "money shock"). The impact of this shock (without stronger growth in the U.S.) on Canadian output would be negative, and more so if the increase in U.S. interest rates were to lead to a sharp and persistent increase in mortgage rates in Canada as well as a faster decline in house prices than currently in our baseline scenario. Provide greater fiscal accommodation at the federal level; some provinces also have fiscal space to respond. Maintain monetary policy accommodation. Medium This could impact Canada mainly through trade channels, including through a negative impact on the terms of trade (as commodity prices would fall). Domestic demand would also be affected through negative confidence effects and tighter financial conditions. However, the weakening of the Canadian dollar (if energy prices fall) would soften the impact. Maintain monetary policy accommodation. Allow automatic stabilizers to operate fully at the federal level (and for provinces which have fiscal space), or consider fiscal loosening in the event of a larger shock. Intensify reforms to improve productivity. Medium An abrupt correction in house prices would have an adverse impact on household wealth and access to finance, reducing domestic demand and output. Canada's strong financial regulatory and supervisory framework, together with a credible federal system of safety nets, would be a mitigating factor. Banks have capacity to recapitalize. CMHC and the federal government have space to respond. BOC to stand ready to provide liquidity support in the event of substantial credit losses and severe liquidity shortages for Canadian financial institutions. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced economies or in emerging economies HighSource of RisksExpected ImpactPolicy Response Surges in global financial market volatility, resulting in tightening of global financial conditions High Sharper correction in house prices Medium Page 15 Box 2. Risk Scenarios and Spillovers 1/ Main external risks . Canada can be adversely affected by unexpectedly sharp monetary normalization in the United States, a more protracted period of slow growth in advanced and emerging market economies, and a further decline in oil prices. Sharper U.S. monetary normalization Monetary conditions could tighten unexpectedly in the United States and the United Kingdom (with a 100 basis point rise in term premium in 2015), triggered by market fears over a sooner-than-expected policy rate hike reflecting financial stability concerns ( Spillover Report) . Even assuming a quick policy response to address market misperception and lowered short-term interest rates, the output loss for Canada could still be significant in the near term. On the other hand, if tightening is accompanied by a private domestic demand-driven expansion in the U.S., Canada’s higher net exports and depreciation against the U.S. dollar are expected to more than offset the negative impact of financial tightening in Canada due to spillovers. In this case, Canada’s output would rise, or stay around the baseline after accounting for a likely house price correction (IMF Country Report, No. 14/27, Annex I). Slower growth in advanced and emerging economies A protracted period of slow growth in advanced and emerging markets could also hurt Canada over the medium term, mainly through weaker U.S. demand and lower prices for commodities, including oil. The impact on Canada, however, from further downward pressure on energy prices would be smaller if the additional shock is primarily driven by weaker demand outside the U.S. (and/or supply factors in oil markets). Housing shock House price correction can be more abrupt than expected, triggered by, for Main domestic risk example, an overreaction to factors affecting fundamentals, such as an increase in mortgage rates and deterioration in the terms of trade. Model estimates suggest that a 10 percent decline in house prices could lead to about 0.1 percent decline in Canada’s private consumption. The rise in interest rates would further subtract from consumption through higher mortgage debt service, with a 100 basis point increase in interest rates translating into about 0.3 percent decline in private consumption in one year. Combined risk scenario . Given interconnections between external and domestic risks, some could materialize together. A deeper downside scenario would include tighter financial conditions, amplified by a debt-service channel, a further deterioration in the terms of trade (for example, from an additional 10 percent decline in oil prices), and a housing market correction occurring in unison, where, for example, financial tightening would increase debt service costs while lower commodity prices would trigger a reassessment of house price fundamentals. The combined effect on real GDP would be about 1 percent drop in the first year, rising to about 1¼ percent reduction over the medium term. Consumption and especially investment would be significantly hurt, while exports would increase as monetary policy is expected to react by easing its stance (Chart). Real GDP Canada: Downside Risk Scenario Scenario 1: Term premium shock Scenario 2: Scenario 1 + Increase in debt serviceScenario 3: Scenario 2 + Lower oil price Scenario 4: Scenario 3 + Decline in house prices Source: IMF staff estimates. Consumption Investment Exports Page 16 Box 2. Risk Scenarios and Spillovers 1/ (concluded) Inward spillovers . Canada remains mainly exposed to spillovers from the United States through trade and financial linkages. Canada’s merchandise exports are predominantly directed to the United States, although the U.S. share has declined from about 85 percent in 2003 to 75 percent in 2013. Reflecting this tight trade link, export growth is highly synchronized with the U.S. business cycle and especially with U.S. business investment (through imports of manufacturing goods).2/ Meanwhile, Canada has become more exposed to emerging markets over recent years, mainly through commodity prices.3/ On the financial side, Canadian banks’ consolidated claims on non-residents as of 2014Q2 stood at about 70 percent of GDP, of which two- thirds were vis-à-vis the United States. While Canada’s liabilities to foreign banks is relatively small (about 20 percent of GDP) compared to other advanced economies, Canada’s financial and non-financial sectors could be affected by the materialization of the risk of runs on U.S. mutual funds in the event of an interest rate shock. Outward spillovers . External effects on the Caribbean could be substantial given Canadian banks’ dominant presence in the region and large tourist and remittance flows from Canada. A network analysis based on BIS banking statistics indicates significant cross-border financial linkages to the region and could be a potential source of significant spillovers for a number of Caribbean islands where Canadian financial institutions have a dominant market position. For example, Canadian banks account for about 60 percent of the ECCU’s banking system assets. Changes in Canada’s economic conditions can also affect the Caribbean islands through tourism and remittance flows. In 2013, Canadian tourists accounted for about 12 percent of total arrivals in the region, which is the second after the United States ( Caribbean Tourism Organization, 2014 ). Remittance inflows from Canada are also sizeable for countries such as Guyana and Jamaica, amounting to about 3 and 2 percent of their GDP in 2012, respectively. _____________________ 1/ The discussion on assessing macroeconomic implications of shocks has benefited from inputs by Benjamin Hunt, Keiko Honjo, and Dirk Muir (all RES). 2/ Staff estimates that a one percentage point increase in U.S. business investment growth is associated with ½ percentage point increase in Canada’s real exports of goods and services growth after one year. 3/ Canada is particularly exposed to fluctuations in China’s fixed asset investment given its high commodity-intensity: a one-percentage point decline in China’s fixed asset investment growth could reduce Canada’s export growth by up to ¼ percentage point (IMF Country Report, No.13/40). Page 17 Energy sector in Canada Box 3. Lower Oil Prices: Implications for Canada Energy sector plays an important role in Canada’s economy . The sector accounted for almost 10 percent of GDP (over half of which oil and gas extraction) and over 25 percent of exports in 2013–14. Capital expenditure in Canada’s oil and gas sector comprises about ¼ of total non-housing private investment, about equally split between conventional oil/gas and unconventional oil extraction. While the sector’s direct contribution to GDP and employment has been small, it has notable spillovers to other sectors linked to unconventional oil extraction activities. Overall, Canada has benefited from the boom in the unconventional oil production from oil sands (see, IMF Country Reports No. 14/27 and No. 14/28). Fiscal exposure at the federal level to oil is limited but important for oil-rich provinces, mainly through royalties . At the general government level, direct revenues from oil amount to about 1½ percent of total revenue or ½ percent of GDP (over two-thirds of which in Alberta). Corporate income tax from oil- and oil-related companies is also an important source of revenue. Other effects would work through indirect taxes and other revenues affected by the reduction in the tax base (lower nominal growth). To this end, the Fall 2014 update of the federal budget introduced an adjustment to largely account for the sharp decline in oil prices, lowering the level of nominal GDP over the medium term. Implications of persistently lower crude oil prices A persistent and sizeable decline in oil prices dampens Canada’s growth through a number of channels . The adverse direct effects would be on investment and employment in the energy sector. Breakeven prices for Canadian oil sands are believed to be wide ranging from US$50 per barrel to over US$85 per barrel; more advanced projects would be able to expand even at lower prices, but further increases in investment would more likely be delayed if low oil prices were to persist.1/ Canadian equity prices would decline as energy companies represent an important share of the Canadian stock market. Deteriorating terms of trade, weaker domestic income, and lower financial wealth would negatively affect private consumption–more so, if the housing market was negatively affected as well. Public consumption in oil-producing provinces may also be negatively affected (assuming they do not adjust their fiscal balance targets). Interprovincial trade and labor mobility (which increased alongside the energy boom in Canada’s western provinces) would also be negatively affected. The historically strong relationship between oil prices and the Canadian exchange rate would indicate a weaker currency that would help cushion the growth effects through non-energy exports. Lower energy costs could also benefit consumers and help increase exports, investment, and employment in non-energy sectors and provinces, especially in the context of a slightly stronger U.S. growth. Simulations suggest that typically a 10 percent decline in oil prices, driven largely by supply factors, reduces Canada’s GDP growth by less than 0.1 percentage point per year , cumulating to about ¼ percent lower level of GDP over the medium term (Chart). The output losses would, however, be noticeably larger if demand factors increasingly drive lower oil prices. The effects on headline inflation are felt on impact while the pass-through to core inflation is small. The effects of falling energy prices would in part be offset by exchange Page 18 Box 3. Lower Oil Prices: Implications for Canada (concluded) rate depreciation (and monetary policy would ease to react). The deterioration in the current account is small and short-lived. Overall, the effects would be smaller if U.S. demand remains strong, oil price decline is perceived as temporary, and/or there is meaningful progress on important energy infrastructure projects which would support exports and investment and keep the margin between WCS and WTI narrow.2/ Preliminary reactions from the industry Canadian oil sands producers are taking a long-term view of the global oil market but have indicated spending cuts in the near term in response to the current low crude price environment . Typically, oil sands projects are based on long-term price expectations and decades-long production profiles. Suncor Energy, the largest Canadian energy company by market capitalization, plans to cut capital spending by $1 billion in 2015 from previously planned $7.2–$7.8 billion while keeping average production of 540,000–585,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day, compared to $7.8 billion capital spending and 565,000–610,000 barrels of oil production planned for 2014. Canadian Natural Resources, the largest oil and gas producer and the second largest energy company by market capitalization, plans a somewhat lower production in the short term along with a large cut in its 2015 capital budget (from $8.6 billion to $6.2 billion). The companies expect major projects that are already underway for oil sands and heavy oil to move forward as planned but new projects will be deferred. Over a longer run, pipeline capacity remains the main issue for Canada’s crude oil production.3/ ________________________________ 1/ According to Alberta’s government, most projects have already committed large amounts of capital and are increasingly shifting to the production phase. More broadly, investment decisions are also linked to infrastructure issues, and progress on any major infrastructure projects to export oil would likely help sustain investment. 2/ The price discount between the Canadian oil sands price (WCS) and WTI, which has varied between US$15–20 per barrel recently, is only in part driven by quality differentials. 3/ While approval or implementation of major pipeline projects continue to face significant resistance, other projects have become operational in 2014 enhancing pipeline capacity to and from the U.S. refining center in Cushing (such as Keystone XL’s southern leg, Enbridge’s Flanagan South pipeline, Seaway twinning). In addition, transporting crude oil by rail remains an important alternative. Real GDP Current Account (Percent of GDP difference) Real Consumption Real Investment Core CPI Inflation (Percentage point difference) Headline CPI Inflation (Percentage point difference) Canada: Oil Price Shock Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 19