A modest recovery in the near term . GDP growth is projected to recover gradually to 1.7 percent in 2016 and 2.2 percent in 2017. The projection assumes another 30 percent decline in investment spending by the energy sector in 2016 since oil prices are likely to be range-bound as markets search for a new equilibrium; a gradual pick up in non-energy exports, as manufacturing regains competitiveness and U.S. demand remains strong; and in line with this, growth in business investment is expected to strengthen starting in 2017 as the drag from cuts in energy-related investment spending dissipates and stronger non- energy exports absorb available capacity. Imports are projected to increase over the medium term and real business credit gradually recovers to sustain the expansion in business investment. Private consumption is expected to remain solid, supported by easy monetary policy and steady increase in household credit. Fiscal stimulus is expected to boost growth and facilitate a faster return to potential. Cautious optimism over the medium- term outlook. The oil shock has prompted a fundamental process of structural adjustment. Capital and labor are being reallocated from the resource to the non-resource sectors (Figure 2). The manufacturing and services sectors are expected to benefit although it will take time for capacity that was eroded during the oil boom years to be restored. How this transformation plays out will determine the outcome on growth. In this context, supportive On a calendar year basis, the fiscal stimulus is expected to boost growth by ¼ to ½ percentage points in 2016 and 2017, respectively (see paragraph 20). Adjustment in the labor market is ongoing. British Columbia and Ontario have shown strong net job growth, especially in the services sector (170,000 jobs has been added between 2014Q4 and 2016Q1). In goods- producing industries, including the higher-paying mining, oil and gas sector, employment has been relatively weak. ill pp pp ili Page 18 demand policies would help facilitate the structural adjustment and make structural reforms that have upfront costs more palatable. Staff assumes a smooth transition that will enable Canada to take advantage of shifting global trade patterns and raise potential growth to about 2 percent in the medium term, which is still lower than the annual average of 2¼ percent over the past 15 years (Table 4).