The authorities stressed their commitment to address the following challenges facing the country, in their efforts to boost growth Consolidating peace and security, and re-establishing state authority throughout the country Security has been improving with the help of the UN peacekeeping mission and the French military contingent, SANGARIS. Nevertheless, security conditions remain volatile in, Bangui, the capital city and in some other parts of the country, including the North-East diamond-producing regions, which remain under the full control of armed groups, hindering the restoration of state authority. The return and resettlement of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) are a major political, economic and social priority. The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, and reinsertion of ex-combatants into civilian life are crucial to reduce security risks and boost economic activity. The security policy is being reshaped, with a view to scale up, in a context of a civil security format, specialized forces (police and gendarmerie), with adequate training and equipment needs. The needs for the latter are significant to enable the security forces to maintain state authority across the country. At the same time, a concerted reconciliation campaign is needed, as the fighting has divided the population along religious lines. The authorities are designing, in concertation with their partners, a security reform that will redefine the respective roles of the army, gendarmerie and police, that will be complemented with training and capacity building. Restoring and building basic infrastructure and utilities Even before the 2013 crisis, the supply of electricity and access to safe drinking water were poor and mainly limited to Bangui. Large parts of the country were inaccessible due to the poor road conditions which deteriorated further during the crisis. Private economic infrastructure has been destroyed, from factories in the forestry sector to service providers, including in the oil sector where there are only 8 gasoline stations for the whole country. The authorities are already implementing, with their development partners, an investment plan in the energy sector (that is expected to double power generation over the next three years) and road transportation. A wave of violence erupted in the middle of June 2016 in Bangui and also in the Northern part of the country. MINUSCA’s intervention helped restore a fragile security. Page 18 Mobilizing domestic revenues and returning to normal budget procedures: In the face of such daunting challenges, domestic resources are scarce and insufficient to meet wage payments, key social outlays and external debt service. This has led to a significant dependence on external aid which reached 27 percent of GDP in 2015 after a plateau of 43 percent of GDP in 2014 (Figure 2 Text Table 1). Rebuilding and modernizing the revenue administration, improving tax policy, and restoring normal budget processes are the cornerstone for the return to fiscal sustainability and to ensure that expenditures are well managed. The authorities have adopted actions plans to address these challenges. On the revenue side, they intend to review the tax policy and the management of their natural resources. On the expenditure side, the authorities intend to move ahead with the second phase of the wage bill reform, including human resource management. Figure 2. Central African Republic: Total Revenue (excluding grants), 1995-2015 Percent of GDP CAR SSA Type of Support Humanitarian aid Project aid Grants Loans Budget support Total Memorandum Items: Domestic Revenue Sources: C.A.R authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Text Table 1. Central African Republic: External Support, 2014–19 Percent of GDP Projections Act. Act. Improving social conditions Social and economic conditions are among the lowest in the world, as reflected in C A R ’s rank of 187 out of 188 countries on the UNDP 2015 Human Development Index (Figure 3). Raising income levels – which stagnated before collapsing in 2012 (Figure 4) – and improving access to health, education, and safe drinking water, are therefore critical to reduce widespread poverty and promote human development. The authorities will redeploy social service in the country and undertake significant investments in health and education. Page 19 Figure 3. Central African Republic: HDI trends for selected Sub-Saharan African countries, 1990–2014 Rwanda Liberia Sub-Saharan Africa Benin Central African Republic Source: 2015 Human Development Index, UNDP. Figure 4. Central African Republic: Real GDP per capita, 1990–2015 (CFAF thousands) Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Improving competitiveness. C.A.R. ranked 185 th out of 189 countries on the World Bank Doing Business Index for 2016. It ranked bottom on four of the ten components of the index: paying taxes, trading across borders, enforcing contracts, and resolving insolvency; and close to bottom on the remaining six components. The Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom shows weaknesses in property rights, corruption, and business freedom. C.A.R. ranked 145 th out of 167 countries on Transparency International’s 2015 corruption perceptions index. The authorities have started an inclusive dialogue with the private sector and they are taking steps are reducing red tapes, corruption and improving financial sector intermediation. Staff argued that the real effective exchange rate (REER) has appreciated sharply Following a long period of stability, the REER appreciated by almost 63 percent from 2013 to 2015, mainly reflecting the sharp increase in inflation observed during the crisis. This highlights the substantially weaker external position for C.A.R (see attached technical note on the external sector assessment). The authorities agreed with staff assessment of the external sector. They noted that inflationary pressures are receding and they are ready to take further actions to bring the consumer price inflation in line with the regional convergence rate. C.A.R. participates in a currency union and the exchange system common to all members operates without restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current transactions (see informational annex). The loss of competitiveness would be best addressed by the removal of structural bottlenecks to growth . Enhancing C.A.R. non-price competitiveness requires substantial structural reforms to improve: (i) the challenging business environment (especially the cumbersome business, regulatory, and trade regulations for starting a business, getting Page 20 electricity and accessing credit); and (ii) the institutional and governance environment (especially the labor and competition policies, as well as the quality of public administration). The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment and are committed to move forward with such reforms (simplified investment code and updated mining code and telecommunications regulations) that would generate, over time, tangible productivity gains, mainly by bolstering private sector investment and expansion as well as public sector efficiency (including through more effective policy making and use of development assistance).