Volume of new debt in PV of new debt in 2016 (program purposes) PV of new debt in 2016 (including negative GEs) USD million Percent USD million Percent USD million Percent Social policy is a critical component of the authorities’ strategy to exit fragility and rebuild national cohesion (MEFP, ¶28). The overarching goals of the government are: (i) assisting the IDPs and refugees return to their lands and assets; (ii) reorganizing and redeploying public administration throughout the country; (iii) improving access to drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene; (iv) rehabilitating educational facilities to ensure full coverage and quality education at all levels to children of both sexes, across the country; and (v) revitalizing the health system, including strengthening the fight against HIV/AIDS. Page 24 Box 2. Proposed Capacity Building Framework Challenges and lessons from recent technical assistance (TA) provision : During the political transition period from January 2014 to March 2016, the donor community offered technical assistance (TA) in the areas of treasury management, public financial management (connecting the key modules of the public finance management system), and macro fiscal capacity. In addition, a bilateral donor posted several long term experts covering budget, customs, the wage bill, and aid management. Delivery of Fund TA was hampered by the suspension of TA missions due to the deterioration of the security conditions. Forward-looking macro challenges and policy priorities : Looking ahead, TA will be needed to help the authorities: (i) improve VAT collection; (ii) rationalize tax and customs exemptions; (iii) reform the tax and customs administration; and (iv) reform the diamond, telecom and forestry taxation. On public financial management , the focus will be on improving the accounting framework and the reporting system while building some macro fiscal capacity. Regarding the wage bill , the focus will be on completing the cleaning of the roster, securing the final register, simplifying hiring procedures, implementing management and training tools for human resource managers and assessing performance. On public debt management , TA will be needed to: (i) modernize the institutional and regulatory framework for public debt management; (ii) improve debt management strategy; (iii) strengthen analytical and operational capabilities of debt managers; and (iv) strengthen the capacity to record and monitor public debt. Lastly, TA will aim at improving macro fiscal capacity and statistics, including national accounts, consumer prices, and balance of payments. Fund TA : In the context of a new ECF arrangement, TA priorities that will be covered by Fund are: (i) macro fiscal capacity; (ii) tax policy; (iii) revenue administration; (iv) macroeconomic statistics; and (v) public debt management. Main results expected from TA during 2016–19: The timely provision of TA will help the authorities achieve the following measurable targets: (i) improve domestic revenue from 7.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 10.1 percent in 2019; (ii) reduce the wage bill from 6 percent of GDP in 2015 to 4.5 of GDP in 2018, including hiring new staff to meet the needs in the social sectors; (iii) produce the treasury balances on a quarterly basis, starting in 2016. Milestones in terms of outcomes : They are as follows: (i) link annual budget preparations and the medium-term macroeconomic framework underpinning the authorities ‘growth and poverty reduction strategy; (ii) improve revenue from the downstream oil sector, forestry and mining sectors; (iii) streamline tax exemptions: (iv) streamline and modernize processes for large taxpayers/importers, secure revenue collection through commercial banks network, and prevent and fight against VAT fraud; (v) improve compilation in national accounts, and immediate review CPI compilation for 2013 to eliminate methodological errors and ensure consistency with the series in 2014 and 2015; and (vi) review the institutional and regulatory framework for public debt management and improve debt management strategy in 2016. Authorities’ absorptive constraints: Domestic administrative capacity—already low before the crisis—has further weakened in 2013 due to losses in terms of staffing, equipment and infrastructures. The Ministry of Finance and Budget, the Institute of Statistics and Prices, and the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, the three government units involved in economic and financial affairs are understaffed, poorly equipped, and work under difficult conditions, including a lack of sufficient energy to power computers and office equipment. As part of their CBF pilot, the new authorities are committed to improve capacity and make the best use of the TA that will be provided by the development partners and the Fund. They are also committing to train staff in place and hire young qualified staff if possible. Risks: The first risk relates to security which remains volatile despite recent progress. Other risks include delayed support from the development partners, and the lack of local qualified experts. This could limit the effectiveness of the new TA on improving capacity. To mitigate the security risk, the authorities are planning to send staff to outside locations for training. To offset the lack of specialized local staff, they plan to hire young college graduates and train them in the specialty identified as crucial to improve capacity. Page 25