The macroeconomic framework of the ECF-supported program is built upon achievable growth rates (MEFP, ¶11). With improved security conditions, real GDP growth is projected at 5.2 percent in 2016, and should remain around an average of 5.5 percent in the medium term, reflecting a rebound in agriculture following the return of the remaining IDPs and refugees, a continued pick up in trade and transportation, and a boost in construction with the implementation of major public investment projects in energy and social sectors. Inflation is projected to return to the regional convergence rate of 3 percent, associated with the increase in agricultural output and better supply conditions. The current account deficit is projected to remain at about 9.7 percent of GDP given the sizable imported reconstruction material needs. Gross official foreign reserves are projected to rise steadily from 4 months of imports in 2016 to 5 months of imports in 2019, a level that helps the country smooth consumption and face external shocks. Financing needs, which are covered, are expected to decline from 4.8 percent of GDP in 2016 to 3.2 percent of GDP in 2019. The risks to the program are tilted to the downside. They include: (i) a resumption of violent conflict which could prevent implementation of the program, lead to a return to, or escalation of the use of emergency spending procedures, and undermine the economic recovery that the program seeks to achieve; (ii) delayed disbursements in donor funding for both the economic and security reforms, including the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of ex-combatants; and (iii) the inexperience of the new government. The materialization of these risks (see the Risk Assessment Matrix Table 11) could complicate policy implementation and hinder growth prospects (Box 3 and text table 3). Page 26 Box 3: Risks and Alternative Policy Responses Staff and the authorities discussed the scenario of protracted lower growth and agreed on possible policy responses to meet the program target. Continued volatile security conditions associated with delays in security reforms and slow recovery of the agriculture, mining and forestry can lead to lower growth and higher inflation. This would result in a higher domestic primary deficit, higher financing gap, and higher public debt compared to the program target. Lower exports and wider current account deficits would lead to a slower increase in international reserves. In this context, the financing gaps will be covered through a mix of additional adjustment averaging 1 percent of GDP (authorities are committed to reduce domestically-financed capital spending, delay new hiring, and restrain other non-priority current spending) and a less-ambitious arrears clearance strategy. Text Table 3. Central African Republic: Selected Economic Indicators, Low Growth Scenario, 2015–21 Real GDP growth (percent change) Inflation (percent change) Domestic Primary Balance (percent of GDP) Reserve Coverage (months of imports) Public debt (percent of GDP) Financing Gap Sources : C.A.R. authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 48.5 49.8 46.7 43.7 57.8 54.3 40.9 38.7 53.0 52.9