RECONSTRUCTION The return to democratic institutions provides a new window of opportunity for C.A.R. to engage on the path of national reconciliation, good governance, and better economic management. The peaceful elections in early 2016 brought to an end a protracted political transition and the return to democratic institutions. This enhances the prospects of ending the political instability in the country that erupted in 2013 when armed rebels overthrew the democratically elected government, leading to violent fighting along religious lines. State institutions collapsed, economic activity ceased, civilians fled to internal camps or abroad, and a humanitarian crisis ensued. With help from the international community, a transitional government was eventually set up in January 2014. The United Nations put in place a peace keeping mission mandated to restore security, protect civilians, support the transition to democracy, and restore the rule of law. Following several delays for financial, security or logistical reasons, presidential and legislative elections were held in early 2016, leading to the election of President Touadera and a new parliament. The elections were generally acclaimed as free and the results widely accepted and President Touadera formed a coalition government composed of representatives from a wide array of political parties, but excluding some minority groups. The new government is turning its attention to development challenges, with a focus on peace, governance, and economic management . It has announced that its long-term objectives are to reduce widespread poverty by reinforcing security, fostering national reconciliation and social peace, strengthening human and administrative capacity, and undertaking economic reforms. Consistent with these challenges, the authorities intend to: (i) undertake a comprehensive reform of the security services (RSS); (ii) further mobilize revenue collection and rein in non priority public spending, while ramping up pro-poor spending; (iii) strengthen the government institutional capacity; and (iv) improve competitiveness. The RSS will be a key element of the government’s medium-term strategy. This comprehensive security reform plan is being worked out between the authorities and stakeholders. The key issues relate to the departure of many old and untrained officers, the place of the ex-combatants in the society, and the role of a new army, with most of the donors favoring a shift to a civil security format, with small specialized forces to ensure security. The reform will require significant financial support from development partners and is not expected to impact the public finances. It is expected to be submitted to the donor community in November 2016. Page 12