DEVELOPMENTS Despite the progress achieved in the context of the emergency program, economic growth remained elusive, and fiscal revenue insufficient to cover current primary spending. The return to democratic institutions and the restoration of a peace –albeit fragile- provides a historic window of opportunity for C A R to focus on longer term issues. The crises during 2013 followed by a protracted political transition in 2014–15 provide the context for recent economic developments. Following a 4.1 percent rise in 2012, real GDP growth contracted by an estimated 36.7 percent in 2013. During the transition, economic activity remained weak, reaching 1 percent in 2014, before rising to 4.8 in 2015, driven by an uptick of subsistence agricultural activity, construction, transportation and trade. Inflation peaked at 11.6 percent in 2014 and receded to 4.5 percent in 2015 thanks to improved supply conditions resulting from enhanced security along the Douala-Bangui transport corridor, a fall in the prices of some basic imports, and improved distribution networks (Table 1 and MEFP, ¶5). Per capita growth, which stagnated throughout the pre-crisis, collapsed in 2012 and did not recover during the transition. Furthermore, the crisis led to a deterioration of all social indicators, as suggested by the 2015 Human Development Report which ranked C A R at 187 out of 188 countries, with a Human Development Index significantly lower than the average sub-Saharan Africa (Box 1). Fiscal and current account deficits widened . The primary fiscal position shifted from a small surplus in 2012 to a deficit of 3 percent of GDP in 2015 (Tables 2 and 3). This was attributable to a collapse in domestic revenue to 4.9 percent of GDP in 2014 (from 11.5 percent of GDP in 2012) before rebounding to 7.1 percent of GDP in 2015 thanks to corrective measures taken during the last year of transition. At the same time, current primary spending remained at about 9.7 percent of GDP, of which 6 percent representing the wage bill. Domestically-financed capital spending fell to 0.4 percent of GDP in 2015, from 1.5 percent in 2012. The current account deficit doubled since 2012 to 9 percent of GDP, mainly reflecting a collapse in exports of diamonds and forestry products. The treasury situation remained tight during the first half of 2016 despite strong revenue performance and strict expenditure control (Table 6a) . During the first quarter, domestic revenue, together with the financial reserves accumulated at end-December 2015, helped cover salaries, pensions, and debt service obligations, including vis-a-vis the IMF. For the second quarter, the authorities faced a treasury gap of CFAF 10 billion which prompted donors to provide bridge emergency support as they were reassured by the discussions on a new ECF-supported program. The crisis led the country to be assessed at high risk of external debt distress. Public debt rose from 23.5 percent of GDP in 2012 to 48.5 percent of GDP in 2015, as a result of the significant fall in GDP and increases in domestic payment arrears. During the emergency period, C A R received significant support in the form of grants, with limited new debt financing. The first Page 14 Box 1. Central African Republic: Exiting the Fragility Trap Despite its abundant natural resources, C.A.R. has been trapped in persistent fragility since independence in 1960. C.A.R.’s main sources of fragility include: (i) a lack of common vision; (ii) weak governance; (iii) lack of education and employment opportunities; and (iv) lasting political conflicts. These sources reinforce each other and keep CAR in a persistent “fragility trap”. Protracted political crises led to a deficit of institutions and the disintegration of the state, and undermined efforts to develop the country’s rich and diverse endowment and sustainable development path. This fragility trap has kept the country in extreme poverty with the lowest rankings of social and economic indicators in the world. The experiences of seven Sub-Saharan African countries that have managed to exit fragility point to the key drivers for building resilience. Using the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) ratings and incidents of conflicts to define fragility, seven countries have been identified as “becoming resilient” since 1990s: Cameroon, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda and Uganda. A panel regression model of the seven countries is used to regress the CPIA index of the seven countries on the following independent variables: development aid, tax revenue and current expenditure, education and health expenditures (all in percent of GDP). Three variables - inflation, growth of real GDP per capita, and terms of trade - are used as control variables. The sample period covers 14 years from the most fragile year for each country. The estimation results suggest that maintaining macroeconomic and political stability, building strong fiscal institutions and collecting efficiently domestic revenue, scaling up development aid and social spending can help the countries in building resilience towards exiting fragility. The key elements of a strategy that can help C.A.R. build resilience to exit fragility include fostering long-lasting domestic security, maintaining political stability, and improving macroeconomic performance and creating conditions that are conducive to economic recovery. Public expenditure should be oriented to priority spending such as health, education and security and public investment that are essential for engineering inclusive growth and maintaining political stability. At the same time, it is critical for the government to build strong fiscal institutions and funding to finance those essential government services above. Efforts and resources should first focus on “low hanging fruits” such as strengthening cash management, VAT and petroleum taxation and strengthening the treasury single account. In addition, scaling up external budget assistance and technical support in capacity building can help CAR address its daunting challenges of overcoming persistent fragility through security and economic reforms. This requires strong coordination between the United Nations, development partners, and security partners. major loan was signed in December 2015 by the Transition Government with Saudi Arabia for CFAF 45 billion (5 percent of GDP) to finance investment in infrastructure and social sectors. The loan is concessional with a grant element of 49 percent. The financial sector, the smallest in CEMAC, is largely underdeveloped and plays a limited role in supporting the economy . Only about 1 percent of the population holds a bank account and 0.5 percent has access to credit. Access to mobile banking remains low, dampening the potential expansion of access to financial services (Figure 1). The fragile security, together with the absence of appropriate guarantee instruments, the lack of long-term resources, and a poor judicial system capable of supporting debt collection are impediments to a sound credit expansion to the private sector, beyond a small core of clients that have adequate accounting practices. Demand for credit was at the same time weak reflecting the fragile security environment and the loss of investors’ assets during the crisis. Financial sector indicators show that while the overall liquidity has increased in 2015, banks’ asset quality remains precarious (Table 9 and MEFP, ¶8 and ¶9). Non-performing loans represent close to one third of all loans, mostly due to the large stock of outstanding government payment arrears (about 50 percent of Page 15 the sector’s NPLs), and government arrears to its suppliers. Banks have recently increased provisioning of NPLs to about 70 percent (compared with about 50 percent in March 2015), reducing banks’ capital, which remains broadly adequate, and profitability. Bank lending activities tend to be concentrated in short-term loans to the public sector, leaving banks exposed to sovereign risk. Page 16 Figure 1. Central African Republic: Financial Inclusion Statistics 1. Financial Inclusion - a Regional Comparison (in percent, most recent years) 3. Financial Inclusion by Gender (in percent, most recent years) Female Male 5. Mobile Phone Used to Receive Money (in percent, most recent years) 2. Financial Inclusion by Income (in percent, most recent year) Poorest 40% Richest 60% Overall By income Overall 4. Financial Inclusion by Income (in percent, most recent years) Poorest 40% Richest 60% 6. Formal and Informal Savings (in percent, most recent years) Formal Formal and Informal Source : World Bank Global Findex database. Note: CAR = Central African Republic, CMR = Cameroon, CEMAC = Central African Monetary and Economic Community, TCD = Chad, COG = Republic of Congo, GAB = Gabon. SSA frontier economies refer to the following countries: Ghana, Kenya, Mauritius, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. Page 17 MEDIUM-TERM CHALLENGES AND POLICIES: