Maintaining macroeconomic stability is a prerequisite for growth. Staff and the authorities agreed that macroeconomic stability and structural reforms should help lift growth prospects and attract investors On the fiscal side, with external budget support expected to steadily decline over the medium term, the emphasis will be on efforts to mobilize domestic resources and control spending through key structural reforms. The authorities have readied medium-term action plans to that effect. They noted, however, that low capacity, the continued presence of armed groups, the poor state of the revenue administration, deep-rooted rigidities, and the high expectations of the populations require careful prioritization of reforms, continued external support, and further technical assistance. Taking into account these constraints, staff and the authorities agreed on a set of medium-term macroeconomic policies and reforms that would pave the way for a return to macroeconomic stability and sustainable growth (MEFP, ¶11). Enhancing revenue mobilization Staff and the authorities concurred to further increase domestic revenues through the implementation of the medium-term action plan prepared in 2015 and updated in March 2016 together with an FAD TA mission . With a view to raise domestic revenue from 7.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 10.1 percent of GDP by 2019, the plan aims at: (i) broadening the tax base and simplifying tax procedures, including improving management of the VAT system and the base for assessing export taxes; (ii) strengthening tax and customs administration, including introducing pre-completed tax returns for real estate; revision of fiscal exemptions agreements; (iii) harmonization of the General Investment Code by implementing the CEMAC directives on VAT and duties; and (iv) streamlining and enhancing management of tax exemptions (MEFP, ¶17). Improving public financial management and the efficiency of spending Staff and the authorities concurred on the need to keep the wage bill in check. Efforts will continue to bring the wage bill down from 6 percent of GDP in 2015 to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2019 (MEFP, ¶15). In this context, the authorities are planning to continue streamlining the public sector work force through: (i) the continued cleaning of the civil service roster; (ii) the timely retirements of eligible civil servants (CFAF 150 millions); (iii) the gradual elimination of non-regular civil servants (CFAF 150 millions); and (iv) the repatriation of diplomats whose assignments have ended in 2016 or before (CFAF 60 millions). The expected savings for the period 2016-19 will help scale up poverty spending and domestically-financed investment Page 21 spending, and clear more domestic payments arrears. Staff will assess, with the authorities, the budgetary impact of the reforms in the security sector, once finalized, ahead of an international donor conference scheduled in November 2016. Staff and the authorities agreed that the cash constraint is the fundamental anchor of the program. Accordingly, they will pursue strict treasury management and widen the coverage of treasury operations This will help: (i) ensure that more efforts will be made at revenue mobilization; (ii) calibrate available resources with priority spending; and (iii) avoid accumulating domestic payments arrears. In this regard, the authorities have prepared a monthly treasury plan for 2016 and 2017 (Tables 6a & 6b) whose execution will be monitored by the Treasury committee through monthly review meetings chaired by the Minister of Finance and Budget. Staff and the authorities agreed to strengthen the fiscal policy framework to improve public financial management (PFM) and the efficiency of public spending . The authorities prepared, with the support of the Fund and other partners, an action plan aimed at improving and modernizing public financial management (MEFP, ¶18-19). The objectives of the plan are to: (i) secure and strengthen treasury management by widening the coverage of treasury operations to all government operations and identifying all government accounts in commercial banks and move towards a reinforced single Treasury account; (ii) strengthen the recently established Central Accounting and Treasury Agency (ACCT), including launching a sensitization campaign to explain the role of this new unit; (iii) normalize the expenditure process (commitment, settlement, authorization, payment) and limit emergency spending procedures (budget and cash payment orders) to 5 percent of non-wage and debt-service expenditures; (iv) re-establish proper accounting practices for all government operations, for the general budget and budget annexes, including reinforcing the public management information system to produce monthly accounting balances; and (v) re-establish the credibility of the state by fighting corruption and fraud and by re-gaining creditor confidence. In this context, the government will rigorously enforce the law requiring ministers to declare their assets within 60 days of appointment. Furthermore, it is considering creating a committee of wise persons to pave the way for implementing a coherent anti-corruption framework, following international best practices. At the same time, a plan is under discussion to improve the public investment framework to enhance project execution. C. Restoring debt sustainability through a strengthening of public debt