The IMF provided significant support during the 2014-2015 political transition through three disbursements under the RCF. Performance by the authorities under their program created favorable conditions for longer term engagement. The IMF and the international community supported the transition’s government emergency program with significant financial assistance and targeted technical assistance The transition authorities improved treasury management, streamlined the civil service roster to contain a ballooning wage bill, and put in place a collaborative institutional framework. Donors provided significant budgetary aid, humanitarian assistance, and project support. The three successive disbursements under the RCF provided SDR 22.28 million (20 percent of new quota). In the 2011 Article IV consultation, the authorities were encouraged to maintain macroeconomic stability while substantially increasing investment to address structural gap. Directors called for measures to ensure budget execution in line with the priorities approved by Parliament. They also recommended putting in place a mechanism for adjusting domestic petroleum products on a monthly basis. Directors stressed the need to strengthen public debt management, contract new debt on concessional terms to preserve debt sustainability, and clear arrears. They identified improving financial intermediation, removing structural rigidities, including expanding access to electricity, and improving the business environment as key structural reforms to uplift growth prospects. Notwithstanding the political and security crisis that prevailed, most of these reforms are underway, including those aimed at enhancing the contribution of the banking sector to growth and expand electricity supply. Performance under three successive RCF disbursements set the stage for an upper credit tranche program and staff sees merit in longer-term engagement. The authorities have rebuilt basic state functions and core capacity, and delivered on macroeconomic management objectives and structural reforms—even under difficult political and security conditions. The new authorities have requested an ECF arrangement to meet protracted balance of payments needs. The latter would persist beyond the medium term because of a slow take off of their export earnings capacity due to the lingering impact of the partial embargo on diamond exports, low timber prices, and rising imports to meet the country’s food needs and reconstruction and investment requirements. The ECF-supported program aims to provide a macroeconomic framework to that will strengthen substantially and in a sustainable manner its balance of payments position consistent with strong and durable poverty reduction and growth. In line with this objective, the ECF will help mobilize revenue, improve efficiency of spending, scale-up social and infrastructure investment, anchor priority structural reforms, and mobilize and coordinate support from development partners. The Kimberly Process Certification Scheme (KCPS) lifted the embargo on the sale of diamonds produced in the green zone (South west part of the country) in June 2015. A partial embargo remains on the diamonds produced in the North East regions, where the most important mines are located. Page 13