It is proposed that C.A.R.’s program be supported by an arrangement under the Fund’s Extended Credit Facility (ECF) over three years . The financing gap is projected to decline from 4.8 percent of GDP in 2016 to 3.2 percent of GDP in 2019. With a cumulative gap of CFAF 190 billion, the proposed access of 75 percent of quota (SDR 83.55 million or equivalent to about CFAF 68 billion) is sufficient to close about 36 percent of the gap. Access would be below the norm. Staff proposes a slightly frontloaded disbursement schedule for the first year of the program (Table 10), that would help C.A.R. cover the large financing need in 2016, and the heavy repayment schedule to the Fund. For 2016, the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the European Union, and France have committed resources amounting to CFAF 30 billion which together with Fund support will help cover the CFAF 50 billion gap (Table 7). For the first half of 2017, financing needs are projected at CFAF24 billion. They will be covered by drawings on the financial reserves accumulated at end-December 2016, disbursements from donors who have tentatively committed at this stage CFAF 10.2 billion, and IMF support. For the remainder program period there are good prospects that any residual gaps will be filled. The first test dates would be end-August and end-December 2016. C.A.R. has a good track record of financial relations with the Fund and an adequate capacity to repay (Table 8). Fund support is essential for the successful implementation of C.A.R.’s economic program, and its catalytic role in the mobilization of budget support from multilateral and bilateral partners will help ensure that the program is fully financed. Looking forward, additional support for the outer years is expected to be discussed at a donors’ conference in October, including the World Bank turnaround facility. In early May, The BEAC Board of Governors agreed to extend the C.A.R. authorities an exceptional advance for an amount of CFAF 9.24 billion. Staff and the government agreed to use this advance only as a bridge loan in case a disbursement is delayed. Once the latter takes place, the amount disbursed will be repaid. The government will consult with staff each time such case arises. Page 30 Box 4. Central African Republic: The Wage Bill in percentage of GDP, unless indicated otherwise CEMAC: Wage Bill Development and Projections, 2012-15 Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Republic of Congo Equatorial Guinea Gabon Memorandum Item: Population (millions) Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Republic of Congo Equatorial Guinea Gabon A rising wage bill . During 2014–15, the transition government, with technical and financial support from the World Bank and UNDP, cleaned the civil service roster with a view to bringing the wage bill to CFAF 50.8 billion, its 2012 level, the year before the major political and security conflict of 2013. This implied the reduction of 2,500 civil servants for a saving of CFAF 4.8 billion. However, by end of 2015, the number of civil servants was reduced by only 1,261 and the savings amounted to CFAF 2.8 billion. By end-2015, the wage bill reached CFAF 56.4 billion (6 percent of GDP). The sharp rise of the wage bill reflects a set of factors, including: (i) the difficult context against which the reform was conducted; (ii) weak administrative hiring practices; (iii) the rapid expansion of the number of high level posts (“hors statut” carrying salary premiums; (iv) delays in repatriating diplomats whose appointment ended; (v) delays in the retirement process; (vi) higher cash allowances and benefits; and (vii) poor human resource management, compounded by a weak public administration. New measures to reduce the wage bill The new government continues to work closely with the World Bank and the UNDP to clean up the civil service roster and reduce the wage bill. Measures to that effect in the context of the third phase of the reform of the wage bill will include: (i) continue the cleaning of the civil service roster through a reduction in the number of “ghost workers and the holders of high level posts, the repatriation of the diplomats who ended their assignment (structural benchmark at end-December 2016), and the timely retirement of thee eligible staff ; (ii) secure the final register; (iii) clarify the recruitment procedures; (iv) implement management and training tools for human resource managers using computer applications adapted to CAR; (v) assess performance. At the same time, the military roster will be cleaned, including accelerating the removal of 700 retirees from the roaster. Uncertainty remains on the size of the army, police and gendarmerie. New recruitment . As the government proceeds with the administration redeployment and implements its strategy to improve social services and improve security, there will be staffing needs to meet. The authorities are currently assessing those needs and their costs in preparation for the donors’ conference that will take place before end-year in Brussels. The cost of hiring new staff in the priority social sectors will be offset to a certain extent by gains made through the continued cleaning of the civil services roster. Components of the Wage Bill, 2015 in percentage Base Salary Benefits and bonuses Family allowances Retroactive adjustments Other allowances Total Share Size of the Public Administration, 2014-15 Wage Bill (billions of CFA franc) Civilians of which: high level posts Military Total Memorandum Item: Population (millions) Sources : C.A.R. Authorities; WETA database; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 31 Performance will be monitored through quantitative performance criteria, indicative targets, and structural benchmarks (MEFP ¶31). Quantitative performance criteria will include: (i) a ceiling on net credit to the government; (ii) a floor on domestic revenues; (iii) a ceiling on the domestic primary deficit; and (iv) a floor on repayment of domestic payment arrears. Continuous performance criteria will include zero ceilings on: (i) non-concessional public and publicly guaranteed debt; and (ii) the accumulation of public sector external payment arrears. An indicative floor will be set for social expenditures. Structural conditionality will focus on supporting domestic revenue, PFM, debt management, and governance. Structural conditionality for the second half of 2017 and 2018 will be proposed at the time of the first review, drawing on significant TA projected in the near time. The authorities attach the highest importance to the success of their program (MEFP, ¶32) . In this context, it will be monitored at the highest levels of the government, including the staffs of the Office of the Presidency, the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Finance and Budget, and the BEAC. Technically, the program will be implemented by the Economic Reform Monitoring Committee (CS-REF), a unit under the authority of the Minister of Finance and Budget that includes representatives of the various ministries and agencies involved in economic and financial affairs.