Staff and the authorities agreed on a medium-term fiscal strategy that strikes a balance between the speed of restoring fiscal sustainability and supporting social spending and economic growth. It will entail: (i) bringing down the domestic primary deficit through steady implementation of reforms to improve revenue collection (Text table 3) and keep spending under control, notably the wage bill, while ramping up social and infrastructure outlays; (ii) managing the outstanding stock of domestic payment arrears to restore confidence in the state and boost private economic activity; (iii) building fiscal buffers to weather volatility; and (iv) reforming the public investment program framework to ensure efficient execution of the public investment program. In line with this strategy, staff and the authorities have agreed on a revised budget for 2016 that will contain the domestic primary balance to 3.3 percent of GDP (MEFP, ¶13 and ¶15). Page 27 Text Table 4. Central African Republic: Projected Yields of Fiscal Measures, 2016–18 (CFAF billions) Custom Total Tax Custom Total Tax Custom Total Tax Domestic revenue Tax base Simplification of the base Other revenue administration actions Rationalization of exemptions Total Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Staff and the authorities reached understandings on a reduction in the domestic primary deficit, the fiscal anchor of the program, to 0.9 percent of GDP in 2019, from 3.0 percent in 2015 . This will be achieved through reforms that will lead to a rise in domestic revenue from 7.1 percent in 2015 to 10.1 percent of GDP in 2019. Higher revenue will result from measures to improve the tax base, simplify procedures, modernize revenue administration, and reduce exemptions (Text table 4). On the spending side, the program targets a rise of 1.5 percentage points of GDP to 16.4 percent during the same period, as the decline in the wage bill (1.5 percentage points of GDP) (Box 4) will be offset by higher goods and services, transfers and subsidies (including pensions) and domestically-financed capital spending which would cumulatively increase from 4.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 6.4 percent in 2019. Higher revenue mobilization will be a central element of the economic program. While the 2016 budget contains a set of revenue measures amounting to CFAF 5.6 billion, staff and the new government identified low hanging fruits that are expected to be included in a revised budget to be sent to Parliament by August 2016. These measures include a modification of the petroleum products price structure to base it on Platts international prices, a revised valuation base for the exports of forestry products, and a more rigorous application of the existing convention with banks on revenue collection to enhance traceability (MEFP, ¶13). These measures are projected to increase revenue by CFAF 2.2 billion (0.2 percent of GDP) in the last quarter of 2016. To safeguard downstream oil revenue in the future, staff and the authorities discussed introducing in 2017 a new pricing mechanism allowing for a full pass-through of international prices to domestic prices . The new pricing mechanism would enhance efficiency in the marketing and consumption of petroleum products, while obviating the need to use scarce budgetary resources to subsidize petroleum products in the event of higher international oil prices. The authorities intend to request technical assistance to shift to this new pricing The reforms envisaged in the context of the initial budget for 2016 included: (i) extending the tax base for income tax; (ii) increasing the VAT rate to 5 percent for previously exempted staples; (iii) modifying the payment procedures for the property tax through an auto-filled return; (iv) strengthening tax and customs controls, including on oil, mining, and forestry activities; (v) improving VAT collection: (vi) introducing special taxes on tobaccos and transport activities: (vii) implementing an integrated computerized system connecting the customs offices in Doula and Bangui; and (viii) strengthening controls on tax and customs exemptions. Page 28 mechanism and simplify the tax components (which presently comprises a range of earmarked taxes). The introduction of the new pricing mechanism would be accompanied by a social safety net program which would be part of a wider social protection program for vulnerable groups. Most importantly, it will be part of the government’s plan to also increase the number of gasoline stations to improve service to consumers. Built-in fiscal buffers will be crucial to face the impact of volatility. In the absence of short term debt instruments, staff and the government concurred on the need to build deposits of about 0.5 percent of GDP by end-2016, and 1.5 percent by 2019 to hedge against volatile aid disbursements, and enable it to regularly pay for wages, pensions and priority spending. These buffers should cover about 2 months of wages, pensions and external debt service (MEFP, ¶12). The program will also focus on the orderly clearance of the large outstanding stock of domestic arrears. This is central to the authorities’ efforts to rehabilitate public financial management and support the economy (MEFP, ¶21). The recent agreement with BEAC, the regional central bank, to consolidate government liabilities totaling CFAF 55 billion is one element of the strategy. The ongoing EU-funded audit of government debt with commercial banks and other contractors (CFAF 30 billion) should lead to the adoption of an action plan to clear them in early 2017, including through securitization. Audits for the other payments arrears, including debt, suppliers, and cross-debts are expected to be launched in the next few months, with a view to adopt by July 2017 an overall plan to settle all arrears. In this context, cutting suppliers arrears is expected to be the top priority. Staff also urged the authorities to strengthen the project management framework. This will help restructure the current public investment program and facilitate project execution. In this context, the upgrade will cover all the stages of project management, including identification of projects, preparation and evaluation, inclusion in the national budget, on site and financial execution, and regular reporting. The authorities agreed that the current framework is weak and needs to be reformed, but noted that they will need significant technical assistance from donors to undertake this crucial task.