Human development indicators are improving slowly in Chad, but challenges to long- term development remain The onset of oil production in 2003 helped increase spending in various socio-economic areas and accelerated economic growth. Real GDP per capita increased by around 20 percent between 2007 and 2014. But because of rapid population growth and domestic armed conflicts that plagued Chad up to 2009, the absolute number of the poor still increased and per capita consumption for the poorest rural households declined. The arrival in 2010 of internal political stability paved the way for improved economic management and Chad achieved the HIPC Completion Point in April 2015. Still, despite the progress, Chad’s human development indicators remain among the lowest in the region (Text Fig. 1). A recent deterioration in external (economic and security) conditions poses challenges to the achievement of the country’s socio-economic development goals. Text Figure 1. Chad: Human Development Indicators – Regional comparison Human Development Index (2011-2015) CAR TCD COG CAM EQG GAB Mortality rate under 5 per 1000 children (2006-2015) years Life expectancy at birth (2006-2014) CAR TCD CAM EQG SSA COG GAB Improved water source - % of population with access (2006-2015) TCD CAR EQG CAM SSA GAB COG EQG TCD SSA CAR CAM COG GAB Sources: World Bank Indicators, UNDP CAR-Central African Republic; TCD-Chad; COG-Republic of Congo; CAM-Cameroon; EQG-Equatorial Guinea; GAB-Gabon SSA: Sub-Saharan Africa (average) Page 9 In Presidential elections in April 2016, President Déby comfortably won a fifth term in office. Mr. Déby, who is in office since 1990, received nearly 62 percent of the votes while running against 12 opposition candidates. Legislative elections are also due for 2016 but no date has been set yet. The massive and persistent decline in oil prices since mid-2014 combined with elevated regional insecurity pose huge challenges for Chad . From 2013 to 2015, Chad has experienced an 80 percent reduction in fiscal oil revenue. This is mainly the result of the drop in oil prices, but also the repayment of the 2016 installments on the oil sales’ advances which funded the government’s acquisition in 2013 of a large oil asset. Meanwhile, the deterioration in regional security is disrupting economic activity, especially cross-border trade. N’Djamena was the target of terrorist attacks by Boko Haram in June and July 2015. Chad plays a key role in the regional military counteroffensive against Boko Haram, and continues to assist the Mali government, bearing the associated fiscal costs. In addition, Chad hosts some 750,000 refugees and displaced people, with significant direct and indirect economic costs. The authorities’ response to those shocks over 2014-15 included a large fiscal adjustment (with a 30 percent reduction in domestically-financed spending) and the mobilization of additional financing . Financing flows included advances from the regional central bank (BEAC), securities’ issuances in the regional market, an agreement on a new repayment schedule of the oil sales’ advances, and budget support from the World Bank, the European Union, the African Development Bank, and Saudi Arabia, complemented by disbursements from the Fund and debt relief under the HIPC Initiative. Still, domestic payment arrears accumulated with knock-on effects on economic activity and the health of the banking system. Traction of previous policy advice has been broadly satisfactory as attested by the approval of an ECF-supported program in 2014 and completion of two reviews by December 2015 (Box 1). The advice of the 2013 Article IV fed into the ECF approved in August 2014 and is being followed up in the context of its reviews. However, the policy dialogue and advice have had to adapt to the impacts of the sharp and sustained fall in oil prices and the deterioration of the security situation. The oil sales’ advances were rescheduled, extending the repayment period from 4 to 6-7 years, but also now calling on other oil revenue beyond the income from the asset, for their repayment. Page 10 Box 1. Chad: Implementation of Key Recommendations from the 2013 Article IV Consultation (completed March 2014) Key recommendations: Fiscal policy should remain anchored on a sustained reduction of the non-oil primary deficit, supported by public management reforms and sizable increases in non-oil revenue collection to offset the projected exhaustion of oil revenue. A more diversified and competitive economy over the medium- and long-terms will require increased efforts to improve the business environment for the private sector, promote agricultural activities, and expand access to basic and financial services. Implementation: A three-year arrangement under an ECF approved in August 2014 planned a smooth decline in the non-oil primary deficit (NOPD) in the context of a doubling of oil export volumes and a gradual decline in international oil prices. The focus of the government’s structural reform agenda under the program was on strengthening public financial management (PFM) and on improving governance and the business climate. Given the sharp decline in oil prices, preserving fiscal and debt sustainability required a much more rapid reduction in the NOPD than planned. A large expenditure compression took place in 2014-2015 combined with the mobilization of more domestic and external (concessional) financing to smooth the adjustment and limit adverse effects on non–oil economic activity. Implementation of structural reforms was framed within the 2013-15 National Development Plan. The use of emergency spending procedures ( Dépenses avant Ordonnancement , DAOs) was curtailed, most CEMAC PFM directives were transposed into domestic legislation, quarterly budget execution reports were published, and inter-ministerial debt and oil revenue coordination units were established. However, actual progress has been slow and uneven due to limits to institutional capacity including the capacity to absorb technical assistance.