The short and medium-term outlooks are challenging in the context of permanent external shocks. Real GDP growth is expected to continue to slow as the non-oil sector lags . Including a contraction of 1.1 percent in 2016, GDP growth is projected to average about 2 percent per year over 2016–18, compared to almost 5 percent over 2013-15. Sizable planned production increases in certain fields have been delayed until oil prices improve sufficiently. A gradual recovery of non-oil GDP growth is expected over 2016-2018, reaching 4 percent per year over the medium term. This would be largely driven by agriculture, commerce, and transportation and as fiscal constraints ease with a rebound of fiscal oil revenues. In contrast, contracting bank credit to the private sector during this period would slow the recovery of non-oil tertiary activities. Text Table 1. Chad: Medium-Term Projections (In percent of non-oil GDP, unless otherwise indicated) The external position is projected to remain weak , with only a gradual improvement in the trade balance starting in 2017. Foreign direct investment in the oil sector will remain a key source of external financing. Imputed international reserves will remain low. Risks are mostly tilted to the downside (Annex 1, Risk Assessment Matrix), reflecting internal and external vulnerabilities. Internally, a potential deterioration in food security is a key risk that could lead to social and political tensions in an already fragile environment and jeopardize the government’s fiscal position as authorities respond to a crisis. Externally, a deterioration of regional security and low (and volatile) international oil prices pose significant fiscal risks and could further dampen economic growth prospects. The pick-up in oil production levels now envisaged for 2018- 19 could be delayed further if oil prices do not recover as currently projected. Budgetary pressures in Chad could spill over to other CEMAC countries through a deterioration in regional security conditions if Chad’s military efforts weakened, or through pressures on the currency union, if Chad presses the regional central bank for additional monetary financing. cc un nu ll ud U un nd ff Page 15