A. Fiscal Policy For some time, the government has made use of fiscal space. Chile’s strong net worth position and credibility of the structural balance rule have allowed fiscal policy to counter the sharp growth slowdown. On average fiscal stimulus reached around ½ percent of potential GDP since 2013. The headline deficit is expected to widen to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2016 as expenditure increases related to the government’s reform program (education, infrastructure) have exceeded revenue gains from the 2014 enacted tax reform, partly as a result of a weak economy. The 2017 budget has appropriately tilted the needle towards fiscal consolidation. The budget proposal is in line with the consolidation path announced last year of about ¼ percent per annum in structural terms although reaching fiscal balance has become more difficult given weaker growth. It aims to largely maintain pro-growth spending plans, in particular education and health care and to a lesser extent infrastructure, within a tight budget envelope. Permissible expenditure growth under the fiscal rule has more than halved relative to 2015 (staff estimates), reflecting downgraded long-term copper prices and trend growth (USD 2.56/lb and 3 percent, respectively, down from USD 2.98/lb and 3.6 percent in the 2016 budget). To limit the scaling back of pro-growth spending, a concerted effort should be made to identify and eliminate inefficiencies in public spending. Fiscal consolidation needs to continue, but Chile can proceed slowly for now. Debt is projected to increase rapidly and reach 25 percent of GDP next year and to 30 percent by 2021. Government financial assets are sizeable at about 21 percent of GDP in 2016, of which more than 50 percent are highly liquid. The general government debt position is resilient to a series of macro and fiscal shocks in the medium term (see Annex IV). A gradual adjustment path over 2017 — 18 can be justified by the government’s positive net worth position; low financing costs; and the focus of the The fiscal rule adjusts the structural balance regularly for changes in estimated trend growth and long-run copper prices. The uncertainty surrounding those estimates implies that it takes time for them to feed through. As a result, fiscal policy was accommodative during the adjustment period to lower copper prices and trend growth post 2011. As of 2016, structural revenues and balances are estimated respectively 2 percent and 1½ percent of GDP lower than estimated using 2011 trend growth and long-run copper price. The government’s adjustment path of ¼ percent of GDP per year has been unchanged but is starting in 2017 from a lower headline fiscal balance than originally estimated in 2015. Together with lower medium-term revenue projections this implies that a larger expenditure adjustment is needed to achieve the same consolidation effort as envisioned last year. dg Page 18 budget on building human capital and infrastructure. However, as growth recovers, and spending needs are addressed, a more ambitious fiscal consolidation path should be adopted. In the meanwhile, any new spending commitments should be part of a budget balance-neutral package. Expenditure programs should be evaluated for effectiveness and targeting improved including by linking free access to tertiary education to means-testing. To buttress fiscal credibility, the Advisory Fiscal Council could be given financial independence and its mandate broadened to assessing annual and medium-term fiscal targets. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with staff. The authorities agreed that maintaining fiscal credibility was a priority and that addressing skill and infrastructure gaps requires a careful balancing act. With regard to the near-term, they reiterated their commitment to fiscal adjustment as a means to safeguard the credibility of the fiscal framework, while using fiscal space. For the medium-term, they saw merit in a comprehensive expenditure review, going beyond the regular program evaluation conducted under the 2017 budget. They also reinstated their intention to strengthen the independence and mandate of the Advisory Fiscal Council, though the legislative agenda is deemed crowded. B. Pension Reform Chile’s pension system is rooted in sound principles. Created in 1981, Chile’s pension system is based on individual savings accounts administered by privately-owned corporations Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones ) and was complemented in 2008 by a publicly-funded solidarity pillar which provides minimum pensions. Over the last 30 years, the fully-funded defined- contribution system has raised national savings, helped develop capital markets, and reduced fiscal risks. The governance of the system is sound, pension investments are well protected, and supervision is effective. The system is, however, not delivering adequate benefits for a large share of retirees. Chile’s average pension is below the minimum wage and estimated replacements rates are very low relative to the OECD average of 63 percent (text table), particularly for women. Low mandatory contribution rates of 10 percent and short contribution periods—largely reflecting discontinuous career paths—are the main reasons. In addition, contributions have not been adjusted to rising life expectancy and dependency ratios. Furthermore, the coverage of workers under the system is narrow (e.g., self-employment, informal labor), and the solidarity pillar does not provide adequate minimum pensions. The government outlined the broad contours of a pension reform. Drawing on recommendations of a 2015 commission report ( Comisión Bravo ), the government has announced Total MenWomen (in percent of average salary over last 10 years) Actual replacement rates (2007-14) Self-financed pension (*)344824Self-financed pension + public benefit (APS)456031 Projected replacement rates (2025-35) Self-financed pension (*)15248Self-financed pension + public benefit (APS)374134 Source: Comisión Bravo (2015). Chile: Median Replacement Rates Page 19 plans to gradually increase contribution rates by 5 percentage points over 10 years; allocate the additional revenue in yet-to-be-determined shares to individual accounts and for solidarity related payments (improving pensions of current retirees); and reduce costs of the pension fund administration. The reform should preserve the current system, but strengthen its delivery (Annex III) Adequate pensions can be achieved through a variety of policies including increases in contribution rates, retirement ages, expansion of mandatory coverage, and an augmented solidarity pillar. A reform package should give consideration to the following measures:  For future retiree s, contribution rates for individual accounts should be raised alongside other measures. An increase of contribution rates to 15 percent would raise replacement rates close to OECD country averages. A gradual increase in the retirement age (currently at 65 years for men and 60 for women) would also similarly increase replacement rates, but given the projected rise in life expectancy by 5 years in 2050 are likely necessary regardless. Importantly, for women a gradual increase of the retirement age to 65 years should be strongly considered given discontinuous lifetime-employment and contributions. Contributions of self-employed should be made mandatory to cover a larger share of workers under the individual accounts.  For current retirees , pension and solidarity pillar benefits should be increased. Given fiscal constraints, any increases in benefits need to take future aging-related commitments into account. Specifically, growth and equity implications of different financing modalities should be studied carefully. For instance, IMF simulations suggest that a pension reform package funded by a mix of higher contributions and indirect taxes would carry lower growth costs than one funded exclusively by increased contribution rates (Annex III). Overall, such a pension reform would lead to more stable life-time incomes for broader segments of the population and likely raise Chile’s savings. Over the near to medium-term, however, higher tax or contribution rates could generate growth costs. For these reasons, the economic effects of any reform need to be assessed carefully alongside its impact on current and future pensions. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the key principles of staff’s recommendations, though noted that any reform needs to support the retired middle class in the short run. Both the authorities and staff agreed that any reform proposal needed to be carefully evaluated for its implications on current and future economic growth, for its long-term fiscal costs and risks, and for the implications on inter and intra-generational fairness. In doing so, any final proposal should then carefully weigh the tradeoffs between efficiency, incentives, inequality, and fiscal considerations. C. Monetary Policy Central bank policy has become more accommodative this year. After remaining above the 2−4 percent target band for over two years, inflation has slowed since the beginning of this year. In parallel, the policy rate has remained unchanged at 3½ percent and the central bank has softened its Page 20 policy guidance in successive policy meetings, dropping its tightening bias in August. In recent months, inflation has decelerated more rapidly than expected, from 4 percent in July to 3.1 percent in September. Although largely the result of a stronger peso since earlier this year, the risk of disinflation spreading to the non-tradable sector has risen given weak economic activity. The central bank should cut rates if disinflation pressures become broad based and persistent, and if the growth slowdown intensifies in coming months. The expected widening of the output gap and slowing wage growth have raised the risk that inflation could undershoot the target for some time. The decision whether to ease now or wait for further evidence needs to weigh the benefits from safeguarding against the risks of a decline in inflation expectations, versus the costs of prematurely reacting to temporary factors. Balancing these considerations, staff agrees with the central bank’s recent adjustments to its forward guidance, its decision to keep rates for now, and to remain data dependent. Authorities’ Views The central bank shared staff’s assessment. The authorities stressed that monetary policy had become more accommodative this year in response to the slowdown in activity and a more subdued inflation outlook. They saw the recent disinflation as broadly in line with the central bank’s baseline forecast, but noted that the pace has been somewhat faster than expected. Going forward, the authorities concurred that policy should remain data dependent. D. Macro Policy Mix The current policy mix is broadly adequate. Permanently lower copper revenue and trend