Staff discussed with the authorities the policy implications of high corporate and household debt. Staff stressed that prudential measures might need to be considered if corporate debt continues to grow, in order to reduce Chile’s vulnerability to adverse shocks. In p articular, consideration could be given to higher risk weights or higher provisioning for commercial credit, in order to increase the resilience of the banking sector to shocks in the corporate sector. The Public Institutions' Tuition Fees and StudentsBenefitting from Assistance Programs USA JAPAUSNZLNLDITAAUTBEL (fl.) BEL (fr.)FRA CHEFINNORDENSWEMEXGBRTUR0.01.53.0 T hou and A ee y li ee m ( U S D PPP G D P ) Percentage of students whobenefit from public loans and/or scholarships/grants Source: OECD, 2011. Page 22 authorities noted that the best indicator of debt is leverage (debt-to-equity ratio) which has been relatively stable over the past two years and comparable to other economies. They also noted that imposing prudential measures that have a broad reach over the corporate sector may be inappropriate at this stage, given the weak economy and the lack of systemic risks from corporate leverage. On household debt, staff welcomed the new provisioning regulation for mortgage loans, which from 2016 onwards will increase provisions for high loan to value (LTV) ratios and delinquent mortgages. Staff argued that tighter LTVs and debt service-to-income ratios could be considered if mortgage credit growth were to accelerate. The authorities responded that the new regulation on provisions was sufficient to address the risks, particularly because mortgage credit growth should decelerate in 2016, after the VAT on first homes is introduced. Forthcoming changes in the General Banking Law will bolster the resilience of the banking sector. The authorities expect to send the new Banking Law to Congress during the second half of 2015. The new law will adapt Basel III capital standards to Chilean banks on a transitional basis and introduce a capital surcharge for domestic systemically important banks. Staff also welcomed the new liquidity regulation (effective from August 2015) and the authorities’ plans to specify the minimum requirements for the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and net-funding stable ratio (NSFR). This will strengthen liquidity risk management and address the risks stemming from the reliance on wholesale funding, particularly for medium and small banks. The authorities noted that the banking sector in general is well prepared to implement Basel III capital and liquidity requirements on a transitional basis. The authorities are also planning to implement a legal framework for bank resolution, broadly in line with the 2011 FSAP recommendations. While the authorities are willing to strengthen the SBIF operational independence, staff emphasized the importance of ensuring that SBIF is given sufficient fina ncial resources to conduct effective implementation of the new regulatory requirements. The search for yield by life insurance companies warrants close attention. Staff stressed the importance of monitoring the potential implications for financial stability from the insurance sector’s expansion to riskier investments. The authorities shared the concerns, although their stress tests suggest that the insurance sector is resilient to large shocks. A new regulation was introduced in 2015 that asks insurance companies to define their risk appetite and introduces a concept of own risk and solvency assessment. But the legislative proposal that introduces risk-based supervision for insurance companies is still in Congress. Staff also enquired on the rapid increase in Chilean pension funds’ exposure abroad, as this could signal a shift of funds’ appetite towards riskier assets. The authorities noted that pension funds are subject to strict regulation regarding their foreign investment, and that the expansion abroad was mainly in response to the lack of investment opportunities in the domestic market. Foreign investment Corporate sector Financial sector Government Total assets growth (RHS, in percent, y/y) Structure of Pensions Funds' Investments (Inpercent of total, unless otherwise stated) Source: Superintendenciade Pensiones (SP). Page 23 Improving the supervision of conglomerates would reinforce the resilience of the financial sector. The Financial Stability Council (FSC) law represents an important step to ward strengthening consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates. The law removed all barriers to information-sharing among supervisors; expanded their power to request information from the final owners of financial institutio ns within the conglomerate; and established solvency requirements for the controlling shareholders of banks and insurance companies. However, supervisors still lack the powers and authority to conduct comprehensive group-wide supervision (including setting risk- based minimum prudential standards and monitoring conglomerates’ compliance with limits on risk exposure). The 2011 FSAP recommended stronger coordination among supervisors and the identificatio n of a group-level supervisor with enhanced powers, including that of establishing risk- based minimum prudential standards for financial conglomerates . The authorities said the biggest challenges are to design a crisis management framework for conglomerates and to s upervise mixed conglomerates, and said they are waiting the final report from a recent technical assistance mission of the IMF.