In staff’s baseline scenario, growth bottoms out in 2014 and then gradually recovers In line with recent data prints, the driving forces behind this scenario are a continued gradual turn-around in private fixed investment, including in mining, and strong net exports, both underpinned by the monetary easing, real depreciation, and the recovering global economy (Box 1). Activity will gather strength in 2015, with growth reaching 4¼ percent (staff’s estimate of long-run potential) in 2016. But there is a clear risk that the recovery could be underpowered and bumpy, held back by sluggish private consumption, near-term policy uncertainty, and international shocks. Inflation will decline to 3 percent over the next 12–18 months as the temporary effects from the peso depreciation wears off. Two risks dominate the outlook (Annex IV). Copper prices Copper represents over half of Chile’s exports, equaling 15 percent of GDP. A further sharp and sustained decline in copper prices—triggered, for example, by a drop in demand from China (which consumes about 40 percent of world copper)—would hurt investment, crimp growth, and require another round of substantial real depreciation. Previous staff analysis suggested that a 10 percent fall in copper prices reduces Chile’s GDP by 0.8 percent over eight quarters. Global financial volatility Financial spillovers to Chile from tapering and emerging market turmoil have been muted. And as shown in the Spring 2014 World Economic Outlook , Chile is less vulnerable to capital flow volatility than most other emerging markets thanks to its robust macroeconomic framework and deep local capital market (including large pension funds). Still, Chile’s large and internationally integrated financial system, the significant real- financial linkages, the increased corporate leverage, and the sizeable gross external financing need expose Chile to sudden stop risk. The authorities are in the process of reassessing their macroeconomic forecasts but broadly agreed with staff on the outlook and risks. On external risks, they saw a disorderly slowdown in China as most important, especially if associated with further postponement of copper- related investment projects. On financial spillover risks, they no longer see tapering as an immediate risk, as the earlier uncertainty has been resolved, but will remain vigilant of any major deviations from announced plans. Medium-term growth prospects and potential growth should improve with implementation of structural reforms. 3040Jan-13Mar-13May-13Jul-13Sep-13Nov-13Jan-14Mar-14 Capital goods imports (US$ million) GDP (proxy IMACEC, annualized rate; RHS) Activity Has Started to Strengthen at the Margin (qoq s.a. growth; in percent)Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Fund staff calculations. 2009-13Projection 2014-19Copper price (US$ per lb)3.343.066-month LIBOR (in percent)0.652.26Real GDP of trade partners3.53.7China real GDP9.27.1US real GDP0.82.7Terms of Trade 5.0-0.6Source: World Economic Outlook (WEO) database. External Conditions (Average; percent change; unless otherwise indicated) Page 9