Chile’s financial system is large, with significant links to the local economy, the region, and the rest of the world Financial system assets exceed 200 percent of GDP. Chilean banks (and corporations) are net borrowers in world markets. Subsidiaries of foreign banks account for a large share of bank assets. Foreign participation is also significant in the insurance and pension fund sectors. Moreover, in recent years, domestic banks have expanded their operations outside of Chile. Further, bank credit equals 77 percent of GDP, so bank linkages to the real economy are large. Thus, the system is exposed to regional and international developments and has extensive linkages to the real economy. So far, the tapering effects have been mild and financial system risks remain contained. Systematic Risk Assessment and Mitigation in Chile , by N. Arregui, Selected Issues Paper, 2013. ChileOECD 1/Other LA6 1/ Global Competitiveness (WEF) Overall Labor Market Flexibility Flexibility of wage determination Hiring and firing practices Redundancy costs, weeks of salary Innovation Innovation capacity Quality of scientific research inst. Company spending on R&D Goods Market Competition Ease of Doing Business (WB) Starting a Business Dealing with Construction permits Resolving Insolvency Selected Indicators of Competitiveness Sources: World Economic Forum (WEF), Global Competitiveness Rankings 2013-2014, World Bank Doing Business 2014 and Fund staff calculations. (percentile rank; higher means better score)1/ Mean. LA6 includes Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay Share of totalShare of GDPBanks52.4107.7Pension fund administrators 1/ 28.959.4Insurance companies10.020.5 Property and casualty1.12.3 Life8.918.2Other fund administrators 1/ 2/8.717.8Total100205.4 2/ Includes mutual funds, investment funds, investment funds for foreign capital. Financial System Structure (2012) (assets as a share of system total and GDP; in percent) Source: Superintendence of Banks and Financial Institutions, Superintendence of Insurance and Securities, Superintendence of Pensions, and Fund staff calculations.1/ Assets under management. Page 14 Chile has made considerable progress in enhancing oversight, but further efforts would strengthen the resilience of the system. Much of the progress has built on the 2011 FSAP (Annex V). But important parts of the agenda remain unfinished. The mission encouraged the new authorities to push forward with reforms to buttress the resilience of the bank and nonbank system. Banking sector soundness is being reinforced While bank soundness indicators do not point to immediate risks, real estate, funding, and corporate leverage developments merit watching. Real estate exposure. Mortgage loans represent about one-quarter of banks’ loan portfolio and the share of mortgages with elevated (80 percent or higher) loan-to-value (LTV) ratios has stabilized at a relatively high 60 percent. Prompt implementation of regulation underway linking mortgage credit provisioning to LTV levels would be important, and further action (hard limits on LTVs and debt-to-income ratios) might need to be considered. The mission also encouraged the authorities to address real estate data gaps, in particular for commercial real estate. Bank funding. The banking system’s loan-to-deposits ratio—an often-used measure of liquidity risk—is high by international comparisons. The main reason is its heavier reliance on institutional deposits and, on the asset side, its higher share of loans. The Basel III Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) is a broader measure and the 2011 FSAP Update found Chilean banks well-positioned to meet the NSFR The mission welcomed the work of the Superintendence of Banks and Financial Institutions (SBIF) and the Central Bank to enhance liquidity regulation and reporting, taking into consideration recent proposals of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Corporate exposure. In recent years, corporate debt has risen (as a share of GDP), and profits and liquidity ratios have worsened from pre-crisis levels, especially in the construction and retail trade sectors that also have a large share in bank commercial debt. Corporate loans represent roughly half of banks’ portfolios, so banks’ exposure is significant. That said, local and global appetite for Chilean corporate debt remains strong, firms’ currency mismatches appear limited, and other indicators of corporate debt vulnerabilities do not point to acute risks (see Annex III). Central bank stress-tests find the banking sector solvent even under extreme scenarios. Chilean Banks’ Loan-to-Deposits Ratio, by N. Arregui, Selected Issues Paper. In a test involving a 6 percentage point output drop relative to baseline and subdued growth over the medium term, a 300 basis points rise in interest rates in the short term and 100 basis points in the long term, and 20 percent peso depreciation, all banks maintain regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets above 8 percent. Financial Sector Reforms in Progress 1. Legal reforms currently in Congress Risk-based insurance supervision Comprehensive credit registry Stronger governance and independence for the Securities and Insurance Superintendence (SVS)New legal framework for the Financial Stability Council, improving coordination and data sharing 2. Regulatory changes currently under public consultation Standardized bank mortgage credit provisioning model linked to LTV levelsEnhanced liquidity regulation and reporting, in line with Basel III Source: National authorities. Page 15 The soundness of the non-bank system is also being strengthened further Insurance companies The important life insurance sector (with assets equal to 20 percent of GDP) is expected to expand as the number of retirees increase. Longevity risk is being mitigated by regular review of mortality tables to reflect future life expectancy improvements, as recommended in the 2004 FSAP. As for credit risk, a longer average maturity for assets than for liabilities exposes life insurers to a decrease in interest rates. Life insurers’ growing direct exposure to commercial real estate merits watching, though stress tests undertaken by the Securities and Insurance Supervisor (SVS) find no significant concerns. Exposures to domestic corporate bonds (almost one-third of life insurers’ investments) also merit continued monitoring. The mission encouraged speedy approval of the law now in Congress that would introduce a risk-based supervisory system, including changes in solvency requirements. Fund management industry Chile’s fund industry is led by the rapidly expanding mutual fund sector, which is large relative to other emerging markets. Its assets (14 percent of GDP) are primarily in fixed income securities, and about half in money market funds (fixed income with maturity of 90 days or less). The 2013 law Ley Unica de Fondos which became effective on May 1, 2014, puts the industry under a unified legal framework, modernizes the regulatory framework, and improves investor protection by enhancing the supervisory powers of the SVS and setting qualification requirements for fund managers. Pension funds Chile’s privately-administered pension system is large by international standards. The government has appointed a commission to propose parametric changes to ensure adequate replacement rates in the face of declining investment returns and rising life expectancy. The government also plans to create a publicly-managed pension fund to complement the six privately-managed funds. In response to concern from the mission on Chile’s Insurance Sector , by N. Arregui, Selected Issues Paper. Non-Bank Financial Institutions Pension Fund Value (RHS, in billions of US dollars) Real Return Real Return Average 81-05 Pension Funds Size and Returns 1/ (In percent, unless otherwise stated) li K K ee un Average 2010-12 OECD Median Life Insurance -Return on Equity Mutual Funds -Assets Under Managament (In billion s of US dollars) Sources: Superintendence of Banks and Financial Institutions,Superintendence of Insurance and Securities, Superintendence of Pensions, OECD and the Chile'sMutual Funds Association.1/ Returns are showed for Pension Funds type C, out of pension funds type A to E (ranked from more to less risk appetite). Profitabilityin Chile's important life insurance sector is healthy. The sector has grown to 18 percent of GDP ... ...whilemutual funds have doubled their size in the last 5 years, reaching 14 percent of GDP in 2012. With assets of almost 60 percent of GDP, pensionfunds are the largest non-bank financial institutions. Page 16 how this might affect the industry, the authorities stressed that the new fund manager would operate under the same legal and regulatory framework as the others and that it would focus on enrolling workers not currently picked up by private funds (e.g. self- employed, rural). Multiple agencies provide close and active financial oversight but the framework and governance could be strengthened. The financial industry is regulated by the Central Bank, and supervised by SBIF, SVS, and the Superintendence of Pensions. The Financial Stability Council, chaired by the Minister of Finance, facilitates coordination and data sharing. Two laws currently in Congress, which will provide a legal framework to the Financial Stability Council and strengthen the operational independence of SVS, should be implemented promptly once approved. But it will also be important to strengthen the independence of the banking supervisor (SBIF). Conglomerates pose a challenge for supervision and a consolidated approach would be more effective. Most financial institutions in Chile are part of conglomerates, which tend to be large, complex, and prone to regulatory arbitrage and intra-group contagion. Chile’s financial oversight structure relies on a silo approach, based on sectoral supervision and built-in firewalls (such as related-party exposure limits). The authorities have strengthened oversight of conglomerates within the current legal framework, including by advancing risk identification based on case studies, tightening related-party exposure limits for banks, and improving the coordination and information exchange mechanisms among supervisors. When approved, the Financial Stability Council law will remove data sharing constraints among supervisory bodies that have hampered effective supervision. While these advances are important, a more comprehensive approach (as suggested by the 2011 FSAP) would be more effective. This would require a clear allocation of powers and responsibilities for continuous consolidated supervision, prudential regulation at conglomerate level, and corrective actions to address compliance with the framework. Implementation of other initiatives would strengthen financial resilience further. The mission encouraged prompt congressional approval of legislation expanding the credit registry with comprehensive credit history from banks and nonbanks. Furthermore, the revision of the General Banking Law mentioned in last year’s staff report remains unfinished, and the mission recommended that the authorities give it a new push, focusing on incorporating Basel III capital standards, improving the legal framework for bank resolution, and strengthening the SBIF’s independence. The authorities explained that they are committed to push ahead with financial sector reforms They are committed to ensuring prompt approval of the legislative initiatives already in Congress. They are also committed to pushing forward with other financial sector reforms, including revising the General Banking Law to complete the adoption of Basel bank capital standards, strengthen SBIF’s independence, and modernize the banking resolution, though the timing of these reforms would require careful consideration given the broader policy agenda. In the shorter run, the Central Bank has already put in consultation the new proposed regulation for the sound management of banks’ liquidity risk. Page 17