Monetary policy should remain vigilant to the inflation outlook. The present accommodative stance is consistent with keeping inflation in check over the policy horizon and supporting the baseline’s recovery. However, the recent broad-based spurt in inflation calls for caution and for interest rates to be left on hold absent a further weakening in domestic demand. Monetary policy normalization should proceed as the economy reverts toward potential. A broadly neutral fiscal stance would be appropriate It would be consistent with full execution of the 2014 budget (approved last year with a structural deficit of 1 percent of GDP) and would allow for a robust increase in expenditure, investment in particular, after under-execution in 2013. At the same time, the headline deficit will double to 1.2 percent of GDP and central government net assets will decline by about 1 percentage point. The government’s target of a balanced structural position by 2018 is welcome and should be feasible as activity recovers, though the consolidation should be calibrated to avoid an unduly contractionary stance. The strong public finances allow for automatic stabilizers to operate fully. There is room to react if risks materialize The floating exchange rate should be the first line of defense, in particular in case of a further sharp and lasting fall in copper prices and capital flow reversals. Foreign exchange intervention could help avoid excessive currency volatility, if needed. If domestic demand falters, further monetary easing could be appropriate though room has shrunk. Fiscal support—beyond automatic stabilizers—could be considered if there is a large decline in activity. In the event of a capital flow reversal, the authorities should also be prepared to contain liquidity pressures, including through expanding repo operations, broadening the range of accepted collateral, and setting up dollar swap auctions. The authorities broadly agreed. The central bank stressed that monetary policy will continue to focus on inflation. The pick-up in inflation had been stronger than expected but the central bank was confident that this increase was temporary, as suggested also by market expectations, and that inflation would revert toward 3 percent during 2015. Still, the rapid rise in inflation was a concern. Fiscal policy will be cast around a target of a structural balanced position by 2018. The government is considering revisions to the 2014 budget that would likely include additional outlays relating to costs of the recent earthquake in the north and widespread fires in Valparaiso. They also noted that the macroeconomic assumptions on which the 2014 budget was based have turned out to be too optimistic and, therefore, a somewhat larger headline deficit could be expected this year. The government is committed to bring the structural budget to a balanced position by 2018 using receipts from tax reform. Page 10