The labor market reform, currently under discussion, aims at expanding the coverage and scope of collective bargaining by empowering trade unions (Table). While its unionization rate is not exceptionally low, Chile has a relatively low coverage of collective bargaining agreements compared to other OECD economies. Chile’s labor market is also characterized by a highly dual structure: about one-third of employees have temporary jobs (against the 12 percent OECD average) and nearly 15 percent do not have written contracts. In the authorities’ view, the highly fragmented nature of bargaining implies a relatively inefficient and unbalanced system of industrial relations, with frequent illegal strikes and heavy involvement of the legislator in addressing labor market disputes, and may contribute to Chile’s high income inequality. They argued that the reform would make industrial relations more balanced, promote social cohesion by enhancing the cooperation between employers and workers, and reduce income inequality. MEX KOR USATURJPN NZLESTCANPOLGBRHUNSVKCZEIRLAUSCHE OECD ISR LUXDEUGRCEUESPNORNLDDNKITAISLFINPRTSWEFRASVNBELAUT IDN LVA BRA ZAF Unionization and Coverage of CollectiveBargainingAgreements 1/ (Inpercent of total number of wage and salary earners) C ll ee m Trade union density (unionmembership) Source: OECD, Economic Policy Reforms 2015: Going for Growth.1/Number of workers covered by wage bargaining agreements can be higher than the number of trade union members as a result of extensions of collective bargaining contracts to non-negotiating parties. Page 20 Staff stressed that fostering Chile’s labor market efficiency and flexibility should remain a priority. Empirical evidence suggests that greater unionization and more extensive collective bargaining may help reduce wage inequality and promote social dialogue. But changes in labor market institutions should not happen at the cost of reducing labor market efficiency. In this regard, it is particularly important that the reform maintains collective bargaining at the firm level and introduces more flexible work arrangements within the collective bargaining process (independently of the level of unionizatio n within the firm). Protecting workers’ right to strike should be balanced by clearly defining the range of “minimum services” that are guaranteed in case of strikes while remaining mindful of the effects of the reform on small firms. Staff welcomed recent changes in unemployment insurance (which have increased the amount and duration of the benefits from a relatively low base, and linked them to mandatory training), and the efforts to improve skill training programs for youth and women outside of the labor force. Lowering the relatively high severance payments could also contribute to reducing the duality of Chile’s labor market. The education reform has the potential to raise the quality of Chile’s human capital, increase productivity, and lower income inequalities . The legislation approved early this year (that ends the for-profit education, co-payment, and discrimination practices at primary and secondary levels) could deliver higher quality and equity in education by reducing the level of segregation in Chile’s school system. The proposed introduction of a national teaching policy could AreaCurrent frameworkProposed changesRight-to-bargainNon-union groups can negotiate collectively in the presence of unions.In companies where they exist, unions will have a priority for collective negotiation. Non-union workers may only bargain collectively by affiliating to the union, or creating a new one. Non-union groups can negotiate in firms where there are no unions. Level of collective negotiationCompany-level negotiation; intercompany unions are allowed to bargain collectively only if the individual employers agreed to negotiate (employers are not obliged to negotiate).Collective negotiation remains at firm level. Intercompany unions are allowed to negotiate only at the company level (provided that they have a sufficient number of members in that company), and employer must negotiate.Extension of benefits of collective agreementsEmployers can unilaterally extend the benefits to non-union workers (who must pay 75% of the union fees)Both union and employer should agree whether benefits are extended. In order to benefit, non-union workers should pay the total union fee.Coverage of collective negotiationWorkers on apprenticeship or temporary contracts are excluded from collective negotiation.Workers on apprenticeship and temporary contracts are allowed to negotiate with some restrictions (for example, if they work in SMEs).Adaptability pactsBy law, the workweek is set at six days or 45 hours. The maximum workday length is 10 hours (including two hours of overtime pay), with some exclusions (e.g., caretakers, domestic workers). Allow negotiation of special work conditions (exceptional work/leave days, overtime, retribution of non-work days) if the company has 30% affiliation in one or more unions. Other terms of collective negotiationMinimum time period to start negotiating collectively is one year from the beginning of firm's operations. There are no restrictions on employer's response to employees' proposals.Minimum time period is reduced to six months for new large firms (unchanged for SMEs). Negotiation process starts with a 'floor': the employer cannot offer lower benefits than the ones that already exist, with some exclusions.Right-to-strikeUnder certain circumstances and subject to constraints, employers may hire replacement staff (internally or externally).Employers cannot replace workers on strike; unions must provide necessary personnel to comply with indispensable operations ("minimum services" to be agreed, prior to a strike, by the parties or resolved by the Labor Board otherwise). Labor Reform: Overview of Selected Areas Note: Staff summary based on Moderniza el sistema de relaciones laborales, introduciendo modificaciones al Código del Trabajo, No. Boletin 9856-13 . The labor reform is presently under discussion in Congress. Therefore, some of the specific changes mentioned in the table may undergo some changes as a consequence of the legislative process. Page 21 also increase the quality of education by raising entry wages for teachers and linking teachers’ evaluation with their professional and career development. The authorities reiterated their willingness to extend free tertiary education to all students (beyond those currently covered by scholarships and subsidized loans), but noted that the implementation period would be determined by the growth outlook and availability of public resources. Staff recognized that a reform of higher education appears warranted, in light of the relatively high tuition fees and more difficult access to financing in Chile’s public universities compared to many other OECD economies. At the same time, staff stressed that careful consideration should be given to the implications of universal free university education on income distribution (also given the significant private return to tertiary education) in addition to its fiscal costs. The authorities highlighted the legislative efforts to strengthen public and private sectors’ governance and institutions. A series of political and corporate scandals in the recent past may have undermined investors’ confidence in Chile’s public and corporate sectors, contributing to the fall in business confidence. The authorities’ response has been admirably swift, with a series of legislative and regulatory measures announced over the past few months (under the government’s “Transparency Agenda”). A host of measures aim at improving corporate governance, investor protection, and market transparency, including by tightening internal and external audit processes, improving transparency about the composition and practices of publicly trade corporations’ boards, and giving additional intervention, enforcement, and sanction powers to the new Securities and Insurance Commission. A series of legislative efforts is also underway that aim at restoring confidence in public institutio ns, including by regulating funding to both political parties and campaigns and tightening norms over conflicts of interest, corruption, and lobbying. Finally, the institutional framework for PPP arrangements is strengthened by a law proposal that establishes a centralized unit within the Minister of Public Works tasked with the responsibility of assessing, approving and developing new concessions. The bill also improves the transparency and terms of renegotiations of old concessions, and introduces minimum standards of service. Staff welcomed the initiative that, if well implemented, could contribute to mobilizing the private financial resources needed to fill Chile’s infrastructure gap, as well as promoting a more efficient use of public funds.