Chile faces two important medium-term challenges: fostering strong and sustained growth and reducing inequality Growth . Rapid growth over the past decade was led by investment and employment expansion, while total factor productivity increased a paltry 0.4 percent a year (and was particularly lackluster in the copper sector). The shifting tailwinds raise doubts about the mining sector as a driver for future growth—even if some recovery is projected—and the scope for employment expansion is constrained by low unemployment and the decelerating working-age population (from 1.6 percent in 2013 to 1.1 percent by 2019).The floating exchange rate and the flexible labor market will be key in facilitating the needed economic adjustment. But fostering strong and sustained growth will also require structural reforms. Equity . Inequality has declined but it remains high compared with the region and OECD countries. Chile’s inequality is reflected also in low intergenerational social mobility, which is largely caused by unequal access to quality education. Social public spending has risen significantly over the last two decades, especially on health and education, but still lags regional and OECD averages. The Chilean tax-transfer system is characterized by low progressivity and has been less effective in reducing poverty and income inequality compared with the experience in OECD. Chile’s Experience with Inclusive Growth , by E. Ture, Selected Issues Paper. Other LA6 /1 /2OECD /2 /3199020002012 or latestGDP per capita PPP (in 2005 $US)6,91410,99015,84811,14531,248Poverty (percent of population living below $4 PPP/day)41.623.311.928.0-Extreme poverty (percent of population living below $2.5 PPP/day)21.29.04.314.0-Gini Index (in percent)57.155.250.848.531.3Skill premium (ratio of wages: tertiary/secondary education)2.83.12.72.31.6Gender wage gap (in percent)36361917-Female labor force participation rate (ages 15-64; in percent)3539556262Public Social Expenditure (in percent of GDP)11.915.016.717.2- Public Expenditure on Education (in percent of GDP) 2.4 3.7 4.2 4.6 5.8 1/ Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay2/ Simple averages Socioeconomic Indicators Relative to Comparators Chile2012 or latest Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators, PovcalNet Database, OECD, Socioeconomic Database of Latin America and the Caribbean (CEDLAS), Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (CEPAL) and Fund staff calculations.3/ Values not shown if incomparable. See Chile's Experience with Inclusive Growth , Selected Issues Paper, for alternative comparisons with the OECD. Output6.64.3BaselineCapital Stock2.22.1Continuation of TFP trend growth of 2000-2013Total Hours0.81.3Female labor force participation growing Human Capital0.90.5TFP2.60.4 Sources: Central Bank of Chile, Ministry of Finance, and Fund staff estimates.Sources: Central Bank of Chile, Ministry of Finance, and Fund staff estimates. 4.6 1 percent more than in baseline Contribution of Factors of Production to Output Growth (Average annual percentage contribution) Alternative Scenarios for Medium-Term Growth (Average annual percentange change) Page 11 The government is launching an ambitious policy agenda that could galvanize strong and inclusive growth, while preserving Chile’s record of prudent macroeconomic policy. The plans, most of which are under development, focus on the following areas: Education and tax reforms. The government has proposed a major tax reform to reduce regressivity and raise 3 percent of GDP by 2018 in revenue to fund education reform, increase outlays on health, and raise public savings (see Box 2). The mission supported these objectives. The proposal prudently matches new spending with permanent revenue.  Education Chile’s PISA score improved over the past decade and is the highest in the region but still well below OECD averages. In Chile, student performance is also highly dependent on the student’s socio-economic background. Thus, improving education will help on both growth and equity fronts. Chile’s public spending on education is low by international standards and has limited scope for efficiency gains, so improvements would require more resources. The government’s immediate reform priorities include expanding the coverage of daycare, increasing education subsidies for low and middle- income students, and overhauling the schools’ selection process to foster equal access to education (text table). The mission supported the general direction of the reform and underlined the importance of leveling the playing field and raising quality of early-childhood education. A Hybrid Approach to Estimating the Efficiency of Public Spending on Education in Emerging and Developing Economies, by F. Grigoli, IMF Working Paper No. 14/19, January 2014. See, e.g., Starting Strong III: Early Childhood Education and Care , OECD 2012. ElementStatus Early education Expand coverage of childcareSent to Congress on May 20 2014Modernize preschool institutional framework and establish Preschool Deputy MinistrySent to Congress on May 20 2014 Primary and secondary education Exclude from receiving public funding (e.g. vouchers) profit seeking schools.Sent to Congress on May 20 2014Eliminate copayments by increasing public subsidySent to Congress on May 20 2014 Eliminate any form of student admission selection at the school level.Sent to Congress on May 20 2014Replace municipal school management with a national administration with local branches.To be sent during 2014H2Revamp teachers' education and trainingTo be sent during 2014H2 Tertiary education Gradually achieve free access to tertiary education. 4-year target: 70% of the populationTo be sent during 2014H2Establish Superintendence of Tertiary Education to modernize institutional frameworkTo be sent within first 100 days (by June 19, 2014)Source: National authorities Elements of the Education Reform Agenda OECD MedianCHLMEXURYBRACOLPER Source: OECD PISA (2012) and Fund staff calculations. Sample includes 69 countries. In education, Chile ranks the highest within the region, but well below OECD countries. (PISA Learning Outcomes; percentile ranks; higher is better) Page 12  Tax reform (Box 2). The reform involves several changes to Chile’s integrated tax regime. The current system of tax deferral for undistributed earnings (in place since 1984) has become a source of significant tax planning and evasion—mainly benefitting those with higher incomes—and challenging to administer. The tax reform (expected to be approved in September 2014) is tilted toward taxing the upper-income brackets, including through its focus on capital income and closing loopholes, and should reduce the regressivity of the current tax system. Given the size and complexity of the reform there is some uncertainty over its expected revenue yield and economic impact. Further, there is not much international experience to draw on for the proposed new profit/dividend tax regime but higher taxation of corporate profits and capital income would likely dampen investment and, in particular, corporate savings, while instant depreciation and higher public savings would provide some offset. Strengthening the tax authority will help support the expected revenue yield; and the planned gradual implementation is welcome and would allow fine-tuning if needed. Energy (Box 3). While demand for electricity has risen steadily (and will continue to rise), investment in the sector, including in generation, has stalled. Energy reform is a top concern for the business sector and a priority for the government. The mission commended the government’s plan to promote energy investment and efficiency, and to facilitate entry and the use of new, clean technologies. Infrastructure. Chile ranks well in international comparisons but with scope for improvement. The mission welcomed the government’s focus on transportation and logistical hubs (including, importantly, ports) and water and telecommunication infrastructure. Frontloading infrastructure investment could also boost investment and growth in the near term. Labor market. The government is considering a number of labor market reforms. The mission encouraged in particular reforms to promote female labor force participation (e.g., training and improved access to daycare), which, despite important progress over the last decade lags OECD and regional averages and is particularly low for lower-income groups. As for the minimum wage, which is quite binding in Chile, the government’s commitment implies an increase by about 20 percent over three years at the time of a weaker labor market. The mission stressed the importance of maintaining a labor market that allows for sufficient flexibility while fostering equity. Chile’s Tax System and Reform , by D. Rodriguez-Delgado, Selected Issues Paper. OECD MedianCHLMEXURYPERBRACOL Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2013-2014)and Fund staff calculations. Sample includes 148 countries. Infrastructure quality is high in Chile by regional standards, but lags behind the OECD countries. (Percentile ranks; higher is better) Page 13 Business climate. In World Economic Forum and World Bank Doing Business rankings, Chile scores high in the region in most categories, and compares well with OECD peers. The “business-in-a-day” reform approved in 2013 pushed Chile up in business environment rankings. And the Bankruptcy Law approved in early 2014 addressed one area where Chile lagged the most. The authorities’ plans to promote research and development, job training, small and medium-enterprise management, and competition should help spur innovation, growth, and economic diversification. The authorities emphasized that the reform agenda is designed to provide a strong boost to medium-term growth and achieve a fairer distribution of income, which is important for social stability The tax reform will bring needed fresh fiscal resources that will be used prudently on education and health and on increasing public savings. Improving access to high quality education will strengthen long-term growth prospects but also attack a root cause of inequality. And the planned agendas for energy reform and productivity, innovation and growth will address the main concerns of Chilean industry. All in all, the authorities were convinced that the implementation of their bold reform program should have an important positive impact on medium-term growth prospects and potential output.