Growth is expected to firm up this year and the next, though remaining well below its potential. Staff expects GDP growth to average 2½ percent in 2015, mainly on the back of a strong fiscal impulse, and to accelerate to 3.1 percent in 2016 as private domestic demand gradually strengthens. Inflation is projected to slowly decline towards 3 percent by mid-2016, under the combined effects of the negative output gap and the waning pass-through of the peso depreciation in 2014. The main assumptions underlying the expected recovery of private domestic demand in 2016 are as follows A moderate pick-up in non-mining investment, as monetary policy conditions remain highly accommodative and business sentiment gradually improves. This will more than offset continued weakness in mining investment, as copper prices are expected to remain stable in 2016 after falling by another 10 percent in 2015. Stronger non-mining exports, mainly thanks to the more competitive real effective exchange rate as trading partners’ growth fails to increase substantially (going from 3.2 percent in 2015 to 3.4 percent in 2016, based on the July 2015 update of the World Economic Outlook ). A modest firming of private consumption, reflecting a gradual return of consumer confidence, still easy access to credit, and some pick-up in real income as lower inflation partly offsets slower nominal wage growth in the context of weaker labor market conditions. Average, excluding state Average75th and 25th percentile range EBIT: Profitability of Coporate Sector 1/ (In percent of total assets) Sources: Central Bank of Chile and SVS.1/ Twelve months accumulated earnings before interest and taxes. Page 16 The balance of risks is mainly on the downside (see Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM), and Annex II on spillovers). The main risk to staff’s baseline scenario is a more persistent weakness of private sector confidence and investment, amid continued uncertainty over the structural reform agenda and the external outlook. On the external front, a further decline in copper prices (for example associated with a deeper-than-expected downturn in China) would imply more depressed activity in the mining sector. Tighter and more volatile global financial conditions also pose risks to Chile’s economic recovery. Although Chile’s deep local capital market, sound macroeconomic fundamentals, and credible policy framework are likely to reduce the risk of a “sudden stop” of capital inflows, a sharp asset price adjustment and decompression of credit spreads could reduce the availability, and increase the cost, of funding for the non-financial corporate sector and banks. Moreover, high leverage and heavy reliance on foreign currency debt make Chile’s corporate sector relatively vulnerable to a tail-risk downside scenario, where foreign interest rates increase sharply, the peso depreciates strongly, and the economic slowdown accentuates . Staff revised down its estimate of medium-term GDP growth, although a successful completion of the reform agenda has the potential to boost growth in the long run . Capital accumulatio n is expected to slow from its historical average, as lower copper prices and higher taxes on capital income depress investment (Table). Population aging should reduce labor input growth from 2⅓ in the 2000s to about 1 percent in 2020, lowering total hours worked. The slowdown in TFP growth, from an average 2½ percent in the 1990s to around ¼ percent since the early 2000s, is likely to have an important trend component, reflecting declining productivity in the mining sector and infrastructure bottlenecks. While the positive impact of some of the structural reforms (particularly of the education system) may take a long time to fully materialize, staff expects greater spending on infrastructure to start contributing to TFP and capital growth over the next few years. In particular, TFP growth and capital accumulatio n are likely to be boosted by recent progress in addressing energy bottlenecks, including by increasing electricity generation capacity (by about 30 percent by 2020) and reducing electricity costs (with spot marginal costs lowered by a more competitive tender process among distributing firms). As a result of all these factors, staff expects potential GDP growth at 3.7 percent in 2020. Chile LA6 Emerging asia Total Dependency Ratio 1/ Source: United Nations World Population Prospects (2012).1/ Share of population aged 0-14 and 65+ in population aged 15-64. T Other Wind Solar Hydro Thermo Electricity Generating Capacity by Technology (In gigaawatts) Sources: Chilean National Energy Commission and OECD. Average1994-2013No reformsWith reforms Output4.73.23.7TFP0.90.20.4Capital5.34.85.1Hours1.50.60.6Human capital0.80.80.9 Staff estimates, 2020 Growth Assumptions: Medium-Term Scenarios Page 17 Risk Assessment Matrix Impact if RealizedPolicy ResponseNature of the shockVulnerabilities/ Channels of transmission (color = severity)(color = likelihood) DOMESTIC - Encourage private sector investment by reducing policy uncertainty, including through a careful design and implementation of the reforms.-Maintain an accommodative monetary policy stance. EXTERNAL - The floating exchange rate represents the first line of defense.- Foreign exchange intervention could be used if needed to counter temporary disorderly conditions. A surge in global financial volatility related to asymmetric monetary policies - In case of a severe output drop, fiscal balance should be allowed to deteriorate for cyclical reasons.- The floating exchange rate represents the first line of defense. - Capital flow management measures could be envisaged on a temporary basis but only in crisis type circumstances.- Foreign exchange intervention could be used if needed to counter temporary disorderly conditions. Note: Colored boxes on left hand side represent shock likelihood and colored boxes on right hand side represent severity of impact. Red = High, Yellow = Medium, and Green = Low. Sources of Risk - The authorities should be prepared to contain liquidity pressure: expand repo operations, broaden the range of accepted collateral, and set up dollar swap auctions. Sharp slowdown in China economic growth, possibly due to a severe housing downturn or a shock in the shadow banking sector Real: Copper exports to China represent 40 percent of mining exports and 25 percent of total exports. Spillover effects to other sectors through the value added chain could amplify the first- round effects. Fiscal: Revenue from mining companies constitutes more than 10 percent of total revenues. Revenue Slower than expected growth in China would impair copper sales and spill over to sectors related to copper production. This would also negatively affect the fiscal position. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions, possibly reflecting Euro area bond market contagion or a sharp reassessment of risk from global investors from a disorderly normalization of monetary policy conditions in the US Renewed financial turbulence in Europe or a disorderly exit from unconventional monetary policy in the U.S. could cause a sharp increase in interest rates, a sudden reversal of capital inflows, and a strong depreciation of the peso. The impact, however, is likely to be muted by a series of factors: -A significant share of external debt is FDI-related (70 percent for financial corporate and 40 percent for non-financial corporate sector).-Rollover risk is relatively low, as maturities have been increasing.-There are significant natural hedges and scarce evidence of large currency mismatches -Institutional investors are likely to act as stabilizers (by investing in domestic assets following broad-based corrections in valuations, as occurred in the past). A slower recovery of private sector confidence (for example as the labor market reform worsens industrial relations, or the debate over the reform of the constitution becomes increasingly polarized) A weaker-than-expected investment outlook would depress growth. Lower growth could generate corporate stress in the context of relatively high corporate leverage, have negative repercussions on real estate market, and undermine financial sector health Leverage Financial: Banks have large exposure to non -financial corporate debt (55 percent of total bank credit), even if direct exposure to natural resource sectors is only 11 percent. Leverage: Financial firms and non-financial corporate rely on external sources for 36 and 38 percent of their funding, respectively. More than half of banks' funding is wholesale and non-financial corporate debt stands at about 100 percent of GDP. 45 percent of financial and non-financial corporate sector debt is in foreign currency. Real: A slower rebound of private sector confidence would translate into a weaker recovery of private investment. Page 18