not an option. In the near term, it may result in higher growth, but at the expense of a continued rise in vulnerabilities. China still has the buffers and tools to prop up growth through continued reliance on credit and investment-fueled growth. However, over time, declining efficiency of investment would weigh on growth and further strain the repayment capacity of the corporate sector. A no-reform scenario illustrates these dynamics: at current levels of productivity, keeping growth at about 7 percent for the next two years would require another substantial increase in investment (Box 6). Given falling corporate profitability, such investment would require a commensurate increase in credit flow, boosting further the credit-to-GDP ratio and credit gap. Investment efficiency would continue to drop and eventually financial conditions for the private sector would tighten, leading to a sharp reduction in investment, much slower growth, and increasing risk of disorderly adjustment. 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Source: IMF staff estimates and projections. Baseline scenario In contrast, staff baseline projections assume Baseline vs. No-reform Scenario steady progress in addressing vulnerabilities and implementing reform. Growth slows in the near term as a reduction in unsustainable demand weighs on activity. This includes slower credit growth to eliminate the debt overhang and a multiyear correction in real estate investment to bring down excess housing inventories. Growth thus falls to 6¼ percent in 2016 and 6.0 percent in 2017, cushioned by productivity gains from structural reforms. Starting in 2018, overall growth picks up modestly as those productivity gains begin to dominate. Staff analysis—based on the experience of other fast-growing Asian economies, modeling exercises, and growth convergence regressions—suggests that growth of around 6½ percent in 2020 is Source: IMF staff estimates and projections. No-reform scenario Page 15 ambitious yet achievable with successful reforms (Box 6 and Figure 6). Toward internal and external balance by 2020. The staff baseline assumes that the Third Plenum blueprint is implemented by 2020 as announced by the authorities. Implementing these reforms—including social security, financial sector, fiscal, exchange rate, capital account, and SOE reforms—will reduce excess savings, lower investment, raise productivity, and boost consumption. The investment-to-GDP ratio declines as growth becomes less capital intensive and shifts to more labor- intensive services. At the same time, reforms increase income and lower savings by households (with better social security and financial systems) as well as corporates (financial, SOE, and resource pricing reforms). As a result, national savings fall by more than investment, and the external position moves