Despite progress in addressing vulnerabilities, much work remains. Progress is evident in slower real estate investment and credit growth, especially shadow banking. However, so far this slowdown has largely just reduced the rate at which vulnerabilities are rising (Figure 5). Further progress, therefore, is needed to put vulnerabilities on a firmly declining path. Public Debt and Fiscal Deficit (In percent of GDP, 2014) DNK DEU CHE LUX EST ISL RUS KOR NZL TUR IDN AUS CHL CHN, general government (staff estimate) CHN (NAO CAN NLD CZE SWE SVK FIN POL MEX AUT BEL FRA GBR ITL IRL PRT USA SPN HUN ISR BRA IND GRC JPN CHN, augmented debt and net borrowing General government gross debt Sources: CEIC; NAO; IMF World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. NAO audit indicates general government debt of 39.4 percent of GDP as of end-2012. The NAO audit does not provide a government deficit figure. Staff estimate that the corresponding deficit would be within the range shown. w b d Rising fiscal debt. Continued fiscal policy support since the global financial crisis, manifested in the high augmented deficit, has brought the augmented government debt-to-GDP ratio to about 57 percent of GDP. While this is still manageable, with the rise in debt contained by the favorable interest-growth rate Page 13 deferential, the dynamic is changing as growth slows. Although there is still fiscal space to support activity in the transition to the new growth model, the augmented deficit has to come down over the medium term. All commercial banks Capital adequacy ratio Tier I capital NPL ratio Financial Soundness Indicators 2014 15Q1 Rising credit and risks to financial stability. A variety of indicators suggests that credit has risen to an excessive level. These include the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) credit gap measure and the high credit-to-GDP ratio in China relative to other economies at a similar income level (Box 3). The credit-to-GDP ratio is still growing, albeit at a slower rate given the recent slowdown in credit flow. Official banking indicators appear healthy, but there are reasons to believe they could weaken going forward. The nonperforming loans (NPLs) ratio—albeit still low at 1.4 percent—has been rising and the sum of NPLs and special-mention loans now constitute about 5.4 percent of GDP. There has also been a significant increase in disposals (26 percent of the gross stock of NPLs in 2014 compared to 18 percent in 2013). Loss-absorbing buffers in the banking sector, thus, could be eroded. Deleveraging and a further slowdown in the economy could reveal more problems with credit quality, especially in the SOE sector—SOEs account for the bulk of corporate liabilities and their performance indicators have weakened since 2008 (Figure 7). The equity market rally is another source of financial sector risk, especially given the increasing role of margin financing (Box 4). Global debt issuance by Chinese firms and their offshore subsidiaries has also increased considerably, but remains small relative to the stock of TSF and thus does not pose significant risks for financial stability (Figure 8). Provision coverage ratio Return on assets Return on equity Construction & real estate loans Source: CEIC. 1/ Data after 2013 are under Basel III definition. 2/ Percent of total loans. … 10.0 … 10.2 Substandard Doubtful Loss Buildup of housing inventory. Years of very high real estate investment have resulted in considerable oversupply. Residential real estate investment—which accounts for more than two-thirds of total real estate investment—has been an important source of growth and employment, including by boosting activity in related industries. However, housing inventories have risen a lot, especially in smaller (Tier 3 and 4) cities, which on average have unsold supply of around three years of sales. These smaller cities are macro relevant as The latest developments in the equity market, including the authorities’ policy response, will be covered in a staff supplement (see footnote 1). Page 14 they account for over half of real estate investment. While a correction in real estate has started and growth in real estate investment has slowed, working off the excess inventories will require a multiyear adjustment (paragraph 37 and Box 5). Authorities’ views . The authorities agreed on the importance of shifting the pattern of growth and reducing vulnerabilities. On the augmented fiscal deficit and debt, they continued to consider the staff’s estimates as too high, especially as some of the LG debt was commercial. However, they did not provide alternative estimates, and noted that the local government submissions of outstanding debt earlier in the year were still being reviewed and verified. On credit, they acknowledged the rapid rise, but noted that part of the increase represented financial market deepening and a welcome shift toward more market-based financial intermediation. Private sector (excl. LGFVs) LGFVs General government GDP growth (in percent; RHS) Staying with the current growth model is No-reform Scenario: Debt Ratios and GDP Growth (In percent of GDP unless otherwise specified)