FX regime. China has made progress over the past year in moving toward a more flexible, market-determined exchange rate system. The past year has also shown that the Page 33 transition from many years of stability/gradual appreciation is difficult and potentially bumpy, particularly amid the challenging global and domestic context. Achieving a smooth, successful transition will need to combine a clear overarching drive toward progressively greater market determination and skillful, short-term management to avoid excessive volatility. In particular Achieving an effective float within the next couple of years, ideally by 2018, remains a key goal. A more flexible, market-determined exchange rate is needed to allow the market to play a more decisive role in the economy, absorb shocks, and maintain an independent monetary policy as the capital account opens. While staff assesses the current level of the RMB as broadly in line with fundamentals, the value of permitting market forces to help guide the exchange rate toward equilibrium levels should be recognized. Therefore, the effective exchange rate (relative to a basket) should over time be allowed to move in response to market conditions. At the same time, the authorities should also ensure that such adjustment is not destabilizing by preventing overshooting, one-way expectations, and disorderly market conditions—the large buffer of reserves provides ample ammunition for such intervention, to be deployed, for example, in the event of a significant shock. A possible framework for managing this transition could be to progressively widen a tolerance band around an equilibrium effective rate within which the spot rate could fluctuate. The band could be widened gradually or in discrete steps; spot rate fluctuations within the band could be smoothed by intervention; and the center of the band could be adjusted if the equilibrium effective exchange rate is assessed to have changed (influenced heavily by sustained market pressures in either direction). A more market-based monetary framework. The move to a more flexible exchange rate should proceed in tandem with completing the transition toward a more market-based monetary framework. Key elements include: Objectives. Although the PBC does not operate under an explicit inflation targeting regime, its official mandate includes maintaining “the stability of the currency value and thereby promote economic growth.” Formally, the PBC targets multiple objectives (inflation, balance of payments, growth, financial stability). As an important first step, the authorities should introduce an explicit medium-term inflation target or a range (set by the government/State Council) together with operational (instrument) independence for the PBC. Instrument. The PBC should declare the seven-day repo rate its new intermediate policy target for monetary policy purposes and publish a new market rate (seven-day repo) representative of lending conditions for Tier 1 banks. The clearer the policy framework, the easier it will be for the market to establish a yield curve. Standing facilities should act as a backstop with unlimited access for banks against appropriate collateral. Operational framework. While the volatility of short-term repo rates has decreased significantly since last summer, the PBC could further improve its operational framework to ensure the stability of the short-term market rates. For instance, reserve averaging Page 34 (introduced in 2015) could be expanded to a 4–5-week period to allow easier liquidity management by banks. Backstop. Clear standing facilities should be put in place as a backstop. The overnight standing credit facility may function as an important backstop for the payment system. In addition, eligibility and collateral requirements for the PBC’s liquidity facilities should be clear. Transparency. Most central banks have found that policy operates more efficiently and effectively if it is clearly and simply communicated and implementation clearly supports the stated policy. For example, domestic monetary policy would be clearer if the PBC were explicitly to announce its monetary policy goals and use monetary policy instruments to achieve those goals in the most transparent manner possible. Capital account. Enforcement of capital controls has been tightened since last summer and some additional measures, notably the 20 percent unremunerated reserve requirement on FX forwards, have been introduced to stem significant depreciation pressures. Such tightening has likely contributed to the restoration of stability in the capital account, but has come at some cost to the efficiency of individual corporate treasury management. While new controls should be avoided, further liberalization should be phased very cautiously. Indeed, capital account liberalization (and financial liberalization more broadly) can only succeed if supported by a strengthened financial system, enhanced corporate sector governance and greater exchange rate flexibility, suggesting that much further progress on the former (capital account liberalization) may need to await the latter (a strengthened financial system, enhanced corporate governance and greater exchange rate flexibility). Care should also be taken to ensure that enforcement of existing capital controls does not spillover to affect current account transactions. Authorities’ views The authorities noted that exchange market pressures had eased considerably in recent months and the move to a more market-based exchange rate was progressing. The approach was to continue maintaining broad stability against a currency basket while allowing market forces a greater role in determining the level. FX intervention had decreased in recent months and was used largely to smooth adjustments and curb overshooting. The authorities remain committed to gradually liberalizing the capital account over the medium term. They may complement such reforms (including the reserve requirement on FX forwards that the authorities consider macroprudential measures) to maintain stability and minimize disruptive short-term capital flows. The monetary framework was also being adapted to elevate the role of interest rates as a policy lever. Daily open market operations, open bid auctions for liquidity, and 10-day reserve averaging had contributed to increased stability and predictability in money market rates. The PBC did not see the need to extend the period over which reserve averaging is calculated, citing banks’ liquidity management had adapted well to the current system. Page 35