Securing financial stability requires action on multiple fronts. Banks  Provisioning and loan classification regulations should be examined to foster more proactive recognition of potential loss. This could involve, for example, classifying all loans with overdue payments beyond 90 days as nonperforming. This process could usefully be complemented by a focused asset quality review (e.g., of a random selection of assets or those from a particular sector).  Capital ratios should be increased. Increasing loan-loss provisions will help absorb higher potential NPLs, but banks face a broad variety of risks, which call for a stronger layer of equity capital This can be achieved, for example, by imposing a high countercyclical capital buffer and encouraging common equity issuance (helped by removing constraints on issuing when valuations are below book). Funding. As banks and other financial institutions have grown total assets far faster than deposits, funding has shifted toward wholesale, short-tenor, and more volatile instruments. Banks’ reliance on interbank funding has increased, leverage has risen in the repo bond market, and collateral quality is deteriorating. These developments should be kept under Page 31 close review and measures considered to strengthen liquidity in stress scenarios. These should include a strong supervisory focus on the adequacy of liquidity risk management as set out in the Liquidity Coverage Ratio standard and associated Basel guidance, and paying close attention to collateral standards. Shadow products. The proliferation of shadow credit products calls for a holistic approach to their supervision. The recently published “CBRC Notice 82” appears to close some regulatory arbitrage opportunities and should be implemented aggressively; additional action should be considered as necessary for a comprehensive approach. Capital markets. The priority should be on orderly functioning of markets (which could include emergency liquidity provision by the central bank), not on intervention to influence valuation. Fundamentally, the solution to recurrent market excesses lies in addressing the underlying search for yield and curtailing excessive liquidity creation. A set of more immediate issues includes refraining from intervention during sell-offs and tightening underwriting and disclosure standards, in particular in the bond market where issuance of publicly traded products has surged over the past year with relatively limited dispersion in credit ratings. The resilience of securities firms and other regulated institutional investors should be strengthened through capping leverage and improving risk management practices. Property. Residential investment is reviving again in several parts of the country, even as excess inventory remains high, and region-specific policies could be appropriate. Specifically, tighter macroprudential measures in Tier 1 cities seem warranted (for example reducing loan-to-value ratios on mortgages for second homes). For lower-tier cities, where multi-year excess inventory levels are particularly acute, restricting new starts seems warranted, for example by tightening prudential measures on credit to property developers. Crisis preparedness. Given the rising vulnerabilities, the authorities should be prepared for potential idiosyncratic and systemic stress. Key actions include: (1) conducting stress tests and readying the emergency liquidity framework; (2) preparing a strategy, including a resolution framework, for distressed financial institutions, especially nonbanks; (3) instituting a clear public funding backstop for the deposit insurance scheme; (4) ensuring adequate data and analysis (e.g., on bank/shadow bank interlinkages and FX exposures); and (5) allocating coordination of crisis preparedness and management to a high-level forum with a clear implementation plan and communications strategy. Regulatory structure. International experience does not speak clearly in favor of a particular structure. Nevertheless, a major upgrade in supervisory cooperation and coordination is necessary. III ill gg II III Page 32 The goals should be: (1) seamless information sharing, coordination and communication among agencies; (2) more proactive response to markets’ proven agility to expand into regulatory gaps and engage in regulatory arbitrage; and (3) stronger crisis management capabilities. Authorities’ views The banking regulator disagreed with staff’s assessment of corporate debt-at-risk. Their own internal exercise, taking into account the mitigating impact of loan collateral, had produced significantly lower estimates. They noted that unlisted companies— assumed the same as the listed universe in staff’s exercise—were healthier as a group than the listed universe. The regulator also argued that the classification of loans as nonperforming would need to consider other criteria besides payments overdue beyond 90 days, such as judgment about the borrowers’ long-term viability and whether they faced cyclical or structural cash flow problems. The regulator noted that bank exposures to nonstandard credit assets was a key concern and they had already instructed banks to conduct stringent asset quality classification, which would require them to set aside more reserves against these exposures than against loans. The banking regulator was also closely monitoring the growing reliance on wholesale funding, but viewed this as a needed adaptation in banks’ business models with the growing competition for deposits. The banking regulator argued that bank capital ratios were sufficient and stable, and viewed dynamic provisioning (introduced in 2011) as effectively playing a similar role to a countercyclical buffer. The securities regulator concurred with staff that the regulatory focus should be on ensuring smooth functioning of capital markets. They emphasized they stood ready to provide liquidity to distressed securities firms and would avoid indiscriminate and large purchases of securities. Information requirements for bond issuers had been raised and onsite inspections increased. The authorities questioned staff’s view on instituting a public backstop for the deposit insurance scheme. They argued that the deposit insurance system was a market-based framework to prevent moral hazard and should not be directly linked to public funding. The authorities further noted that international experience and standards suggested that premium contributions—not fiscal resources—should be the main source of financing deposit insurance. At the same time, the legal framework does not preclude public emergency liquidity funding for the deposit insurance system, though such public funding shall be repaid by bank premiums. More generally, the authorities agreed that closer cross-agency coordination was needed to bolster supervision, policymaking, and crisis preparedness. Steps were already being taken in this regard, for example through closer collaboration on issuing new liquidity guidelines for securities firms.