In staff’s baseline growth falls to about 6 percent by 2018 and continues declining thereafter. The lack of decisive progress on addressing corporate debt and governance in SOEs in the baseline implies that the credit-to-GDP ratio continues to rise, with increasing risk of a disruptive adjustment. The baseline does, however, assume continued pro-consumption and pro-service reforms, including strengthening the social safety net and deregulating the service sector; as a result, the structure of demand and production would shift further toward consumption and services. Near-term growth. The economy is expected to grow by 6.6 percent in 2016, slowing to 6.2 percent in 2017. This assumes: Domestic demand holds up on generally robust labor market conditions, with consumption contributing more than half of overall growth. Investment growth is expected to pick up slightly in 2016—as strong infrastructure spending and a rebound in real estate and SOE investment offset weakness in manufacturing and non-SOE investment—but to moderate in 2017 as stimulus measures wane. External demand is expected to remain subdued, with net exports dragging growth in 2016‒17. Export growth will stay tepid, while imports are likely to pick up in line with investment. Policy support provides a positive fiscal impulse in 2016, returning to gradual consolidation in 2017. The projection assumes a slightly higher ‘augmented’ deficit relative to last year, resulting Page 18 from a larger on-budget deficit as well as slightly stronger off-budget local government spending supported through policy bank lending and the new special construction fund (Appendix II). Credit growth is assumed at 15 percent year-on-year in 2016, based on the authorities’ total social financing (TSF) projection and staff adjustments for local government debt/loan swaps. In 2017, credit growth is assumed to slow to 13 percent as investment growth moderates and corporate profitability improves with the pick-up in producer price inflation and progress in reducing overcapacity. Inflation is expected to gradually pick up reflecting the rebound in commodity prices, the exchange rate depreciation since mid-2015, and progress in cutting overcapacity, but to remain contained at 2–2½ this year and next. Over the medium term, inflation is expected to rise gradually to around 3 percent as commodity prices recover and wage pressures build with the slower growth of the labor force. Current Account . The current account surplus is expected to narrow to just under 2½ percent of GDP in 2016, driven by an increase in the services and income deficit. The trade surplus is projected to remain stable in 2016 at slightly over 5 percent of GDP, with terms of trade effects broadly offsetting the pick-up in imports. Over the medium term, as the economy rotates further toward private consumption and away from external demand, the trade surplus is expected to decline to below 4 percent of GDP. The services deficit is expected to continually rise with healthy outward tourism, while the income deficit is expected to remain broadly stable. Over the medium term, the current account surplus is expected to fall to around ½ percent of GDP by 2021. Savings are projected to decline from 48 percent of GDP in 2015 to around 42 percent by 2021. This reflects an expected fall in household savings, owing to demographic effects and a stronger social safety net, lower corporate savings as factor costs rise and efficiency diminishes, and a decline in public savings as social spending increases. Investment is expected to decline from 45 percent of GDP in 2015 to around 41 percent of GDP by 2021, reflecting both moderating private investment, as returns diminish in a slowing economy, and less excess in public investment. Capital flows. The volume of capital outflows is expected to be broadly similar to last year as a percent of GDP. The large outflow seen in 2015:Q3–2016:Q1 will gradually moderate as the pressure from external debt repayment peters out. The secular trend of residents’ acquisition See IMF Working Paper 14/4 for an explanation of augmented deficit and debt: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=41204.0. Under the new budget law, around RMB 14 trillion of existing local government financing vehicle (LGFV) borrowing has been recognized as explicit local government debt, of which nearly a quarter has already been swapped into LG bonds. Since the swapped portion is no longer counted in TSF, the reported TSF growth underestimates credit growth. Staff adjust the official TSF statistics for this swapped amount to correct the underestimate. Unadjusted for this swap, TSF is projected to grow by 12.7 percent in 2016. Page 19 of foreign assets to balance their investment portfolio is expected to continue, but not materially accelerate from current levels. Rebalancing. The high national savings rate, the crux of China’s internal and external imbalance, is expected to fall gradually due to aging and a stronger social safety net. Household consumption is expected to continue to pick up on the back of falling household savings and rising disposable income, which, in turn, derives from labor-intensive services increasingly replacing industry as the main fulcrum of activity on the supply side (which should also reduce the carbon intensity of output and income inequality). But the baseline assumes only modest progress on corporate restructuring and SOE reform; hence credit rebalancing is projected to progress only slowly. Medium-term growth prospects. The near-term reliance on policy easing and credit-financed investment, and the lack of decisive progress on addressing corporate debt restructuring, SOE reform, and entry of dynamic private firms is expected to add to the existing stock of vulnerabilities and worsen resource allocation. The price of achieving stronger near-term growth in this way is that the economy will likely encounter further diminishing returns, slowing to 6 percent by 2018 and declining further into the medium term. In particular, the credit intensity of growth is projected to decrease only modestly, resulting in a continuously rising nonfinancial private sector credit/GDP ratio. This gives rise to an increasing risk of disruptive adjustment (banking crisis and/or sharply slower growth), as credit booms often have in other countries. Despite the relatively benign near-term outlook, downside risks dominate (Appendix III). Downside:  Near term: the key risks are a loss of investor confidence, disorderly corporate defaults, a sharp fall in asset prices, and a quicker fading of the stimulus impact. With high leverage, corporates are especially sensitive to declines in profitability and higher borrowing costs (but less so to FX risk given low aggregate Source: IMF staff estimates and projections. Disposable income Private consumption Consumption growing, butslowly Household saving (RHS) Consumption Share to Rise... (In percent of GDP) United Kingdom Belgium DenmarkItaly Norway SwedenFinlandGreeceIrelandPortugalSpainArgentinaBrazilUruguayUruguayMalaysiaPhilippinesThailand GDP growth change 1/ Followed by banking crisis Credit Booms Tend to End Badly (In percentage points) Source: IMF staffestimates.1/ Average growth differential between 5-year post-boom and 5-year pre-boom periods. 2/ No growth change as China's boom has not ended. China 2/ Page 20 FX exposure). These could be amplified by the financial system, with renewed capital outflows and exchange rate pressure.  Medium term: the key risk is slow progress on reform and continued reliance on policy stimulus and unsustainable credit growth, which would add to vulnerabilities, worsen resource misallocation, and lead to permanently lower growth. While near-term growth will be temporarily boosted, medium-term growth would continuously fall under an illustrative “no-reform” scenario, reflecting a sustained TFP growth slowdown. The nonfinancial private credit/GDP ratio would rise significantly higher than under the baseline, as would the risk of a disruptive adjustment.  UK / European Union . The direct impact of UK voters’ June 23 decision to exit the European Union (EU) is likely to be limited (for example, the UK accounts for 2½ percent of China’s exports). However, should growth in the EU be affected significantly, the adverse effect on China could be material (exports to the EU, including those routed via Hong Kong SAR, are equivalent to almost 4 percent of China’s GDP). Staff estimates suggest that a 1 percentage point growth slowdown in the EU is associated with a reduction in Chinese growth by about 0.3 percentage