International experience, including China’s own in the 1990s, suggests that tackling a systemic corporate debt problem requires a comprehensive approach. Without this, individual initiatives, like debt-equity conversions, will likely fail. The strategy outlined below cuts across topics Page 25 and government agencies, affects swathes of people, firms, cities, banks, investors, and regions, and requires politically challenging decisions. There may thus be merit in establishing a well-staffed, high-level group with a clear mandate for policy formulation and communication. Progress should be kick-started in the next few months with a few high-profile pilot restructurings/liquidations of weak SOEs in more dynamic regions where it is relatively easier for displaced workers to find new employment, building on the plans for “zombie” company exits already underway in a few provinces (see Selected Issues). Key elements include: High-level decision. Upfront and most importantly, a high-level decision is needed to stop financing weak firms, strengthen corporate governance, mitigate social costs, and accept the likely lower growth. This decision should be reflected in the coordinated action of all involved public bodies, especially SOEs, local governments, and financial supervisors. Hardening budget constraints. Reducing the access to credit of weak firms is critical not only to help address the existing debt overhang, but also to improve the efficiency of new credit allocation. This requires hardening budget constraints by removing implicit guarantees and subsidies and allocating losses to firms and investors carefully in a system relatively unaccustomed to defaults. Indeed, the number of firms defaulting on bond coupon payments has increased in recent months, as have ratings downgrades and issuance cancellations. These developments will help investors to price risk more accurately (as seen in the recent widening of credit spreads) and improve the allocation of credit over time. Triage. Continued support of fundamentally unviable firms will only result in greater losses in the future and further resource misallocation. Thus, firms facing difficulties servicing their debts should be triaged into the viable, which should be restructured, and nonviable, which should be liquidated. From the government’s perspective, this means triaging the universe of SOEs and beginning to liquidate nonviable firms, with fiscal support to help meet the welfare costs of laid-off workers, along the lines of the recently announced restructuring fund for coal and steel sectors. Viable but insolvent SOEs will need a restructuring plan and a management that can execute it (which will likely require a greater role for the private sector). Their nonmarket objectives and responsibilities should be removed. This plan should also involve scaling back subsidies (e.g., for land use and preferential access to credit) to these firms and raising their dividend payouts to the budget to the targeted 30 percent. BB + ee Y AA Y AA Y AA + Y AAA Page 26 Loss recognition . Regulatory and supervisory oversight should require banks proactively to recognize and manage impaired assets. Critical policies include loan classification and provisioning; bank capital; collateral valuation; prudential reporting; and a supervisory review approach fostering proactive NPL resolution (restructuring, write off, or sale). Asset quality recognition standards should be applied equally to loans and to securities whose underlying assets embody credit or market risk, and encompass both banks and nonbank financial institutions. Once losses are recognized, techniques such as debt-equity conversions, NPL securitization, and sales to AMCs, can be useful to workout impaired assets, if nested in a comprehensive strategy and with the right design. Burden sharing. Recognizing the full extent of impaired assets will likely result in significant losses. A plan to allocate these losses, taking into account appropriate hierarchy of claims among banks, corporates, and investors, and if necessary backstop them with government funds, will be critical. This in turn calls for an active role for the state, which China is well placed to undertake. Restructuring mechanism. While the legal framework for enterprise insolvency does not seem significantly to deviate from best international practice, its application has been extremely limited. Large-scale and expedited restructuring requires creative approaches to complement the existing framework, such as an out-of-court debt restructuring mechanism for priority-distressed companies that would use independent restructuring experts to provide valuations and restructuring/liquidation proposals. This process should be market based, rather than relying on forced mergers between weak and strong firms, and transparent, to prevent corruption and the state losing value. Distressed debt market. A more market-based system for resolving distressed debt would facilitate the disposal of nonperforming loans. This may require greater involvement of specialist financial institutions and legal workout agencies, and would also benefit from better functioning collateral auctions to help increase recovery values. Existing AMCs can also play a role in jump-starting the market for distressed assets, provided they have the right incentives and independence. Social costs. A comprehensive restructuring will involve substantial social welfare costs, such as layoffs. Staff estimate potential employment losses in the excess capacity sectors (aluminum, cement, coal, construction, plate glass, and steel) at close to 8 million—some 1 percent of total employment. Given the likely regional concentration of this economic hardship, the central government should bear a portion of the welfare costs related to displaced workers. See IMF Technical Notes and Manuals, 2016/05: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=43876. & tt K Page 27 The costs of structural unemployment and worker resettlement are best borne by targeted assistance through earmarked funds to complement existing local social security programs, such as with the RMB 100 billion Restructuring Fund for the coal and steel sectors. Facilitating market entry. Improving resource allocation is not just about the exit of nonviable firms, but equally the entry of dynamic private firms. Where possible, markets should be made more contestable by lowering barriers to entry for potential competitors and dismantling monopolies, for instance in services (especially telecommunications and healthcare) and utilities (electricity, gas, and water). The recently announced SOE reform strategy has underscored some of these elements—the key is to follow through with decisive implementation (see Selected Issues). Authorities’ views The authorities emphasized that the key focus areas in the 13 th Five Year Plan—drawn up keeping in mind corporate debt-related vulnerabilities and financial stability considerations— were supply side structural reforms, deleveraging, destocking, reducing energy intensity, facilitating entry, and giving markets a more decisive role in resource allocation. They noted that a list of state-owned “zombie” companies was being prepared, mostly in the coal and steel industries, and that capacity reduction was underway in these sectors. Disbursements from the restructuring fund to facilitate worker resettlement had begun, with close to RMB 30 billion (a third of the total) already transferred to provinces that had provided commitments on capacity reduction. The authorities, however, cautioned that the process would be necessarily slow due to complicated corporate structures involving overlapping balance sheets and control of assets among parent, subsidiary, and affiliated companies that made valuation assessments difficult. Ultimately, they saw a need for more market involvement—rather than government directives— in the process, with creditors discriminating more carefully among borrowers and thereby hardening budget constraints. The authorities further noted that implicit support to SOEs had been largely phased out and they were increasingly competing on an equal footing with private firms. They also expected the envisaged mixed ownership reforms in SOEs would instill professional management, strengthen corporate governance, and attract private participation to improve efficiency. The authorities also observed that entry was being facilitated with approval procedures for capital injection in new growth areas cut by a third.