Reforms are good for China and the world. The near-term slowdown in economic activity in China is a price worth paying for safer and more sustainable growth. Staff simulations based on the FSGM model suggest that the impact of such a slowdown on other major economies is relatively minor, while slow progress in reforms or containing vulnerabilities—resulting in much lower income in China over time—would have significant negative spillovers in the medium to long term. Contribution to Global Growth (In percentage points) European Union United States World (percent) Rest of World Japan China Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff calculations. Global benefits are not distributed uniformly. While China’s transition is beneficial for the global economy, benefits accruing to individual countries vary at different stages of this process: Commodity Prices and Real GDP Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Growth transition and commodity prices. The post-global financial crisis investment drive was associated with a significant increase in the demand for commodities, particularly steel and Crude oil price Metals price Real GDP (RHS) 05Q1 06Q1 07Q1 08Q1 09Q1 10Q1 11Q1 12Q1 13Q1 14Q1 15Q1 Source: IMF staff calculations. Page 24 other metals. The demand from China has therefore been seen as supporting world commodity prices in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, and this view has been strengthened by the association between the slowdown in China’s investment growth and the recent decline in commodity prices. Staff empirical estimates based on a structural VAR indicate that the impact of China on global commodity prices has indeed been increasing and is now sizable. Simulations based on the GIMF model suggest that the impact depends on how the slowdown is perceived: it would be largest if fully anticipated, which could be interpreted as a substantial revision of expectations regarding growth prospects (or, equivalently, a misperception about growth prospects before the slowdown, which could have led to excessive investment in future supply). While this would have an adverse impact on commodity producers, simulations suggest that it would not have a major deflationary impact on the world economy given the cushioning effect of lower commodity prices on global demand and solid medium-term growth prospects in China. China moving up the global value chain. While Domestic Value Addded (In percent of world's domestic value added) USA CHN CAN KOR JPN RUS EU-28 (RHS) the post-global financial crisis investment boom had a major impact on China’s trade pattern, deep structural changes played an equally important role in shaping China’s role in the global economy. In the last two decades China graduated from a low-skill, labor-intensive exporter towards more sophisticated products, increasing domestic value addded and reducing import content of exports (Box 10). Such changes have posed challenges and opportunities for its trading partners, particularly in the region. For example, the move up the value chain has contributed to a sharp improvement in China’s trade deficit with the main Asian electronics supplier countries even as its surplus with the United States and the European Union has continued to rise. Meanwhile, the exit from labor intensive goods—albeit gradual given remaining pockets of relatively cheap labor in inland China—has allowed low-income Asia (such as Bangladesh, Cambodia, and Vietnam) to fill the space vacated by China. Sources: OECD June 2015 TiVA database; and IMF staff Authorities views. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment, emphasizing positive spillovers from the steady rise of the Chinese economy. They also noted potential spillovers from the ‘One Belt One Road’ initiative, which would bring substantial benefits to both China and the region through greater integration, improvement in infrastructure, and increased trade. While they also concurred with staff assessment that opportunities for growth in low-value added industries are limited, given the ongoing transition to higher-value added products with associated increases in wages, they maintained that reservoirs of relatively cheaper labor in inland China could still allow for some growth in labor-intensive industries, particularly given improvements in infrastructure in less developed regions. See G. Gottlieb, G. Hong, S. Jung, K. Mathai, J. Schmittmann, J. Yu, “China and the CLMV: Integration, Evolution, and Implications,” IMF Occasional Paper (forthcoming). Page 25