Macro policies should be consistent with lowering vulnerabilities and the resulting moderately slower near-term growth. Restructuring will likely entail slower growth in the near term. This should be accepted in the interest of achieving higher, better-quality, and more robust longer-term growth. Some of the negative impact on near-term growth may be offset if sentiment were lifted by sending a strong signal of policy intent. On-budget, pro-consumption fiscal stimulus can be used if growth threatens to fall excessively. Page 28 Targets. The practice of setting annual growth targets (rather than projections) has fostered an undesirable focus on short-term, low-quality stimulus measures. If annual targets are to be maintained, they should be downplayed in importance compared to other indicators (such as household income growth), set flexibly (wider ranges) and at sustainable levels—for 2017, around 6 percent. Credit growth , most importantly, needs to fall substantially to stabilize the nonfinancial private credit/GDP ratio. This should be done by decisively tackling the problem at source—soft budget constraints on SOEs and local governments, the web of implicit and explicit guarantees, excessive risk taking by financial institutions and the pursuit of unsustainably-high growth. Interest rates. Staff’s monetary policy index suggests rate cuts have gone beyond what the historical relationship with output and inflation would imply as necessary. Short-term rates are barely positive in real terms and likely below the longer-run neutral level. Interest rates should rise towards less accommodative levels as inflation picks up as projected. This should be data dependent, with an earlier upward move if, for example, inflation strengthens faster than envisaged, growth surprises on the upside, or capital outflows intensify substantially. Stronger prudential settings—which, in the past, have contributed to a significant slowing of credit expansion—should be the main financial policy tool to restrain credit growth, but somewhat higher interest rates could play a complementary role, for example, by reaching parts of the financial system that prudential measures may miss (such as shadow banking and the corporate bond market). That said, higher rates should be used with caution as they could intensify corporate distress and worsen credit conditions for SMEs. Fiscal stance: Monitoring the fiscal stance in China is especially difficult. Much spending and most of the deficit and financing occurs off budget with little transparency, and the line between public and private is blurred. Staff’s estimates of the “augmented” balance and debt (i.e., including estimated off-budget spending/financing) are thus subject to a particularly high degree of uncertainty, but likely reflect more accurately the effective fiscal position than the official budget balance and debt. Over the medium term, the large augmented deficit should gradually decline towards around 7 percent of GDP, to slow and eventually stabilize debt. The projected increase in the 2003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015 2016 Proj. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; Chinese Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Consolidated general government balanceAugmented balance FiscalDeficit Remains Large, But More on Budget (In percent of GDP) Page 29 augmented deficit in 2016 is thus not warranted from a structural perspective. Neither is it warranted from a cyclical perspective given the growth outlook. For 2017, a moderate reduction of the augmented deficit seems appropriate. Only if growth threatens to fall sharply (well below staff’s projection of 6.2 percent) should the deficit widen (and if so, with measures that promote rebalancing, as detailed below). The on-budget fiscal deficit is projected to increase from 2.7 percent of GDP in 2015 to 3 percent of GDP in 2016. Going forward, the reallocation of fiscal resources from off-budget investment towards on-budget measures that support rebalancing (boosting household incomes and consumption) and restructuring should continue. Such a reallocation could be helped by setting fiscal policy within a sound multi-year budgeting framework and greater coordination between the various bodies responsible for fiscal policy and planning. Provincial government quotas for new debt issuance should be set consistent with this overall envelope, with the aim of curtailing off-budget local government borrowing and bringing it on budget. Increasing on-budget support for consumption should include raising pensions, social assistance, education and health spending, unemployment benefits and providing restructuring funds, while cutting minimum social security contributions and raising SOE dividend payments. Increases in social benefits should be targeted to ensure progressivity. Substantially raising taxes on fossil fuel and pollution (e.g., a carbon or coal tax) would help curtail emissions, improve energy efficiency, raise revenue and prevent almost 4 million premature deaths by 2030 (see Selected Issues). Progress should continue on structural fiscal reforms that will facilitate better use of public resources and reduce the distortions and costs imposed on the private sector (see D. Lipton, Finance and Development , March 2016). Key reforms include: (1) implementing the new budget law, improving the transparency of local government financing, and closing new “back-doors” for continued quasi-fiscal borrowing/spending (2) modernizing the tax system and making it more progressive (e.g., relying more on direct taxes and allocating local governments revenues to match their spending responsibilities) and (3) expanding social security and improving the portability of all types of benefits, liberalizing residency restrictions, and improving active labor market policies. Authorities’ views The authorities emphasized that monetary and fiscal policies would provide a supportive environment for supply-side restructuring. They viewed the level of interest rates as appropriate from a cyclical perspective. They expected credit growth to normalize in the remainder of the Y gg Page 30 year, observing that the exceptional pace of expansion in early 2016 was in part driven by the real estate sector—which would likely moderate going forward. The authorities highlighted that the pace of credit growth would fall over the medium term, given the emphasis on deleveraging and structural reforms in the 13 th Five Year Plan. They noted, however, that the speed of deleveraging would need to be gradual to prevent adverse feedback loops between the financial sector and the real economy, as seen for example in Europe after the financial crisis. The authorities also emphasized that reducing the pace of credit growth would mean foremost reining in credit to unviable “zombie” firms, while ensuring that dynamic firms continued to have access to finance. The authorities noted that fiscal policy would proactively take the lead in supporting aggregate demand, with a higher on-budget deficit projected this year compared to last. They questioned staff’s ‘augmented’ balance, arguing that the concept was no longer relevant since local government off-budget spending had been prohibited. The authorities observed that the implementation of the new budget law was largely on track, although some local governments continued to guarantee borrowing by LGFVs, requiring the central government to step up its monitoring and enforcement of the rules. They emphasized that losses on any new loans to these entities would be shouldered by the financial institutions advancing the credit. The authorities also highlighted that tax reforms were underway, including to the personal income tax, environmental protection, resource and excise taxes. However, they questioned staff’s estimate of the expected health benefits of a carbon or coal tax, arguing that causal links from higher tax rates to lower mortality rates had not been conclusively identified.