Progress in domestic rebalancing. Shifting to a more consumption-oriented economy will After the report was written, the authorities announced a further reduction in benchmark interest rates (25 basis points) and targeted reduction in RRRs. This will be covered in a staff supplement that will be issued after the release of second quarter data on July 15. Jun Ma and others, “2015 Mid-Year China Macro Forecast,” PBC Working Paper No. 9 (2015). Page 11 Contribution to Growth (In percentage points) involve both lowering the household saving rate and increasing household’s share of income. Consumption has been playing a more important role in driving growth in recent years. In 2014, staff estimates suggest that consumption contributed 0.1 percentage points more to growth than gross fixed capital formation, and consumption’s share of GDP increased (Figure 3). Other indicators also point to some progress in rebalancing, with wage growth that seems to be outpacing GDP (pushing up the share of labor income). These developments are attributable, in part, to the rising share of the tertiary (service) sector in employment and output. GDP is thus becoming more labor intensive, which helps explain the resilience in the labor market and consumption (Box 2). Consumption Investment Net exports Real GDP growth (y/y, percent, RHS) Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff calculations. REER (%, year-on-year) Current account balance (% of GDP) Current Account Balance and REER Considerable progress in external rebalancing, but the job is unfinished. The current account surplus last year was 2.1 percent of GDP, a big reduction from the 2007 peak of around 10 percent of GDP. Likewise, the renminbi has appreciated considerably in REER terms, up 55 percent since the exchange rate reform in 2005 (Figure 4). Over the past year, the REER has appreciated by over 13 percent (April, year-on-year), in tandem with the rise in the U.S. dollar. Despite this appreciation, Q1 registered a strong trade surplus, driven largely by lower commodity prices and the domestic slowdown. However, capital outflows have also been strong, and monthly proxies for intervention suggest that the PBC has not intervened to buy foreign currency since July 2014. Indeed, the PBC appears to have been selling reserves since late last year, with proxies suggesting cumulative sales of 137 billion U.S. dollars from October 2014 to May 2015. Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. 1/ Calculated as 4-quarter rolling sum. 05Q1 06Q1 07Q1 08Q1 09Q1 10Q1 11Q1 12Q1 13Q1 14Q1 15Q1 External assessment. The external position in 2014 was moderately stronger compared with the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings, and the renminbi was moderately undervalued (Appendix II). Since then, as noted, there has been substantial appreciation in real effective terms. Nonetheless, staff projections for 2015 suggest that the external position probably remains moderately stronger than fundamentals. There are several factors influencing a country’s external position, with the exchange rate being one of them. While undervaluation of the renminbi was a major factor causing the large imbalances in the past, staff’s current assessment is that the real effective appreciation over the past year has brought the exchange rate to a level that is no longer undervalued. However, staff’s assessment that the external position is probably still too strong highlights the need for other policy reforms—which are indeed part of the authorities’ agenda—to reduce excess savings and achieve sustained external balance (paragraph 23). Reserves were at 149 percent of the IMF’s composite Page 12 metric at end-2014 (down from 160 percent in 2013); relative to the metric adjusted for capital controls, reserves were at 238 percent, down from 254 percent in 2013. Given China’s progress and plans with capital account liberalization, the appropriate metric is shifting toward the unadjusted one; under either metric, further accumulation is unnecessary from a reserve adequacy perspective. Authorities’ views . The authorities concurred with the staff assessment of the progress in domestic rebalancing, citing the stable labor market and job creation, rising household incomes, relatively strong retail sales, and continued expansion of the service sector. They reiterated their commitment to transforming the economy toward the new growth model, and considered the speed of ongoing rebalancing as appropriate. Investment, they noted, would still play a critical role, but the challenge was to make it more efficient while also relying more on consumption as a driver of growth. On external rebalancing, the authorities welcomed the assessment that the renminbi was no longer undervalued. However, they thought the current account surplus last year was in a reasonable range and that the external position was close to equilibrium.