The biggest risk is inadequate progress in advancing reforms and containing vulnerabilities. As illustrated in the no-reform scenario discussed above, vulnerabilities would continue to rise if the unsustainable pattern of growth persisted and reform progress was too slow. Over the medium term, the likelihood of China falling into a period of protracted weak growth would rise considerably, and the risk of a sharp and disorderly correction would increase as the existing buffers—a still relatively healthy public sector balance sheet and large domestic savings—would diminish. This risk would also increase with the opening up of the capital account—potentially leading to large outflows should market sentiment change—pointing to the importance of careful coordination of liberalization steps with other structural reforms. As noted, achieving a ‘soft landing’ of this economy while addressing vulnerabilities and advancing structural reforms, as envisaged in the baseline, will be challenging. Thus, staff considers this risk to be of medium likelihood. The illustrative no-reform scenario and related spillovers analysis suggest that the realization of this risk would have a high impact on China and the global economy. Near-term risks are manageable. The hard-landing risk described above is considered to be of low probability in the near term. Fiscal and financial buffers, combined with the still-important role of the state, leave the authorities with sufficient tools to respond effectively to support growth if needed. While these buffers are diminishing over time, they should still allow the authorities to prevent a shock— such as widespread credit events, disorderly correction in real estate, or policy mistake—from triggering a negative feedback loop that spirals out of control. Other risks include: Real FAI Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Total Infrastructure 08Q1 10Q1 11Q1 07Q1 12Q1 1/ Deflated using quarterly FAI prices published by authorities. 2/ 15Q2 is average of April-May 2015. 09Q1 13Q1 14Q1 15Q2 15Q1 External risks . China’s large size, limited financial integration, capital controls, and sizable reserves provide cushions against global shocks (see Appendix IV for the Risk Assessment Matrix). Fiscal cliff . Tighter fiscal control over local government finances combined with falling land sales revenue could lead to a sharp reduction in local government spending. However, as discussed above, so far infrastructure spending has held up in 2015 (a good proxy for local government off-budget spending) and measures have been introduced to ensure financing. Equity market . The stock market shows signs of froth. Wealth effects from an asset price correction are likely to be small. Thus, while a correction could take place, it is unlikely to have a significant macro impact, although risks are rising given the fast increase in leverage (Box 4). The authorities have taken steps to contain risks, especially from margin lending; staff recommends continued vigilance to prevent macro risks, including potential linkages to the banking system. Deflation . While a deeper-than-expected slowdown could contribute to deflationary pressures, particularly in upstream industries benefitting from the past investment boom, staff assess the risk of Page 26 deflation as low at the current juncture. As noted above, disinflation so far appears largely explained by supply shocks, and price declines in overcapacity sectors do not translate to wider deflationary pressures given robust labor market and consumption. However, the risk of deflation bears close watching. Authorities’ views . The authorities broadly agree with the staff assessment that risks are low in the near term. In their view, they also had substantial buffers that would be sufficient to fend off any pressures in the medium term, and therefore the trade-off between addressing vulnerabilities and supporting economic activity was not as sharp as illustrated in staff scenarios. They were monitoring closely the developments in equity markets and were confident that their approach was appropriate, aiming to prevent macro risks without being overly interventionist.