China’s success, China’s challenge. China is now the world’s largest economy (PPP basis), which is testament to its record of successful reforms and development policies. But the country is far from rich: per capita income (PPP basis) was 24 percent of the U.S. level in 2014, and 14 percent in U.S. dollar terms. Thus, China still has considerable room to grow and catch-up to advanced economy status. However, as evidenced by international experience and the literature on the middle income trap, convergence is by no means guaranteed. China’s future success, like its past accomplishments, will depend on continued implementation of necessary yet often difficult macro policies and reforms. New leadership, new direction for the economy . The current leaders have now been in power for two years. Historically, this is a time when policy implementation has often accelerated. It is also the time to formulate the thirteenth five-year plan (2016–20). The leadership has emphasized an economic agenda focused on enduring improvements in people’s livelihood. This includes promoting inclusive growth, improving the environment, and fighting corruption. The Third Plenum reform blueprint, announced in late-2013, set out a comprehensive agenda to be completed by 2020. On the economic side, the aim is to move to a more sustainable growth model, including by giving the market a decisive role in the economy. It also covers issues such as urbanization, rural land reform, one-child policy, environment, and institutional frameworks. Adjustment underway. The authorities’ plans are in line with previous staff advice and progress has been made. Credit growth, in particular the ‘shadow bank’ component, has slowed; the real estate sector is undergoing a needed adjustment; and a new budget law is tackling the challenges of local government finances. Reforms aimed at liberalizing the financial system have also advanced (Appendix I). Key achievements include the introduction of deposit insurance and progress in liberalizing interest rates. Significant challenges still ahead. Faster progress on growth-enhancing reforms is critical. Since the global financial crisis, the pattern of growth has relied on an unsustainable mix of credit and investment. This has led to rising government and corporate debt, increasing pressure on the financial system, and declining investment efficiency. Moving to a safer and more sustainable growth path requires reversing these trends. Doing so will reduce demand, and thus unavoidably slow near-term growth. Managing this slowdown is a key challenge: Going too slow will lead to a continued rise in vulnerabilities, while going too fast risks a disorderly adjustment. The key to managing this trade off is structural reforms to boost potential growth.