Structural reforms to unleash new sources of growth. While a period of slower growth is necessary to reduce vulnerabilities, slower growth is not a goal unto itself. Instead, the goal is to move the economy to a safer and higher-quality growth path. The Third Plenum reforms will achieve this, but faster implementation is needed—the faster the progress, the sooner the benefits will materialize. Monetary and Financial Lending rate Lending rate floor Benchmark Lending and Deposit Rates (In percent pa; 1 year) Good progress has been made in liberalizing the financial system, especially interest rates . The floor on lending rates was eliminated in 2013 and the deposit rate ceiling has been progressively raised to 1.5 times the benchmark rate. In June, 9 core banks were authorized to offer negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs) for large deposits at maturities ranging from one month to five years. The NCDs have no interest rate ceiling, and can be fixed or floating (benchmarked to SHIBOR). A deposit insurance system was introduced in May. It insures deposits up to RMB 0.5 million (about US$80,000), which covers slightly under half of deposits but over 99 percent of accounts. The authorities have granted licenses to five new private banks, including some affiliated with large internet companies. Deposit rate ceiling Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Lending rate floor was removed in July 2013. Deposit rate May-15 Moving to a market-based financial system. This means completing interest rate liberalization, ending the over reliance on window guidance and moral suasion, and removing implicit guarantees. A defining characteristic of a market-based financial system is that banks set their deposit rates, lending rates, and loan policies based on market conditions and commercial considerations. Without this, it will not be possible to get the better allocation of resources— through improved access to credit and lower borrowing costs for the private sector—that is critical for transforming the growth model. Liberalization with strengthened supervision. The deposit rate ceiling is the last remaining formal interest rate control, but it has a significant impact on the costs of funds and thus interest rates throughout the system. The time has come to complete the liberalization of deposit rates. Deposit insurance is in place, flexibility has been progressively increased, and the ceiling does not appear to be binding for most of the banking system. Concerns about destabilizing competition, especially among smaller banks, should be addressed through supervision and regulation. More Page 20 broadly, the progress made in strengthening supervision and regulation should continue. Looking ahead, priorities include (i) continuing with efforts to manage risks from shadow banking (and shift intermediation back to bank balance sheets) and (ii) guarding against new pockets of risk, such as rising leverage in the equity market. The upcoming FSAP will offer an opportunity to discuss a wider range of financial sector reforms. Breaking the web of implicit guarantees. Implicit guarantees are prevalent throughout the financial system, leading to mispricing of risk and misallocation of resources. Breaking this web will introduce greater uncertainty into the financial system and cannot be done overnight. At the same time, the process must start and will involve greater acceptance of defaults, credit events, and bankruptcies. This applies, in particular, to state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which benefit from preferential access to financing supported by a perceived state backing of their liabilities. Such perceptions create an uneven playing field that distorts the allocation of financing toward SOEs, crowds out the private sector, and lowers productivity growth. Upgrading the monetary policy framework. A key element of a market-based financial system is a monetary policy that uses market-based interest rates as the primary instrument. Building on the progress already achieved, establishing a policy interest rate and using it as the main tool to adjust monetary conditions and signal changes in policy is a priority. Preparatory steps should include reducing the volatility in interbank interest rates through an effective interest rate corridor, improving the functioning of standing facilities, and introducing reserve averaging. Required reserve ratios (RRRs) remain high (18.5 percent for large banks), which imposes an implicit tax on banks that hurts depositors and borrowers and encourages shadow banking. RRRs should be lowered gradually and, if needed, the liquidity impact offset by increased OMOs. In addition, the central bank’s efforts to improve communications are welcome, although there is currently no clear interest rate signal for the authorities’ policy objectives. A further strengthening of communications—including by explaining monetary policy in the broader context of macroeconomic risks and developments—will be an important part of upgrading the monetary policy framework. Authorities’ views. The transition to a market-based financial system and monetary policy was progressing, the authorities explained. The monetary transmission mechanism, however, was posing challenges, and, thus, the focus should be on facilitating the transmission mechanism of benchmark lending rate and strengthening the yield curve, especially SHIBOR; introduce reserve averaging; improve the PBC’s standing facilities; and enhance the flexibility of open-market operations (OMOs). They noted the progress on interest rate liberalization, and for next steps, the PBC would continue to expand the scope of pricing discretion by financial institutions, and will select the right opportunities to complete interest rate liberalization. Regulation and supervision had been strengthened, especially to limit risks from off-balance sheet activity. Regarding implicit guarantees, they agreed that resolving these would improve credit allocation, but flagged the need to advance gradually to avoid widespread defaults that may pose systemic and macroeconomic risks. SOE and Fiscal Page 21 Deepening SOE reform to level the playing field. Leveling the playing field between private and public enterprises is critical to unleashing new sources of growth. Progress with SOE reform, however, has been too slow. Important reforms include accelerating the increase in dividend payments, ensuring dividends flow to the budget instead of being recycled to other SOEs, eliminating direct or indirect subsidies of factor costs (land, energy, capital), strengthening governance, and improving the commercial orientation. Ultimately, successful SOE reform will also have to include greater tolerance of SOE bankruptcy and exit while exposing them fully to private competition, especially in the tertiary sector (including financial services, logistics, health, and education). Similar to the SOE reforms in the late 1990s and WTO-related opening of manufacturing, these reforms have the potential significantly to boost productivity growth and create millions of jobs. Authorities’ views. The authorities’ stressed that deepening SOE reform remained one of the priorities, and disagreed with the assessment that it was going too slow. They noted that there had been steady progress, including increasing dividend payouts, tighter rules on compensation, and advances in mixed-ownership and governance. Moreover, they had implemented measures to encourage private entrepreneurship, such as streamlining business registration, and the number of newly registered private firms has surged since last year. They noted that SOE reform featured prominently in the Third Plenum and that they would continue to press ahead with reforms, including leveling the playing field. This would also need to include the costs associated with addressing legacy problems and spinning off social functions of SOEs. Regarding exit of unviable SOEs, they agreed that this was also important, but considered the problem to be substantially smaller than in the late-1990s due to better social safety nets and stronger SOE finances. On dividends, they were committed to reaching the target of 30 percent payout to the budget by 2020. Continued fiscal reforms. Fiscal reforms are advancing on many fronts, and Fund management recently signed a multiyear technical cooperation agreement with the MOF. Continued progress is being made in extending the VAT to services, and the authorities plan to finish this by the end of the year. Minimizing the number of VAT rates to, ideally, a single rate would have significant administrative benefits, and the policy objectives of multiple rates could be achieved with other fiscal instruments. Recent increases in petrol taxes and ongoing reforms to natural resource taxation are positive steps that will promote more environment-friendly growth. Following the landmark new budget law, finding a long-term solution to the imbalance between local government spending responsibilities and revenue assignments remains a priority. The national rollout of a property tax will help in this regard by providing an important source of local government revenue. Further social security reform. Pension reforms are crucial for achieving the desired rebalancing of the economy toward consumption. The authorities continue making strides toward a more equitable, sustainable, and integrated social insurance system (Box 8). After rapid expansion, pension and health insurance will soon reach universal coverage. Efforts to reduce pension fragmentation include the unification of the pension schemes for rural and urban residents, and recently unveiled plans to integrate the systems for civil service and enterprise workers. The scheme for enterprise workers remains unsustainable in the long term—already today, contributions (excluding subsidies) are only 87 percent of benefits, according to 2015 social security fund budget. Parametric reforms are Page 22 needed to help address looming deficits related to population aging. A key step is to increase retirement ages, which would improve pension system finances and help boost labor supply. Another priority is to lower the current high and regressive contribution rates—mandatory contributions to pension, medical, unemployment, occupational injury, and maternity benefits add to over 40 percent of wages. The lost revenue will need to be offset by a combination of parametric reforms and a broader reform of the tax system and the financing of social insurance programs. Authorities’ views. The authorities noted that tax reform remained an ongoing priority. They explained that the VAT reform was proceeding well and that, while they understood the rationale behind a single rate, multiple rates were helping to smooth the transition to the wider VAT. They highlighted that ongoing work on tax reforms was focused on improving the personal income tax system, including a lower burden on low and middle-income households; strengthening resource taxation to help protect the environment; and introducing a nationwide property tax. The authorities were committed to achieving universal social insurance coverage by 2020. They were equally committed to maintaining the long-term sustainability of the pension system, while ensuring proper incentives to participate in a multi-pillar structure. In addition, they were aiming to improve information systems to facilitate the exchange of records across social security and health insurance systems and provinces, which should help increase portability among social security systems and facilitate policy coordination. External Greater exchange rate flexibility. A more flexible, market-determined exchange rate is needed for allowing the market to play a more decisive role in the economy, rebalancing toward consumption, and maintaining an independent monetary policy as the capital account opens. With capital flows sizable and growing, the “impossible trinity” (inability to have an open capital account, independent monetary policy, and tightly managed exchange rate) will become increasingly binding. Thus, without more exchange rate flexibility, China will have less and less room for its own monetary policy, appropriate for its specific cyclical and structural conditions. Reform should aim to achieve an effectively floating exchange rate—with intervention limited to avoiding disorderly market conditions or excessive volatility—within 2–3 years. International experience suggests there are many options for advancing reform (Box 9). Steps over the next few months could include a further widening of the band and changes to how the central parity is set. Capital account liberalization. The past year has seen continued, gradual progress in opening the capital account, including the establishment of the Hong Kong-Shanghai Stock Connect scheme, increased quotas under various cross-border investment programs, introduction of mutual recognition of eligible mutual funds between Hong Kong SAR and the Mainland, and opening the onshore repo market to offshore renminbi clearing and participating banks (up to the limit of their onshore renminbi bonds). This is a key component of the broader financial reform agenda, aimed at enhancing the efficiency of corporate funding and widening the range of investment options available to residents. To achieve this, capital account opening has to be sequenced carefully with reforms to strengthen the financial system, safeguard macrofinancial stability, and make the exchange rate more flexible. Page 23 SDR. The authorities expressed interest in having the renminbi included in the SDR basket and are undertaking reforms to support the international use of renminbi. This issue will be covered in the forthcoming review of the method of valuation of the SDR. Data. The authorities are working closely with staff to complete the technical work for China to subscribe to SDDS. Staff encourages the authorities to participate in the Coordinate Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS). Authorities’ views. The authorities shared the goal of moving to a more flexible, market-determined exchange rate, and noted the progress they had made. In particular, after years of accumulating foreign reserves, the central bank had retired from day-to-day intervention since the second quarter of 2014. Still, they would step into the market occasionally to reduce unwarranted fluctuations and contain excessive speculative pressures. Regarding the capital account, the authorities planned to continue gradually liberalizing toward “managed convertibility”—supplemented with close monitoring, microprudential limits, and macroprudential and capital flows measures as necessary. Upcoming reforms could include a new qualified domestic individual investors scheme (so-called QDII2) and Hong Kong-Shenzhen Connect for equities. On data, they were committed to continue improving them and were on-track to complete the subscription to SDDS this year.