Continued moderate slowdown of growth. In 2014, the economy grew by 7.4 percent, in line with the official target of “around” 7½ percent (Figure 1). It marked the first time in recent history that growth came in below the headline target. Developments so far this year are consistent with staff projections and recommendations. Growth was 7.0 percent in the first quarter (year-on-year) and recent supply side indicators—such as industrial value added and electricity production—show continued moderation. While demand indicators also point to moderation, led by a correction in real estate construction, household consumption and retail sales have held up well, largely on the back of a robust labor market that reflects the ongoing transition to more labor-intensive growth. In terms of regions, the slowdown is concentrated: six provinces (Tianjin, Liaoning, Jilin, Hebei, Shanxi, and Yunnan) that together account for only 15 percent of GDP explain over 80 percent of the decline in real growth from the 2012–13 average of 7.8 percent to 7.4 percent last year. 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Official, q/q saar Year-on-year Inflation (In percent, year-on-year) Inflation has decelerated, but mainly due to supply shocks . Core inflation has been fairly flat and hovered in the 1–2 percent range for nearly five years. While headline inflation has been more volatile, this largely reflects supply-related shocks to food prices and the effect of real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciation rather than changes in the output gap. Thus, the current slowdown in economic activity does not appear to be a significant driver of slowing inflation (Box 1). Meanwhile, producer prices have been declining for several years. The most recent drop is due to falling global commodity prices effective renminbi appreciation. More broadly, external factors appear to be playing an important role in explaining PPI movements in China and much of the rest of Asia. Headline Core CPI excl. food & energy PPI Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff calculations. May-15 Credit growth, especially in shadow banking, has declined considerably. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, total social financing (TSF), a broad measure of credit, increased dramatically. However, since 2014, the pace of TSF growth has decelerated considerably, from the peak of 34.4 percent (TSF stock, year-on-year) at end-2009 to 12.4 percent in May 2015 (estimated by IMF staff, Figure 2). The change in dynamics was even more dramatic for the flow Interest Rates (In percent, period-average) Interest rate swap: 7-day repo fixing: 1-year Prime lending rate: 1-year Collateral interbank repo rate: 7-day Benchmark lending rate: 1-year Aug-14 Source: CEIC. Oct-14 Dec-14 Feb-15 Apr-15 Jun-15 Page 10 of credit, which contracted 19 percent in 2015 (January-May, year-on-year). The reversal was a result of stricter regulation of shadow banking activities, which also helped improve the composition of TSF growth toward conventional bank loans. TSF growth has also been affected by tighter financial conditions as reflected in REER appreciation and, earlier this year, rising real interest rates (from falling inflation). The central bank has, since last November, lowered the benchmark lending rate by 90 basis points in three steps and twice cut reserve requirements. While these steps initially coincided with a rise in interbank interest rates, the seven-day interbank repo and one-year interest rate swap have both declined since March. Fiscal developments continue to be General Government Balance (In percent of GDP; including state-administered SOE funds and social security) dominated by off-budget activity. Fiscal policy has supported growth significantly since 2008, mainly through off-budget spending. As a result, the official budget deficit is not a good indicator of the fiscal stance, as evidenced by the sizable gap between the budget deficit and an augmented deficit measure (staff estimate of the deficit including off-budget activity). Preliminary staff estimates point to a modest reduction last year in the augmented deficit to around 10 percent of GDP. This estimate is subject to considerable uncertainty due to data gaps (Table 5). The official fiscal stance in 2015 continues to be ‘proactive.’ The 2015 budget implies a positive fiscal impulse of about 0.4 percentage points of GDP, with the on-budget deficit expected to widen to around 2½ percent of GDP. The new budget law and declining land sales may constrain local government (LG) spending this year (see below), but so far infrastructure investment has remained buoyant. On-budget measure based on authorities definition Augmented balance Consolidated general government balance Augmented net lending/borrowing 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Estimate of local government off-budget spending through LGFVs Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff estimates. Net land sale revenues Authorities’ view . The authorities recognized the economy is transitioning from a high to a medium-to-high growth rate, which is one of the characteristics as China enters a new normal. They remained confident of achieving their target of around 7 percent growth for this year. Growth moderated, but was still within a reasonable range. While downward pressures remained significant, they expected activity to firm in the coming months as the effect of recent policy measures filtered through the economy. On inflation, they agreed that supply shocks, not slower growth, were the main factor driving down headline CPI. They considered that inflation was likely to stay positive. A recent PBC publication had projections for this year close to staff’s, including growth of 7 percent, inflation of 1.4 percent, and a current account surplus of 2.9 percent of GDP.