China’s transition will be positive overall for the global economy, but continue to produce large spillovers that vary by country/region. China will continue to drive global growth during its transition. Despite its growth slowing, China doubled its real GDP since 2009, thus continuing to account for about a third of global growth in 2015 (more than it did in 2010 when China was growing in double digits). Sustained progress on reforms and reining-in of vulnerabilities will reduce downside risks, thereby boosting sentiment and lifting investment in trading partners. The announced capacity reductions in coal and steel, if implemented, could also have a sizable effect on global capacity (e.g., the envisaged cuts in steel capacity over the next 3–5 years are broadly equivalent to recent annual steel output of the world’s second-largest producer, Japan). The counterfactual to China’s transition is not everlasting, investment/import-intensive, double-digit growth, but much slower growth, and possibly a sharp slowdown, which would have much more significant negative spillovers. The evolution of China’s production mix is already creating opportunities for frontier and developing economies. Staff analysis shows that China’s movement up the value chain with its wages rising has led China to exit some lower-end, more labor-intensive sectors. This trend is creating opportunities for frontier and developing economies, particularly in Asia (e.g., Cambodia, Lao P.D.R, Myanmar, and Vietnam) to enter those sectors and to satisfy rising Chinese consumption demand. That said, developments in China’s will continue to produce large global spillovers, some of which will be negative for some countries/regions. Spillovers through trade. Economies most adversely affected by trade spillovers are those that have been closely integrated with China through the global value chain, such as Korea, Malaysia, and Taiwan Province of China, as these economies are heavily exposed to China’s investment activity. In contrast, New Zealand will be least negatively affected, as its exports to China will benefit from the increase in China’s consumption demand. Staff analysis (April 2016 World Economic Outlook ) suggests that a 1 percentage point investment-driven drop in China’s output ill Page 24 growth would reduce G20 growth by ¼ percentage point. Spillovers through commodity prices China is a major importer across a range of commodities, especially metals, where it accounted for about 40 percent of global demand in 2014. China’s investment slowdown has had a significant impact on the demand for, and prices of, commodities closely related to investment activities. Staff analysis suggests that China’s rebalancing might account for between a fifth and a half of the declines in broad commodity price indices, with marked difference across commodities. Spillovers through financial markets Financial spillovers from China have increased, in particular since the global financial crisis, magnified by direct trade exposures. Staff analysis suggests that purely financial contagion effects remain less significant, but the impact of shocks to economic fundamentals, such as news about China’s growth, on equity returns in both emerging market and advanced economies has been rising. Over the past year, for example, China has likely transmitted more shocks to other countries than it has received (see Selected Issues). Overall countries most heavily exposed to China’s growth slowdown are those within the Asian regional supply chain and heavy commodity and machinery exporters. Authorities’ views The authorities acknowledged that the needed slowdown in heavy industrial sectors in China could have transitional negative effects on commodity prices and trading partners’ growth, but that this adjustment, by placing China on a sustainable growth path, would benefit the global economy in the long run. The authorities agreed that financial spillovers from China appeared to be rising, but cautioned that establishing a causal relationship was difficult. Several other factors have contributed to global risk-off episodes in recent years, including general weakness in EMs and uncertainty about the direction of unconventional monetary policy stances in AEs. The authorities also observed that negative interest rate policies in some advanced economies appeared to have hurt prospects for bank profitability, at times adding to pressure on equity prices and fueling contagion effects in international markets.