Demand management—finding the right balance. For this year, staff continues to see GDP growth of 6½ ‒ 7 percent as striking the right balance between addressing vulnerabilities and minimizing the risk of too sharp a slowdown/disorderly adjustment. Compared to 2014, this would allow for a further moderation in the growth rates of investment, especially residential real estate, and TSF. If incoming data suggest that growth is likely to exceed 7 percent, then measures should be taken to reduce vulnerabilities faster. If instead growth looks set to dip below 6½ percent, then fiscal policy should be eased. Fiscal stimulus, if needed, should be on-budget and rely on measures that protect the vulnerable, support rebalancing, and are consistent with the reform agenda. All goals that can be best achieved through fiscal policy. For 2016, to allow further progress in addressing vulnerabilities, GDP growth should be permitted to slow to 6–6½ percent Current macro policy stance is adequate. While it is difficult to assess the monetary and fiscal policy stance in China using conventional definitions, staff considers that the current policy setting is broadly consistent with the macro outcomes in the staff baseline (Box 7). However, the See Appendix I in the People’s Republic of China—Staff Report, IMF Country Report No. 14/235 (2014) Page 16 Real GDP Forecasts impact of recent developments—such as appreciation of the real exchange rate, slowing exports, adjustments in RRR and interest rates, and measures to support local government financing—is still reverberating through the economy. Thus, further policy adjustments may be needed. The staff baseline assumes that the authorities make such adjustments as needed to generate GDP growth of 6.8 percent, with an augmented fiscal deficit of around 10 percent of GDP, TSF growth of 12 percent, and a decline in residential real estate investment. For next year, staff assumes that policies are calibrated to achieve 6.3 percent growth, which is below consensus, consistent with further moderate slowing of TSF growth and the ongoing correction in real estate. Sources: Consensus Forecast; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Consensus IMF staff Fiscal Policy: Reform While Avoiding a ‘Fiscal Cliff’ Off-budget fiscal activity remains substantial and bringing it on-budget has proven challenging. Adoption of the new budget law in late 2014 was as an important milestone in fiscal management. It will create a much-needed framework for local government borrowing, improve transparency, and strengthen medium-term fiscal planning. A key goal of the new framework is to bring all spending that is fiscal in nature into the budget and finance it transparently, while clarifying that other, commercial investment projects of local governments do not have an explicit or implicit government guarantee. The transition to this new framework is complex and will take some time, especially for ongoing projects started under the previous regime where the perimeter between government and commercial activity was not clear and financing arrangements often were not consistent with the projects’ future cash flow. Avoiding the fiscal cliff . Staff advice is to keep the augmented deficit in 2015 broadly unchanged at 10 percent of GDP. Strict implementation of the new budget law could generate a sharp contraction in LG spending (‘fiscal cliff’) that would reduce the augmented deficit to well below 10 percent of GDP. This would have a large adverse impact on near-term growth, which should be avoided. Accordingly, the authorities have taken a series of measures to ensure that local governments can meet their ongoing financing needs, facilitating both the refinancing of maturing obligations and the funding of ongoing and new projects (by issuing LG bonds, extending bank loans falling due, and public-private partnerships—PPPs—for which new guidelines were issued in May). The staff recommends that a clear and comprehensive transition plan for LG financing under the new budget law be announced as soon as possible. The solution will need to find a balance between (i) preventing an abrupt contraction in fiscal spending; (ii) not undermining the budget law through excessive forbearance; (iii) minimizing moral hazard from rewarding imprudent borrowing by local governments; and (iv) limiting damage to the financial system from uncertainty and shifting the costs to banks. Page 17 Medium-term fiscal adjustment . Gradual fiscal adjustment should start next year, with a modest reduction in the augmented fiscal balance of around ½ percent of GDP each year. Over the coming years, the pace of adjustment could accelerate as the headwinds from reining in vulnerabilities dissipate and the benefits of structural reform take hold. The staff baseline assumes a gradual consolidation in the augmented deficit to around 8 percent of GDP by 2020. While augmented debt would continue to rise, it would peak at around 70 percent of GDP in 2020 (Appendix III). The structure of fiscal spending is also assumed to adjust in line with structural reforms to promote rebalancing, with lower investment creating room for higher on-budget current expenditures reflecting additional spending on health, strengthening of the social safety net, and bringing some of the legacy social security obligations on budget as discussed below. Authorities’ views. The authorities were confident that the fiscal risk was being resolved gradually without undermining the goal of the new budget law to discipline the spending and financing behavior of local governments. They had developed a transitional plan that ensured that ongoing projects, with contracts signed up to last year, continued to receive financing. They did not regard this as overburdening banks, as many local government projects were commercially viable and did not pose significant credit risk. They highlighted that a key goal of the new budget law was to move all government activity to the budget, thereby clearly distinguishing that all other borrowing must be on commercial terms (such as PPPs) and without a government guarantee. Thus, they continued to question the usefulness of the augmented debt and deficit data. They also reiterated that fiscal policy this year would remain ‘proactive,’ supporting growth as necessary. Monetary Policy: ‘Wait and See’ The current stance of monetary policy is consistent with achieving appropriate inflation and growth outcomes. The ongoing slowdown is part of a needed adjustment to more sustainable growth and not a cyclical weakening that warrants a monetary response; and the outlook for inflation is benign, with recent disinflation related mainly to transitory supply shocks. Following the recent steps by the central bank (RRR and benchmark interest rate cuts) and the relaxation of LG borrowing constraints, the staff expects that TSF growth and private credit will be in line with the 2015 projections (12 percent for TSF and 11 percent for private credit—TSF excluding LGFVs). There is room, however, for further RRR reductions (offset by OMOs as needed) as part of the PBC’s liquidity management. Financial stability. Going forward, the credit-to-GDP ratio needs to be brought to more comfortable levels. The baseline scenario assumes that this occurs through a gradual reduction in investment and credit flows, with private credit growth dropping to around 8 percent by 2020 (Box 3). Such a path is consistent with the gradual reduction investment while avoiding a credit crunch that would result in too sharp a correction. As financial sector reforms advance, including continued development of capital markets to increase the share of equity and bond financing, the efficiency of financial intermediation will improve. As private sector firms gain better access to financing, productivity gains will allow a given growth rate to be achieved with less investment and See also Box 6 in the People’s Republic of China—Staff Report, IMF Country Report No. 14/235 (2014) Page 18 credit. Staff also discussed the benefits of a more proactive policy of encouraging write-offs and corporate restructuring, which would help more quickly to release both credit and physical resources to more efficient uses (see Box 3). Authorities’ views. The authorities explained that the monetary policy stance remained neutral, and that the recent benchmark rate and require reserve ratio (RRR) cuts were done to offset the reduction of liquidity arising from the decline of foreign exchange deposits, and the tightening in monetary conditions from falling inflation. Going forward, the policy stance would remain the same. Although they saw space for additional cuts in benchmark rates and RRRs if needed to keep the stance neutral, they remained mindful of the need to contain leverage. Policies would continue to work on strengthening the monetary transmission mechanism, and facilitate the broader reform agenda for a more market-based financial system. Regarding deleveraging, the authorities were working to simplify the process of write-offs for nonperforming loans, including through changes in relevant tax policy and legal procedures. Real Estate: A Multi-Year Adjustment Excess supply Floor space started Floor space sold (2 years lead) Residential Market Overbuilding and Adjustment Scenario (In millions of square meters) Real Estate Adjustment . A multiyear correction in real estate investment—with some variation by city—is necessary to reduce the new supply coming on the market and allow time to work through the existing inventories. The staff baseline scenario assumes that real estate fixed asset investment decelerates further (from 10 percent growth in 2014), turning to negative growth in 2015–2017. The challenge is to ensure that the correction continues, but at an orderly pace. In particular, this means a continued decline in housing construction, but healthy growth in housing demand, to allow time for demand to catch up to supply. To achieve this, policy options—to be calibrated depending on local real estate market conditions—include adjusting mortgage terms, varying restrictions put in place during years of rapid growth, and provision of affordable housing. In March 2015, the authorities introduced a package of measures, including reducing land supply in cities with excess housing inventory; increasing the loan-to-value ratio for second mortgages from 40 percent to 60 percent; and shortening the minimum period for housing sales tax exemption from five to two years of residency. Social housing investment and shanty town renovation projects have also been increased. These policies have helped cushion the adjustment as evidenced by the recent stabilization of prices and floor space sold; going forward policies must be careful to avoid rekindling investment in the real estate market, particularly where housing inventory is elevated. 1/ Excess supply is measured as the difference between floor space started and sold (2 years lead). Authorities’ views on real estate . While acknowledging some structural imbalances at the regional level, the authorities regarded the ongoing correction in real estate as largely a cyclical phenomenon, while underlying housing demand remained strong. They were confident that the set of measures introduced to stabilize the market had a desired impact, and that further measures Page 19 could be deployed in case of a deeper slowdown. They also considered that the imbalances were smaller than estimated by staff, and that measures to boost demand could play a stronger role in restoring balance in the market.