“The new normal means… a farewell to the unbalanced, uncoordinated and unsustainable growth model” (Premier Li, 2016). But the transition is proving difficult and bumpy. Macro and policy developments Activity slowed modestly through early 2016, shored up by accommodative policies, and rebalancing progressed (see Selected Issues; Figures 1 and 2). Supply-side indicators . Industrial production has moderated steadily, with a needed rotation from excess-capacity upstream sectors (cement, steel, glass) to more consumer-oriented manufacturing (autos, computers, home appliances). Service sector activity has remained strong, even after stripping out the outsized contribution from financial services. Supply rebalancing—the switch from industry to services—continued its trend traced over the period of the previous five-year plan (2011–2015). Demand-side indicators . Retail sales have remained strong on the back of steady growth in household income. Investment has stabilized following the recovery in real estate in recent months. Demand rebalancing progressed, with consumption accounting for two-thirds of growth in 2015 and 2016:Q1. Inflation remained well anchored. Core inflation has been stable around 1½ percent. Headline CPI inflation accelerated recently due to food prices. Producer price deflation is still sizable (though moderated recently), reflecting excess capacity in real estate and heavy industry, and weak commodity prices. Policy support. Benchmark lending rates were cut five times in 2015, and in the second half of the year, fiscal policy turned expansionary, infrastructure spending picked up (supported by policy bank lending and the local government debt/loan swap), and credit growth accelerated. External sector . Exports have been subdued, reflecting weak external demand and real exchange rate appreciation through mid-2015. But import volumes have been weak as well, in line with slower domestic demand growth (Box 1). Positive terms of trade effects lifted the current account surplus in 2015 to 3 percent of GDP, but the external accounts came under substantial pressure due to large capital outflows. 2010Q111Q112Q113Q114Q115Q116Q1 Net exports Gross capital formation Final consumption expenditure GDP growth (In percent, y/y, RHS) Rising Consumption Contribution to Growth (In percentage points, yoy contribution)Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; and IMF staff estimates. Page 11 Exchange rate. The real effective rate appreciated by close to 10 percent from mid-2014 through mid-2015 due to the (then) tight link to the U.S. dollar, and has declined 4½ percent since then. The renminbi remains broadly in line with fundamentals (Appendix I). Reform progress Reform progress continued on many fronts, especially in improving the monetary and fiscal frameworks, and supporting urbanization (Box 2). Monetary framework. Interest rate liberalization was formally completed and the PBC advanced toward an interest rate corridor centered on the seven-day repo rate (see Selected Issues). The more market-based fixing mechanism for the RMB in August 2015 and the greater reference to a currency basket from December 2015 have allowed more flexibility against the U.S. dollar. Together, these reforms help move China towards an independent, market-based, monetary policy. Fiscal framework. A wide range of reforms are underway: the new budget law is being implemented (aimed at improving transparency and accountability of local government finances); the VAT extension to services was completed; a carbon emission trading scheme (the largest in the world) will be rolled out nationwide in 2017; social security reforms to unify pension schemes for urban/rural residents and public/private employees were announced, as was a review of revenue and spending responsibilities across levels of government (which should help address the large vertical imbalances that currently limit local governments’ ability to implement social spending reform). Urbanization. The government has continued to encourage rural residents to settle in urban areas—key for boosting productivity through specialization and knowledge spillovers—including by advancing rural land reforms, allocating basic public education spending to the central budget and improving the portability of pensions. Several provinces are rolling out a new household registration system whereby migrants can gradually qualify for basic social welfare and residency benefits. Corporate restructuring. The restructuring of unviable “zombie” state-owned enterprises (SOEs) has begun on a small scale at the local level, led by provinces with relative strength in public finances and more diverse economic structures. The government adopted a new five-year plan (2016-20), centered on rebalancing the economy. It aims to boost consumption, expand the service sector, protect the environment, further open up the economy, expand public services, and reduce poverty. The government has also announced elements of a reform plan for SOEs and capacity reduction targets in the coal and steel sectors (10–15 percent of existing capacity over the next 3‒5 years), together with a RMB 100 billion restructuring fund to re-employ and resettle an expected 1.8 million affected workers. However, in many areas, especially SOE reform, more details and guidelines are awaited. il Y lli nn Page 12 Box 1. What’s Behind the Import Slowdown? Chinese imports have slowed significantly over the past two years in real terms. Weaker investment, partly due to progress in rebalancing from investment to consumption, accounts for about 40–50 percent of this slowdown. Weaker exports also account for about 40 percent of slowdown, of which about a quarter is due to stronger RMB. The sharp decline in nominal imports has been largely due to prices. In 2015, goods imports were down 9½ percent in RMB nominal terms, mostly driven by lower import prices, of which two thirds is due to the sharp fall in commodity prices (which alone improves the trade balance by about 1½ percent of GDP). Real imports were up by only 1 percent (compared to about 9 percent on average over the previous three years), accounting for about half of the deceleration in real imports globally. The weakness in goods imports is broad based. Machinery and transport imports (accounting for about 40 percent of total imports) are decelerating as re-export demand is falling and rebalancing away from investment-based growth continues. Electronics is relatively more resilient. Commodities (accounting for about 30 percent of total imports) have also decelerated as a result of the slowdown in industry and weak real estate and infrastructure investment. Several factors have contributed to the slowdown in real imports. Overall domestic demand has moderated after the strong surge following the fiscal stimulus in response to the global financial crisis. The economy is undergoing structural change to a model driven increasingly by consumption, with lower import intensity than investment and exports. China has also been substituting imports of higher value-added products with its own production. In addition, sizable currency appreciation has eroded price competitiveness of exports, and thus lowered demand for processing imports. Staff analysis finds that weaker investment and exports have been the key drivers . Estimation for the post-WTO accession period (2002:Q1–2015:Q3) suggests that weaker investment has been the main factor, accounting for about 40–50 percent of the slowdown over the last two years. Weaker exports also account for about 40 percent of the slowdown, of which about a quarter is due to stronger RMB. Substitution of imported intermediate inputs with domestic production (“onshoring” measured as the ratio of processing imports to total exports) has not been an additional drag over this period but it continues to slow import growth at a constant pace. ––––––––––––––––––– 1/ See J. Kang and W. Liao, IMF Working Paper 16/106. mm & Page 13 Box 2. Recent Reforms Key reforms have been to improve the monetary and fiscal frameworks and to promote urbanization. Financial sector reforms Deposit insurance introduced (May 2015) Interest rates formally fully liberalized (October 2015) PBC launched the Macro Prudential Assessment (MPA) mechanism (January 2016) Pilot programs on securitization initiated (February 2016,) Equalized capital requirements and risk weights for certain off- and on-balance sheet activity (CBRC Notice 82, May 2016) Applied the “period-average” in monitoring financial institutions’ reserve requirements (September 2015) Structural reforms Capacity reduction targets (about 10–15 percent over the next 3–5 years) announced for coal and steel sectors (February 2016) A restructuring fund of RMB 100 billion was established for re-employment and resettlement of affected workers in overcapacity sectors (February 2016) Published guidelines on SOE reforms; ten pilot programs were implemented (September 2015, February 2016) Reduced the number of prices set by central government (December 2015) Relaxed the one-child policy (December 2015) Property rights for rural land clarified, including use as collateral for securing agricultural loans (March 2016) About 30 provinces announced guidelines on “hukou” (household registration) reforms (April 2016); a new household registration system is being rolled out by end-2016 Social housing program extended (May 2016) Certain provinces have commenced restructuring unviable provincial SOEs (June 2016) SOE social functions (provision of certain utilities and property services) to be reduced (June 2016) Implementation of the new budget law (January 2015) Business tax fully converted to VAT for remaining services (May 2016) Employer contributions toward social security payments reduced (April 2016) Improved regulation and reduced number of fees paid to various government funds by firms (February 2016) Fiscal reforms New fiscal accounting framework introduced from January 2016 Revised price adjustment mechanism for oil products (January 2016) Reform of the Personal Income Tax to further promote equity and redistribution New environmental protection and resource tax laws; carbon emission trading scheme (will be introduced in Expanded zero rating for exports (October 2015) Tax cuts implemented for small and high tech firms (September and November 2015) 2017) External sector reforms Mutual Recognition of Funds program introduced (July 2015) to allow mutual funds domiciled in Mainland China and Hong Kong SAR to mobilize funds from the other jurisdiction Access to onshore fixed income and FX markets eased for official sector and qualified institutional investors (July 2015; October 2015; February 2016) RMB increasingly referencing a basket of currencies rather than the U.S. dollar; additional basket of currencies (“CFETS") announced with weights (December 2015) RMB to be included in the SDR basket effective October 2016 (November 2015) RQFII quota announced for United States (June 2016) Page 14 Policy obstacles While strategic announcements have been in the right direction, obstacles impede implementation and vulnerabilities are rising. Traditional stimulus. In response to slowing growth in mid-2015, the government boosted infrastructure spending, real estate activity and credit, supporting near-term growth but raising vulnerabilities. It also set a growth target for 2016 of 6½‒7 percent, above staff’s recommended sustainable range of 6–6½ percent. Uneven reform progress. A corollary of the focus on near-term growth is less focus on reforms critical for medium-term growth, but growth detracting in the short term. Progress has been relatively slow on some key structural reforms, especially strengthening governance and imposing hard budget constraints for SOEs, tackling excessive corporate debt, and opening up state-dominated service sectors. As a result, resource misallocation continues. Lack of policy clarity. Government policy and pronouncements seem to alternate between prioritizing reform and growth. Some of these difficulties are to be expected, as the transition from the ‘old growth model’ is complex and politically challenging. In particular, the task of further liberalizing the economy while disentangling the still-pervasive web of distortions requires a broad set of well-timed and carefully designed policies and will involve learning- by-doing along the way. Nevertheless, the seeming lack of consistency at times feeds market concerns about the commitment to reform (e.g., the heavy-handed response to the equity market correction in June 2015) and prospects for engineering a smooth transition to sustainable growth. In part, this reflects inherent tension in an economic strategy that simultaneously aims to allow the market a “decisive” role in the allocation of resources, yet also affirms the “dominant” role of the state. Rising vulnerabilities ‘Hard landing’ in overcapacity sectors/regions. Overcapacity sectors were simultaneously hit by falling demand from real estate, lower global commodity prices, exchange rate appreciation, and higher labor costs. The stress is most pronounced in SOEs, where profits have fallen sharply, and in the north. 051015202510Q111Q313Q114Q316Q1 Two-speed Economy (In percent, year-on-year growth) Nominal growthof industrial sectorNominal growth of services sector Sources: CEIC Data CompanyLtd.; and IMF staff estimates. Nominal GDP growth Wide Regional Growth Disparity (In percent, year-on-year growth, 2015) Sources: CEIC Data CompanyLtd.; and IMF staff estimates. Page 15 Weakening corporate fundamentals (Figure 3). Industrial profits fell in 2015 for the first year since the late 1990s against a backdrop of excess capacity, moderating domestic demand, weak external demand, and declining producer prices. Intercorporate payment arrears are growing—the median number of days for outstanding receivables among listed firms has gone up to 45 from less than 30 in 2010. Defaults and downgrades are increasing. A rising fraction of debt is held by firms with weak interest coverage—about 14 percent by firms with profits less than interest payments. Impaired loans, largely to corporates, are rising fast, especially in smaller banks. High and rising credit growth  Credit growth has accelerated and is growing twice as fast as nominal GDP. As a result, the already high nonfinancial private credit/GDP ratio has risen rapidly, mainly reflecting corporate debt. The deviation of credit growth from its trend, a key cross-country indicator of potential crisis, has reached 20–25 percent of GDP—very high by international comparison.  The increasing credit intensity of growth, which is rising faster in regions where the traditional industry is concentrated, points to worsening efficiency of credit allocation, weak governance, forbearance, and soft budget constraints.  Potential losses from such a rapid and inefficient credit expansion could be large. The Global Financial Stability Report of April 2016, for example, estimated potential losses of 7 percent of GDP on corporate loans. Additional losses can be expected in other parts of the financial system, especially in shadow credit products. tt il tt tt z il ee K il K gd ee tt nu nu Page 16 An increasingly large, leveraged, interconnected, and opaque financial system (see Selected Issues; Figure 4). Behind the rapid credit growth of recent years lies a complex network of links between banks and nonbanks and a proliferation of investment products. Such innovation can enhance financial inclusion. But it also reflects regulatory arbitrage, makes it more difficult for supervisors to identify emerging vulnerabilities, increases the potential for contagion across market segments, and could amplify financial stress in a downturn. The growing interconnectedness across asset classes and intermediaries is seen through a variety of channels:  The sharp increase in bank balance sheets (by 22 percentage points of GDP in 2015), particularly the claims on other financial institutions (up from 5 percent of GDP in 2010 to 26 percent of GDP in 2015), and off- and on-balance sheet bank exposure to ‘shadow’ credit products.  The rapid expansion of pledged repo borrowing in the interbank market, with trading volume more than doubling in 2015 (mostly overnight lending), as large banks lent to smaller banks and nonbanks (including securities firms, trust companies, and asset management companies).  The increasing role of smaller and provincial banks, especially city commercial banks, which have greater exposure to shadow credit products and have grown rapidly. A propensity for asset price booms. China has recently experienced a sequence of booms in various asset prices—property, equity and bonds. This propensity is a symptom of a large stock of savings searching for yield, rising tt lli dd Booming Tier 1 House Prices (In percent, year-on-year growth, 3mma) May-16 Tier ITier II NBS: Floor space selling price Tier III or IV Sources: Fangguanju; and IMF staff estimates. mm ee ee dd Page 17 leverage, and a belief that the web of implicit guarantees will limit losses. This distorts the pricing of risk and facilitates bouts of speculative excess. Most recently, Tier-1 cities such as Shenzhen, Shanghai, and Beijing, are seeing large housing price increases as bank lending for home purchases increased strongly. Capital outflows. Despite an external position moderately stronger than fundamentals (Figures 5 and 6), capital outflows in 2015 and early 2016 were in excess of the current account surplus, prompting a substantial fall in FX reserves. The degree of outflows suggests a de facto more porous capital account than de jure restrictions would suggest. Several factors appear behind these outflows (see Selected Issues), including:  A shift in expectations about relative near-term returns on RMB assets, as domestic rate cuts, higher FX volatility, and the approaching Fed liftoff reduced the attractiveness of the carry trade. Many investors and market analysts expected the growth slowdown last year to trigger progressive policy easing and, eventually, RMB depreciation—an expectation seemingly reinforced by the August 2015 change in the exchange rate system.  Rising investor concerns about the growth outlook, near and longer term. Some also questioned China’s longer-term growth prospects amidst doubts about the government’s ability to carry out the reform agenda. Such concerns may explain, in part, the surge in outward investment during the last year.