Colombia’s pension system is fiscally sustainable but characterized by low coverage and high inequality. The share of the population receiving a pension in Colombia is low, especially among the poor, due to high informality. Only about a third (about 7 million) of the employed population (about 21 million) contributes to a pension regime, with 4.7 million contributing to the private capitalization (defined-contribution) system and 2.5 million contributing to the pay-as- you-go (defined-benefit) public regime. Average benefits in the public regime are generous by international standards, with the replacement rate being among the highest in the world, implying a high overall cost given the low number of people covered. Also, the statutory retirement age, particularly for women, is low. Outlays by the public pension regime are projected at about 4 percent of GDP in the coming years, but are projected to decline to 3 percent of GDP by 2050. The authorities expressed their intent to broaden the coverage of the pension system and make it more equitable. The mission welcomed the initiative and advised the authorities to consider creating space for expanded coverage by changing the benefit formula to reduce replacement rates for new retirees, equalizing retirement ages for men and women, and adjusting the retirement age in line with increases in life expectancy as part of the reform package. The implementation of recently-reinforced social security programs, including Beneficios Económicos Periódicos, Pensión Familiar, and Cotización por Semanas, is expected to foster savings and assist the population that does not qualify for a pension, without incentivizing informality. Staff also welcomed the authorities’ intention to extend a non-contributory program for the elderly poor to cover the full amount of the eligible population (about 2.4 million), which would have a fiscal cost of 0.1 percent of GDP. Expenditure Revenue BalanceSources: Fund staff estimates. Projected public pension balance, 2012-2050 (In percent of GDP) Page 15 Colombia’s health system has high coverage, but faces financial challenges. In contrast to the pension system, Colombia’s health care system has nearly universal coverage, but cost control has been undermined by the system’s complexity, high administrative costs and constitutional entitlements that have led to legal claims for expensive treatments. Public health spending, currently at over 7 percent of GDP, is expected to rise by about 1½ percentage points of GDP over the long term without any reforms, reflecting income growth, demographics and technological change. The authorities explained that a new statutory law, approved in June 2013, should reduce legal claims for expensive treatments, although this legislation is currently under review by the Constitutional Court. The mission encouraged the authorities to move forward with cost containment measures that can be implemented within the existing framework, in particular in the area of pharmaceutical prices, and to make efforts to clear arrears with hospitals.