Staff and the authorities concurred that the current account deficit and the real exchange rate are broadly in line with fundamentals. According to the CGER external stability approach and the External Balance Assessment (EBA), the real exchange rate in 2013 was about 8 to 13 percent overvalued, respectively. However, staff estimates that the significant depreciation of the peso in real effective terms of the last few months has reduced the estimated misalignment. Staff’s analysis based on the EBA methodology but adjusting for extremely conservative oil reserves assumptions suggests that the cyclically-adjusted current account deficit in 2013 (2.7 percent of GDP) was about 1 percent of GDP larger than its norm. However, accounting for profit remittances by foreign companies, which are not well captured in the EBA, would reduce this gap. Overall, the mission and the authorities agreed that Colombia’s external position is strong, noting that the financing of the current account deficit largely through foreign direct investment, a relatively more stable source of financing, mitigates risks. The exchange rate does not appear to have been an important driver of manufacturing sector weakness. Manufacturing output fell in the past two years, underperforming the rest of the economy. Some observers attributed the weak performance of the manufacturing sector to the real exchange rate appreciation of recent years. Analytical work conducted by staff based on firm-level data found no strong evidence that the exchange rate has negatively affected the manufacturing sector, especially given that the real appreciation of the peso vis-à-vis the The EBA methodology estimated the current account norm in 2013 at+3.2 percent of GDP, compared to ‐2.6 percent of GDP in 2012. This pronounced change in the estimated norm was largely due to the introduction of oil wealth (as measured by proven oil reserves) as a new variable in the model. The estimate relied on a conservative assumption of Colombia’s oil wealth. However, the Colombian authorities and the oil industry at large (including foreign multinational companies) share the view that the country’s oil resources are substantially larger than indicated by the proven reserves measure. This is further supported by a high ratio of potential oil reserves to proven reserves. In addition, the substantial foreign investment of recent years and the incorporation of new technologies have allowed the industry to attain a high reserve replacement rate (of about 170 percent for Ecopetrol in the last 5 years), with the trend likely to continue. Using these higher oil wealth assumptions leads to a much lower estimate of the current account norm. Page 16 currencies of Colombia’s manufacturing trade partners appears to have been more limited than the overall real appreciation (Box 5). International reserves appear adequate for precautionary purposes. Staff and the authorities concurred that Colombia has an adequate reserve buffer for normal times, though they might be insufficient to cope with tail risks (Box 6). The current stock of international reserves covers approximately 7 months of imports and over 100 percent of the short-term external debt amortizations and the projected current account deficit. Nonetheless, reserves measured relative to broad money, short-term external debt plus the current account deficit, and months of imports are still below the ratios prevailing prior to the global financial crisis of 2008–09. The authorities reiterated their intention to continue strengthening their international reserve position with the aim of returning to the pre-crisis reserve ratios, which proved to be an important buffer in confronting that large external shock. Staff and authorities concurred that the opportunity cost of accumulating reserves increases as they reach higher levels and that a careful cost-benefit-analysis is warranted. The authorities are increasing their reserve buffers through foreign exchange purchases during periods of abundant external inflows. The authorities executed this policy by pre-announcing a minimum reserve accumulation amount (US$3 billion between February and May, 2013, with a minimum daily purchase). At the end of May, the authorities reduced the size of the reserve accumulation program to US$2.5 billion for June to September, and removed the minimum daily purchase. After significant depreciation of the peso, the authorities in October further slowed the pace and set a quarterly reserve accumulation ceiling (as opposed to a floor) of US$1 billion. In the first quarter of 2014, the authorities maintained the quarterly US$1 billion ceiling, but bought only US$0.7 billion. Staff agreed that the implementation of the foreign exchange purchase program has been prudent and did not undermine exchange rate flexibility or the inflation-targeting regime, as reflected by significant exchange rate variability and well-anchored inflation expectations. In the past, the authorities have modified the foreign exchange intervention policy as necessary to preserve the credibility of the inflation-targeting regime, and are committed to continue doing it in the future.