The current account, currently adjusting to a new equilibrium, is weaker than fundamentals and desirable policy settings, while the real exchange rate has adjusted quickly in line with fundamentals . The External Balance Assessment (EBA) methodologies assessing the current account directly show a gap of around 2 percent of GDP (adjusted for potential oil reserves) whereas the EBA REER methodology estimates the exchange rate fully in line with fundamentals (Box 6). The difference between these results highlights the transition to the new equilibrium of lower oil prices. Prices have adjusted quickly, with a REER depreciation of 18 percent at end-2014, but import compression and the growth in exports of non-traditional goods will occur more gradually. The CA gap is therefore expected to narrow in the medium term. The remaining gap reflects Colombia’s very high levels of investment and elevated repatriation of profits. The authorities noted that the current account deficit is temporarily somewhat higher than historical levels and agreed that the exchange rate was in line with fundamentals by the end of 2014. They emphasized that the peso is allowed to float freely and has depreciated more than other currencies in the region since mid 2014, driven mainly by oil prices and to a lesser extent by expectations of U.S. monetary policy normalization and the widening of global risk premia. Due to the oil price shock, the current account deficit is projected to widen in 2015, but remain predominantly financed by FDI inflows. Oil export receipts are projected to drop significantly in 2015 due to the fall in global oil prices, but lower profit repatriation of foreign-owned firms and a decline in imports should partially compensate the impact on the current account. FDI inflows are expected to moderate from recent high levels (from 4.2 percent of GDP in 2014 to 3.3 percent by 2020), but will finance about 80 percent of the current account deficit over the medium-term. As a result, the current account deficit will continue to be financed largely through stable funding sources, as in the past. The current account is expected to strengthen over the medium term. Staff and the authorities expect the current account deficit to narrow going forward as the peso depreciation supports growth of non-traditional exports and reduces growth of capital and consumer imports after a lag, although the associated improvement in the trade balance would be partly offset by a higher cost of external debt. The authorities pointed to a similar delayed improvement in the current accounts of other countries in the region following a negative terms of trade shock (e.g., Chile’s copper price shock in 2009). Over the medium-term, oil export receipts are projected to increase as prices partly recover and help offset some decline in oil production in response to decline in oil-related investment (Box 3). The authorities concurred that further efforts to diversify the economy would lower reliance on oil receipts and help dampen current account volatility, while productivity-enhancing labor market reforms, and efforts to diversify export markets and products would improve competitiveness. They noted, in addition, that the planned fiscal consolidation would play a role in strengthening the current account balance over the medium term. Page 20 The authorities have built an adequate level of international reserves, adapting their intervention to changing external conditions. Staff and the authorities concurred that Colombia has an adequate reserve buffer for normal times, though they might be insufficient to cope with tail risks. The authorities reiterated that reserve ratios prevailing prior to the global financial crisis of 2008–09 had proved to be an important buffer in confronting that large external shock. Therefore, the central bank took advantage of abundant capital inflows through 2014 to rebuild external buffers. As of end-2014, the stock of international reserves covered approximately 7 months of imports and about 100 percent of 2015 gross external financing needs, but reserves measured relative to short-term external debt plus the current account deficit are still below pre-crisis ratios. As reserve ratios increased and in light of the significant depreciation of the peso, in line with its fundamental value, the central bank halted its foreign exchange purchases in 2015.