Colombia’s economic outlook is favorable. Growth is projected to remain robust. With the output gap nearly closed as of end-2013, real GDP is projected to grow at around potential, estimated at 4½ percent, in 2014 and beyond. Growth is projected to be driven by the private sector, supported by a steady increase in investment largely financed by higher domestic savings (Box 2). Inflation is expected to stay within the (2‒4 percent) target range. In 2014, inflation is projected to rise gradually, as the temporary factors that held it down in 2013 filter out. Given well-anchored inflation expectations, inflation is expected to remain well within the target range throughout the forecast period. The balance of payments would remain in surplus. The current account deficit is projected to remain at about 3 percent of GDP in the medium term, with the deficit in the income balance (resulting from profit remittances and external interest payments) continuing to exceed the trade surplus. The deficit in the current account is expected to be more than financed by capital inflows, especially foreign direct investment. The near-term fiscal outlook is in line with the fiscal rule. The 2014 budget envisages a central government deficit of 2.3 percent of GDP, down from 2.4 percent in 2013, and in line with the fiscal rule. The deficit of the combined public sector is projected to decline slightly to 0.9 percent of GDP, from 1 percent in 2013. The fiscal deficit and public debt are projected to decline over the medium term. Staff projects the deficit of the central government to decline to 1.9 percent of GDP by 2019, following the authorities’ fiscal rule, and the combined public sector deficit to reach 0.6 percent of GDP. As a result, the public sector debt would fall to 29 percent of GDP by 2019, from 35 percent at end-2013. The financial system is expected to continue deepening. Credit and assets under management by pension and other investment funds are poised to continue growing as a share of GDP. The participation of nonresidents in both the local government debt market and the equity market is also projected to rise, driven by the recent increase in Colombia’s weight in Page 8 global bond indices and further integration of the local stock market with other regional bourses. However, risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside. As a result of its important linkages with the rest of the world, the Colombian economy is significantly exposed to external risks. Furthermore, the risks associated with emerging markets and geopolitical tensions have increased since the last Article IV consultation. External risks include a sharp decline in commodity prices, especially oil; a deterioration in global financial conditions, including a surge in global financial market volatility related to the normalization of financial conditions in the U.S.; and negative growth shocks in key trading partners. If any of these global shocks materialize, they would slow Colombia’s growth, reducing export and fiscal revenues, curtailing foreign direct investment, cutting foreign credit lines, increasing the burden of debt service, and putting pressure on the exchange rate and local asset prices. A decline in oil prices would cut export receipts (oil exports account for more than one half of total exports), reduce fiscal revenues (oil-related revenues amount to about 4½ percent of GDP and 16 percent of total government revenue), and adversely affect economic activity. It could also reduce foreign direct investment (since a significant share of it goes to the oil sector), with a further negative impact on the external accounts. According to staff estimates, a US$10 drop in the price of oil would reduce exports by about US$3.3 billion (0.9 percent of GDP) and fiscal revenue by about 0.4 percent of GDP. In addition, a VAR model estimated by staff suggests that the same shock would cut real GDP growth by ½ of a percentage point on a cumulative basis after six months after the shock. A rise in U.S. interest rates could negatively impact Colombia, if not accompanied by a corresponding increase in U.S. growth (e.g., in the event of an increase in the term premium driven by a surge in U.S. inflation expectations) or if it led to higher global risk aversion and capital outflows and weaker growth in emerging markets. In turn, financial volatility in emerging Since 2011, Chile, Colombia and Peru integrated the operations of their stock markets, creating MILA (“Integrated Latin American Market”), with the aim of providing companies and investors greater access to each of the three individual capital markets. MILA has become Latin America’s second largest stock market after Brazil, and could become the largest if ongoing plans to integrate Mexico’s stock market into MILA materialize. Est2013201420152016201720182019Real GDP growth (percent)4.34.54.54.54.54.54.5Consumer prices (percent, end of period)1.92.73.03.03.03.03.0Current account balance-3.3-3.3-3.3-3.1-3.0-3.0-2.9Combined public sector balance-1.0-0.8-0.6-0.6-0.7-0.6-0.6Total public sector gross debt35.234.733.532.231.029.828.6 Sources: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Colombia. Medium Term Outlook (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Proj Page 9 markets could also trigger dislocations in the domestic capital market and a sharp decline in the value of domestic financial assets, with negative implications for the real economy (Box 3). Deterioration in global financial conditions could also reduce external bank credit lines and portfolio flows, negatively affecting the external accounts and economic activity. Data from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) shows that claims of international banks on Colombian borrowers amounted to US$47 billion (12 percent of GDP) as of September 2013, largely on account of corporate borrowers. A simulation exercise developed by staff suggests that lending from international banks (including those operating in Colombia) to Colombian borrowers could decline by up to 6.6 percent of GDP in the event of a sizable shock to the balance sheets of international banks. A negative growth shock in key trading partners would reduce the demand for Colombian exports, weakening economic growth. A multi-country vector autoregressive (VAR) model estimated by staff suggests that a 1 percentage point slowdown (vis-à-vis baseline projections) in real GDP growth of China, the Euro area, and the U.S. could reduce real GDP growth in Colombia by 0.3, 0.2 and 0.1 percentage points, respectively. The exercise also pointed to a significant adverse growth impact in the event of a slowdown in the growth pace of regional trade partners, with whom the bulk of Colombia’s manufacturing trade takes place (¶13). Shocks in the region could also be a source of negative spillovers to Colombia. Shocks in the region could affect Colombia through trade and financial channels. Colombian exports to Latin America account for about a quarter of total exports and the bulk of manufacturing exports. The Latin American trade partners are in turn exposed to shocks to the global economy, in particular in the U.S. and China. A multi-country VAR model estimated by staff suggests that a combined 1 percentage point slowdown (vis-à-vis baseline projections) in real GDP growth of Colombia’s main trading partners in the region could reduce Colombia’s real GDP growth by about ½ of a percentage point. The main risks are comprised of an increase in restrictions to trade with Ecuador (which has become Colombia’s main market for manufacturing products), an intensification of economic stress in Venezuela (which despite the significant reduction in trade since 2009 remains an important market for Colombian goods), and a growth slowdown in Central America (which has become an important trade partner in recent years). On the financial side, the main sources of risk are a shock in Central America affecting the balance sheets of Colombian banks (which have become prominent players in the Central American banking system, ¶35), or possible financial contagion arising from an increase in investors’ perception of regional risk in response to adverse political or economic developments in one or more countries of the region. On the domestic front, the main risks relate to high growth of house prices and consumer credit, as well as contingent liabilities from public-private partnerships (PPPs). House prices rose significantly in recent years, fuelled by a robust expansion of income and credit See the accompanying 2014 Selected Issues Papers—“Colombia: Assessing Spillover Risks.” Page 10 growth and government subsidies. If prices were to fall, banks’ non-performing loans could increase. However, the risk is mitigated by low households’ loan-to-value ratios (about 55 percent), fixed borrowing rates, and a low exposure of banks to mortgage loans. High growth in credit to the private sector, including consumer loans, has been a concern in recent years (IMF Country Report 13/35), but has been abating (¶32). On the fiscal front, one source of risk is that road concessions or other infrastructure projects lead to unforeseen public sector liabilities. This risk, however, is mitigated by a revamped legal framework for PPPs, approved in 2012. The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and characterization of risks. Their forecasts for the main macroeconomic variables are broadly in line with staff’s projections. In relation to risks, the authorities highlighted Colombia’s exposure to external shocks, expressing particular concern about the pace and implementation of monetary policy normalization in the U.S. and its possible effects on global financial markets and economic growth in emerging markets. They also underlined the risks of a slowdown in China, with possible adverse implications for oil prices, and agreed with staff that shocks in the region could have a significant impact on Colombia. LikelihoodImpactPolicy Advice Side-effects from global financial conditions : surges in global financial market volatility, triggered by geopolitical tensions or revised market expectations on UMP exit/emerging market fundamentals.HighHighUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Protracted period of slower growth in emerging economies : maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incompletestructural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth.HighMediumUse monetary policy to support growth; speed up execution of capital projects in the public sector. Growth slowdown in China:Significant slowdown of growth in 2014. Growth may fall significantly below the authorities’ target, with the slowdown caused by a variety of possible reasons and absent offsetting stimulus measuresLowHighUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber; tighten fiscal policy. Continued buildup and eventual unwinding of excess capacity , eventually resulting in a sharp growth slowdown and large financial and fiscal losses (medium-term).MediumHighUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber; tighten fiscal policy. Geopolitical risks (financial flows, commodity prices, and supply chains): a sharp increase in geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia/Ukraine that creates significant disruptions in global financial, trade and commodity markets.MediumLowUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Sustained decline in commodity prices , triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming-on-stream of excess capacity (medium-term)MediumHighUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber; tighten fiscal policy. Bond market stress from a reassessment in sovereign risk Euro area : Sovereign stress re-emerges due to incomplete reforms, unanticipated outcomes from the asset quality review and stress tests in the absence of a fiscal backstopLowLowUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. United States : protracted failure to agree on a credible plan to ensure medium-term fiscal sustainabilityLowHighUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Political or economic distress in Venezuela HighMediumUse the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Contingent liabilities from PPPs MediumMediumStandardize PPP contracts to lower risk of litigation, strengthen the role of the Ministry of Finance in the gataway process; boost project evaluation. Continued high growth of credit and house prices MediumLowAdopt prudential measures tailored to the risk profile of financial institutions. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Colombia: Risk Assessment Matrix Page 11 Possible outward spillovers from Colombia are estimated to be limited. The main channel through which shocks in Colombia could transmit to other countries is through the financial sector via cross-border bank lending and foreign direct investment links. In the event of a shock in the Colombian banking system, this channel could be significant for some Central American countries (in particular El Salvador and Panama), where Colombian banks have gained a significant share of the market. Shocks in Colombia could also transmit through the trade channel. However, Colombia’s share in total trade of individual trading partners is modest, suggesting that the potential for real spillovers to other countries in the region is small.