The authorities reaffirmed their strong commitment to fiscal consolidation. Under the fiscal rule, the central government’s structural deficit is set to decline to 1 percent of GDP by 2022, from an estimated deficit of 2.4 percent of GDP in 2013. In turn, the combined public sector balance is projected to shift into a small surplus, from an estimated deficit of 1 percent of GDP in 2013. This improvement in the fiscal balance would allow the public debt-to-GDP ratio to fall to 29 percent of GDP by 2019 from 35 percent at end-2013. Staff cautioned that the long-term oil price assumed in computing the structural balance may be too optimistic. If the long-term oil price is lower, reflecting market projections for a substantial decline over the medium-term, a larger fiscal adjustment would be required to meet the fiscal rule. The authorities responded that their assumption for oil production is conservative and the overall oil revenue projection over the medium-term is well balanced. Staff and the authorities concurred that the fiscal targets are prudent and appropriate on account of uncertainties related to oil revenues over the medium term, absent large new discoveries of oil reserves. In addition, the improvement in the non-resource primary balance projected in Colombia’s medium term fiscal framework (1.9 percentage points of GDP by 2024) will allow a larger share of Colombia’s natural resource wealth to be transferred to future generations (Box 4). Staff noted that achieving the medium-term fiscal consolidation goals would be challenging. The targeted reduction in the central government’s deficit of 1.4 percentage points of GDP by 2022 will confront challenges both on the revenue and the expenditure sides. Fiscal revenues are expected to fall by up to 2.1 percentage points of GDP during the period, stemming from the planned phasing-out of the financial transactions tax (0.8 percent of GDP), the expiration of the wealth tax (0.4 percent of GDP), and a projected decline in oil revenues (0.9 percent of GDP). To attain the fiscal consolidation targets, the authorities’ medium-term fiscal framework requires a significant decline in expenditure. Staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to seek efficiency gains in current expenditure. At the same time, it noted that expenditure pressures may arise from developmental needs (e.g., infrastructure investment), social security, and any possible outlays related to a peace agreement. The authorities agreed that adhering to the fiscal plan would require exceptional discipline, but they expressed confidence that the targets would be met given broad consensus for the fiscal rule. In this context, revenue mobilization will be key to accommodating expenditure needs while abiding by the fiscal consolidation path set out by the fiscal rule. Staff noted that non- commodity revenues in Colombia are low by international standards and should be the focus of mobilization efforts. At the same time, the mission supported the planned elimination of the financial transactions tax, given its distortionary effects. To enhance revenue, staff encouraged the See the accompanying 2014 Selected Issues Paper—“Colombia’s Fiscal Policy Framework and Risks.” Page 13 authorities to broaden the tax base by lowering exemptions and fighting informality. Other options could include extending the wealth tax, taxing dividends, or increasing the value added tax rate. Staff highlighted that particular focus should be given to strengthening tax administration, by improving information technology, standardizing certification of accountants, and tightening sanctions for non-compliance. The authorities indicated that they would step up efforts to strengthen tax administration, including by implementing IMF technical assistance recommendations. Staff welcomed the authorities’ infrastructure program. Staff and the authorities agreed that the infrastructure program is essential for Colombia’s sustained economic development. While infrastructure investment has been substantial in the past, its efficiency has been subpar, resulting in an inadequate road infrastructure. In 2013, Colombia ranked 126 out of 144 countries according to the Global Competitiveness report on the quality of transport infrastructure. The mission acknowledged that Colombia’s road infrastructure deficit is a drag on competitiveness and growth, and supported the authorities’ infrastructure program, including the fourth generation of road concessions (4G). The authorities indicated that the 4G would include projects valued at COP 47 trillion (about 7 percent of GDP) to be undertaken over the next 7 years through public- private partnerships (PPPs) under a revamped legal framework approved in 2012. The authorities expect the bidding process for the first 9 projects (for COP 11 trillion or about US$5 billion) to be completed in 2014, with construction set to begin in 2015. To support these projects, the authorities created a national financial institution, Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional (FDN), in charge of mobilizing long-term financing to infrastructure, primarily by developing standardized financing structures suitable for local institutional investors (banks and pension funds). FDN started its operations with a small initial capital (about US$230 million) provided by the government, and is expected to receive capital injections by multilateral institutions, such as the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Andean Development Corporation. FDN is governed by a 7-member Executive Board, of which some are independent. The authorities are also planning to create a development fund with the proceeds of the sale of power company Isagen, which would be used to support infrastructure investment. Staff welcomed these initiatives. The authorities are taking actions to minimize fiscal risks from PPPs. Colombia’s government has a long history of inviting private sector participation in infrastructure and public services. Colombia was the first country to implement PPPs in the region and is the one with the largest share of projects financed through this arrangement. However, past experience with PPPs in Colombia has pointed to a high risk of contract renegotiations and the low effectiveness of contract monitoring. The authorities indicated that planned outlays for service and recuperation of costs after projects 4G PPPs investment Budgetary caps ("vigencias futuras") for 4G PPPs 4G PPPs projected investments and government outlays (In percent of GDP) Source: Ministry of Finance. Page 14 are completed (to be reflected as investment in the fiscal accounts) would not exceed the fiscal space available under the fiscal rule and would be limited to 0.4 percent of GDP per year. The outlays would be incorporated into the overall available capital expenditure envelope in the medium-term fiscal framework. To minimize any fiscal risks that could come on top of the outlays committed to the program, the authorities have added precautions by standardizing PPP contracts, supported by World Bank, IADB and IFC technical assistance. With regards to accounting and reporting practices, the mission encouraged the authorities to accelerate migration to accrual accounting under GFSM 2001, so that the budget implications of PPPs are better reflected. The authorities indicated that the adoption of GFSM 2001 is currently in progress, and that contingent liabilities would continue to be reported in the medium-term fiscal framework.