Economic policies supported growth in 2013. Staff and the authorities agreed that the central bank’s decision to hold the policy interest rate at 3.25 percent from April 2013 to April 2014 was appropriate in light of soft growth during the first half of the year, a negative output gap, and inflation at or below the lower bound of the target range throughout the year. The reallocation of central government spending to provide targeted stimulus (e.g., through mortgage interest subsidies) and the use of royalties for investment spending by sub-national governments also supported growth. These policies helped economic activity rebound strongly during the second half of the year. Staff supports the authorities’ intention to move to a more neutral stance for demand policies as the recovery takes hold. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to adjust the policy rate as necessary as conditions warrant to keep inflation within the target range. They indicated that fiscal policy would remain guided by the fiscal rule. With the latter mandating a slight improvement in the central government’s structural balance, the fiscal policy stance is expected to be broadly neutral in 2014. The authorities indicated that the flexible exchange rate would continue to serve as a shock absorber. Staff and the authorities agreed that the flexible exchange rate regime plays an important role in helping the economy adapt to shifts in global economic and financial conditions. The authorities noted that, after the U.S. Federal Reserve announced its intention to commence tapering, the exchange rate weakened significantly. At the same time, the central bank continued acquiring foreign exchange (with the intention of strengthening its international reserve buffer, ¶30), The authorities increased the policy rate by 25 basis points to 3.50 percent at the end of April, 2014. Page 12 though at a slower pace. The authorities noted that the exchange rate adjustment did not lead to any important effects on balance sheets or inflation.