The severe oil price decline constitutes a strong headwind to the near-term economic outlook, although some rebound in conditions is expected over the medium term. Staff projects growth to slow to 3.4 percent in 2015, reflecting a deceleration of private investment, especially in the oil sector, a negative fiscal impulse (¶15), and a slowdown in private consumption. Oil production has been above 1 million bpd in the first quarter of 2015 and is projected to remain high throughout the year, benefitting from past investments in exploration and development, The new capital adequacy measure better defines Tier 1 capital, but still includes a broader recognition of Tier 2 (subordinated debt) as capital and is not as strict in terms of deduction of future intangibles and goodwill from the base capital calculations relative to Basel III capital standards. Stress tests undertaken by the central bank in June 2014 indicate that the corporate sector is resilient to interest rate shock. GFSR, April 2015, Chapter 1. Page 12 improved pipelines, and competitive production costs (Box 3). However, oil companies’ cutbacks in investment, mainly due to cash flow constraints after the fall in prices, will likely limit the growth of the sector over the medium term despite an expected partial recovery of oil prices by 2020. The negative growth impact of the terms of trade shock is expected to be partly offset by the authorities’ fourth generation (4G) infrastructure investment program and a slight improvement in external demand, which would boost growth to about 4¼ percent by 2018. The growth dividend from the 4G infrastructure agenda is projected to be frontloaded, as construction of the first and second wave of projects which constitute about US$14 billion out of a total program of US$25 billion (about 6.2 percent of 2014 GDP over 2014 − 22) is expected to commence in 2016. The temporary upsurge in inflation (4.6 percent y/y in March) is projected to ease to 3.6 percent y/y by end- December, as food price increases begin unwinding and slower real GDP growth closes the output gap. Inflation expectations are expected to remain anchored within the target band. The current account deficit is projected to widen in 2015 due to the oil price decline, but would gradually narrow with the slight recovery in oil prices and growth in Colombia’s trading partners, especially the U.S. GDP Consumption Private Public Investment Private Public Inventories Net Exports Exports Imports Contributions to GDP Growth (Percent) Large risks threaten on the downside. A massive oil price shock has already materialized, far beyond risk scenarios envisaged only a year ago, and there are risks of a further decline and increased volatility in energy prices. While latest data still show relatively solid economic activity, the impact of the oil shock on the Colombian economy may turn out significantly worse than expected in the baseline outlook. Private investment is the most likely component of GDP to disappoint, particularly if FDI inflows slow significantly, and could lead to a more subdued medium-term growth outlook. Private consumption might also falter beyond the expected moderation in consumption of durable goods. Any delays in the implementation of the PPP program could undercut potential growth and competitiveness. At the same time, additional external risks loom. The global environment continues to toil under the legacy of financial fragility and a high debt overhang in many advanced countries. The main risks stem from the expected asymmetric exit from unconventional monetary policy in the U.S. where a faster decompression of term premiums could lead to rapidly rising yields and substantially higher volatility, which coupled with further dollar appreciation and surging global risk aversion could have strong knock-on effects on emerging markets’ growth and commodity prices, including oil. Further, an intensification of sovereign distress in the Euro Area could generate a surge in bond yields, large movements in the value of major currencies, or an increase in global financial volatility. In the context of Colombia’s greater economic vulnerability after the oil price decline, including a stronger reliance on portfolio inflows, such global shocks could lead to sharp repricing of Colombian assets and exchange rate, as well as spillovers to export revenue, FDI, and growth. In addition, further oil price decline stemming from weaker global Page 13 demand due to protracted period of slower growth, including in the Euro Area and China, or supply factors could lessen Colombia’s exports receipts and FDI inflows, while economic distress in Central America could adversely affect the subsidiaries of Colombian banks that have expanded into the region. Side-effects from global financial conditions: Colombia: Risk Assessment Matrix Likelihood Impact Policy Advice A surge in financial volatility: as investors reassess underlying risk and move to safe-haven assets given slow and uneven growth as well as asymmetric monetary exit. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies: Emerging economies : maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth. Medium Medium High High Use the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Use monetary policy to support growth; speed up execution of capital projects in the public sector. Risks to energy prices: Increased volatility due to uncertainty about the persistence of the oil supply shock and the underlying drivers of the price decline. High High Persistently low prices triggered by supply factors reversing only gradually, and weaker demand. Medium High Use the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Use the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Growth slowdown and financial risks in China: Insufficient progress with reforms leads to a continued buildup of vulnerabilities, which over the medium term results in a significant growth slowdown. Sharp slowdown in 2015-16. Growth falls significantly below target, possibly due to a severe housing downturn or a shock in the shadow banking sector, and absent offsetting stimulus. Bond market stress from a reassessment in sovereign risk Euro area : Sovereign stress re-emerges due to policy uncertainty, faltering reforms, and political and social upheaval, particularly in Greece. United States : protracted failure to agree on a credible plan for fiscal sustainability (medium-term). Country-specific risks: Economic distress in Central America affecting Colombia's banks' subsidiaries Political or economic distress in Venezuela Medium Medium Low Medium Medium Medium Low High Low Medium High Medium/ Low Delay in the implementation of the PPPs due to insufficient financing or other obstacles. Low Medium Continued high growth of credit and house prices Low Low Use the exchange rate as shock absorber. In the event the shock is large and protracted use and monetary policy stimulus and countercyclical expenditure adjustor under the fiscal rule. Use the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Provide liquidity support to systemic institutions. Use the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. Re-prioritize projects towards those yielding higher growth, develop new financing instruments while avoiding to increase government exposure and alter optimum risk distribution. Adopt prudential measures tailored to the risk profile of financial institutions. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 14 The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and characterization of risks. They projected near-term growth to be below potential, reflecting economic adjustment to the significant decline in national income associated with the fall in oil prices. They saw Colombia as more vulnerable to adverse shocks during this process of adjustment, and also considered that downside external risks had become more elevated. In particular, the authorities expressed concern that the continued delays in the normalization of U.S. monetary policy had increased vulnerabilities in global financial markets, which could exacerbate volatility and spur sharp capital flow reversals in emerging markets as soon as U.S. interest rates begin to rise. The still tepid economic recovery in advanced countries and slower growth in emerging markets posed a risk to external demand. The authorities underscored that regional risks had risen significantly, with growth in neighboring countries projected to decline, thereby undermining the potential export boost from the peso depreciation. The oil price shock is likely to dampen growth in Ecuador (which has also recently raised import tariffs), and to exacerbate the economic distress in Venezuela, both of which remain key destinations for Colombia’s nontraditional exports. In addition, any potential civil unrest in Venezuela could spillover to Colombia’s border areas, where unemployment could increase due to migration.