The subdued outlook for oil revenues represents an important challenge for achieving medium-term fiscal targets. The authorities’ medium-term fiscal framework implies a 1½ percent of GDP reduction in the structural deficit between 2015 and 2020 with structural oil revenues declining as a percent of GDP. While this path will represent a mild annual fiscal withdrawal (average fiscal impulse at -0.3 percent of GDP), under unchanged tax policy, consolidation would require primary expenditure cuts of about 1½ percent of GDP (text table), leaving limited room to accommodate social and infrastructure expenditure pressures.9 Similarly, regional and local governments will face expenditure constraints arising from the subdued medium-term outlook for oil-related royalties. In the near term, the fiscal balance of the subnational governments is expected to improve as the start of a new administration is typically associated with lower expenditure execution. While public debt is now some 4 percentage points higher than a year ago at 38.7 percent of GDP—due to the widening of the central government deficit and the valuation effects of the peso depreciation—it will gradually decline over time and remain in line with other investment-grade countries and sustainable (Table 8 and Figure 8). Additional downward revisions to the oil price outlook would, however, further constrain expenditure plans and increase debt levels (Box 4). Oil revenues (dividends and income tax) are indirectly related to both exports and domestic sales. For Ecopetrol (which represents about 62 percent of oil production), domestic sales represented 37 percent of total sales in 2014. The rest of the oil companies are mostly devoted to the export market. Further, direct fuel consumption taxes amounted to 0.3 percent of GDP in 2014. The baseline scenario does not assume new tax measures, and the gradual decline in central government revenues as a fraction of GDP is due to a reduction in oil-related revenues. Further, the outlook for expenditure in the baseline scenario is broadly based on the 2014 Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) which includes a plan for achieving the consolidation path mandated by the fiscal rule through reductions in expenditure, including a moderation in investment (about ½ percent of GDP between 2015 and 2020). The 2015 MTFF will be published in June and would be in line with the expenditure priorities arising from the upcoming National Development Plan 2014 − Staff projections are broadly guided by the authorities MTFF, which includes the expected outlays related to PPP investment program, existing pension programs, and some existing programs to compensate victims of the civil conflict (e.g. Victims’ Law; Law 1448 of 2011). Page 17 Medium-Term Fiscal Outlook (in percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) Central Government Headline balance Expenditure Primary expenditure o/w Investment Structural balance (staff estimate) Structural primary non-oil balance Fiscal Impulse Structural balance (authorities' parameters) 1/ Consolidated Public Sector Headline Balance Structural balance (staff estimate) Structural primary non-oil balance Fiscal Impulse Memo items: Output gap (percent of potential GDP) Brent price (US dollars per barrel) Long-run oil price (Brent; US dollars per barrel) 1/ Public sector gross debt Public sector net debt Source: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. 1/ The key parameter in the calculation of the structural balance is the long-run oil price. The official structural balance relies on the fixed price determined by the expert committee every year, while the staff's estimate is based on a MA(4,1,4) filter applied to the currently available oil price path set by WEO. The former estimate is relevant to measure compliance with the fiscal rule; while the latter aims to measure the underlying fiscal position. 2/ Obtained through a MA(4,1,4) filter. The authorities agreed on the urgent need to mobilize revenue in order to protect social and infrastructure spending, especially given falling oil revenues. They concurred that additional revenue, gained through tax reform and better enforcement, would help replace the expected decline in oil revenues and finance key social and infrastructure expenditure programs which could bolster the outlook for inclusive medium-term growth, while complying with the fiscal rule targets. Therefore, the government established an independent expert commission in early 2015 to advise on options for tax reform. As a pragmatic first step, with the potential to boost revenue in time for the 2016 budget, the authorities were considering revamping the tax system for non-profit organizations, which had proliferated in recent years. They also reassured staff that the expenditure plans set out in the forthcoming MTFF would be well-aligned with the new National Development Plan (NDP) agenda. Further, they thought that a potential peace agreement was not likely to entail significant unfunded mandates but would facilitate stronger agricultural development and create political and social support for future reforms. Staff and the authorities agreed on the broad objectives for tax reform. Revenues should be mobilized in a way that simplifies the existing tax structure, increases progressivity, broadens the tax base, and facilitates private investment by ensuring international competitiveness. Staff advised that the tax system currently imposes a comparatively high burden on companies, and will continue to over the medium term as the wealth tax on companies is phased out and replaced Page 18 by higher corporate income taxes. Some options for a broad tax reform could include strengthening the income tax system and increasing the VAT rate and base (Box 5). Staff considers that if sufficient revenues could be gained from these sources, they could help reduce existing non-conventional taxes (e.g., personal wealth tax, financial transaction tax, VAT on capital goods) to foster investment and growth. The authorities believe that the personal wealth tax has been an important instrument for achieving more progressivity. There was also consensus that enormous gains in revenue could be achieved through improving tax administration, including by imposing criminal penalties for tax evasion, increasing the number of officials, and strengthening the information technology of the tax administration authority. The authorities remain confident of the success of their infrastructure program. Although Colombia compares well with peers in some areas of infrastructure, such as the quality of electricity supply, a significant road infrastructure deficit generates bottlenecks and hinders competitiveness and inclusive growth. The fourth generation (4G) infrastructure program of road concessions is being implemented in a context of a much strengthened risk framework, which includes a framework Law, standardized PPP contracts, contingency planning, and ex-post financing of functional units. Continued efforts are underway to develop alternative financing options and instruments for risk hedging, including by amending the financial regulatory framework to facilitate participation of institutional investors. Colombian banks and pension funds are already showing strong interest despite their limited experience with project financing. The first set of roads concessions has been awarded and the authorities expect contractors to establish financing agreements by year end. The authorities intend to use proceeds from the prospective sale of the power company Isagen to increase resources in the development fund. They consider that infrastructure investment would support aggregate demand in the short run, offsetting part of negative growth impact of the terms of trade shock, and raise long-run potential growth by about 0.7 percent (estimate of the national planning department, DNP). The details of a potential peace agreement remain uncertain, but the impact on fiscal spending is likely to be manageable. A peace agreement would likely entail continued expenditures for the re-integration of demobilized combatants (up to 0.1 percent of GDP), victims’ reparations (1 percent of GDP), health, and education benefits for victims, most of which would likely reflect programs that have already been included in the MTFF. Financing for additional outlays would likely include redistribution of government assets through the ongoing land and rural development reforms, and be partly financed also through lower military spending. As security has considerably improved over the last decade, risk premia have come down and the investment climate has improved. However, while there might be some further gains from stability, any The traditional corporate income tax (CIT) could be replaced with a higher corporate income surcharge (CREE) which has a broader base (e.g. fewer deductions). The traditional personal income tax could be substituted with an extended alternative minimum tax (IMAN). The VAT regime does not grant a credit for VAT paid on the purchases of capital goods. This feature is a deviation from standard practice, disproportionally affects capital-intensive activities and is an important contributor to the overall corporate tax burden. Page 19 additional peace dividend for growth would likely materialize beyond the medium-term horizon, given long implementation lags for land reform and rural development.