Staff and the authorities agreed that the macroeconomic framework provided sufficient buffers and flexibility to mitigate the impact of the oil price shock and smooth the adjustment to a lower level of national income. As a result of the strengthening of the fiscal framework (e.g. new royalty system; structural fiscal rule) during the last few years, and moderate levels of public debt, Colombia is in a strong fiscal position to absorb the oil price shock. In addition, the flexible exchange rate regime, credible inflation targeting framework, and comfortable level of foreign exchange reserves, complemented by the FCL from the Fund, provide the central bank with powerful tools to respond to shifts in cyclical economic and financial conditions. Indeed, the oil price shock led to a sharp depreciation of the peso (20 percent against the U.S. dollar and 14 percent in real effective terms estimated on average for 2015), which should boost exports in the non-resource sectors and partially offset the impact of lower oil prices on the domestic currency value of oil revenues. In addition, with inflation expectations well-anchored, there is ample space to adjust monetary policy rates if needed. The structural fiscal rule will partially shield expenditures from the oil shock. The central government’s structural balance rule includes an adjustment for the deviation of the actual oil price from the long-term price set by an expert committee in spring 2014, which helps protect Page 15 the expenditure envelope for 2015 (Box 4). The headline deficit would widen to about 3.4 percent of GDP and gross public debt increase to 40 percent of GDP. Nonetheless, lower-than-expected income taxes and a partial deferral of Ecopetrol’s dividend will affect structural fiscal revenues this year. Consequently, the government enacted a tax reform in late 2014, targeting corporations, and announced a reduction in planned expenditures of about 0.7 percent of GDP for 2015, in order to comply with the fiscal rule target ex post. The decree-based expenditure adjustment would be confined to the central government, and be slightly more heavily tilted towards investment spending, but would also imply some (yet to be specified) across-the-board cuts in current outlays, possibly excluding education and compensation of civil victims of the conflict. The authorities acknowledged the potential (first round) negative impact of the expenditure cuts on growth, but suggested that fiscal multipliers in Colombia could be low (between 0.4 and 1). By demonstrating their commitment to the rule, they also expected to reinforce confidence and private investment. The central government’s negative fiscal impulse will be partly offset by strong expenditure execution at the subnational level ahead of elections in the fall. The authorities and the staff agreed that the experience with the oil shock will provide an opportunity for the fiscal rule committee to revisit the operation of the fiscal rule and the sensitivity of fiscal revenue to oil shocks. With the economy operating close to potential, a broadly neutral monetary policy stance would support economic activity and be consistent with achieving the inflation target. The monetary policy rate, at 4.5 percent, is currently near its neutral level. The authorities pointed out that the exchange rate pass-through to prices is low (estimated at about 4 percent) because Colombia is relatively closed and the share of tradables in the CPI is only 26 percent (excluding food). In addition, domestic energy prices are also expected to decline and the currency depreciation is lower in trade-weighted terms. Therefore, inflation pressures are expected to unwind later this year, especially as the disinflationary impact of the slowdown in domestic demand takes hold. Staff advised that if growth slows more than expected there would be scope for monetary policy easing as long as inflation expectations remain anchored. With the peso broadly aligned with fundamentals, and already strong buffers, the pace of reserve accumulation will likely abate as reflected by the central bank’s decision to suspend foreign currency purchases during the first quarter of 2015. Most of Colombia’s oil revenue accrues to the public sector. Ecopetrol, with 88 percent government ownership, constitutes 65 percent of oil exports. Includes lower dividends and income tax from 2014 Ecopetrol profits, and subdued income tax collection this year (pre-payments of the 2016 tax bill) from oil companies. The government also decided to smooth the shortfall in income accrued by Ecopetrol, postponing part of the mandated dividend transfers to 2016. The strategy would improve Ecopetrol’s cash flow and also smooth central government revenues as dividends are expected to decline in There is no broad consensus in the size of fiscal multipliers in the literature. Recent empirical estimates for expenditure multipliers in emerging and low income countries range from -0.4 to 1.7 (IMF Working Paper/14/93). Page 16 Medium Term Outlook (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Projections Real GDP (percent) Consumer prices (end of period) External current account balance Combined public sector balance 1/ Overall balance of payments balance Total public gross debt Total public net debt Sources: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Includes the quasi-fiscal balance of Banco de la República, sales of assets, phone licenses, and statistical discrepancy.