Brisk growth continued in 2014, with mildly supportive macroeconomic policies. Despite strong headwinds from the external environment, real GDP increased by 4.6 percent in 2014, driven by domestic demand. An expansion of civil works and the government’s mortgage subsidy program for middle-income households boosted construction activity. Strong economic growth underpinned historically low unemployment rates and increased labor formality. As inflation returned quickly to the midpoint of the target band from a low level in 2013 and Q1 growth surged to 6.3 percent, the central bank normalized the monetary stance, increasing the policy rate by 125 bps between May and August, to 4.5 percent (Figure 2). However, real interest rates remained moderately supportive. The central government fiscal balance remained broadly unchanged from 2013, and met the structural balance target embedded in the fiscal rule. However, subnational governments posted strong expenditure growth, which drove a widening of the consolidated public sector deficit to 1.6 percent of GDP and pushed public debt to about 39 percent of GDP (Figure 3). From position of strong growth, Colombia confronted a severe oil price shock in the second half of 2014. The economy was operating slightly above potential in mid-2014 and inflation expectations were anchored near the center of the central bank’s 2 − 4 percent target band. During the second half of 2014, oil prices plummeted by about 40 percent, leading to a moderation of portfolio inflows as well as a decline in asset prices, including sovereign debt and Ecopetrol securities (Figure 4). Reflecting some pass-through from a sharp peso depreciation (17 percent during Q4), and a weather-related agricultural output supply shock, inflation accelerated to 3.7 percent at end-December. Despite a higher current account deficit, reserve buffers remained strong through The current account deficit widened to 5.2 percent of GDP, owing to strong import demand from buoyant economic activity and the temporary shutdown of the Cartagena oil refinery. Partly due to its favorable economic conditions, Colombia experienced heightened portfolio inflows from the beginning of the year, triggered by an increase in Colombia’s weight in the J.P. Morgan’s Emerging Markets Bond Index. Despite some moderation in the last part of the year, portfolio inflows (net 3.1 percent of GDP) added to the ample inward foreign direct investment (net 3.2 percent of GDP) to more than finance the current account deficit (Figure 5). Consequently, gross international reserves rose (by US$3.7 billion in 2014), reaching US$47 billion at end-2014, representing 131 percent of the reserve adequacy metric for commodity exporters (Figure 6). Total external debt remained low (28.6 percent of GDP). “Impacto macroeconómico de la línea de crédito flexible con el Fondo Monetario Internacional”, Manuscript. Departamento de Modelos Macroeconómicos, Banco de la República, March 2011; Review of the Flexible Credit Line, the Precautionary and Liquidity Line, and the Rapid Financing Instrument, IMF, January 2014. Page 11 Corporate Sector Debt, June 2014 (Percent of total) The banking system and corporate sector remained in good financial health. Financial soundness indicators remained strong (Figure 7 and Appendix I). Following the implementation of new enhanced capital standards in August 2013, capital adequacy declined marginally but stayed above the regulatory limit. Growth in credit to the private sector was buoyant, at 14.7 percent (nominal y/y; Figure 4). Vulnerabilities stemming from the cyclical increases in house prices in recent years remained contained given low household leverage, a low share of mortgages in banks’ portfolios and very conservative, forward looking loan-loss provisioning (Box 1). Corporate profitability was strong, and liquidity remained adequate. Corporate debt increased to some 29 percent of GDP of which over ⅔ was due to domestic banks, but remained modest by international standards and total leverage was within historical norms. Moreover, the share of corporate debt in firms with weak debt servicing capacity-interest coverage ratios (EBITDA divided by interest expense) less than 2— has declined during 2010–14 by about 15 percent points to 1 percent. institutions (COP) Source: Financial Stability Report, June 2014 institutions (FX) Foreign financial Bonds Domestic financial Domestic financial institutions The 4G PPP program was successfully launched, with a first wave of projects awarded The authorities aim to attract private investment to reduce the existing infrastructure gap, which is most acute in the area of transportation, particularly roads. With that objective in mind, the PPP framework was strengthened recently through regulatory and institutional changes (i.e. standardization of contracts and better linking of government payments to project completion points; Box 2). According to the official timetable, project awardees would arrange their financing sources this year and start the building phase in 2016.