Colombia has a broad financial system, dominated by complex conglomerates. The total assets of the financial system amounted to COP 963 trillion (143 percent of GDP) as of end- 2013, with credit institutions (mainly banks) holding 44 percent of the system’s assets or 62 percent of GDP, followed by trust companies (29 percent of the assets or 40 percent of GDP) and pension funds (16 percent of the assets or 22 percent of GDP). A small number of domestic conglomerates own a large share of the system’s assets. See the accompanying 2014 Selected Issues Paper—“Recent Performance of Colombia’s Manufacturing Sector: Exchange Rate or Structural?” Page 17 Financial intermediation continued to deepen, with credit to the private sector reaching 39.2 percent of GDP in 2013. In response to stronger consumer loan provisioning since mid-2012, growth in credit to the private sector continued to slow to 12.1 percent at end-2013, from over 20 percent in mid-2011. At end-2013, the credit portfolio was largely made up of commercial loans (24 percent of GDP) and consumer loans (11 percent of GDP), while the share of mortgages (3½ percent of GDP) and microcredit (1 percent of GDP) remained small, albeit growing. The domestic capital market continued to deepen and expand its product offerings, but remained dominated by government debt (Box 7). The financial system appears sound. The financial sector has been stable, supported by favorable macroeconomic conditions. Financial soundness indicators remain robust (Table 7). In 2013, liquidity ratios were stable, profitability remained high (albeit somewhat lower than in 2012), and asset quality continued to be strong, with non-performing loans at 2.8 percent of total loans and high levels of provisions. The system’s risk-weighted capitalization ratio fell to 15 percent as of February 2014, from 18 percent at end-2012, due to the introduction of an improved capital adequacy standard that focused more on loss-absorbing types of capital. Staff welcomed the introduction of an improved quality of capital measure. While asset quality is strong, the system remains exposed to concentration risk. Commercial loans to the largest 1,000 borrowers stood at 42 percent of total in 2013, a fifth of which went to the manufacturing sector, followed by commerce and construction. Concentration of lending continues to expose banks to corporate credit risk. While regulatory limits to individual exposure exist, exceptions remain. Staff recommended the authorities to remove exceptions to large exposure limits and further simplify the number of separate limits in place, and require banks to hold more capital to reflect concentration risk in line with enhanced supervisory expectations. Staff and the authorities agreed that fostering financial inclusion (see ¶38, Box 9) would contribute to easing banks’ exposure to concentration risk. The supervisory framework is broadly effective, though there is scope for further improvement in some areas. The strength of the supervisory framework relies on a unified approach to supervision which mitigates the scope for regulatory arbitrage. The SFC exercises effective oversight of the banking system and is strengthening supervision further to fully implement a comprehensive risk management framework, including for conglomerates. It enforces a robust framework for assessment of credit risk and asset classification and provisioning, and ensures The issuance of equity shares by a large bank in March is likely to have boosted the system’s capitalization ratio further. The new requirements include a higher minimum of 4.5 percent for Tier 1 capital that now excludes newly generated goodwill; the recognition of voluntary reserves as part of Tier 2 capital up to 10 percent of total regulatory capital; and a deduction of deferred tax assets and pension liabilities from regulatory capital. See the accompanying 2014 Selected Issues Papers—“Selected Financial Sector Issues.” See the accompanying 2014 Selected Issues Paper—“Financial Inclusion, Growth, and Inequality: A Model Application to Colombia.” Page 18 that banks adopt prudent management of market, liquidity and operational risks. The new capital regime represents an important step forward from the outgoing capital adequacy rules. IFRS implementation is on track and is expected to be fully applied by January 2015. The Financial Superintendence (SFC) received technical assistance from the Toronto Center on supervisory practice, including risk-based supervision. Staff and the authorities agreed that the SFC should be provided full supervisory powers over holding companies of financial institutions to broaden the scope of consolidated prudential requirements and resolution of conglomerates, and that capital ratios and buffers of banks that are part of financial and mixed groups should reflect their intra- group activities and future risks. This would mitigate the risks on regulated entities from the larger conglomerate structures they are part of. The authorities were receptive to staff’s advice to consider implementing stress tests also on tail risks and consulting with the market over proposals in tackling the too-important-to-fail problem of systemically important banks and conglomerates. Staff and the authorities agreed that, going forward, it will be important to continue implementing risk-based supervisory enhancements to enable the supervisor to tailor prudential norms to the risk profile of institutions (especially systemic banks and conglomerates). Staff reiterated that a key priority remains enhancing the independence and legal protection of supervisory staff with regard to the execution of their duties. Authorities agreed and are looking into ways to provide legal protection to supervisors. The expansion of the largest financial institutions across the region poses additional challenges for supervision. The retreat of some international banks from Central America opened up new opportunities for Colombian banks. Colombia’s largest banking groups expanded rapidly across the region in recent years, as part of their strategy of market diversification. Operations of large Colombian bank conglomerates represent over half of banking system assets in El Salvador and over 20 percent in Panama, Nicaragua and Honduras. In turn, the acquired assets in Central America account for about a third of the Colombian parent banks’ assets. A significant share of the acquisitions was funded through debt issuance, implying some risk for the acquiring entities. Staff and the authorities concurred that the banks’ efforts to diversify their operations are a welcome step. At the same time, they agreed that the regional expansion of the Colombian banks brings new challenges for supervision. Staff advised the authorities to adopt a deeper framework for monitoring tail risks, including cross-border risks, as part of stress testing and the banks’ capital planning. The SFC indicated that it has made progress in enhancing cross-border supervision, by participating in supervisory colleges of Colombian banks’ subsidiaries, signing memorandums of understanding with host supervisors in Central America, obtaining access to home-host supervisory data, and conducting on-site visits to Colombian banks’ subsidiaries. In addition, the SFC is currently participating in a joint study with the Fund of financial interconnectedness in Central America and among Colombia and Central America. See the accompanying 2014 Selected Issues Papers—“Selected Financial Sector Issues” and “Colombia: Assessing Spillover Risks.” Page 19