Over the medium term, Colombia’s main challenge will be to foster more inclusive growth. Despite significant progress in the past decade, Colombia’s poverty, unemployment, inequality, and informality rates are still elevated (Box 8). At end-2012, Congress approved a comprehensive tax reform to improve tax progressivity and reduce non-wage labor costs, including a reduction in payroll and corporate income taxes, simplification of the VAT structure, introduction of a new tax on corporate profits, and an increase in progressivity of individual income tax. The reform was a positive step. However, at about 40 percent of total labor costs for average worker, non-wage labor costs remain high, compounding the effect of the minimum wage on informal employment. Efforts to address these challenges need to be sustained through structural reforms in the labor market, the fiscal area, and the financial sector. The mission encouraged the authorities to explore options for further reducing non-wage costs and contain the pace of growth of the minimum wage to fight informality. Progress on financial sector deepening and inclusion is moving forward, albeit slowly Investment and growth of firms in the informal sector is more constrained by insufficient finance than firms in the formal sector. Informal workers also earn and save less than their counterparts in the formal labor market, have lower access to financial services, and are more likely to find themselves in a difficult financial situation. Colombia has made important strides in fostering financial inclusion in recent years including through targeted transfers, subsidized bank accounts and mortgages, and expansion of physical infrastructure into rural areas. However, there is evidence that the widespread increase in accounts penetration hides low balances and low usage. The mission recommended fostering financial inclusion by lowering borrowing constraints and the cost of access to finance by improving the quality and transparency of public registries on movable property, promoting mobile banking, and enabling simplified financial licensing for electronic money issuers to foster competition. Efforts to promote financial literacy and develop products tailored to low- income households, such as micro insurance, are also key to expanding financial services to the most vulnerable population.