Colombia has maintained a robust economic performance in recent years. A strong policy framework—anchored by an inflation-targeting regime, a flexible exchange rate, a structural fiscal balance rule, and effective financial supervision and regulation—has allowed the authorities to respond adequately to shocks and pursue effective demand management. As a result, real GDP grew at a pace of 4 percent and annual inflation averaged 2.7 percent in the last five years. The authorities have continued to improve the policy framework in recent years, by including a fiscal sustainability principle in the constitution; introducing a structural fiscal balance rule; overhauling the oil and mining royalties system; and implementing a comprehensive tax reform that replaced payroll taxes with a corporate income tax. The economy has important and growing ties with the global economy. Trade is rising, driven by commodity exports, and the economy is receiving substantial foreign direct investment. At the same time, Colombian firms are expanding abroad, primarily across Central and South America. The corporate sector borrows significant amounts from international banks, and the sovereign and a number of large firms have fluid access to the international capital markets. The participation of nonresidents in the domestic equity and government bond markets is rising. As a result, Colombia’s economy is increasingly sensitive to global economic and financial developments. In June 2013, the IMF’s Executive Board approved a new two-year Flexible Credit Line (FCL) for SDR 3.87 billion (about US$6 billion, or 500 percent of quota), which provides Colombia protection against external tail risks. Colombia will hold presidential elections in late May and the authorities are negotiating a peace agreement to end the country’s long armed conflict. President Juan Manuel Santos (in office since 2010) is running for a second term. The next president will be inaugurated in August. On March 9, 2014, Colombia held congressional elections, in which the ruling coalition maintained a working majority in Congress, although the opposition increased its representation. In October 2012, the authorities began peace talks with the main guerrilla group, the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia). As of March 2014, agreement has been reached on two of the five topics under discussion. Exchange regime and economic data. Colombia has a floating exchange rate regime (de jure and de facto). Colombia maintains an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval under Article VIII arising from the special regime for the hydrocarbon sector (see IMF Country Report 13/35 for details). Data provision is adequate for surveillance.