The financial system is sound, and exposure to the oil sector is limited. Financial indicators are strong (Table 7). Because oil sector companies do not borrow domestically and finance themselves largely through re-investment of profits, and some issuance of local bonds, banks’ exposure the oil sector is extremely low (about 1–3 percent of assets), mitigating the risk from the oil shock to direct lending portfolios. Non-banks’ exposure to the oil sector is also moderate and does not pose macro-stability risks.  Financial sector institutions exposure to the oil sector, including loans and bonds, is concentrated in Ecopetrol (97 percent) whose liquidity position remains strong and with moderate leverage. There is also no evidence of high concentration in the volume of deposits of oil companies at any of the credit institutions.  Exposure to oil shares in the repo and futures markets and to oil securities in private debt arbitrage trading is small.  Some individual non-systemic insurance companies and broker-dealers’ investment portfolios have a significant share of their equity exposed to oil companies.  Households’ exposure to the oil sector is negligible. Less than 5 percent of shares of the three major oil companies were held by minority shareholders at end-2014. Individual shareholders (domestic and foreign) kept 0.018 percent of shares of Ecopetrol, 0.15 percent of shares of Pacific Rubiales and 19 percent of Canacol. Including banks, financial corporations, fiduciary institutions, insurance companies, pension funds, cooperatives, and the stock exchange. At end-December 2014, exposure to Ecopetrol stock in standardized derivatives market represented 1.2 percent of this market. Pacific Rubiales standardized derivatives consisted of 0.6 percent of the standardized derivatives market. Page 21  According to a central bank stress test conducted in June 2014, the banking sector would remain solvent even under an extreme macroeconomic shock. A liquidity stress test suggests that the liquidity coverage ratio would remain well above the regulatory minima of 100 percent for banks and non-banks. Risks from the credit cycle appear moderate and the macro-financial system is stable on both microprudential and macroprudential dimensions. While financial sector vulnerability risk has increased reflecting a recent pick-up in credit and is marginally above the “low” threshold in the last quarter of 2014, banking system balance sheets have remained strong and buffers are ample (Appendix I). Moreover, while household and corporate leverage has been increasing, it remains low and the low exposure to the oil sector is expected to dampen the effect of the oil shock on households and corporate borrowing and consumption. The authorities agreed that house price increases have stabilized more recently, as the mortgage subsidy on middle-income households was discontinued, and do not pose a significant risk to the banking sector. Construction Mining Sectoral Concentration of Loans (Percent) Credit growth has remained robust, at 14.7 percent in 2014. Colombian corporates replaced credit lines from foreign banks with domestic credit due to the exchange rate depreciation, contributing to strong credit growth. Moreover, ample liquidity, in part due to strong capital inflows and imperfect sterilization of reserve purchases, and strong competition between banks have fuelled substantial payroll and consumer loan growth, which will need to be monitored closely against potential worsening of underwriting standards and turnaround in the economic cycle. Credit growth was also boosted by government’s housing subsidy program targeted to middle-income households and will continue to be strong going forward through financing of the 4G infrastructure program (see below). Although consumer lending for durable goods is expected to slow, due mainly to lower credit demand as economic activity and private consumption moderates, total credit growth will continue to outpace nominal GDP growth. This is in line with the authorities’ financial inclusion policy which has resulted in credit deepening and will boost microfinance going forward, and the strong drive for home ownership that will support mortgages as incomes continue growing. Source: Superintendencia Financiera According to scenario analysis, Colombian banks have sufficient capacity to help finance the 4G infrastructure program. The financial system supervisor ( Superintendencia Financiera de Colombia , SFC) ran a macro-financial scenario to gauge the banking system’s capacity to fund Col$14 billion (30 percent of total financial need) of fourth generation (4G), PPP-based road infrastructure projects. The scenario assumed staff’s baseline macroeconomic projections for The combined shock consists of an 8 percent decline in real GDP, an increase in the real interest rate to 12 percent, 17 percent fall in house prices, and an increase in unemployment rate to 15 percent. Page 22 2016 and 2017 and normal growth of credit and provisioning. The results indicate that bank financing for 4G is manageable without crowding out lending to other sectors or unduly increasing concentration and banks could maintain strong capitalization. The authorities were optimistic about bank’s appetite for financing the 4G projects, including because of lower business prospects for other credit lines due to the cooling of the consumer lending cycle and slowdown in activity. Colombian banks' large presence in Central America continues to pose risks. Economic risks have declined in some of the Central American countries where Colombian banks have expanded in recent years, as these countries benefit from close linkages to the U.S. and lower energy costs. However, concerns persist over lower loan quality, higher FX exposures, and weaker prudential standards and AML/CFT framework. The absence of common regulatory and supervisory standards and confidentiality obstacles on information sharing create challenges for cross-border supervision, including for AML/CFT purposes. A network contagion analysis suggests that, at this point in time, Colombian banking conglomerates are systemic for the region (including Central America and Panama) while they are not vulnerable to shocks on individual banks in other countries. However, banks’ capital, while currently above regulatory minima, could prove insufficient against risks run by banking groups in case of system-wide shocks. Moreover, removing goodwill from banks’ capital results in a more negative scenario in which Colombia becomes significantly more contagious for the region and its banks more vulnerable to shocks. Consideration should be given to strengthening capital buffers further and building a regional body in charge of financial stability that would act as a forum for the coordination of regional macro-prudential surveillance (Box 7 and Selected Issues Paper). The Colombian authorities are making good progress in implementing FSAP recommendations, including those that help address cross-border risks. Draft laws granting independence and legal protection of the supervisor, and laws awarding regulatory powers over holding companies of financial conglomerates currently lie before Congress. Extended delays in approving the laws would weaken supervisory oversight of the financial system. The SFC continues to move ahead with risk-based supervision to enable the supervisor, together with banks and nonbanks, to tailor prudential requirements to the risks that their operations entail. The authorities noted that while work on addressing risk from financial conglomerates has progressed, assessing risks from mixed conglomerates remains challenging given complex family ownership and offshore structures where SFC regulatory reach is limited. The Ministry of Finance is working on proposals to implement the Basel III capital adequacy measure, Basel II (Pillar 2) buffers, the capital conservation buffers, and domestic systemically important banks’ (D-SIB) buffers for large internationally active Colombian banks. These measures build on an already enhanced capital adequacy measure (introduced in 2013) and will provide increased loss absorbency for Colombian banks against cross- border and domestic risks once fully implemented (Box 8). The continued growth of nonbank financial intermediation raises additional challenges for supervision. Credit growth outside the banking system has been robust and broker-dealers Page 23 have been growing in size, with some large entities accounting for around 30 percent of key public debt and derivatives markets. Since the collapse of a large broker-dealer, Interbolsa, in 2012, regulations such as the management of liquidity risk of broker-dealers and investor protections were strengthened. The authorities agreed that notwithstanding such enhancements, risks from a larger presence of systemic broker-dealers in capital markets require continued monitoring. To that end, the SFC continues to move ahead with risk-based supervision to enable the supervisor to tailor prudential requirements to the risks that their operations entail, which would also instill better risk management practices at banks and nonbanks. Pension funds Fiduciary institutions Insurance companies Stock brokers Nonbank Financial System Assets (Percent) The derivatives market has grown in recent years and its regulatory regime needs to be further simplified. The regulatory framework for derivatives in Colombia has sought to to address risks from growing transactions but in doing so it has created a complex and fragmented framework that could be simplified. The authorities have pointed that the current framework has provided clarity which has in turn allowed such a large scaling up of derivatives transactions. To address risks they are developing analytical and supervisory tools for on-site and off-site surveillance of derivatives transactions. Their risk-based approach to supervision currently addresses counterparty risk, including risks flowing from institutions' regional exposure, and should be upgraded to monitor concentration risk as well as leverage and collateral quality in the OTC derivatives market (Box 9, and Selected Issues Paper). Share of total financial system assets Percent of GDP Development of capital markets should focus on creating depth and enhancing liquidity . Liquidity in interbank money markets (e.g. repo) tends to be concentrated at overnight maturities while money markets at maturities beyond the overnight are illiquid. This limits the scope of Colombian capital markets to provide liquidity management and financial intermediation services for a variety of corporate (financial and non-financial) institutions. While good progress has been made to limit counterparty access to routine open market operations, thereby encouraging counterparties to manage liquidity through the money markets, further development of money markets could benefit from imposing a higher cost of overnight credit, and from a greater issuance of short-term government securities.