A strong policy framework and prudent macroeconomic policy management have underpinned Colombia’s vigorous economic growth during the last several years, which has been among the highest in Latin America. Colombia’s robust and broad-based growth in recent years has contributed to a decline in poverty, inequality, and unemployment (Figure 1). Economic stability has underpinned strong capital inflows, especially FDI, which have also benefited from steady upgrades in Colombia’s sovereign credit rating, and, more recently, an increase in its weight in global bond indices. The central bank has taken advantage of the abundant capital inflows to rebuild net international reserves and the government has been able to lengthen the average maturity of its debt, issue at historically low yields, and widen the foreign investor base. The inflation targeting framework has served to maintain low and stable inflation and anchor inflation expectations. Prudent financial supervision and regulation have supported financial deepening and macro-financial stability. Colombia’s government is engaged in ongoing peace negotiations. The government has been holding peace talks with the main guerilla group (FARC), now counting some 8,000 members, since 2012. The parties have reached agreement on three out of six points on the peace agenda, and in early January 2015, President Santos announced the intention to discuss a bilateral ceasefire. A peace accord would end five decades of armed conflict. Exchange regime and economic data. Colombia has a floating exchange rate regime ( de jure and de facto ). Colombia maintains an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval under Article VIII arising from the special regime for the hydrocarbon sector (IMF Country Report 13/35 for details). Data provision is adequate for surveillance. Past Fund advice. Since the 2014 Article IV Consultation, the authorities have enacted a tax reform to raise revenue and have taken steps toward consideration of a broader tax reform. They have been implementing key recommendations from the 2012 FSAP Update. They continue to advance an agenda of inclusive growth, with measures set out in the recent development plan. Colombia’s Flexible Credit Line (FCL) arrangements have served the country well. The successive FCL arrangements have provided a cushion of international liquidity and complemented the authorities’ countercyclical policy response to heightened external risks, including after the 2008–09 global financial crisis and during the euro area crisis. The arrangements have allowed the authorities to preserve policy frameworks and to rebuild buffers, while sending a positive signal to international financial markets on the strength of the economy. Empirical analysis conducted by the Colombian central bank and Fund staff’s econometric analysis found that the FCL reduced the sovereign risk premium, improved consumer confidence and growth, eased exchange rate pressures, Page 10 and mitigate the confidence effect of a surge in sovereign yields after the taper talk episode in mid-