An analysis of macro-financial linkages suggests that the decline in oil prices may have important spillover effects to the financial sector. Banks’ compliance with CEMAC prudential ratios remains, on average, broadly adequate. Three (out of the 10) banks do not maintain capital above the COBAC CFAF 10 billion minimum. Two of these have drawn up time- bound recapitalization plan. The third bank may be turned into an SME bank with the government taking a share in it. The non-performing loan (NPL) ratio more than doubled, albeit from low levels, to 2.5 percent in 2014. The stress tests in the January 2015 FSAP highlight that Congolese banks would be most vulnerable to a re-classification of performing loans to NPLs. In light of this, anecdotal reports of a buildup of government arrears to domestic private sector operators underscore the risk that the large decline in oil revenues and the resulting need to reduce government spending could lead to a further increase in NPLs. Increased financial access and intermediation could have important economic benefits. The Republic of Congo’s financial sector is shallow, highly concentrated, and characterized by limited inclusiveness (SIP chapter 3). Staff’s analysis suggests that increasing access to bank lending and other financial services, increasing the quality of loan collateral and lowering bank intermediation costs could have an important impact on growth, productivity, and inequality. In light of this, staff advised to (i) accelerate the implementation of a centralized balance sheet bureau to strengthen the quality of accounting data; (ii) strengthen the credit registry; (iii) establish a property registry and a unique window to register land titles; (iv) strengthen the judicial framework by boosting the judges’ and tribunals’ capacity to address financial sector issues. In addition, there is scope to encourage microfinance and mobile banking by fostering collaboration between commercial banks, microfinance institutions and telecommunication companies and move forward with the ongoing implementation of the Page 26 electronic payment system for taxes and utilities and developing the bank branches network. The authorities are encouraged to work in close collaboration with COBAC and BEAC on financial innovations to ensure consistency with regional regulations. Staff encouraged the authorities to put in place a strategy to develop the financial sector that includes a roadmap of prioritized time-bound actions, involves all the relevant stakeholders, and whose implementation is proactively monitored. AML/CFT. Staff encouraged the authorities to move forward with ensuring financial sector compliance with customer due diligence (CDD) and operationalizing the recently created financial intelligence unit (ANIF-Congo) and ensuring that it has an adequate budget that will allow it to immediately undertake its core functions independently. Authorities’ Views The authorities highlighted that the FSAP findings showed that the Congolese banks were the most resilient to shocks among the banks in the CEMAC region. They recognized the importance of encouraging financial sector development in order to promote the diversification of the economy. The authorities acknowledged that the successful development of the sector requires reforms of the legal system to facilitate use of collateral. They considered that progress has been made in requiring civil servants to receive salaries through bank accounts and the development of mobile banking. More generally, the authorities are in the process of reviewing and updating their 2006 financial sector development strategy which would also ensure that national measures are fully integrated with regional objectives in the CEMAC context.