The PFM system faces a number of challenges in critical areas. Progress has been made in recent years in refining the legislative framework for the budget, strengthening the public procurement system, and in developing a medium-term budget framework. Significant shortcomings remain, however, in adhering to budget allocations during execution. In addition, the budget does not provide full coverage of government revenues and expenditures (see ¶24). Shortcomings in commitment control are also evident, in particular for investment expenditures, while there is also frequent recourse to in-year budget adjustments These practices complicate budget management and the timely and accurate reporting of expenditures. This is further compounded by weaknesses in accounts preparation. A visible result of these shortcomings is the persistence of domestic payment arrears at some 5.5 percent of GDP and there are risks from further arrears being generated by the reduction in public spending. Since the adoption of the Organic Law in 2012, reforms have mainly focused on the transposition of the six CEMAC PFM Directives. The government is taking important steps to transpose the CEMAC PFM Directives through draft legislation on fiscal transparency, budget classification, and the chart of accounts. The draft fiscal responsibility and transparency (FRT) law would establish guiding principles for other PFM laws and includes provisions on natural resources revenue transparency which would complement Congo’s compliant status under the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) since February 2013. This should be implemented expeditiously and remain consistent with the relevant CEMAC directive. The authorities have also made efforts to work on improving the expenditure management under the IT system (SIDERE), and program budgeting is being developed. While the efforts to transpose the Directives are welcome, implementation of PFM reforms is lagging in some critical areas. These are highlighted in the recent PEFA assessment, which presents an opportunity to refocus reforms on these critical shortcomings (Box 1). At the same time, reinvigorating the reform process will require a clearer institutional framework and a review of the timeline of activities in order to ensure appropriate sequencing. Staff encouraged implementation of measures to enhance the equity and efficiency of government spending based on the findings of the PEMFAR. This includes: Prioritizing the budgetary allocations to the agriculture and social sectors (health and education) and building capacity of staff in these ministries in PFM issues whilst improving monitoring and evaluation of projects to address low execution rates; Page 24 Improving the allocations of public resources, including by providing a geographic coverage of the budget by regions or rural vs. urban areas; Piloting, and eventually mainstreaming, a pro-poor cash transfer program that is well- targeted and adequately monitored; Improving access to health care, for example by waiving user fees for the poor and compensating providers as part of the government’s universal health care coverage, to be rolled out over the medium term; and Prioritizing infrastructure spending with a stronger growth and human development impact. Box 1: Public Expenditure and Accountability Framework Assessment and Recommendations A follow up to the initial 2006 assessment under the PEFA was undertaken in 2014. The PEFA recognizes progress made since the earlier assessment in introducing a medium-term budgetary framework, reforms to the procurement system and the clearer legal underpinnings provided by the 2012 budget framework law. At the same time, the assessment finds continued important scope to strengthen the credibility of budget allocations; the scope and coverage of budget documents; timeliness and accuracy of accounting data; internal control and transparency. In addition, a critical cross-cutting issue that hampers progress across the cycle of budgetary operations is the performance of the various IT systems underpinning the PFM system. Against this background, staff recommended that an updated reform plan should contain the following critical elements: spending; Broadening the scope of budget documentation and fiscal reporting and consolidating off-budget Ensuring reliable forecasts of fiscal aggregates and strengthening commitment controls and procedures to help prevent further accumulation of arrears; Tightening procedures for in-year budget adjustments; Taking a multi-year perspective in fiscal planning, in particular for commitments on investment projects; Reinforcing the link between the National Development Plan (NDP) and budgetary allocations; and Rationalizing IT systems to ensure full coverage and inter-operability between key departments and modules. Authorities’ Views The authorities gave high priority to PFM reforms and considered that their focus on the overarching legal framework, as set out in the CEMAC Directives, was appropriate. In particular, they noted their intention to move ahead with the FRT law before the end of the year. The authorities emphasized that ongoing projects were not being cancelled and only Page 25 postponed. For this reason, the costs of the projects should not increase and arrears should not accumulate. The authorities consider that the problem of payment arrears may be overstated, depending on the accounting conventions used for their recording, as their definition of arrears differs from that of private sector companies. The authorities nevertheless broadly agree that a more comprehensive presentation of government fiscal operations is appropriate, and indicated their willingness to further engage with IMF staff on how to move ahead with this. The question of providing geographical information on budget allocations, meanwhile, was something that the authorities considered to be best addressed in the context of their ongoing efforts to move towards a program budgeting approach to budget preparation. With regard to public investment efficiency, the authorities indicated that they intended to give higher priority to quality concerns in the public investment program. In terms of sectoral priorities, however, they considered that agriculture allocations were appropriate and that a range of flanking policies in rural areas (health, electricity, water, transportation, etc.) were equally important for developing agricultural potential. With regard to the proposed cash transfer program, in the second half of 2015 the authorities plan to roll out the Lisungi project, with World Bank support, across a number of pilot districts.