Some encouraging steps have recently been taken to strengthen PFM. Preparations to implement some of the CEMAC directives on PFM, including with Fund technical assistance (TA), have been initiated. Since the adoption of a new Organic Budget Law (LORFE) in 2012, the authorities have engaged in a number of projects for strengthening and reforming the PFM system. These efforts include work on improving the expenditure management under the IT system (SIDERE), and program budgeting has started being developed. A law on FRT has also been drafted recently. This law would establish guiding principles for other PFM laws and includes provisions on natural resources revenue transparency. The draft law, which aims, on the whole to establish a more transparent fiscal framework, would assign oversight responsibility to a new body. Significant efforts remain for addressing the PFM system’s weaknesses. In this context, full advantage should be taken of the ongoing Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR). The PEMFAR, which is conducted by the World Bank and other development partners, should help identify steps to improve budget execution and procurement and disbursement processes. For example, reducing the number of steps in the procurement process would speed up the implementation of projects under the NDP. The public expenditure review in key sectors could form the basis for action plans to improve the efficiency and quality of spending. Staff encouraged the authorities to complete the audit of domestic arrears as a matter of priority and to put in place a repayment plan that is included in medium-term budget planning. Moreover, to improve budget execution and prevent the accumulation of arrears, the authorities were encouraged to focus on: (i) real-time reporting of budget implementation (tax revenues and expenditure) through centralized accounting systems; and (ii) improving treasury management and forecasting, including unifying data reporting at the central level, enhancing the reliability of revenue and expenditure forecasts as well as their monthly adjustments, and entrusting the centralized cash flow management to a dedicated team. Authorities’ Views The authorities noted their intention to move ahead with the FRT law. The authorities also indicated that Fund PFM TA would be most beneficial if it would be timed with the drafting of new legislation. They reaffirmed that they are continuing to work with the World Bank and the EU to improve aspects of financial transparency and responsibility in the context of the PEMFAR and that they are in the process of implementing reforms regarding real time reporting and centralized accounting. An audit of domestic arrears is underway; pension arrears will be audited separately from commercial arrears. Depending on the size of commercial arrears, a multi-year repayment plan would be put in place.