Overall compliance with the regional prudential ratios remains broadly adequate in the aggregate but the financial sector remains underdeveloped (see SIP on Financial Inclusion, Development, and Risks). The ratio of non-performing loans to total loans has remained low and banks have maintained capital above the minimum levels (8 percent, Table 7). Lack of credible Page 16 collateral and inadequate protection of creditors’ rights continues to hinder financial sector development. Banks remain averse to channel loans to SMEs in spite of ample liquidity. Despite a steady increase in private sector credit and the development of microfinance and mobile banking outperforming regional trends, financial access in Congo—measured as the proportion of population with access to formal financial accounts—remains among the lowest in the CEMAC and CFA Franc Zone. Banks’ business models rely on fees and commissions related to bank services and transfers. One bank is implementing an action plan to comply with the financial supervisor’s (COBAC) regulations by mid-2014. The policy agenda should include measures to address the main barriers to financial access. The authorities should expedite actions to address problems regarding legislation, property rights and documentation to support access to finance. Actions should include: (i) strengthening the judicial framework by boosting the judges’ and tribunals’ capacities to address financial sector issues; (ii) implementing a centralized balance sheet bureau ( Centrale des bilans ) to strengthen the quality of accounting data; and (iii) establishing a property registry ( Fonds National du Cadastre ) and a unique window to register land titles. The efforts to create a good environment for microfinance and mobile banking should continue by fostering collaboration between commercial banks and microfinance institutions and telecommunication companies. Ongoing implementation of the electronic payment system for taxes and utilities has to move forward and development of the banking branches network encouraged. Efforts to strengthen the quality of information available at the central risk bureau ( Centrale des risques) and the central payment incident bureau ( Centrale des incidents de paiement) should continue. Authorities’ Views The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to continue to work with the regional authorities on strengthening the regional regulatory and supervisory system. They highlighted their efforts to increase and monitor credit to SME’s for carefully appraised projects. The authorities also noted their efforts to strengthen the implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework, including through outreach and training.