Staff advised the authorities to anchor fiscal policy on a non-oil primary balance rule that insulates spending from oil revenue volatility while ensuring medium-term fiscal and debt sustainability and supporting growth. The authorities’ fiscal anchor introduced in 2013 would help to protect government spending from oil price volatility but could be further strengthened by taking into account oil exhaustibility over the medium term. In particular, staff recommended anchoring fiscal policy on a gradual reduction in the non-oil primary deficit that takes into account public investment needs and the effect of this type of investment on growth while Page 14 preserving medium-term fiscal sustainability. The authorities are also encouraged to follow up on the recommendations on the reform of fiscal anchors in the forthcoming 2014 CEMAC Article IV consultation report. In view of the short-term spending pressures, staff underscored the importance of meeting the fiscal targets in the 2014 budget. The aging of existing oil wells and recent technical difficulties to sustain oil production caused gross oil export revenue to decline, thus illustrating the uncertain outlook for oil production and revenues. Including the large foreign-financed capital spending, the 2014 budget would imply a 22 percent increase in total government spending compared to the outturn in 2013. The acceleration of foreign-financed capital spending would raise the Republic of Congo’s external debt to about 38 percent of GDP by the end of 2014, up from 32 percent of GDP projected for end-2013. Ideally, a supplementary budget would formalize changes to fiscal targets, particularly in case the 2015 All Africa Games would require additional spending. Efforts to enhance the effectiveness of spending should be stepped up Projects should be analyzed and prioritized carefully to maximize their impact on productivity and poverty reduction. Implementation of projects with a more limited impact on medium-term growth and poverty reduction should be scaled back particularly in view of absorption and implementation capacity constraints. Also, by foregoing lower-priority capital investment projects, maintenance costs in later years would be commensurately lower. The authorities are also encouraged to contain fiscal risks relating to their plans to establish a special fund for guarantees and support (FIGA— Fonds d’Impulsion de Garantie et d’Accompagnement ), which is designed to aid the creation of small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs). Particularly, there should be an annual report and assessment of the fiscal risks involved with the FIGA. The design of the fiscal consolidation package matters for achieving the government’s distributional and efficiency objectives while supporting growth. To the extent that the fiscal consolidation is based on progressive tax and expenditure measures, vulnerable households can be protected from the adjustment. For example, fuel subsidies in the Republic of Congo (about 3.6 percent of GDP in 2010) likely benefit the better off (see Selected Issues Paper (SIP) on Equitable Fiscal Consolidation). In this regard, staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to focus more on critical social spending and to develop a comprehensive social safety net system. Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that they were discussing ideas for a dynamic fiscal anchor , with all options on the table, including staff’s proposal to target a declining path for the non-oil primary deficit. They highlighted that the Republic of Congo has consistently met the CEMAC convergence criteria of a positive basic fiscal balance. While underscoring their vast investment needs, they were cognizant of the risk of excessive debt-financed investments. If necessary, they would table a supplementary budget to revise their spending plans. The authorities noted that, apart from the initial capital injection, the FIGA has to generate its own revenues and be self-sufficient. Also, project proposals under the FIGA would be carefully appraised and the use of credit monitored. Page 15