Against the background of the limited remaining lifetime of oil reserves, the decline in international oil prices makes the need for fiscal adjustment more urgent. Staff reiterated earlier recommendations regarding fiscal adjustment to preserve medium-term fiscal sustainability. At the same time there is a need to safeguard priority expenditures to address social and infrastructure gaps. The supplementary 2014 budget, ratified in September, deviated from a consolidation path consistent with fiscal sustainability. The supplementary budget entailed a considerable increase in domestically-financed capital expenditures, mainly for the AAG. Following the fall in oil prices, however, on-budget domestically-financed capital spending was under-executed as the authorities prioritized AAG projects and the urbanization program. Additional spending pressures emanate from elections in 2016 (presidential) and 2017 (legislative). The draft supplementary 2015 budget appropriately tightens the fiscal stance. According to the authorities’ projections, the supplementary budget envisages a narrowing of the non-oil primary fiscal deficit to about 42 percent of non-oil GDP from 81.2 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014. Staff projects a smaller narrowing of the non-oil primary deficit to a deficit of 57 percent of non-oil GDP in 2015. The consolidation mostly reflects reductions in domestically- financed investment spending. In addition to postponing non-priority projects and not initiating new ones, this would entail partly reversing the doubling of on-budget current and capital expenditures that took place over the past three years. This is expected to have a significant negative impact on non-oil growth, which is projected to decline to 3.2 percent per annum in the period 2015 to 2020, compared to almost 8 percent per annum in the five years preceding. The focus of the adjustment on reductions in investment spending, which has a strong external component, reduces import growth and therefore dampens the overall impact on growth. In view of the projected reduction in expenditure, the authorities should strive to safeguard pro- SEZs were discussed in Country Report No. 14/272. Page 20 poor programs, improve investment efficiency to maximize the buildup of capital and safeguard debt sustainability, and ensure that public financial management weaknesses do not generate arrears. Non-oil tax revenue collection is expected to increase from new taxes introduced in 2015, including on mobile telephone operators, and further strengthening of customs administration. Staff recommended that the Supplementary Budget clarify the basis for the strong projected growth of non-oil revenues. Staff also emphasized the importance of preparing contingency plans, given the fluid global situation, to manage downside risks should they materialize. In this regard, staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to closely monitor budget execution through comprehensive monthly fiscal reports. The authorities are likely to face important fiscal policy tradeoffs in the rest of 2015. They should carefully weigh the trade-off between financing the projected fiscal deficit from drawing down government deposits at the central bank (as currently assumed in the staff’s baseline projections), additional fiscal adjustment, and additional borrowing from external or domestic sources. In particular, it would be useful to analyze the nature and expected benefits of discretionary spending and the comparative costs of alternative financing, including from using the government’s fiscal buffers. Maintaining deposits at the regional central bank would provide a buffer in the event of additional adverse shocks, including to oil prices, and would ensure the continued smooth operation of the pegged exchange rate arrangement which has served Congo well. External sustainability will require maintaining a level of reserves above five months of imports to support the exchange rate peg. The decline in oil prices, and its impact on foreign exchange reserves, reinforces the importance of compliance with existing regional reserve pooling requirements. Over the medium-term, it will be important to develop a comprehensive and coherent fiscal adjustment strategy. There are several aspects to this: Strengthen fiscal reporting, including regarding the government’s overseas deposits and off budget expenditures In particular, the monthly preparation of the Table of Government Financial Operations (TOFE) budget execution should include off-budget spending above the line and financing from changes in offshore deposits below the line. Off budget spending mainly comprises in-kind oil payments to finance a number of commercial agreements and to cover losses incurred by the state oil refinery (CORAF) in maintaining regulated domestic fuel prices. At a minimum, these amounts should be included as memorandum items in fiscal The 2013 TOFE reports negative financing of CFAF 629 billion (9.4 percent of GDP) under “ décalage techniques ” (statistical discrepancy). Based on discussions with the authorities in June 2014, the published 2014 IMF Article IV consultation report noted that this large negative financing reflected a buildup of overseas deposits. However, data newly made available to staff makes clear there was no such build up of offshore deposits. In fact, there was a drawdown of deposits by about CFAF 59 billion during 2013. Outside the coverage of standard fiscal reporting, the money was spent on a power plant built under the supervision of a foreign oil company. Consideration could also be given to include subventions to the oil sector (to cover trading shortfalls owing to the operation of administered retail prices for petroleum products) to the transfer expenditures line in the TOFE, in line with the GFS 1986 Manual. Page 21 reporting. This is important to make a meaningful assessment of the stance of fiscal policy and to derive a realistic fiscal consolidation path. Adopt a multi-year perspective in fiscal planning. In this regard, staff recommended that over the next five years, the non-oil primary deficit should be reduced to about 40 percent of non-oil GDP in order to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability (Annex IV). Strengthen commitment control . This would help stem the accumulation of domestic spending arrears and curtail increases in public debt that could significantly undermine the resilience of the economy and fiscal policy space. Enhance macroeconomic surveillance and coordination at the regional level . In view of the significant and differential impact of the oil price decline in the CEMAC context, the Republic of Congo could spearhead enhanced regional coordination in order to ensure an appropriate policy mix in response to the shock. The impact of fiscal consolidation on longer-term growth and the poor should be minimized. Specific measures could include: Strengthen non-oil revenue collection . Consideration should be given to minimizing the use of reduced VAT rates and tax exemptions, and strengthening the effectiveness of tax and customs audits and inspections and bringing non-filers into the tax net. Reprioritize capital spending, including off-budget capital spending . There is scope to rationalize capital spending by prioritizing projects with clear impact on growth potential. Recent work by the IMF to assess investment efficiency reveals an efficiency gap for Congo which is significantly higher than the average for Low Income Developing Countries. This suggests that there is scope for improved quality of investment. In particular, project selection methods should be enhanced to boost the quality of public investment spending and maximize the level of Congo’s long-run capital stock (Annex IV). This should also entail adequate provisions for maintenance costs in budget planning. Also, any off-budget investment spending should be consolidated under the budget process and hence be subject to standardized procedures. Rationalize subsidies that disproportionately benefit the people that least needs them . Energy subsidies amounted to about 4 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014. With the fall in oil prices, such subsidies have significantly declined to about ½ percent of GDP. Several countries (e.g. Cameroon, Indonesia) have taken advantage of the current environment of low international prices to phase out subsidies on petroleum products. Congo would benefit from implementing similar steps. The prices of utilities should also be evaluated. Timing the rollout of a program of energy subsidy reforms to coincide with the introduction of the pilot Making Public Investment More Efficient (IMF 2015). Page 22 cash transfer program could help to mitigate the social impact of the removal of energy subsidies (SIP Chapter 2) Consider options to control the growth of the government wage bill . A multi-year schedule of civil servants’ wage increases was announced in 2013, when the outlook for international oil prices was more favorable. The wage bill is forecast to peak at nearly 14 percent of non-oil GDP in 2017, from less than percent 10 percent in 2013. Part of the upward pressure on the wage bill is expected to emanate from the increase in hiring of qualified health care professionals related to the countrywide medium-term hospital building program aimed at re-balancing the significant geographical inequalities in health care provision. However, increases in wage rates should be moderated. Adherence to a prudent borrowing policy is essential to avoid jeopardizing debt sustainability. External debt has risen steadily in recent years and the authorities intend to mobilize additional borrowing in addition to drawing down the country’s oil reserves. Against this background, staff urged the authorities to pursue a prudent borrowing policy that keeps the NPV of net debt below indicative Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) thresholds. As a result of the decline in oil prices and the consequent drop in nominal GDP, the NPV of gross external debt to GDP ratio temporarily breaches the 30 percent of GDP threshold in 2015 and 2016. Together with the sustained breaches in the standard stress tests, this would give rise to a downgrade to a “high risk of debt distress.” However, an analysis based on net debt, which takes into account Congo’s sizable government deposits at the BEAC, indicates that there are only sustained breaches of the thresholds under the stress tests. On this basis, Congo is classified as at “moderate risk of debt distress.” To the extent that new borrowing over the medium-term is on less concessional terms than recent years, the risk of debt distress could rise. Staff encouraged the authorities to strengthen debt management and also take into account the drawdown of oil wealth. As the authorities seek to broaden financing sources, it would be important to develop a medium-term debt strategy (MTDS), strengthen skills for evaluating financing offers, and to enhance transparency in debt and asset management. As regards the option to issue government bonds in the local and regional markets, staff recommended strengthening institutional and analytical capacities before proceeding. This should include drawing up a strategy, in close collaboration with CEMAC partners, to develop the regional government securities market and outlining in more detail the financing requirements that would be covered by government securities and other sources, in the MTDS. Authorities’ Views The authorities had mixed views on staff’s recommendations. The authorities aimed to fast track Parliamentary approval of the 2015 supplementary budget. They also highlighted their intention to consider additional cuts in expenditure in the event of further revenue shortfalls. The expenditures related to the AAG were the authorities’ main immediate priority. The pace of other investment expenditures would be slowed and projects completed over a longer period of time. The authorities would not consider making adjustments to the announced Page 23 multi-year increases in civil servants’ salaries because of their commitments to social partners. They also argued that the rural poor would be hit hardest by the removal of energy subsidies and would therefore maintain the current system of administered prices for petroleum products. The authorities acknowledged that off-budget expenditures had caused discrepancies in the fiscal accounts and agreed that, going forward, off-budget spending, including for energy subsidies, should be consolidated in fiscal reporting.