The near-term outlook for growth is favorable but inflation will likely drift up . The economy is projected to expand by about 6 percent in 2014, on a technical rebound in oil production and the start of iron ore production. Inflation is expected to inch up owing to demand pressures from continued large government spending, which may be compounded by cost pressures from the recent expulsion of about 80,000 low-paid illegal workers from the Democratic Republic of Congo. The medium-term outlook is favorable but hinges on substantial progress with structural reforms and fiscal adjustment. NDP implementation should be complemented by efforts to improve the business climate and to implement targeted employment and social safety Page 12 net programs. The high level of government spending and the exhaustibility of oil reserves, in conjunction with concerns about absorptive and implementation capacity of government spending, call for careful management of oil revenues. Therefore, and in line with the authorities’ stated commitment, a core feature of the baseline scenario is a gradual reduction in the non-oil primary deficit to about 30 percent of non-oil GDP over the next five years, down from about 60 percent of non-oil GDP in 2013. A further reduction would be in order over the long term to help build an endowment the size of which would depend on average investment returns. This endowment could support government spending in the post-oil era while allowing room to implement the government’s public investment program (Annex 3). An alternative scenario in which fiscal consolidation is delayed illustrates the downsides of continued high government spending (see Debt Sustainability Analysis, DSA). In this scenario, fiscal adjustment would be postponed. Declining oil revenues would be replaced by funds borrowed from abroad, possibly by taking advantage of the favorable sovereign credit rating. The higher government spending (compared to the baseline) would initially provide a boost to overall growth but higher inflation would erode competitiveness and deteriorate the current account. The buildup in external debt over the medium term to finance the higher spending would eventually trigger an abrupt fiscal adjustment. The result in the medium to long term would be a loss of competitiveness, lower growth and a worse overall net external position compared to the baseline scenario of fiscal consolidation. A DSA run on the “alternative policy scenario” would suggest significantly higher debt vulnerabilities and entail a rating downgrade. Box 2 discusses the tradeoffs related to scaling-up public investment. There are upside and downside risks to the outlook (Annex 4). A protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies and a sharp slowdown in growth in China, by weighing on international prices of commodities, could reduce oil revenues. To the extent that this gives rise to a reduction in government spending this could reduce growth in the Republic of Congo. Social tensions and political instability resulting from inequality and poor job opportunities could also adversely affect the outlook. Conversely, geopolitical tensions could cause international oil prices to rise. Moreover, the discovery of new oil reserves and the earlier-than-expected start of new mining projects would provide more time and financial resources to prepare for the post-oil era. Authorities’ Views The authorities were in broad agreement with the fiscal adjustment path underlying the baseline scenario and risks to the outlook. They were more optimistic regarding the medium- term outlook for the mining sector noting that several projects were moving closer to the production stage. The authorities highlighted their programs to increase agricultural sector productivity. They were hopeful that their efforts to put in place basic infrastructure (access to potable water, expansion of paved-roads network, and access to electricity), particularly in the rural areas, and to improve the business climate and health and education systems would lead to higher non-oil growth and poverty reduction over the medium term. Page 13 Box 2. Public Investment, Debt Sustainability and Savings Tradeoffs The Republic of Congo’s projected decline in oil revenue poses a challenge for the design of public investment paths that can foster economic growth while ensuring fiscal and debt sustainability. To analyze this issue, the Debt, Investment, Growth and Natural Resources (DIGNAR) model developed by the IMF’s Research Department was applied. The model takes into account the projected paths for the oil price, oil production, public investment, concessional debt as well as oil revenues. Simulations were carried out with three alternative investment paths: (i) the baseline scenario described earlier consistent with the authorities fiscal consolidation objectives and commitments, (ii) the “alternative policy” scenario and (iii) a “high investment until 2017” scenario. Moreover, to study the impact of PFM reforms and structural reforms, a sustained steady increase in investment efficiency was considered. Finally, in order to analyze the downside risks posed by a decline in the oil price (production), a scenario with a lower path for oil revenues was considered. The model and its simulations yielded the following main results: The baseline scenario delivers the best outcome in terms of public capital and debt sustainability and allows a buildup of savings. The ratio of public debt to GDP settles at around 35 percent in the long run. An aggressive scaling up of public investment can pose a threat to fiscal sustainability. In the “alternative policy” scenario, the public debt to GDP ratio reaches 120 percent and savings fall to the statutory minimum requirement. An increase in investment efficiency through credible and sustained PFM reforms and improvement in the business environment would allow for a relatively faster buildup of capital without adversely affecting the debt ratio or savings. An unexpected decrease in oil revenues (from a fall in oil prices or production) can result in a relatively fast decline in savings and increase the level of public debt in the long run. The authorities reiterated their commitment to anchoring fiscal policy in a prudent way. They noted that they had observed the spirit of the 2013 fiscal rule. However, savings fell short owing to the need to settle unbudgeted arrears and because of below-budget oil revenues. In practice, however, they considered that the present anchor has a number of problems, foremost that the absolute level of savings is not guaranteed.