The authorities have recently reinforced targeted social expenditures and safety net programs in the context of a new labor market policy. The finalization of a previously initiated National Employment Policy is pending review by stakeholders. However, a range of measures have been introduced to address skills mismatches that exacerbate unemployment. This includes strengthening and expanding the coverage of technical and vocational programs as well as implementation of programs to support rural job creation and self-employment. There are also plans to introduce training to meet the needs of the mining sector this year. Preparations are underway for the pilot cash transfer program ( Lisungi ) to the poor for spending on health and education services with the assistance of the World Bank. Food stamp and school-lunch programs were implemented in 2014. Page 17 Republic of Congo: Financial Depth and Inclusion f p Financial Inclusion by Income (in percent) G E h d p f g m v g S S F E m s Poorest 20% Richest 20% Source: Global Findex database (World Bank) and IMF staff calculations TCD GNQ GAB COG CMR CAR Financial Inclusion by Income (in percent) 2005 benchmark 2012 benchmark Note: TCD = Chad, GNQ = Equatorial Guinea, GAB = Gabon, COG = Republic of Congo, CMR = Cameroon, CAR = Central African Republic. Source: World Development Indicators (WDI) database, country authorities and IMF staff calculations The government is making efforts to create employment and diversify the economy by creating four special economic zones (SEZs) (SIP on SEZs). The legal framework governing the zones has not yet been finalized, but the 2014 budget law extends preferential incentives to SEZs. Given the narrow tax base and high dependence of government revenue on the oil sector, strict controls should be put in place to avoid abuse of the favorable fiscal regime. Staff encouraged the authorities to prevent the proliferation of tax incentives and exemptions in SEZs. The impact on direct and indirect tax expenditure should be quantified and monitored. Efforts to improve the business climate should be intensified. The Republic of Congo ranked 185th out of 189 countries in the 2014 World Bank’s Doing Business Survey . This is in spite of recent steps to improve the business environment that have been taken in the context of an inter- ministerial action plan in collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC). In the short term, the authorities plan to streamline administrative procedures and costs pertaining to registering enterprises, construction permits, access to electricity, cross-border trade, access to land, as well as take measures to protect investors. An Investment Promotion Agency established last year is in the process of identifying relevant sectors in which investments could be promoted. Authorities‘ View The authorities acknowledged that the fiscal incentives to SEZs entail loss of revenue. However, they considered that the losses incurred in the short term would be recouped in the long term as the tax expenditures would create employment and promote industrialization. The authorities agreed on the need to be vigilant and to ensure that the tax incentives do not become widespread and encourage rent seeking behavior. The authorities highlighted their commitment to strengthening social safety nets and ameliorating the business environment. They argued that due to the timing of implementation of some measures, the 2014 Doing Business rating did not yet reflect all the measures that they had implemented. Page 18