Robust growth is yet to result in a broad-based improvement in living standards. Growth averaged 5 percent over the last 5 years as government spending was ramped up, financed mostly by rising oil receipts. This translated into increased activity in agriculture, industry and services. Nevertheless, the Republic of Congo continues to suffer from large infrastructure gaps and the 2011 household survey showed limited progress in reducing poverty and inequality, (Selected Issues Paper (SIP) Chapter 1). Against a background of uncertainty about the future of oil prices and growth in key export markets, sharply lower oil receipts will constrain efforts to address these development challenges. Limited progress in this area could give rise to tensions and instability. Selected Poverty and Inequality Indicators Poverty Head Count Ratio at National Level (2011, percent of population Lorenz Curve for Household Consumption Expenditure 2005 and 2011 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators Database Source: World Bank Poverty and Inequality Database The oil dependence requires a recalibration of policies. The current low international oil price environment has increased the urgency for fiscal consolidation and underscores the need to address pervasive development challenges. In view of the projected depletion of oil reserves over the medium term, it is essential that the ongoing investment surge is effective and supportive of economic diversification. The public investment program should therefore be clearly oriented towards raising the potential growth of the non-oil economy – the main source of employment – and combined with a stronger policy focus on the costs of doing business and competitiveness issues. Presidential elections are planned for mid–2016. The constitution does not allow President Sassou N’guesso to run for a third term. In May 2015, the government launched a dialogue with political, civil society and religious leaders to discuss constitutional reform to remove this obstacle. Opposition parties have announced a boycott of this process. Comparators are developing countries that have a per capita GDP (in PPP US$) between 25 percent above and below that of the Republic of Congo ie Armenia, Egypt, El Salvador, Georgeia, Guatemala,, Indonesia and Mondgolia . C m h y q il Cumulative share of population Line of equality Page 10 Policies have partially followed recent Article IV recommendations (Annex 1). An expansionary supplementary budget was approved in September 2014 for increased spending on the All Africa Games (AAG) that will be held in Brazzaville in 2015. In view of the oil price decline, however, the 2015 budget envisaged some fiscal consolidation and the Cabinet recently approved a supplementary budget with additional fiscal adjustment to fully take into account the decline in oil prices. The authorities stopped short of adopting the recommended medium-term fiscal framework, however, that targets a decline in the nonoil primary deficit. In the context of the Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR), the authorities are reviewing, with development partners, the scope for improving the efficiency and quality of public expenditures. Some of the government’s deposits in China have been repatriated to the Bank of Central African States (BEAC), in line with regional reserves pooling arrangements.