Unemployment Rate (Percent) Growth decelerated in 2013 and has remained stable in 2014, opening a small output gap . After expanding by about 5 percent in 2012, activity rose by 3½ percent in 2013, largely on account of weaker domestic consumption (Figure 1) and net exports, the latter mirroring slower growth in the U.S.—Costa Rica’s major export market (Analytical Note (AN) 2, Figure 6). Growth is reckoned to have stayed the same in 2014, as activity was dampened by closure of Intel manufacturing, announced in April. With growth below its trend rate of 4¼ percent (AN 1), output has now fallen slightly short of potential. The unemployment rate has been elevated since the global crisis and increased further in early 2014, reflecting new and returning entrants into the labor force. Avg. CAPDR excl. CRI U.S. CRI Sources: WEO and Fund staff estimates. F Page 6 Potential GDP Growth Rate Potential GDP growth rate Production Function Approach Cycle Extraction Filters Hodrick-Prescott Butterworth Christiano-Fitzgerald Baxter-King Univariate Kalman Filters Deterministic Drift Mean Reversion Multivariate Filters With inflation With inflation and financial vars. Average of All Models Source: Fund staff estimates. */ Estimate for 2013. Potential GDP growth rate Potential GDP growth rate Potential GDP growth rate 4.1* Output Gap Output Gap Output Gap Output Gap Exchange Rate Pass-Through (Percentage points) Inflation remained within the target range in 2013, but rose sharply and breached its new upper limit in 2014. Inflation at end-2013 was 3.7 percent. To signal commitment to lower inflation, the central bank (BCCR) lowered its target range from 4–6 percent to 3–5 percent in early 2014. However, owing mainly to the pass-through to domestic prices from XR depreciation (AN 5) and sticky inflation expectations which persist above the target range, inflation reached 5.7 percent in October 2014 and is anticipated to have finished 2014 above the upper limit of the target range. To contain the second-round effects from depreciation, the authorities have raised monetary policy rates twice since the beginning of the year (to 5.25 percent in May), undoing the reductions effected in the second half of 2013. Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Average elasticity from three specifications, ranging from 0.16 to 0.36. Contribution to changes in inflation since end-2013 Composition of CPI basket Higher elasticity (0.36) Lower elasticity (0.16) passthrough elasticity of Non-tradable sevices Non-tradable goods Tradable goods Tradable services Tradable From other factors Average 0.25 1/ The private capital inflows of 2012 have reversed and the exchange rate depreciated markedly in early 2014. The current account deficit declined slightly to 5 percent of GDP in 2013 and is expected to remain broadly stable in 2014. Private capital inflows combined with government tapping of international capital markets in 2012–13 kept the XR at the bottom of the band, with strong accumulation of reserves by the BCCR (Figure 2). However, in the wake of U.S. monetary Page 7 COSTA RICA policy (USMP) normalization, the colón lost 10 percent of its value between January and March 2014, as private inflows and government use of its FX deposits ceased, while domestic residents adjusted their portfolios toward FX assets. It has since recovered somewhat, with year-to-date depreciation standing at 7 percent in mid-November. The BCCR intervened in an attempt to smooth excessive XR fluctuations, selling about 6 percent of its end-2013 NIR stock, but reserves were boosted by government Eurobond issuance in April and resumed purchases by the BCCR towards year-end. Thus, reserves remained well within the IMF adequacy metric at end-2014 (Box 1). Reserve coverage (Percent of GDP, end-2013) Reserves 100 % of Short-term Debt Composite metric 1/ 3 months of imports CRI DR SLV 2/ GTM HND 3/ NIC PAN 2/ Sources: National authorities and Fundstaff estimates. 1/ Composite Metric (floating exchange rate) = 5% × Exports + 5% × Broad Money + 30% × Short-term Debt + 10% × Other Liabilities Composite Metric (fixed exchange rate) = 10% × Exports + 10% × Broad Money + 30% × Short-term Debt + 15% × Other Liabilities 2/ El Salvador and Panama are dollarized economies. Panama does not have a Central Bank. Hence the interpretationof reserve adequacymight be different for these countries. 3/ 3 months of imports refers to the following year's imports of non-maquila goods. The composite metric was calculated based on Dabla-Norris, Kim, and Shirono (2011), '"Optimal Precautionary Reserves for Low-Income Countries: A Cost-Benefit Analysis," IMF Working Paper 11/249. Costa Rica: Composition of the Financial Account in the BOP (Billions USD) FDI Public Private Financial account Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Competitiveness has improved as a result of colón devaluation. The real effective exchange rate (REER) rose by over 30 percent between 2005 and 2013, largely due to high inflation differentials (Figure 3). Some of this appreciation was undone in 2014, as the REER declined by 4 percent with nominal depreciation outpacing a growing inflation differential. However, multilaterally consistent estimates under the EBA and CGER approaches (Box 1) suggest that Costa Rica’s current account and REER are broadly in line with fundamentals. Nonetheless, there are some signs of competitiveness problems (Box 1) suggesting that productivity-enhancing reforms (¶29) and wage restraint would help Costa Rica maintain a competitive edge. This is especially important in light of Intel’s exit which may generate negative “signaling effects”, although its direct impact on Costa Rica’s competitiveness is likely small. Fiscal consolidation (¶18) would also support long-term external stability. Page 8 Box 1. Costa Rica: External Stability Assessment Costa Rica’s real effective exchange rate (REER) is generally in line with medium-term fundamentals. Staff used various approaches to assess the external balance and exchange rate. These included changes in the CPI-based REER, regression-based methods to evaluate the appropriateness of the current account balance, and stability conditions for net foreign assets. A large nominal depreciation in 2014 combined with only a modest inflation increase partially reversed the REER appreciation of the last 10 years. The 30 percent appreciation in the CPI-based REER since 2003 has been mostly driven by inflation differential with the main trading partner, the U.S. With year-to-date depreciation at 7 percent in mid-November and outpacing inflation (below 6 percent in October), the REER has declined by 4 percent. Nonetheless the current account deficit has remained broadly stable and the market share has improved. The current account deficit has hovered close to 5 percent of GDP, as a strong positive services balance partly offsets a negative non-oil trade balance. Costa Rica has gained export market share during the same period in contrast to other emerging markets (Figure 3). The financing structure of the current account and relatively low external liabilities mitigate risks. The current account is mostly financed by FDI inflows, which have hovered at around 5 percent of GDP. As a result, while the IIP is negative at over 35 percent of GDP, FDI comprises more than 60 percent of total liabilities. The external debt profile presents no sustainability concerns, with the external debt-to-GDP ratio set to decline into the medium term, and with a low share of short-term debt. Net international reserves stood at 5.6 months of non-maquila imports of goods and services at end-2013 and are within the Fund’s composite reserve adequacy metric. Costa Rica: Implied undervaluation ("+" = Overvaluation) REER deviation (updated) CA projected/ cyclically- CA norm CGER-like methodologies Macroeconomic balance External sustainability ES (NFA exlud. FDI) EBA Macroeconomic balance WHD staff model 1/ REER deviation (2012 AIV) NA NA Average Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ For details see "Current Account Imbalances: Can Structural Policies Make a Difference?" by Anna Ivanova, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=25750.0 IMF’s multilaterally consistent estimates suggest that Costa Rica’s REER is broadly in line with fundamentals both in the short term and relative to medium-term benchmarks. The macro balance approach in the External Balance Assessment (EBA) is estimated on the basis of existing fundamentals and desirable policies. It points to a sustainable cyclically-adjusted current account deficit of 5.4 percent of GDP, which is about 1¼ percentage point larger than the actual cyclically-adjusted deficit of 4.2 percent, implying and undervaluation of 4¾ percent. Identified policy gaps are a significant contributor to Costa Rica’s relatively large estimated current account norm, in particular health expenditures which are higher than the world average. The macro balance approach in the CGER methodologies (which rely on medium term fundamentals) points to an estimated REER undervaluation of barely less than 1 percent. The CGER benchmark external sustainability approach, on the other hand, finds a moderate overvaluation of 13¼ percent. However, in order to interpret appropriately these estimates, the Page 9 COSTA RICA Box 1. Costa Rica: External Stability Assessment (concluded) significant proportion of FDI in Costa Rica’s total external liabilities should be taken into account. Thus, if FDI is excluded from NFA, an undervaluation of little less than 6 percent is assessed. The WHD staff model is based on a current account regression that is similar to the CGER macro balance approach, but includes an additional variable capturing the speed of aging, the youth dependency ratio instead of population growth, changes in oil price for oil producers instead of the oil balance, and a measure of trade openness. This method suggests the REER is broadly in line with fundamentals, with an undervaluation of about 1½ percent, in line with EBA estimates. In staff’s view, the macro-balance-type approaches—which all point to a small undervaluation—are most reliable, while a simple average across the different reliable methodologies implies virtually no over- or under- valuation. Given model uncertainty and standard errors, staff concludes that Costa Rica’s REER is broadly in line with fundamentals. Nevertheless, there are some signs of competitiveness problems. In contrast to the other countries in the region, Costa Rica has gained market share over the past decade. Nonetheless, further steps to improve competiveness may be needed. Costa Rica lost five positions in the 2015 Doing Business Survey partly driven by a dteterioration in the “starting a business” category where the country lost ten positions. Moreover, according to the Global Competitiveness Index, inadequate infrastructure, difficulty in accessing finance, and concerns over inefficient government spending weigh on the country’s competitiveness. The achievements in containing public spending of 2011 came to a halt in 2012–2013, with public debt continuing to climb (Figure 4) The efforts to restrain government outlays, mainly through capital expenditure cuts in 2011, were undermined by the rising transfers and interest bill in 2012–2013. While expenditures continued climbing, revenues stagnated. As a result, the central government (CG) deficit increased by 1¼ percentage points of GDP in 2012–13 to 5½ percent of GDP and debt reached 36 percent of GDP in 2013. The new government acknowledges the need for fiscal consolidation and is developing a strategy focused on strengthening revenue. After nullification of the 2012 tax reform by the Supreme Court due to procedural irregularities, the previous administration prepared a roadmap with measures yielding a potential adjustment of about 3½ percent of GDP over five years, broadly in line with previous staff recommendations to ensure long-term sustainability. However, no action was taken before the elections. The new administration, which took office in May 2014, has formulated a consolidation proposal of its own, initially focused on reducing tax evasion and a few exemptions. In this connection, a new draft anti-tax evasion law, which includes measures to reduce income tax expenditures as well as strengthen tax control, was submitted to Congress but the potential impact on revenues from its administrative provisions remains unclear. Since then, a more comprehensive plan has been developed (¶21). Domestic monetary and financial conditions are broadly neutral. Following a substantial increase in domestic interest rates, driven by large government borrowing and buoyant private sector credit demand in 2012, financial conditions eased in early 2013 as the government reduced reliance on domestic financing with Eurobond placements (Figure 5). However, interest rates started rising again in the Monetary and Financial Conditions Index (Percentage points of y-o-y real GDP growth) Overall FCI Real GDP growth (rhs) S S S S S S S Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Page 10 second half of 2013, as global financial conditions tightened. A broad-based index (FCI) developed by staff (featuring the influence on economic activity of interest rates, REER, house prices, equity prices, VIX, U.S. interest rate) suggests that financial conditions were neither propelling nor dragging GDP growth earlier in 2014, even before the latest policy rate raise (AN 5). At the same time, growth of credit to the private sector, excluding the impact on the stock of FX credit from the devaluation of the colón, has moderated somewhat in H2. Nonetheless, credit growth, supported by a generally healthy financial system (¶9), remains robust and consistent with continued benign financial deepening. Credit composition shifted away from foreign currency loans, while, conversely, deposits moved towards foreign currency in the wake of XR depreciation. Private Sector Credit Growth Adjusted for Exchange Rate Depreciation (Percent, y-o-y) National Currency Foreign Currency Total b F g t O b F g t O Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Deposits by Currency Denomination (Share as a percent of total) Local currency Foreign currrency Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. The financial system appears sound, though dollarization continues to be a source of vulnerability. Capital is well above regulatory requirements (Figure 5). Liquidity indicators are generally robust, albeit the loan-to-deposit ratio has been rising since mid-2013 and exceeds 100 percent. Non-performing loans have remained manageable. Profitability declined slightly and remains below that of regional peers. Reliance on foreign funding has increased in the past few years (Figure 5), though banks continue to have a long FX position. Staff estimates suggest that intensification of sovereign and banking strains in advanced countries would not have a large direct impact on credit in Costa Rica (Figure 5 and AN 2). Stress test exercises conducted by bank supervisors yield similar results. Nevertheless, a large depreciation of the colón may impact asset quality, given unhedged liability dollarization of households and corporations. Staff analysis indicates, however, that risks from currency and maturity mismatches are limited and concentrated in the non-financial public and financial sectors (AN 7). The Impact of 2014 Depreciation on Net Foreign Exchange Position of the Banks/Private Sector (Percent) Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. 1/ For non-financial private sector, includes FX bank credit and deposits of non-financial corporations and households. Impact of 2014 depreciation (7.8 percent) End-2013 Non-financial private sector 1/ Percent of bank capital Percent of GDP Percent of GDP Banks Page 11 COSTA RICA Financial Soundness Indicators (in percent) 1/ Costa Rica Guatemala El Salvador Honduras Dominican Republic Nicaragua 2/ Panama CAPDR 3/ LA6 4/ Regulatory Capital to Risk- Weighted Assets Capital to Assets Ratio Nonperforming Loans to Total Loans Ratio Return on Assets Return on Equity Net Open Position in Foreign Exchange to Capital 9.1* N/A N/A 15.1* 10.2* 1.8* 2.3** 21.9* 15.0*** N/A Source: FSI Tables, April 2014, IMF, http://fsi.imf.org 1/ As of December 2013, unless noted otherwise * As of June 2013; ** As of October 2013; *** Chile is as of November 2013; N/A, not available 2/ Nicaragua data are from national authorities. 3/ Comprises Costa Rica, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, and Panama. 4/ Comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay