Staff commended the authorities for their achievements in lowering inflation and endorsed their decision to further lower the target range. The central bank’s monetary policy has succeeded in preventing any durable deviations from the target range since 2009 and anchoring inflation expectations to the center of the 3-5 percent target range introduced in 2014. Based on this, the staff supported the central bank’s decision to take advantage of the recent sharp decline in inflation to revise the target range to 2-4 percent, in line with average inflation of trading partners. At the same time, staff emphasized, this move should be accompanied by fiscal consolidation to prevent the risk that an excessively tight monetary policy might be needed to contain inflation within the target range. The authorities have made steady progress toward full-fledged inflation targeting, but additional steps would be useful. The mission underlined that removal in early 2015 of the legal constraint to exchange rate flexibility posed by the XR band is a milestone toward establishing inflation as the undisputed anchor of monetary policy and lowering XR pass-through to inflation. It also acknowledged that the authorities’ preference for maintaining a significant role for active XR management, with an FX intervention rule aimed both at averting excessive volatility and at countering unwarranted deviations from medium-term fundamentals, is understandable, in light of the large financial dollarization. However, staff advised that a gradual, contained increase in the flexibility of the exchange rate, in line with the stated policies of the central bank, would be important to further strengthen the credibility of the inflation-targeting framework, as well as to enhance the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber and make market participants more cognizant of Page 26 two-way risks in exchange markets, promoting the development and use of hedging facilities and the reduction of foreign currency mismatches, while more generally discouraging dollarization. The latter should also be pursued with the tightening of macro- prudential norms (¶28). Moreover, the mission questioned whether the lack of transparency of the triggers for the FX-intervention-rule aimed at curbing volatility might not, under circumstances less favorable than those presently prevailing (¶4), undermine confidence in the full subordination of XR management objectives to the inflation target. The central bank agreed in principle, but emphasized that allowing more XR flexibility and more transparency about the intervention policy should proceed in parallel with the transfer of all FX transactions to the open market to make the XR less prone to speculative moves. Staff saw merit in deepening the FX market, thereby facilitating higher XR flexibility. Fostering growth of the underdeveloped secondary market for government securities, including through use of standardized simple instruments with conventional maturities, was also considered desirable to reinforce the effectiveness of monetary policy and enhance resilience to external financial shocks.