There was agreement that economic conditions call for a policy mix characterized by the start of fiscal tightening and continuation of a supportive monetary policy. The authorities appropriately intend to begin a gradual fiscal adjustment in 2016 (¶s16, 20). With output below potential and zero inflation, a continued accommodative monetary policy stance consistent with bringing inflation back to the target range will help offset the small contractionary impact of the tighter budgetary stance in the short term. Indeed, the authorities are pursuing a sizable reduction in the deficit in 2016 as part of a gradual path toward fiscal sustainability. Although the 2016 budget envisaged the overall and primary deficits to edge up to 6½ and 3¼ percent of GDP respectively in a passive scenario, as a result mainly of constitutionally-mandated rises in education outlays and continued increases in interest payments, the government has submitted to Congress bills that could result in a correction of about ¾ percent of GDP relative to the budget. In staff’s view, this correction, as part of a policy mix that takes into account the cyclical position of the economy (¶20), would be suitable. Officials were also adamant that it will be critical to implement these measures as part of a comprehensive package that delivers the total budgetary consolidation measures of 3¾ percent of GDP needed to stabilize debt over the medium-term (¶s19 and 20 ). Adjusted for targets in the medium-term framework (published together with the budget law) that have generally been more aligned with the authorities’ intended fiscal stance. Page 21 The authorities concurred that the current expansionary monetary stance is broadly adequate. Headline inflation was negative and core inflation was below the lower bound of the 3-5 percent target range during most of 2015. Inflation is projected to return to the center of the new 2- 4 percent target range by end-2016, while output remains below potential. Thus, the monetary stance—with 350 basis points in cumulative policy rate cuts to 1¾ percent, well below the estimated neutral rate of 5 percent—is appropriately expansionary (AN III). While transmission of the stimulus has been slow (¶9), domestic financial conditions are expected to gradually reflect the monetary easing, which, together with continued credit growth at a pace consistent with healthy financial deepening, should support the return of economic activity to its potential level over the medium term and of inflation within the target range in the near term (¶11). At the same time, it was noted that, if signs emerge whereby price pressures threaten to drive inflation above the mid-point of the new target range and jeopardize the still-very- recent anchoring of inflation expectations, taking into account the lags in monetary policy transmission, the central bank ought to start reversing the easing cycle. This consideration is reinforced by the prospective upward normalization of global interest rates, which could induce depreciation pressures. Neutral Interest Rate for Costa Rica. Latest Estimates QPM Model Average Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Notes: 1/ All units expressed as percent points unless otherwise stated. 2/ (bps): Basis points Expected Inflation Dic-2016Actual Monetary Policy RateMethod 1/Neutral Real Interest Rate (NRIR)Neutral Nominal Interest Rate (NNIR)Nominal Monetary Policy GAP (bps) 2/2.45.4368Uncovered Interest Parity1.64.6283Expected-Inflation Augmented Taylor RuleForward Looking Monetary Model1.84.8301General Equilibrium Model2.65.63811.44.42651.94.9320 nd Page 22