Officials acknowledged that limited progress has been made in implementing pending recommendations from the 2008 FSAP update (Annex 1) Advances have been slow, largely due to a crowded legislative agenda. In particular, legislation aimed at empowering the Superintendence of Financial Institutions to conduct consolidated supervision, providing adequate protection to bank supervisors, and strengthening bank resolution procedures has been stalled in Congress for 8 years. The authorities are preparing new proposals to replace the old draft laws but the time-frame for their completion and the degree of alignment of the new laws with the 2008 FSAP update recommendations is not clear. The authorities noted, in particular, that introduction of further legal protection for bank supervisors faces strong opposition and may run into court challenges. Staff endorsed progress made towards full implementation of risk-based supervision, but encouraged stepping up efforts to bring it up to best practices. The authorities concurred that gradual adoption of Basel III standards would further improve resilience of the financial system. The authorities believe that the regulatory and risk management frameworks would benefit from gradually firming up capital quality and increasing liquidity and capital requirements in line with Basel III standards. In particular, moving towards the introduction of Basel III definitions of capital, a capital conservation buffer, and a leverage ratio as well as incorporating market and operational risk capital requirements should be immediate priorities. Staff assessment suggests that only a few banks are not yet in full compliance with Basel III standards (AN 7) and that adopting Basel III capital requirements would have negligible growth impact in Costa Rica. Regional initiatives to upgrade cross-border consolidated supervision are important, but additional improvements are needed to alleviate lingering spillover risks. Effective supervision of cross-border financial operations is critical for stability, in particular because financial linkages within the region are not fully understood, owing in part to data limitations but also to legal restrictions on information sharing. Enhancing transnational monitoring is especially important for Costa Rica since its large conglomerate BCT operates in Panama. In this regard, officials emphasized the existence of a data sharing agreement with Panama, but staff underscored that cross-border consolidated supervision seems overall less advanced in Costa Rica compared to other countries in the region. Specifically, though it welcomed Costa Rica’s participation in the system of multilateral Page 25 MoUs and in the newly created Central American Council of Banking Supervisors, staff urged speedier implementation of actions recommended in the 2008 FSAP (¶26). Risk Based Supervision, 2013 LA5 o C s B h t w m o C f o x d I s P DOM CRI HND NIC GTM SLV PAN Source: Fund staff estimates based on country assessments. 1/Scale: 100 = compliant; 75 = largely compliant; 25 = materially non-compliant; 0 = non-compliant.