The joint view of staff and the authorities was that the economy will expand faster and inflation revert to the target range in 2016, with activity returning to potential over the medium term. Growth is expected to accelerate to 4¼ percent in 2016, slightly above potential growth, supported by: (i) dissipation of the one-off effects of Intel’s manufacturing withdrawal, (ii) further terms-of-trade improvement from the additional decline in international oil prices , (iii) domestic monetary stimulus—model simulations suggest that the monetary easing implemented in 2015 would boost GDP growth by ½–¾ percent of GDP in 2016, assuming full though gradual transmission from policy to lending rates—and (iv) sustained real credit expansion (estimated by staff to be consistent with projected GDP growth based on historical precedent). The output gap is anticipated to stabilize in 2016, and then mostly close over the medium term. Model simulations also suggest that the monetary stimulus, together with fading base effects from the oil price decline in 2015, would also bring inflation back to the center of the new 2–4 percent target range by end-2016. Inflation is then projected to hover around that value throughout 2017–21, buttressed by continued prudent monetary policy, while still allowing for continued monetary accommodation during the initial phase of the fiscal adjustment. The current account deficit will widen slightly to 4¼ percent of GDP over the medium-term, amid gradual recovery of international commodity prices, while partial fiscal consolidation—focused on revenue measures that increase the progressivity of the tax system and with some attendant confidence effects— is not expected to have a significant negative impact on domestic demand. The staff baseline scenario, which incorporates the measures already submitted to Congress that have a higher probability of being approved, contemplates fiscal consolidation measures of 2¼ percent of GDP over the medium term. The CG overall deficit would decline slightly to 5½ percent of GDP and the public debt ratio would reach 55 percent of GDP by 2021 (¶18 and AN VI). The authorities also concurred that an alternative scenario incorporating the fiscal adjustment necessary to restore debt sustainability would yield a more favorable outlook. According to staff analysis, a total correction of about 3¾ percent of GDP would stabilize public debt in the medium term within “safe levels,” with only moderate short-term output costs (¶19) . Growth would be only slightly lower in initial years and higher in outer years than in the baseline case. This is not only because of significant confidence effects but also of the more balanced macro policy mix allowed by tighter budgets consistent with restoring fiscal sustainability and reducing the current account deficit. The effect of Intel’s manufacturing closure on the growth rate of potential GDP is estimated to be less than ¼ percentage points. The withdrawal is not expected to have significant impact on fiscal revenue as Intel operated in the free trade zone. PP PP bp = PP = Page 16 Indeed, a looser monetary stance than in the baseline would be sufficient to achieve the inflation target over the medium-term, thereby also mitigating increases in market rates associated with the normalization of U.S. monetary policy. Costa Rica: Baseline Scenario, Partial Fiscal Adjustment 1/ Costa Rica: Full Fiscal Adjustment Scenario 1/ The authorities agreed that risks to the outlook were tilted to the downside. Downside risks stem from both global uncertainties and weaknesses in domestic fundamentals (as detailed in the Risk Assessment Matrix): External risks. The normalization of U.S. monetary policy presents moderately upside risks. Absent pronounced increases in market volatility, faster U.S. growth would have a positive impact on Costa Rican GDP, given strong trade ties, more than offsetting the negative influence of tighter global financial conditions. However, extreme bouts of market volatility — from a disorderly U.S. monetary policy normalization, stresses in emerging markets with high corporate leverage (including in FX), or heightened global geopolitical risks—could inflict cc ¼ cc dd ½ Page 17 serious damage, especially given Costa Rica’s weak fiscal position, bank reliance on foreign funding, and domestic credit dollarization, with associated exposures to interest rate and exchange rate risks, the latter evident only in the event of a large depreciation (¶26 and AN I). Conversely, if the nominal effective exchange rate of the colón continues to appreciate in line with the U.S. dollar, competitiveness vis-à-vis other trading partners would be negatively affected. In addition, deeper-than-expected slowdowns in the rest of the world could hamper Costa Rica’s growth, both in the short term—as the credit cycle matures in key emerging markets—and in the medium term, reflecting structurally weaker growth in advanced countries that have not fully addressed crisis legacies. At the same time, model simulations of the effect of slowdowns in foreign demand suggest that Costa Rica is less vulnerable to adverse developments in key emerging markets, including China and Brazil, than in the U.S., consistent with relative trade ties (AN VIII). In addition, the fact that Costa Rica does not have a significant offshore sector like other countries in the Central America- Caribbean region, and given also comparatively limited anti-money-laundering-compliance concerns (¶31), the country appears less vulnerable to de-risking strategies by global banks including loss of correspondent banking services. Risks from energy prices are balanced, with increased volatility possibly deriving from geopolitical tensions weighing on the downside, while lower-than-anticipated prices would have moderately positive effects. Real and Financial Spillovers The authorities and the financial community confirmed that any requests for additional information on AML/CFT procedures and readiness from correspondent banks had been satisfactorily met and that there had not been any loss of correspondent accounts. Moreover, domestic banks had remained active in monitoring possible AML/CFT activity, as demonstrated by a recent case currently under investigation raised by one of the public banks. z H W ill z Page 18 Domestic risks. The persistence of large fiscal deficits and the ensuing rapid rise in the public debt ratio in a passive scenario where political support for budget consolidation falls short, could render the economy vulnerable to sudden changes in financial market conditions. Also, large government gross financing requirements could lift domestic interest rates, weighing on private investment and growth. Expectations of a pick-up in interest rates driven by the government short-term financing needs are already encouraging maintenance of excess liquidity in banks, which also limits the transmission of the monetary stimulus to lending rates—model simulations suggest that if pass-through of the policy rate cuts continued to be hindered by these concerns, the short-term boost to growth from monetary stimulus would be reduced by half (¶11 and AN I). Given low profitability and heavy dollarization of the banking system, financial stability could also be jeopardized by substantial currency depreciation, mainly through higher NPLs (¶26, AN I and II). Costa Rica: Passive Scenario 1/ cc 2. Inward spillover risks 3. Credit risks4. Market andliquidity risks5. Monetary andfinancial conditions 6. Risk appetite 1. Macroeconomicrisks 2014Q2 2015Q3 Source: Fund staff estimates. Costa Rica: Financial Stability Map bp Page 19 Source of Risks 1. Slower growth in advanced and/or emerging economies. 2. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions, Costa Rica: Risk Assessment Matrix Overall Level of Concern (Scale—high, medium, or low) Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Low/Medium/High Medium/High Sharper-than-expected global slowdown in the short- term, triggered by significant China slowdown (Low in the short-term, Medium thereafter), or turning credit cycle in EMs (Medium). Protracted period of slower growth in advanced (High) and emerging economies (Medium) would reduce growth in Costa Rica, in particular, if growth in the U.S. is negatively affected. Impact of weaker emerging markets growth in the short- or long-term would be moderate, as long as U.S. growth was relatively unaffected (Medium). Protracted period of weaker-than-expected growth in the U.S. would lower export demand and significantly weigh on activity and tax revenues. A shock could have a more severe impact than in 2008-09, as fiscal buffers have been drawn down (High). Surges in global financial market volatility— triggered While orderly UMP exit with stronger U.S. growth in Medium/High High/Medium by geopolitical tensions, or revised market expectations on UMP exit/emerging market fundamentals —would reduce capital flows to Costa Rica, lead to an increase in cost of government financing, as well as potentially an increase in cost of funding for the private sector (Medium). Surge in U.S dollar prompted by improving U.S. economic prospects versus the rest of the world (High). tandem with higher U.S. rates would on net be beneficial for Costa Rica, a decline in capital flows to emerging markets under more disorderly scenarios could disrupt foreign credit lines and reduce banking sector liquidity. If markets reassess more negatively fiscal risks in Costa Rica, the cost of external government and private sector financing could increase sharply, negatively affecting public debt dynamics and growth (High). If the NEER continues to appreciate in line with the dollar, competitiveness vis-à-vis de rest of the world would be negatively affected. Conversely, if the local currency depreciated, the private sector (with negative foreign exchange positions) and banks would be negatively affected (through higher credit risks on unhedged borrowers, despite banks’ long FX positions) (Medium). 3. Dislocation in capital and labor flows. Medium/High Medium Reduced financial services by global/regional banks, including loss of correspondent banking services (Medium). Increased volatility due to security dislocations in the Middle East, Africa, and Europe, leading to sharp rise in oil price volatility (High). Could curtail cross-border payments, trade finance, and remittances. Volatile oil prices could result in adverse changes in terms of trade, increase inflation, and be a drag on growth. 4. Sustained decline in energy prices. High Low The recent fall in oil prices could persist and deepen, Persistently low oil prices would improve Costa Rica’s with supply factors reversing only gradually. terms of trade and counterbalance inflationary pressures, potentially yielding a modest boost to growth prospects. High High 5. Worse-than- anticipated impact from persistently high fiscal deficits, or higher deficits than projected in the baseline scenario. Lack of fiscal consolidation prospects may hurt confidence. Continued expenditure pressure and lack of tax reform could increase the fiscal deficit and public debt more than projected in the baseline scenario, which already envisages a rapid build-up of public debt. Lower confidence or a higher government financing requirement could raise domestic interest rates further and reduce investment and growth. Lower growth or a higher fiscal deficit would exacerbate fiscal sustainability risks, increasing the economy’s vulnerability and reducing the government’s ability to respond to adverse shocks. Alternatively, even if confidence remained strong and financing were available, a looser fiscal stance could result in overheating. Page 20 Costa Rica: Risk Assessment Matrix (concluded) 6. Larger than anticipated impact from INTEL withdrawal Low Low/Medium INTEL’s withdrawal and external competition weighs down on FDI and leads to an increase in unemployment and a reduction in productivity growth as the enterprises with a more sophisticated export base close. An unsustainable fiscal position may exacerbate these risks. Depending on the size of the reduction in FDI flows, there may be low to moderate impact on short-term growth, due to lower capital accumulation and productivity growth. The impact on potential growth, however, is likely to be limited since Costa Rica has strong institutions and a well-educated workforce. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path discussed in this report (which is the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of the staff). The RAM reflects staff's views on the source of risks and overall level of concerns as of the time of discussions with the authorities. The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding this baseline. In case the baseline does not materialize.