The authorities acknowledge that currency mismatches in the private sector pose the key risk to financial stability. Staff noted that Costa Rica’s current level of credit and broader financial development is well below the threshold beyond which risks to stability outweigh the benefits from the positive impact on growth (AN IV). In particular, the current pace of overall credit expansion, not high by historical standards, seems consistent with continued healthy financial deepening. Moreover, a top-down stress test conducted by staff depicts a sound banking sector that could absorb a range of sizable shocks (AN II). However, large dollarization of bank loans was jointly identified as a serious and intensifying concern. Indeed, notwithstanding the overall long FX position of the banking system, a large depreciation of the colón may impact asset quality, given unhedged FX liabilities in large segments of the household and corporate sectors. In particular, staff pointed out that, according to the stress tests, the deterioration of bank capitalization, and related contingent liabilities for the sovereign, could be substantial (AN II). As for the macro impact, general equilibrium model simulations suggest that loan impairment and implied lower credit growth from, say, a twenty percent depreciation could reduce GDP growth by about 1½ percent over the medium-term (AN I). 5% depreciation and 25bp increase in MRP 20% depreciation and 300bp increase in MRP Effect on Real GDP of Adverse Shocks on FX and NPL (Percent difference from baseline) Sources: IMF staff calculation based on RES FSGM Note: NPL= Non Performing Loans; MRP= Market Risk Premium Page 27 High net foreign liabilities of banks, growing household leverage, and sovereign exposures represent other vulnerabilities of the financial sector. After a period of large bank borrowing abroad incurred to fund the rapid growth of FX credit to residents, Costa Rica is among the countries in the region with highest reliance on foreign bank funding, raising concerns about rollover risks. Indeed, staff analysis, based on network model simulations of spillovers from asset quality and capital shocks in international banks, suggests that reduced foreign bank funding could lead to a significant reduction in credit in Costa Rica (Panel 5 and AN II). While the increase in private sector debt has been limited compared to other emerging markets, in Costa Rica it has been mainly concentrated in the household sector, and officials are aware that rising household leverage, not least via credit by non-bank commercial entities, could also endanger asset quality. Finally, it was observed that, though starting from the low levels prevailing before the global crisis, continuing brisk accumulation of holdings of government debt by banks, boosted by the large fiscal deficits, is an additional hazard, particularly in an environment where, over the medium term, interest rates are likely to increase. Although staff recognized that, based on its analysis, banks could currently sustain losses from a significant spike in interest rates on domestic government bonds without capital falling below regulatory requirements (AN II), it also expressed concern that risks from mark-to-market losses on bank exposures to the sovereign will mount without adequate fiscal consolidation. Supervisors recognized these risks and are taking positive steps to gradually reduce them. Staff welcomed the recent increase in capital risk-weightings on FX loans to unhedged borrowers and the extension of reserve requirements to medium- and long-term foreign bank borrowing (in addition to the existing requirement on short-term foreign borrowing). Officials explained that additional measures to further reduce vulnerabilities are currently under consideration. These include: (i) stricter provisioning on FX loans to unhedged borrowers and household debt with income-to-debt service ratios above 30 percent; (ii) counter-cyclical provisioning; and (iii) higher risk-weightings for household mortgages with high loan-to-value and income-to-debt service ratios. The mission deemed that these steps were appropriate, but it was not possible yet to determine whether they would be sufficient to achieve substantial reductions in credit dollarization and rollover risks. Staff recommended that further tightening of provisioning on FX bank lending and of reserve requirements on FX bank borrowing (the latter requiring Congressional action) should be contemplated, if there is no evidence of a reduction in banks’ FX exposures within a reasonable time frame. Additionally, the coverage of the credit bureau should be According to the October 2015 Global Financial Stability Report, private sector debt of emerging markets increased from just over 60 percent of GDP in 2005 to almost 125 percent of GDP in 2014. HH HH X X nd Page 28 extended to loans to households granted by non-bank entities to better assess household leverage and preserve asset quality. Staff urged speedier implementation of the pending 2008 FSAP recommendations. Key points (Annex I) include empowering the Superintendence of Financial Institutions to conduct consolidated supervision, providing legal protection to bank supervisors in line with international best practice, strengthening bank resolution procedures, and broadening the supervisory perimeter to non-bank financial institutions, all of which require new legislation. The authorities remarked that advances remain slow due to the crowded legislative agenda, but also stressed that introduction of further legal protection for bank supervisors faces strong opposition and is constitutionally controversial. Staff commended the progress made towards full implementation of risk-based supervision, although efforts to bring it up to best standard should be stepped up. The FSAP update tentatively planned for 2017 will allow for a more thorough assessment of the financial system and determine the need for additional measures. Officials reiterated their support for gradual adoption of Basel III standards. Staff concurred that it would further improve resilience of the financial system and thus welcomed the recent enactment of the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio. The regulatory and risk management frameworks would also greatly benefit from introducing Basel III definitions of capital, a capital conservation buffer, and a leverage ratio. Staff analysis shows that this could be accomplished without significant detrimental effects on growth. It was agreed that further improvements in the effective supervision of cross-border financial operations are critical for stability. Such a requirement has become more urgent because financial linkages within the region have been growing, though they are not yet fully understood, owing in part to data limitations but also to legal restrictions on information sharing. Enhancing transnational monitoring is especially important for Costa Rica, since conglomerate BCT operates in Panama and regional integration plays an important role in the transmission of financial shocks (AN I). In this respect, staff welcomed Costa Rica’s participation in the system of multilateral MoUs and in the Central American Council of Banking Supervisors. In addition, strengthening the AML/CFT supervision of cross-border financial operations and implementing the recommendations of the GAFILAT mutual evaluation report would assist in safeguarding the financial sector against illicit financial flows, notably to and from higher-risk jurisdictions. Swift adoption at the national level of the relevant recommendations in the WHD Cluster Surveillance Report on Financial Integration in CAPDR (Annex II) and strengthening of the national institutional framework in support of the medium-term Regional Macroprudential Policies Project for CAPDR would also help identify likely spillovers and assess joint risks. GAFILAT is the FATF-style regional body of which Costa Rica is a member. Page 29 Note: See Annex I for details on the status of implementation. Costa Rica. Summary of Stress Test Results mm (cid:160)(cid:160) ili (cid:160)(cid:160) pp (cid:160)(cid:160) pp unh dg q (cid:160)(cid:160) (cid:160)(cid:160) pp q cc (cid:160)(cid:160) pp (cid:160)(cid:160) nn (cid:160)(cid:160) (cid:160)(cid:160) (cid:160)(cid:160) hn q (cid:160)(cid:160) ee All BanksState OwnedDomestic PrivateForeign Summary of Results Solvency Pre-shock CAR17.018.012.215.9Impact of (percentage points of the original RWA)Increase in NPLs 1/-1.7-1.7-1.6-1.8Increase in interest rates 2/-0.1-0.3-0.50.3Exchange rate depreciation 3/-2.2-2.2-2.4-2.2Post-shock CAR (percent of post-shock RWA)13.113.97.812.2Change in CAR (all fundamental shocks)-4.0-4.1-4.4-3.7Impact of interbank contagionPost-contagion CAR13.113.97.812.2Post-contagion CAR if profits used for defense13.514.58.112.6 Liquidity 4/ Liquid assets/total assetsPre-shock22.622.319.923.4 Post-shock (after 5 days)4.02.44.87.1Liquid assets/short-term liabilities0.00.00.00.0Pre-shock69.963.580.784.2Post-shock (after 5 days)36.316.7106.9117.1Source: SUGEF; and IMF staff estimates.1/ Assumes an increase in NPLs of 8 percent of performing loans; and a 25 percent provisioning rate. The sectoral shock to NLP assumes that 6 and 10 percent of the loan portfolio to the construction and trade sectors respectively become non-performing. 2/ Assumes a 3.5 percentage points nominal interest rate increase.3/ Assumes a 14 percent depreciation of the FX rate, leading to 6 percent of FX loans becoming non-performing, and a 50 percent provisioning rate. 4/ Assumes a 10 and 8 percent per day withdrawal of demand deposits in domestic and foreign currency respectively; and a 5 and 3 percent per day withdrawal of time deposits in domestic and foreign currency respectively. Page 30 Figure 1. Costa Rica: Stress Test Results CostaRica: Stress Test Results Source: SUGEF, and IMF staff estimates. Note:The Credit Ris k Shock assumes an increase in NPLs of 8 percent of performing loans; and a 25 percent provisioningrate. The Interest Rat e Shock assumes a 3.5 percentage points nominal interest rate increase. The FX Shock assumes a 14percent depreciation of the FX rate, leading to 6 percent of FX loans becoming NPL, and a 50 percent provisioning rate. The Liquidity Shock assumes a 10and 8percent per day withdrawal ofdemand depositsin domestic and foreign currencyrespectively; and a 5 and 3 percent per day withdrawal of time deposits indomestic and foreign currency respectively. 0510152005101520All BanksState OwnedDomesticPrivateForeign Pre-Shock System-wide shock Sectoral shock REDIT ISK : Capital Adequacy Ratio (Percent of Risk-Weighted-Assets) All BanksState OwnedDomesticPrivateForeign Pre-Shock 10 years average ROA (Percent of Pre-Shock Assets) All BanksState OwnedDomesticPrivateForeign Pre-Shock 10 years average ROE (Percent of Pre-Shock Equity) 05101520253035SimulatedSystem-wideCAR<108 banksCAR<1050% marketshare<10 EVERSE TRESS EST : NPL Increase for Simulated Scenarios (Percent of Performing Loans) All BanksState OwnedDomesticPrivateForeign Pre-Shock Post-Shock N. of liquid banks IQUIDITY ISK : Liquid Assets/Total Assets (Percent, after 5 days) All BanksState OwnedDomesticPrivateForeign Pre-Shock Post-Shocks Post-Contagion OMBINED HOCK : Capital Adequacy Ratio (Percent of Risk-Weighted-Assets) 1520All BanksState OwnedDomestic Private Foreign NII Repricing NII + Repricing NTEREST ISK : Capital Adequacy Ratio (Percent of Risk-Weighted-Assets) All BanksState OwnedDomesticPrivateForeign Direct Indirect Direct + Indirect FX R ISK : Capital Adequacy Ratio (Percent of Risk-Weighted-Assets) Page 31