The authorities appropriately intend to begin fiscal adjustment in 2015, thereby buttressing macro-economic stability and making a head start towards long-term sustainability. There was agreement that budgetary adjustment in 2015 would contribute to mitigate risks of higher inflation, widening external imbalances, and possible adverse financial market reactions. It would also represent a first critical step to reduce the sustainability gap (¶18). Although the 2015 budget passed by Parliament envisages, in the absence of measures, a further increase in the CG deficit to about 7 percent of GDP, the government plans a correction of about 1¼ percent of GDP in 2015 (as noted, most of the supporting measures, including VAT reform and cuts in transfers (¶21) are at an advanced stage of elaboration and are included in the baseline). In staff’s view, this correction would be suitable (¶19 and AN 3), taking into consideration inflation and fiscal sustainability concerns as well as the cyclical position of the economy. It will be critical, though, to implement on a timely basis the planned measures, including speedy adoption of the VAT reform and freeze in real salaries (¶21). There was agreement that the monetary stance is adequate but policy should remain nimble to guard against the risk of higher-than-anticipated inflation (¶3) At 5.25 percent, the monetary policy rate is close to the estimated neutral rate of 5.0–5.1 percent, implying a broadly appropriate stance, given output close to potential. This conclusion is also supported by indications of neutral domestic financial conditions (¶8), and, as the authorities emphasized, by moderating credit growth generally consistent with benign financial deepening. However, staff argued that higher inflation risks prevail due to: (i) higher-than-estimated pass-through and second round effects from currency depreciation; (ii) possibly faster U.S. growth; (iii) bigger-than-assumed regulated price hikes, though these are now more unlikely given recent declines in oil prices. These risks are not expected to be outweighed by larger-than-anticipated oil price drop or slowdown due to Intel withdrawal. Accordingly, staff urged the BCCR to stand ready to raise rates if inflation does not decline as anticipated, particularly if it persists above the upper limit of the target range. The authorities reiterated their readiness to adjust the policy rate depending on inflation developments. Page 16 Costa Rica: Neutral Interest Rate Expected Inflation Mar-2015 Actual Monetary Policy Rate Method 1/ Neutral Real Interest Rate (NRIR) Neutral Nominal Interest Rate (NNIR) Nominal Monetary Policy GAP (bps) 2/ Uncovered Interest Parity Expected-Inflation Augmented Taylor Rule 2006-2014 sample 2008-2014 sample General Equilibrium Model 2006-2014 sample 2008-2014 sample Average 2006-2014 sample 2008-2014 sample Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Notes: 1/ All units expressed as percent points unless otherwise stated. 2/ (bps): Basis points