The authorities recognized that current fiscal trends are unsustainable in the long term. Without policy action, the CG deficit would be above 9 percent of GDP and debt rise above 60 percent by 2019. Even in the baseline scenario, which incorporates a fiscal adjustment of 2¼ percent of GDP, the CG deficit would persist at about 5¾ percent of GDP by 2019, owing to a mounting interest bill and constitutionally-mandated education spending. Correspondingly, CG debt would grow to 51 percent of GDP by 2019 (from 36 percent of GDP at end-2013), further raising vulnerabilities and potentially eroding the underpinnings of macroeconomic stability. Costa Rica: Passive Scenario Without Measures 1/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP growth (percent) Output gap (percent of potential GDP) CPI (percent, end-of-period) Current account balance Central government fiscal balance Structural primary balance Structural overall balance Central government debt Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ This scenario does not include any fiscal adjustment measures, while reflecting the underlying deterioration in the primary balance mainly driven by the constitutionally mandated increase in education expenditure. Page 17 COSTA RICA The authorities also acknowledged that the pension system’s financial position has to be strengthened in the long run. The pension plan run by the Social Security agency (CCSS) and those of the judiciary and the teachers are actuarially imbalanced. They are projected to turn a cash deficit over the long term due to system maturation and population aging (AN 3). Preliminary projections suggest that an adjustment equivalent to about 1½ percent of GDP would be required to ensure actuarial equilibrium of all pension systems for the next 100 years. The authorities indicated that a joint study (by the CCSS and the Superintendence of Pensions) to be released in 2015 would determine the size the imbalance. There was agreement on the amount of fiscal adjustment needed to stabilize the public debt ratio. In staff’s estimates, fiscal retrenchment amounting to about 3¾ percent of GDP over the medium-term would suffice to stabilize the public debt ratio below levels which are shown to pose risks for macro stability in emerging markets (Annex II). The authorities concurred and intend to consolidate public finances by about 4 percent of GDP over the medium term. The authorities also acknowledged that in the longer run further parametric adjustment would be needed to remedy the actuarial imbalance of the pension system (¶17)—including larger contributions, lower replacement rates, and higher retirement age. Page 18 Figure 1. Costa Rica: Long-Term Fiscal Sustainability (Percent of GDP) Central Government Primary Balance Baseline 1/ Gradual adjustment 2/ 3/ Immediate adjustment 2/ 4/ Central Government Overall Balance Baseline 1/ Gradual adjustment 2/ 3/ Immediate adjustment 2/ 4/ Central Government Debt Baseline 1/ Gradual adjustment 2/ 3/ Immediate adjustment 2/ 4/ Source: Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ This path is the baseline through 2019, with a constant primary balance thereafter. 2/ The immediate and gradual adjustment scenarios aim at closing the same initial sustainability gap with consolidation starting in 2015 in both scenarios. The debt stabilizing primary balance is calculated based on medium-term baseline projections of real interest and growth rates that are maintained constant over the projection period in line with the requirements of the optimization model (AN 3). The gap is then measured relative to the 2014 projected fiscal outturn. 3/ The gradual scenario assumes that the authorities place 90 percent weight on the growth objective. Impact of growth is based on fiscal multiplier of 0.3, with a self-correction parameter for the output gap of 0.5, implying that the effect on the output gap of a fiscal adjustment of 1 percent of GDP almost dissipates—is less than 0.1 percent of GDP—in the second year following the adjustment. 4/ The immediate adjustment scenario assumes that the full fiscal adjustment takes place in 2015 and has no impact on growth. Page 19 COSTA RICA Growth and Public Debt (Percent) The pace of fiscal consolidation should strike a balance between lowering the sustainability gap and limiting any adverse impact on growth. The authorities concurred that it would be appropriate to undertake about one third of the fiscal adjustment in 2015 followed by smaller steps in subsequent years. The proposed deficit reduction path would have only moderate output cost over the forecast period, even if fiscal consolidation were simultaneously undertaken by trading partners (AN 2). Staff cautioned against further postponing fiscal retrenchment, stressing that the longer the delay, the larger will be the improvement in the primary balance required to stabilize the public debt ratio. Officials were aware that failing to deliver on the fiscal consolidation plan would also increase the risk of an abrupt shift in investor sentiment and of acute financial market tensions, thus forcing a disorderly adjustment. Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Gradual adjustment scenarios based on model of fiscal adjustment based on authorities’ preferences for growth and fiscal objectives. Impact on real GDP growth of fiscal adjustment, 2015-19 Central government debt, 2019 (rhs) Baseline scenario 90% weight on 70% weight on growth 1/ growth 1/ Fiscal Contribution to Growth Under the Recommended Fiscal Path Change in the Fiscal Balance Total Growth Impact Of which: Domestic Effect Spillover Effect Change in the Fiscal Balance Total Growth Impact Of which: Domestic Effect Spillover Effect Costa Rica of which: - current year - carry over prev. year PPP weighted average Source: Fund staff estimates. A common stance was also reached on the broad composition of fiscal adjustment. The authorities agreed that about two-thirds of the needed adjustment (or 2½ percent of GDP) had to rely on revenue increases. The emphasis on revenue enhancement was considered appropriate given Costa Rica’s low revenue effort compared to other upper-middle-income countries. Moreover, the supporting measures identified by the government are advisable, though some important steps still need to be fleshed out. The authorities have readied a legislative proposal to broaden the base of the VAT to include services and basic goods (the latter at a reduced rate), but the bill to reform the income tax (by eliminating some exemptions and moving from schedular to global determination of the tax liability) has not been finalized yet. Most of the measures for reducing expenditures also have to be fully articulated. Staff acknowledged that major revenue gains may be accrued by reducing tax exemptions and other special treatments (e.g. to enlarge the base of the VAT), but stressed that the substantial budget consolidation required will also demand increases in tax rates over the medium term. Specifically, staff recommended raising the VAT rate from 13 to 15 percent Page 20 gradually and increasing marginal rates on higher-income brackets. The latter could also compensate for any regressive impact of hiking VAT rates. The authorities confirmed their willingness to raise the VAT rate in steps starting in 2016, consistent with the consolidation recommended by the staff. Tax Evasion Rates (Percent) VAT Personal income tax Avg. corp. income tax Corporate income tax Avg. VAT tax Avg. pers. income tax DOM ECU GTM CRI SLV PER ARG MEX CHL Sources: Corbacho, Fretes Cibils, and Lora (2013); CAF (2012); Cardoza (2012); Jiménez, Gómez Sabaini and Podestá (2010); Pecho, Peláez and Sánchez (2012); and Salim (2011). Tax Expenditure in Central America (Percent of GDP) Others Income VAT Total GTM (2011) HND (2012) DOM (2013) CRI (2012) NIC (2010) SLV (2009) Sources: WGTC; Sabatini, Pecho, Moran: Honduras, 2013; national authorities and Fund staff estimates. 'Los gastos tributarios en The authorities also considered important actions to strengthen tax compliance, including the draft anti-tax evasion law recently submitted to parliament. Staff agreed with the need to strengthen tax administration, but cautioned that yields from such initiatives are generally uncertain and far from immediate. The authorities expressed their commitment to expenditure tightening. In particular, they concurred that efforts should start in 2015 and concentrate on containing growth of current spending, especially of the wage bill and transfers, through modifying indexation to prevent automatic real salary increases and improving efficiency of the civil service, including through a partial employment freeze. This would also support desirable increases in growth-friendly capital spending, in line with authorities’ efforts to improve project execution. In this connection, staff cautioned on the need to contain risks of contingent liabilities and additional pressures on domestic financing resulting from new off-budget investment vehicles contemplated by the authorities. Staff estimates that the proposals at a more advanced stage of elaboration are likely to yield some 2¼ percent of GDP, as included in the baseline scenario (¶10). The remaining measures needed to generate the required total adjustment of 3¾ percent of GDP ought to be defined urgently, not least to obtain more reliable estimates of their impact. Page 21 COSTA RICA Costa Rica: Fiscal Consolidation Measures (In percent of GDP) Baseline scenario. Partial fiscal adjustment Full fiscal adjustment scenario Authorities' Staff plans assessment 1/ Additional adjustment 2/ Total adjustment Total adjustment Revenue Administrative measures 3/ Exemptions law 4/ VAT 5/ Income tax 6/ Expenditure Wages 7/ Transfers 8/ Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ The baseline scenario incorporates staff's assessment of measures in the authorities' fiscal plan that are at a more advanced stage of elaboration. Includes expenditure cuts equivalent to 0.3 percent of GDP, other cuts in transfers, a partial hiring freeze, broadening of the VAT base from the second half of 2015, a move towards global income tax, miscellaneous cuts in exemptions, and moderate gains from improvements in tax evasion. 2/ The full adjustment scenario includes additional measures in the authorities' plan that were at a less advanced stage of elaboration at the time of the Article IV mission. Includes measures as in the baseline scenario as well as measures to contain growth in the wage bill, and increases in the VAT rate and marginal income tax rates in outer years. 3/ Includes mainly effects of 2014 anti-tax evasion law. 4/ Includes measures envisaged in draft law that would reduce exemptions on income tax for cooperatives and public entities, as well as reinstate an excise on lottery sales. 5/ Baseline projection includes extending VAT coverage to services sector, with basic goods and private education and health taxed at preferential rate of 2 percent. Additional measures include gradual increase from 13 to 15 percent tax rate. 6/ Baseline projection includes move from schedular to global basis for income tax. Additional adjustment measures include gradual increase in marginal rates on higher income brackets. 7/ Baseline projection includes partial hiring freeze. Additional adjustment measures include freezing salaries in real terms. 8/ Baseline projection includes cuts in transfers in the 2015 budget. Additional measures include enforcement of the legal cap on pensions paid out of the budget. Costa Rica: Fiscal Consolidation Path (In percent of GDP) Total Adjustment Baseline Revenue Expenditure Additional adjustment Revenue Expenditure Source: Fund staff estimates. Total Page 22 In addition, most deficit-reducing measures require parliamentary approval, which is made difficult by a complex political situation. The new administration should take advantage of its high political capital to push forward reforms early in its mandate, not least to persuade the powerful public sector unions to accept sacrifices (the containment of wage growth in the public sector does not require parliamentary approval). Nevertheless, the government noted that it only has a minority representation in Congress, hence passage of several budget consolidation measures requires the cooperation of opposition parties. Lingering resentments from the bitter presidential campaign raise concerns about legislative approval of adjustment measures, notably the reforms of the VAT and income taxes. Nonetheless, there appears to be broad consensus across the political spectrum and society at large that fiscal retrenchment is needed. Thus, there may be scope for leveraging containment of public sector wages to bargain for revenue increases.