The authorities viewed current fiscal trends as unsustainable in the long term. Staff stressed that, without any policy action, the CG deficit would be above 9 percent of GDP and debt rise to almost 70 percent by 2021. Even in the baseline scenario, which incorporates a fiscal adjustment of 2¼ percent of GDP, the CG deficit would persist at about 5½ percent of GDP by 2021, owing to a mounting interest bill and constitutionally-mandated education spending. Correspondingly, CG debt would grow to 55 percent of GDP by 2021 (from 42½ percent of GDP at end-2015), further raising vulnerabilities and potentially eroding the underpinnings of macroeconomic stability. The government confirmed that a fiscal adjustment of almost 4 percent of GDP is needed to stabilize the public debt ratio. In staff’s estimates, budget retrenchment measures amounting to 3¾ percent of GDP over the medium-term would suffice to steady the share of public debt to GDP below levels which tend to weaken macro stability in emerging markets, while allowing for some desirable increases in growth-friendly capital spending (Annex III). The authorities agreed and are prepared to implement a fiscal consolidation package expected to gradually close this fiscal sustainability gap (¶21). To pace consolidation, the authorities aptly intend to maintain a balance between lowering the sustainability gap and limiting any adverse impact on growth. The front-loaded fiscal consolidation appropriately planned by the government, with somewhat less than two-thirds of the total adjustment in 2016–17 and smaller corrections in subsequent years, would have only moderate output cost over the forecast period (¶12 and AN VI). Staff underscored that further postponing fiscal retrenchment would be costly, since, the longer the delay, the larger will be the improvement in the primary balance required to stabilize the public debt ratio. The authorities had the same concern. They asked staff to explain publicly that failing to deliver on the fiscal consolidation plan would increase the risk of an abrupt shift in investor sentiment and of acute financial market tensions, thus forcing a disorderly adjustment. Costa Rica. Fiscal Consolidation Path (Percent of GDP) TotalTotal Adjustment0.81.61.00.10.10.13.8Baseline0.81.10.4---2.3Revenue0.41.00.3---1.7Expenditure0.40.10.0---0.6Additional Adjustment-0.60.70.10.10.11.5Revenue-0.30.5--0.8Expenditure-0.20.20.10.10.10.7Source: Fund staff estimates. Page 23 The authorities’ fiscal adjustment plans adequately focus on raising revenues, with a sizable contribution from expenditures, but full implementation is critical. The measures in the authorities’ plans broadly follow staff advice, including recommendations provided in past technical assistance by the Fund and other multilaterals. The government’s strategy envisions about 2½ percent of GDP in higher taxes, consistent with staff’s advice that about two-thirds of the adjustment should consist of increases in receipts, given Costa Rica’s low revenue effort compared to other upper-middle-income countries. VAT and income tax reforms would boost collections by slightly more than 2 percent of GDP over the medium-term, and other provisions—reduced exemptions, further amendments to the corporate income tax and anti-tax evasion measures—would generate almost ½ percent of GDP. The VAT reform envisages broadening the base to include services and a gradual increase in the rate from 13 to 15 percent, starting in 2017, as well as separate increases of taxes on sales of vehicles and real estate. The bill also foresees a radical narrowing of the basic goods basket, conditional on the establishment of a transfers system that would make the VAT reform broadly revenue-neutral for lower-income households. The income tax reform introduces additional marginal rates of 20 and 25 percent on higher-income brackets, unifies the rate on capital income at 15 percent, and subjects capital gains to tax. Furthermore, the authorities have already identified legislative changes—including to curtail growth of pensions paid out of the budget and transfers to decentralized entities—and administrative measures that would yield the 1¼ percent of GDP of cuts in current expenditures also required to fully close the sustainability gap. The authorities share staff’s view that only the full adjustment of 3¾ percent of GDP needed to stabilize the public-debt-to-GDP ratio would be adequate from a macro-economic perspective. Indeed, a partial fiscal adjustment as assumed in the baseline scenario—with tax reform proposals currently in Congress watered down and insufficient efforts to contain spending—would result in continued large fiscal deficits driven mainly by a mounting interest bill, and significant additional debt accumulation subject to important downside risks under less favorable macroeconomic conditions (¶11 and Annex III). This would further raise vulnerabilities and potentially erode the underpinnings of macroeconomic stability. The alternative full adjustment scenario assumes Congressional approval of all submitted measures, yielding 2¾ percent of GDP. Moreover, it includes administratively-determined H dd pp dd W Page 24 spending cuts that would contain the growth of current spending—mostly transfers and public sector wages—to keep it throughout the medium term below the expansion of nominal GDP. Costa Rica. Central Government. Fiscal Consolidation Measures (in percent of GDP) The government is considering steps to ensure durable commitment to contain expenditures, thus shoring up parliamentary support for fiscal consolidation. The executive power has a minority representation in Congress; hence approval of most budget consolidation measures requires the cooperation of opposition parties. Notwithstanding the broad consensus across the political and societal spectrum that fiscal retrenchment is needed, some opposition parties and influential lobbies have called for greater emphasis on lowering outlays. In this regard, bills currently under discussion to reform public employment conditions—thus preventing excessive automatic increases in current outlays—and a recently presented fiscal rule proposal—aimed at the preservation of government debt sustainability, broadly in line with staff advice though still ub tt dd II II W dg dd ee ili pp ill pp ee ili z tt tt Page 25 requiring greater specification of its key elements—are welcome (AN VI). An agreement is likely to require simultaneous advances on all aspects of the consolidation package. Despite promising moves toward a compromise, the process could still be derailed. The authorities agree that the pension system’s financial position also has to be strengthened in the long run. The pension plan run by the Social Security agency (CCSS) and the special regime for the judiciary are actuarially imbalanced. They are projected to turn a cash deficit over the long term due to system maturation and population aging. Preliminary projections suggest that an additional adjustment equivalent to about 1½ percent of GDP would be required at the general government level to ensure actuarial equilibrium of the CCSS for the next 50 years (AN VI). A study commissioned by the CCSS and the Superintendence of Pensions to be released in 2016 will determine the size the imbalance more precisely. The authorities have nevertheless already taken some measures, including the elimination of the early retirement option, and are considering increasing minimum contributions and gradually raising contribution rates over the medium-term above the scheduled increases already stipulated in 2005. Several legislative proposals currently in Congress also contemplate parametric adjustments to the special regime for the judiciary.