Discussions identified areas to strengthen further the monetary policy framework. Staff commended the authorities’ achievements in lowering inflation since the global crisis. Having posted double-digit inflation for almost 30 years, Costa Rica has maintained it within the BCCR target range of 4–6 percent since 2009 (the range was further reduced to 3–5 percent in 2014). However, the recent depreciation episode illustrated that inflation expectations are not well-anchored. Moreover, perceived exchange rate stability in the past few years has encouraged dollarization, building up vulnerabilities in the balance sheets of banks and the private sector. The FX intervention rule, which aims both to avert excessive volatility and counter excessive deviations from medium-term fundamentals, remains undisclosed. Staff noted that lack of transparency may undermine confidence in the subordination of XR management objectives to the inflation target. The authorities aim to move towards full-fledged inflation targeting, while maintaining a significant role for active XR management. Staff argued that allowing more XR flexibility would help establish inflation as the undisputed monetary anchor and lower XR pass-through to inflation. In particular, since appreciation pressures have now subsided, it is an opportune time for abandoning the XR band. More flexibility would enhance the role of the XR as a shock absorber and make market participants more cognizant of two-way risks in exchange markets, promoting the development and use of hedging facilities and the reduction of foreign currency mismatches, while more generally discouraging dollarization. The elimination of the band would not preclude the BCCR from engaging in FX market interventions to smooth out short-term sharp XR fluctuations and strengthen the NIR position as long as interventions do not jeopardize the inflation target. The authorities agreed in principle, but stressed the need to remain vigilant about the impact of XR movements on financial stability and inflation expectations given the high levels of dollarization and unhedged FX borrowing. Specifically, officials noted that other “inflation-targeting” central banks intervene frequently to stem excessive XR volatility and they are likely to follow this mold. The authorities were also cautious about making the intervention rule public due to the fear of facilitating speculation. Page 23 Table 1. Costa Rica: Extent of Preparedness for Transitioning to Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility Chile Orderly Exits Israel Poland (1984–99) (1985–2005) (1990–2000) Exits Under Pressure Brazil (1999) Czech Rep. (1996–97) Uruguay (2002) C O S T R C I Degree of preparedness Costa Rica (2014)  X      (futures) X X With the float Reasonably well prepared  X Reasonably well X X  X X X With the float Discretionary intervention Reasonably well prepared Not well prepared prepared      Ingredients of a Floating Regime I. FX Market Development Spots Markets Derivative Markets/Hedging Instruments Complementary Markets Interbank Money Market Securities Market II. III. FX Risk Management Capacity Alternative Monetary Policy Framework Monetary Policy Implementation Capacity IV. Intervention Strategy for a Floating Regime With the float    With the float Overall Preparedness Memo: Capital Account Liberalization Short-term Capital Inflows Liberalized Capital Ouflows Liberalized Derivative Transactions Liberalized Well prepared Well prepared Well prepared      Source: Otker-Robe and others (2007) and staff analysis Note: FX = foreign exchange. The years in parentheses refer to the period of transition to a full float Major boom one year before the float. Lagged behind compared to the foreign exchange markets. For maturities less than 270 days. The prudential framework was not in place to control the overall risk exposure of banks, with identified shortcomings mainly regarding the prudential regulation of banks' exposure to FX risk. Corporates in general (and banks) were making active use of the futures markets to hedge their exposures or to take speculative positions. Market participants were not accustomed to assessing, as a matter of routine, the FX risks posed by regular market volatility. For Chile, all controls were removed shortly before or with the float. For Brazil, controls were liberalized gradually during the 1990s (inflow controls of 1993-96 liberalized by 1999), with further liberalization for nonresident investments after the float. In the Czech Republic, most inflows and outflows had been liberalized by 1997, but certain inflow transactions (including financial derivatives) were liberalized in early 1999, following a transition period to phase out the remaining controls under the agreement with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), with full liberalization taking place in 2002, until which time certain transactions (including some selective derivatives operations and short-term portfolio and deposit transactions) had remained controlled. Spot market is relatively shallow and the central bank does not comprehensively collect information on spot transactions on regular basis. Derivatives market is unregulated. Hence, while there are no restrictions on derivatives transactions, it is not clear how the associated risks are assessed by the supervisor and how the derivatives market functions in practice. The interbank market is underdeveloped with low degree of market depth. The securities market is largely limited to primary market in government securities, secondary market in repos of government securities, and a very thin stock market. While the prudential framework to control the overall FX risk exposure of the banks as well as the measures to reduce FX risks is in place, it is somewhat obsolete. The private sector does not use derivatives to hedge their exposures on routine basis and market participants in general are not accustomed to assessing the FX risks posed by regular market volatility. After the depreciation episode in 2014, the CB introduced some measures to smooth volatility in the FX market, including new requisitions for the buying/selling of FX by public sector entities. Specifically, before June 2014, the CB participated in the FX market in order to replenish NIR that was withdrawn by the public sector. Now, the CB can decide discretionally when and how to do this replenishment. While monetary framework is largely in place, the transmission mechnism from policy rates to the market rates is rather weak. While there are no capital controls currently in place, a recently adopted law empowers the executive, upon consultation with the Central Bank, to impose temporary restrictions on inflows of short-term capital through taxation and compulsory deposits with the Central Bank. I T E R T I O L O E T R Y F U Page 24 Steady progress has been made to create a favorable environment for inflation targeting, but more may be needed. The experience of countries that successfully transitioned to more flexible XR regimes (AN 6) suggests the importance of strengthening effective systems for reviewing and managing the exposure to XR risk. In this regard, staff welcomed bank supervision stipulations adopted in 2013, aimed at a more thorough assessment of credit risks related to XR exposures and associated need for higher provisions. The authorities concurred that fostering further development of the secondary market for government securities is also desirable. Finally, staff counseled to resist pressures to expand the BCCR’s mandate to include growth, which could generate confusion as to the main target of monetary policy. Additional steps to buttress BCCR credibility further, including by fortifying its balance sheet, could also be useful (AN 4).