Half Percent Point Shock in Costa Rica's GDP Growth (Change from baseline) The authorities agreed that the outlook for 2015 and the medium term will remain subdued amid deteriorating fundamentals. Growth in 2015 is expected to remain virtually unchanged as the negative impact of a gradual Intel withdrawal offsets again the positive impact of U.S. recovery (¶12 and Figure 6). The Intel closure is estimated to reduce GDP by about ½ to ¾ percentage points in 2014–15 (Figure 1 and AN 1), with temporary negative effects on the level and growth rate of potential GDP (½ and less than ¼ percentage points, respectively), and with no pronounced regional implications (AN 2). The baseline scenario contemplates fiscal consolidation of 2¼ percent of GDP over the medium term, thus incorporating the measures at a more advanced state of elaboration in the authorities’ stated plans (¶21). The output gap is projected to widen through 2016, then mostly closing over the medium term, with growth also converging to potential. The CG fiscal deficit would stay at about 5¾ percent of GDP and the public debt ratio would approach 51 percent of GDP by 2019. Thanks to continued prudent monetary policy, inflation is projected to hover around 4 percent after returning within the band in early 2015, while the current account deficit rises to 5¼ percent of GDP by 2019. Source: Fund staff estimates. DOM HND GTM PAN SLV NIC The closure is not expected to have significant impact on fiscal revenue as Intel operated in the free trade zone. Page 12 Costa Rica: Baseline Scenario 1/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP growth (percent) Output gap (percent of potential GDP) CPI (percent, end-of-period) Current account balance Central government fiscal balance Structural primary balance Structural overall balance Central government debt Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ The baseline scenario includes fiscal consolidation measures of about 2¼ percent of GDP, partly offset by a projected underlying deterioration in the primary balance mainly driven by the constitutionally mandated increase in education expenditure. The authorities also concurred that an alternative scenario incorporating the fiscal adjustment necessary to restore debt sustainability would yield a stronger outlook. According to staff analysis, a total adjustment of about 3¾ percent of GDP would achieve the objective of stabilizing debt with only moderate short-term output costs (¶19) . A tighter fiscal stance consistent with restoring debt sustainability would mitigate increases in market rates, allow for a more balanced macro policy mix to achieve the inflation target , and reduce the current account deficit. Costa Rica: Full Fiscal Adjustment Scenario 1/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP growth (percent) Output gap (percent of potential GDP) CPI (percent, end-of-period) Current account balance Central government fiscal balance Structural primary balance Structural overall balance Central government debt Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ Includes measures as in the baseline scenario and additional measures of 1 ½ percent of GDP. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside. Downside risks stem from both global uncertainties and weaknesses in domestic fundamentals (as detailed in the Risk Assessment Matrix): External risks. Concerning faster USMP normalization slightly upside risks prevail, absent pronounced increases in market volatility (Figure 6). Under these conditions, higher U.S. growth would have a positive impact on Costa Rican GDP given its strong trade ties with the U.S. more than offsetting the negative impact of tighter global financial conditions in the short run (AN 2). However, extreme bouts of market volatility could inflict serious damage, especially given Costa Rica’s weak fiscal position, as interest rates may rise abruptly (Figure 6 Page 13 COSTA RICA and Figure 4). Moreover, if USMP normalization leads to substantial exchange rate depreciation in Costa Rica and reduction in the availability of foreign funding, bank and private sector balance sheets could be negatively affected, with adverse implications for growth, inflation, and the balance of payments. In addition, deeper-than-expected slowdowns in advanced and emerging markets could hamper Costa Rica’s growth. The effects of global factors may be amplified by strong linkages with the U.S. (AN 2). On the other hand, further sustained declines in energy prices, triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming- on-stream of excess capacity, could have a modest positive impact on Costa Rica. Costa Rica: Impact on Real GDP Growth from U.S. Real Demand Growth and Real Interest Rate Shocks 1/ (Percent points deviation from baseline) U.S. real demand growth shock (1% point over 1 year) U.S. real interest rate (1% point over 1 year) Joint Shock Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ U.S. real government bond yield. interest rate used in VAR estimation is U.S. real 10 year Costa Rica: The Impact on GDP in Various Scenarios of U.S. Monetary Policy Normalization S1: U.S. growth S2: U.S. growth + EM risk premium S3: U.S. growth + EM risk premium + U.S. risk premium Source: Fund staff estimates. Domestic risks. The persistence of a large fiscal deficit (for instance, owing to political difficulties in implementing tax reform (¶22)), and the ensuing rise in the public debt ratio, could render the economy vulnerable to sudden changes in financial market conditions. Also, large government gross financing requirements could lift domestic interest rates, weighing on private investment and growth. In addition, a slowdown in FDI due to the “signaling effect” from Intel exit could reduce growth more than expected in the short run. Costa Rica: Financial Stability Map 1/ 2. Inward spillover risks 1. Macroeconomic risks 3. Credit risks 2013Q1 2014Q2 6. Risk appetite 4. Market and liquidity risks 5. Monetary and financial conditions Source; Fund staff estimates. Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. 1/ The variables used for each category are the following. 1) Macroeconomic risks: output gap, inflation rate, unemployment rate, budget balance (percent of GDP), government debt (percent of GDP), current account balance (percent of GDP), domestic credit from banks (deviation from trend and its change as percent of GDP), real investment growth, growth in trade (imports plus exports). 2) Inward spillover risks: exports (percent of GDP), gross foreign assets of banking sector (percent of GDP), LIBOR OIS spreads, Implied volatilities, gross international reserves (in percent of short-term debt, imports and broad money), foreign exchange market pressure index. 3) Credit risks: growth in domestic credit from banks, change in the ratio of domestic credit from banks to GDP, stock market return, unemployment rate, public debt (percent of GDP). 4) Market and liquidity risks: ratio of private domestic credit to resident's deposits, gross foreign liabilities of banking sector (percent of GDP). 5) Monetary and financial conditions: real broad money growth and growth in domestic credit from banks. 6) Risk appetite: volatility of month-to-month stock market returns over past 12 months, volatility of month-to-month exchange rate movements over past 12 months, gross portfolio inflows (percent of GDP) and gross FDI inflows (percent of GDP). Page 14 Costa Rica: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks Overall Level of Concern (Scale—high, medium, or low) Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized 1. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies. High Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies would reduce growth in Costa Rica, in particular, if growth in the U.S. is negatively affected. High Weaker-than-expected U.S. growth would lower export demand and significantly weigh on activity and tax revenues. A shock could have a more severe impact than in 2008-09, as fiscal buffers have been drawn down. High Surges in global financial market volatility would reduce capital flows to Costa Rica, lead to an increase in cost of government financing, as well as potentially an increase in cost of funding for the private sector. 2. Surges in global financial market volatility, triggered by geopolitical tensions or revised market expectations on UMP exit/emerging market fundamentals. High The direct trade impact would be modest. The indirect impact would depend on how much the shock affects U.S. growth. A decline in capital flows to emerging could disrupt foreign credit lines and reduce banking sector liquidity. If markets reassess fiscal risks in Costa Rica, the cost of external government and private sector financing could increase sharply, negatively affecting public debt dynamics and growth. The recent fall in oil prices could persist and deepen, Persistently low oil prices would improve Costa Rica’s triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming-on-stream of excess capacity. terms of trade and counterbalance inflationary pressures, potentially yielding a modest boost to growth prospects. Low 3. Sustained decline in energy prices. Medium High 4. Worse-than- anticipated impact from persistently high fiscal deficits, or higher deficits than projected in the baseline scenario. Lack of fiscal consolidation prospects may hurt confidence. Continued expenditure pressure and lack of tax reform could increase the fiscal deficit and public debt more than projected in the baseline scenario, which already envisages a rapid build up of public debt. High Lower confidence or a higher government financing requirement could raise domestic interest rates further and reduce investment and growth. Lower growth or a higher fiscal deficit would exacerbate fiscal sustainability risks, increasing the economy’s vulnerability and reducing the government’s ability to respond to adverse shocks. Alternatively, even if confidence remained strong and financing were available, a looser fiscal stance could result in overheating. 5. Sudden unraveling of balance-sheet foreign exchange imbalances. Medium Balance sheets of corporate and households are exposed to a depreciation of the local currency, given their negative foreign exchange positions. While the banking sector holds a large open position in foreign currencies, banks’ reliance on foreign funding has been rapidly growing, which makes then vulnerable to funding shocks. Moreover, banks are also exposed to foreign exchange risk through its loan portfolio. Medium Bank loan availability would be curtailed, impacting economic activity and worsening the fiscal position. Depending on the magnitude of the depreciation, balance sheet deterioration may affect some financial institutions. 6. Larger than anticipated impact from INTEL withdrawal Low INTEL’s withdrawal and external competition weighs down on FDI and leads to an increase in unemployment and a reduction in productivity growth as the enterprises with a more sophisticated export base close. An unsustainable fiscal position may exacerbate these risks. Low/Medium Depending on the size of the reduction in FDI flows, there may be low to moderate impact on short-term growth, due to lower capital accumulation and productivity growth. The impact on potential growth, however, is likely to be limited since Costa Rica has strong institutions and a well-educated workforce. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path discussed in this report (which is the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of the staff). The RAM reflects staff's views on the source of risks and overall level of concerns as of the time of discussions with the authorities. The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding this baseline. In case the baseline does not materialize. Page 15 COSTA RICA