Growth prospects are for another contraction in 2014, followed by a gradual recovery from 2015 Staff forecasts another real GDP decline of 0.8 percent in 2014 . Domestic demand would remain feeble, reflecting both weak private sector demand and fiscal consolidation, while exports would benefit somewhat from the projected pick up in the euro area. In 2015 a tepid recovery would set in, as the impact of private sector deleveraging would begin to recede and external demand recovers further. Long-term potential growth is projected at around 2 percent (2.3 percent in per-capita terms), but this estimate is subject to large uncertainties. current account would shift further into surplus in 2014, reflecting weak domestic demand and, as a result, import compression. Inflation would remain subdued, reflecting feeble activity and disinflation in both the euro area and global commodities markets. Risks to this forecast are substantial and, in the short term, mostly tilted to the downside (Box 1). Private sector deleveraging could remain a drag on demand for longer than projected—triggered, for example, by sustained deflation raising real debt servicing costs. The euro area recovery could disappoint and fail to support exports. Fiscal adjustment could trigger a larger private demand compression than projected. Conversely, insufficient fiscal progress could reinforce concerns about fiscal sustainability. External financing pressures. Given its relatively high degree of financial openness and integration into global financial markets, Croatia is susceptible to changes in global funding conditions. Higher interest rates and re- pricing of risk would raise funding costs, including for Croatian sovereign debt (Box 2). Bank deleveraging pressures could be triggered by the ECB’s Asset Quality Review and/or less ample ECB liquidity. Consumer Confidence (Index Points, 0=neutral) Confidence Expectations Sentiment Source:Haver Analytics. Core Inflation (year-on-year) 1/ Croatia (lhs) Euro Area (rhs)Sources: Croatian Bureau of Statistics and Eurostat.1/ Excluding energy and food. EST LAT LITSVKSLVBGRCZEHUNPOLROUALBBIH UVK MKDSRBBLRMDAUKRRUSTUR External Loans ExternalFinancing: Loans and Market Funding Sources: IMF and BOPS database. Market funding and loansMostlyloans Page 8 Foreign direct investment. On the upside, FDI could pick up more rapidly than foreseen, reflecting in part recent policy initiatives to facilitate investments.