Staff projects modest but positive growth for 2015, and a more robust recovery from (Table 2). For 2015, staff projects domestic demand to stagnate, as two effects broadly offset one another: (i) continued corporate balance sheet repair constraining investment, and (ii) lower oil prices that support consumption—the price drop is equivalent of an annual transfer of 0.6 percent of GDP to the Croatian economy. Despite solid growth rates, net exports are expected to make only a modest contribution to growth, given the small tradable sector. From 2016, staff projects a strengthening recovery, as better corporate profits facilitate dealing with high debt levels, exports strengthen further in line with the external environment, and the government increasingly offsets the contractionary impulse from fiscal adjustment with absorption of EU structural and cohesion funds. Staff forecasts that by 2018, real growth would return to long-term potential, estimated at 1¾ percent. Deflation is projected to persist in 2015, reflecting mainly lower prices for energy imports. Core inflation would remain near zero. Sep-12May-13Jan-14Sep-14May-15 Hungary Romania Slovenia 5-Year CDS Spread (Basis points) Source: Bloomberg. Page 13 current account is expected to move further into surplus in 2015 and 2016, reflecting better exports and low commodity prices compressing the import bill (Table 3), and triggering a relatively rapid reduction in external debt (Annex I). Risks to this forecast are substantial and, in the short term, mostly tilted to the downside (Box 3). Domestic political risks feature prominently ahead of parliamentary elections, with popular but destabilizing policies a distinct possibility. This could contribute further to policy uncertainty and depress sentiment. Private sector balance sheet repair could drag on for longer—or end earlier—than projected. Similarly, oil prices may rebound, and/or staff may over-/underestimate the impact of lower oil prices on domestic demand. The euro area economy could falter once again, harming exports and intensifying deflationary pressures. While trade and financial linkages with Russia/Ukraine are minor, the unsettled situation can affect the Croatian economy through sentiment. Liquidity conditions may tighten, especially if financial stress in Europe reemerges, making financing for both the public and private sectors more challenging. Exposure to Greece is limited, however, limiting the risk of direct contagion from Greece-related events.