While still depressed in the first half of 2014, the economy started showing signs of improvement in the second half (Table 1, Figure 1). Growth. In H1 2014, most indicators were still in negative territory. However, from H2, exports, tax revenue, retail sales, and industrial production all showed signs of recovery. For the entire year, the economy contracted by 0.4 percent (annual average). Private investment was the main drag on activity, while exports contributed positively to growth. The economy maintained positive momentum in the early months of 2015, with real growth in Q1 estimated at 0.5 percent (y-o-y). Output gap. Staff estimates that at end- 2014, the output gap stood at close to 5 percent of potential output, using a state-dependent GDP-filter that incorporates financial variables (Box 2). Deflation. Monthly CPI inflation dropped into negative territory in late 2013 and has remained there for much of 2014, reflecting mostly lower prices for imported food and energy. With non-food, non- energy inflation stable and nominal wages growing slightly, there appears limited spillover of deflation into expectations. Contributions to Real GDP Growth (percent) Households' Consumption Expenditure Government Consumption Expenditure Gross Fixed Capital Formation Changes in Inventories and statistical discrepancy Exports of Goods and Services Imports of Goods and Services Real GDP Sources: Haver, IMF staff calculations -2-10123456-2-10123456Jan-13Oct-13Jul-14Apr-15 Inflation Developments Headline Core All items less energy and foodSources:Croatian National Bank; and Croatian Central Bureau of Statistics. Page 12 current account has shifted further into surplus, reflecting better exports, import compression and the lower energy import bill (Figure 2). The financial environment has remained benign (Figure 3). Country risk spreads have remained contained in a range of 250–300 bps, even though Croatia has continued to lose ground relative to peers. The central bank has kept the kuna-euro exchange in a narrow range, by means of a tight regime of prudential regulation limiting banks’ capacity to move FX out of Croatia, moral suasion, and occasional FX interventions. In early 2015, depreciation pressures were somewhat stronger than usual, reflecting in part the one-year de-facto conversion of CHF loans into domestic currency loans (see below). Since then, the kuna has recovered ground. banking system has remained stable, and is, on average, liquid and well-capitalized (Figure 4). Non-performing loans (NPLs) are high at almost 17 percent, but are covered by provisions and large capital buffers.