Diagnostic Croatia’s poor growth record—and policy options to improve it—were at the core of the consultation. With macro-economic policy space constrained—fiscal policy due to high and rising public debt levels, monetary policy because of Croatia’s long-standing peg to the euro and EmergingEurope: Patterns of Recovery Sources: IMF, WorldEconomic Outlook ;and IMFstaff calculations. Real GDP (2008=100) Average EU members BGR, HUN, ROM (avg) Slovenia BB Z D Investment Consumption Exports Imports GDP Contributions to Real GDP Growth, 2008-14 (Percent) Page 14 high loan euroization (see below)—discussions focused on growth enhancing structural reforms. These fall into three broad categories: policies that provide short-term support for the economy —notably debt restructuring; policies that enhance the economy’s capacity to adjust , such as restructuring state-owned enterprises and reducing their role in the economy; and measures that increase long-term potential growth , such as pension reform to raise labor market participation. The drawn-out 2008–14 recession holds important lessons (Figure 5). As most countries in the region, Croatia was left by the pre-2008 boom with an appreciated real effective exchange rate, a bloated non-tradable sector (especially construction) and impaired private sector balance sheets. As others, Croatia suffered a sharp initial contraction. However, in contrast to most peers, Croatia failed to emerge from recession in 2009–11. Instead, its slump lasted a full six years, driven primarily by a sustained contraction in private investment. Further, and again in contrast to peers, Croatia’s corporate sector made little progress with balance sheet repair during this period, but instead continued to leverage up until 2013 (Figure 6, Box 4). Staff’s analysis suggests that several structural factors delayed Croatia’s recovery If unaddressed, they are likely to hamper economic performance going forward. Limited export orientation left Croatian corporations without alternative sources of income as domestic demand contracted. In this regard, Croatia contrasts sharply with central European economies that benefitted from large export boosts after 2009. Rigid labor markets slowed workforce restructuring and wage adjustment. An inefficient judicial system stood in the way of debt workouts. High wages and red tape especially at the local government level, discouraged FDI. Several weaknesses appear related to the dominant position of state-owned enterprises Simple average of newmember states, excl. Croatia 1/Simple average of BGR, HUN,and ROM Debt-to-Equity Ratios of Non-Financial Companies in CEE, 2000-14 Slovenia Source: Eurostat.1/ ESA1995definition used for Estonia until 2008. Z D Z Sources: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. Nominal Wages (end-2014) (Average monthly gross wage in euros) un z Exports of Goods (2014, Percent of GDP) 1/Sources: IMF, ; Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ 2013 data used for Bulgaria, latest available. Page 15 in Croatia’s economy (Box 5). SOEs account for almost one-third of corporate assets and one-fifth of total corporate employment. Several studies show that SOEs operate at lower productivity and higher cost levels than private companies, and spread inefficiencies through trade linkages. SOEs also contribute to Croatia’s high wage level, by raising domestic prices and hence reservation wages. The crisis exposed the un-sustainability of many SOEs’ business models, forcing restructuring, downsizing and deleveraging —or put differently, a structural transition of Croatia’s corporate sector from SOEs toward market orientation; a shift that in Central Europe had typically occurred already in the 1990s. Croatia’s experience is part of a broader pattern: contraction in real investment after 2008 correlates strongly with the degree of corporate transition that had taken place by that time. The authorities have advanced some important structural reforms in recent years, even though frequent policy reversals and stop-and-go implementation have often contributed to policy uncertainty, limiting the positive impact on confidence. The revised labor law passed in 2014 reduces costs of workforce restructuring and increased flexibility of working hours. The Investment Promotion Act of 2013 aims at facilitating FDI and is showing first results. A pre-bankruptcy settlement procedure (PBSP) introduced in 2012 helped restructure some corporate debts. Some central government social benefits were streamlined, the regime for special pensions was tightened, and the penalty for early retirement increased somewhat. The authorities claim that stricter government oversight of SOE operations and restructuring has improved some SOEs’ performance. Policy Discussion While welcoming the progress achieved, staff argued that many structural obstacles remained and would need to be addressed forcefully Debt restructuring framework The PBSP was halted in 2014 after problems arose relating to minority creditor rights. Staff argued that the revised procedure as is currently in front of the parliament should be passed swiftly, to allow debt restructuring to continue and to increase legal certainty surrounding the process. The envisaged consumer bankruptcy act should also be enacted. Judicial reform to enhance the capacity of commercial courts remained critical. dd ee = Employment (2008 = 100) Employment and Labor Productivity, 2008-13 BGRLTVHRVSVKLTN SLV Source:European Commission Bulgaria Slovak Republic EstoniaLatviaLithuaniaPolandRomaniaHungary Slovenia R² = 0.44 x Change in real investment (Percent) EU New Member States: Corporate Sector Reformand Investment, 2009-2014 Sources: EBRD transition report; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Average of the "large scale privatization" and "governance and enterprise restructuring" indices. Page 16 State-owned enterprises. Staff noted that several problem cases persist, including the fertilizer company Petrokemija, and the state highway and railroad companies. In many cases—especially corporations operating in areas other than public infrastructure, and including currently profitable SOEs—sale was the better option than restructuring, as it would allow attracting professional expertise and overcome constraints from the public sector’s limited administrative capacity. Meanwhile, chronic governance issues in SOEs needed to be addressed. A positive step was the planned professionalization of SOE management and supervisory boards, including through public tenders for executive positions, and by holding management accountable to clear performance criteria. Governance and business climate (Figure 7). Staff argued that red tape, especially at the local government level, would best be addressed by comprehensive governance reform that clearly defines municipalities’ responsibilities and regulates access to central government funding in line with municipalities’ capacity to provide public services. As for the central government, better coordination of regulatory activities by different line ministries and agencies was called for. Staff emphasized that the planned rationalization of para-fiscal charges and the envisaged reduction in state agencies were commendable steps. Social benefits. Staff underscored that streamlining of benefits should encompass the entire central government and extend also to the myriad of transfers granted at the local level that often overlap with central government benefits, creating employment and poverty traps. Pensions. Staff argued for a further increase in the penalty for early retirement—beyond that already enacted—and reductions in privileged pensions, with a view to increase chronically low labor market participation. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s recommendations, but emphasized that the turnaround in economic performance owed much to structural reforms already taken, including better performance of state-owned enterprises and the investment laws that had resulted in an increase in FDI. They noted that additional structural reforms were envisaged after the elections, including further streamlining and rationalization of benefits. The authorities argued, however, that another push for pension reform had to wait until the economy was stronger and the labor market better able to absorb additional workers.