Diagnostic Attempts to control the fiscal deficit have been frustrated by the recession and costly initiatives to support the economy. After a good attempt at consolidation in 2012, the deficit (cash basis) widened again in 2013 to around 5½ percent of GDP, reflecting weak revenues and the break on re-invested earnings turned out more costly than anticipated, without boosting investment In the short term, the reform increases uncertainty for some employees and is therefore understandably contested, notably by labor unions. The employers’ association considered the labor reform a modest step, although in the right direction. Page 11 as expected. Public debt—below 30 percent of GDP as recently as 2008—now exceeds 60 percent of GDP (75 percent including guarantees) and is increasing rapidly. The government is largely pre-financed for 2014. More than 80 percent of the central government’s financing needs are expected to be covered from domestic sources, in particular banks and pension funds. As for external financing, the government issued a US$1.75 million bond (3 percent of GDP) in November 2013 at a relatively high yield (6.2 percent, 10 years). Issuance of another €750 million–1 billion is scheduled for later in 2014. Policy Discussions Staff argued—and the authorities agreed—that fiscal consolidation was critical to strengthen confidence in macro-economic management and retain the economy’s access to financing at acceptable conditions. Given the deterioration in Croatia’s standing in credit markets and the prospect of tighter global financing conditions ahead, adjustment could not be delayed further. Consolidation would have to be designed in a way that would both signal clearly that Croatia was getting its public finances under control and limit the short-term contractionary impact on an already weak economy. Specifically, staff advocated the following parameters: Overall adjustment. A structural reduction in the general government deficit of about three percent of GDP within a foreseeable timeframe was called for to ensure the return to a sustainable fiscal stance. Phasing. The government argued strongly against excessively frontloaded adjustment lest to harm the incipient recovery. Staff recommended stretching adjustment over three years in roughly equal annual portions. Composition. Staff advocated an emphasis on the revenue side in 2014—in view of the lower short-term growth multiplier of revenue measures—and a gradual switch to expenditure consolidation in 2015 and 2016. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some state-owned enterprises used the tax break to pay higher bonuses. While the authorities and staff broadly agreed on the composition of adjustment, parts of Croatia’s academic community—such as the Institute for Public Finance—saw the revised 2014 budget as a lost opportunity to curtail wasteful spending. The employers’ association took a similar view. Sources: Croatianauthorities; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ The baseline assumes fiscal adjustment between 2014 and 2016 in the context of the EDP. No adjustment after 2014 implies unchanged policies (no fiscal adjustment) after 2014. 2/ Staff advice assumes continued fiscal adjustment after the EDP to put debt on a downward trajectory. Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Overall Balance Central Government: Gross Financing Foreign Domestic long term Domestic short term Privatization receiptsSource: Ministryof Finance. Page 12 For the medium term , staff recommended restoring structural balance gradually, to achieve a sustained reduction in public sector debt and regain flexibility to react to economic shocks. Staff noted that the revised 2014 budget currently under the assembly’s consideration frontloads adjustment relative to these parameters. Amount of adjustment. Staff estimates net structural adjustment contained in the government’s first draft of a revised budget presented in early March at 0.6–0.8 percent of GDP (full-year impact 0.8–1.1 percent), with two-thirds of adjustment on the revenue side (Box 4). Staff assessed that this pace of adjustment struck an adequate balance between the need to nurture the recovery and restore credibility. Since then, the government has announced a second revision containing an additional 0.4 percent of GDP in measures (full- year impact 0.5. percent), in order to comply with the EDP. The authorities and staff agreed that the additional tightening front-loaded adjustment risked a further weakening of activity in an already contractionary environment. The authorities argued, however, that the benefits from staying within the EDP and, more generally, the EC’s policy support framework would ultimately outweigh the negative impact of a somewhat stronger short-term contraction. Composition. Staff argued that the largest adjustment measure—a hike in health contributions that reverses a reduction enacted in 2012—was suboptimal, as it raises labor cost and thus undermines efforts to strengthen cost competitiveness. Alternative revenue measures that the government had considered at some point—such as introducing a modern property tax, revoking the tax credit for reinvested profits, taxing interest income, or broadening the base for personal income tax—would have been superior. The authorities argued that for a property tax, more preparatory work was required. More generally, staff advocated embedding the revised 2014 budget into a comprehensive three-year plan , so as to render consolidation predictable and maximize the impact on confidence. This would help counter a perception that fiscal measures were taken often only in reaction to external pressure (such as the EDP), chosen on the basis of political expediency, and subject to frequent reversals. Expenditure reductions and tax reforms to be implemented in 2015/16 should, at least in broad terms, be identified already now. In some areas, structural reforms should support sustained reductions in spending; for example, local government reform to permanently reduce the government wage bill (Box 5). The authorities replied that their convergence program—to be published in due course—would specify measures for the entire period of 2014–16, including, on the revenue side, a tax on savings in 2015 and a full-fledged property tax in 2016. Staff stressed that the health sector and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) required immediate attention to avoid contingent fiscal liabilities. Impact in 201412-month impactInitial revision, March 20140.6 to 0.80.8 to 1.1Second revision, April 20141.0 to 1.21.3 to 1.6Difference0.40.5 Source: IMF staff estimates. Net Structural Adjustment in the Revised 2014 Budget Page 13 State-owned hospitals have accumulated sizeable arrears in recent years that required clearance by the central government. The authorities argued that they had taken steps to prevent the problem from reemerging, notably taking over the administration of hospitals whose arrears were cleared, and developing a hospital master plan to restructure the sector. Staff voiced doubts, however, whether administrative steps alone would suffice to restore the sector’s financial balance, and recommended considering revenue measures—such as boosting receipts from co-payments and/or expenditure cuts—including by increasing the efficiency of health services. As for loss-making SOEs , staff commended the authorities for progress with tackling some of the most difficult cases, such as shipyards, railways, and air and road transportation—even though restructuring and privatization has often been possible only at substantial costs to the government, notably the assumption of SOE debts. Staff urged to continue with restructuring and resolution efforts, based on a comprehensive review of state-owned enterprises’ finances.