Growth has continued to disappoint. Real GDP contracted by one percent in 2013, owing to both falling domestic demand and weak exports. Private sector efforts to reduce debt, rising unemployment, and policy uncertainty weighed on investment and consumption. Despite a good tourist season, exports were also weak, reflecting feeble trading partner growth and the restructuring of the shipbuilding industry. Forward-looking indicators hold little hope for an imminent recovery. Notwithstanding the weakness in exports, feeble domestic demand has triggered a swing in the current account to a surplus of 1.3 percent of GDP in 2013, from large deficits in the mid-2000s. Amid weak demand, headline inflation has fallen into negative territory (-0.4 percent y-o-y at end-March), while core inflation is around zero. Disinflation is broad based, with price declines in clothing, communications, transport, and food the main drivers. Credit to the private sector is weak. Borrowing for new investments has continued to decline, while demand for working capital and consumer loans has stabilized at a low level. External financing conditions have remained manageable thus far, and Croatia has been only mildly affected by recent bouts of emerging market turbulence. Country risk spreads have hovered in a range of 300–350 bps for most of 2013 and early 2014. In 2013, Croatia lost significant ground relative to peers. The kuna-euro exchange rate depreciated marginally in the past 12 months (by 1 percent). banking system has remained stable, well capitalized and profitable, the difficult economic environment notwithstanding (see section III.C below). Contributions to Real GDP Growth (percent) Households' Consumption Expenditure Government Consumption Expenditure Gross Fixed Capital Formation Changes in Inventories and statistical discrepancy Exports of Goods and Services Imports of Goods and Services Real GDP Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. Nominal Credit Growth (y-o-y, percent Consumer loans Corporate investment loans Corporate working capital loans Sources: CroatianNational Bankand IMF staff calculations. Hungary Romania Slovenia 5-Year CDS Sources: Datastream and Bloomberg. Page 7