Croatia remains stuck in an unusually drawn out recession (Tables 1–4, Figures 1–4). In 2013, real GDP contracted for the 5 th consecutive year, and stands now at less than 90 percent of the end-2008 level. Unemployment has risen to 17 percent. Domestic demand remains depressed as corporations and households focus on reducing excess debt levels accumulated in the 2000s; a task that is being complicated by the re-emergence of deflation in early 2014. Exports and FDI are also feeble, reflecting deep-seated structural weaknesses and poor trading partner growth. Macro-policies that could revive growth rapidly are beyond reach: fiscal policy has run out of space (see below), while monetary policy is constrained by the need to keep the kuna-euro exchange rate stable, lest a depreciation cause a revaluation of euro-indexed debts. The recession is putting pressure on the public finances. In 2013 the deficit (cash basis) widened to around 5½ percent of GDP, owing to weak revenues and the assumption of debts and arrears from state-owned enterprises. Public debt now exceeds 60 percent of GDP and is increasing rapidly. Reflecting these developments, all major rating agencies have downgraded Croatia to sub-investment grade. The government has started tackling long-standing structural issues, with many measures in line with previous IMF advice (Appendix I). Steps include the restructuring and/or privatization of state-owned enterprises, passage of laws that facilitate investments, the introduction of an out-of-court settlement procedure for insolvent corporations, the reduction of work force restructuring costs, and the easing of hiring restrictions. Croatia’s EU membership—since July 2013—holds the prospect of large medium-term benefits, but also comes with challenges in the short term. Membership opens the large EU market to Croatian firms and creates potential for trade and investment, but in the short term Croatia loses trade with traditional partners in CEFTA (such as Bosnia). While Croatia should eventually be able to benefit from substantial EU structural funds, EU membership fees have an immediate impact on the budget, and the financial balance for 2014 is barely positive (Appendix EU4: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania.Sources: WEO, and IMF staff calculations. Real GDP (2008=100) EU4 Poland Serbia Spain Real Domestic Demand (2008=100) EU4 Poland Serbia Spain Real Exports (2008=100) EU4 Poland Serbia Spain Page 6 II). Further, from this year Croatia is subject to both the EC’s excessive deficit procedure (EDP) and its macroeconomic imbalances procedure.