Diagnostic The debt overhang that accumulated in the mid- to late 2000s continues to weigh on demand . Corporations have reduced debt levels somewhat from the peak reached in 2010, amid a sharp decline in private investment. Household debt has also started to recede, and some households have accumulated substantial assets, notably bank deposits. Amid high unemployment, private consumption has remained feeble, however. In contrast to many of its peers, Croatia has not been able to take advantage of stronger exports and foreign direct investment (FDI). Exports: Sub-par export performance owes in large part to weak trading partner growth, as three out of four of Croatia’s main trading partners—Italy, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Slovenia—went through economic difficulties of their own in recent years (Appendix III). Difficulties have been exacerbated by export industries in structural decline, such as ship building. The quasi-peg to the euro and a rigid labor market—preventing adjustment of unit labor cost through wages—have stood in the way of a rapid price response to these shocks. Staff estimates that the REER is overvalued by about 10 percent, based on a cross-country comparison of unit labor cost (Box 3). Weak FDI owes much to a poor business environment, as evidenced by Croatia’s chronically low ratings in business climate surveys. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a large part of the problem is with ineffective government at the municipal level. Large state-owned enterprises (SOE)—a legacy issue of Yugoslavian times—also hamper investment and productivity growth, and leave Croatia with an outdated infrastructure in sectors such as rail transport. As a result, Croatia has thus far been unable REER vs. EU 27 (2005=100) Export deflator ULC, total ULC, Manufacturing Source: European Commission. Equity Insurance reserves Currency and deposits Other assets Loans Other liabilities Net financial position Households, AggregateNet Financial Position Equity Currency and deposits Other assets Own equity Other debt Loans Net financial position Net financial position excl. own equity Corporations, Aggregate Net FinancialPosition Sources: Croatian National Bank and IMF staff calculations. Page 9 to take advantage of its unique geographic location: at the sea and yet close to Central European markets. As regards longer-term obstacles to growth , low labor market participation—the second lowest in the EU after Greece—stands out (Appendix IV). A plethora of factors— including generous early retirement schemes, work disincentives from poorly targeted benefits, and skill mismatches—contribute to this outcome. The low employment ratio puts pressure on pension systems, even though replacement rates are not particularly high. Policy Discussion The authorities broadly shared staff’s diagnostic, although the central bank argued that household balance sheets had strengthened enough to support a recovery. It saw the core of the problem in weak investment. The authorities also agreed that Croatia’s economy continues to face considerable competitiveness challenges. There was agreement that standard macro-policy responses to weak demand are out of reach. Monetary policy is constrained by the use of the kuna-euro exchange rate as nominal anchor. The central bank argued forcefully that the quasi-peg needs to be maintained, as the contractionary impulse of a revaluation of FX-indexed debts and its impact on the financial system would far outweigh any stimulus from depreciation on the (relatively small) tradable sector. It also pointed to experiences in the 1990s, when devaluations had harmed financial stability without sustained improvements in competitiveness. Staff agreed that large exchange rate fluctuations are undesirable, but noted that exchange rate rigidity increased the pressure on structural and wage policies to adjust. Fiscal policy space is exhausted—the challenge ahead is to advance fiscal consolidation without unduly harming growth (see below). The authorities and staff agreed that private debt restructuring was the main available tool to accelerate a recovery in domestic demand . The authorities pointed to the pre-bankruptcy settlement procedure introduced in 2012 to speed up the restructuring of corporate debt, and argued that after some early difficulties, the procedure was working smoothly. Thus far, it has allowed writing off of corporate debts of 2 percent of GDP (Appendix V). Staff agreed that the pre- bankruptcy procedure was a useful tool, and suggested a similar mechanism for private households, With three quarters of corporate debt denominated in or linked to foreign currency, and corporate non-equity liabilities already exceeding 130 percent of GDP, a sizeable devaluation would reinforce the sector’s debt overhang, curtailing further domestic demand (a similar argument applies to households, although arguably to a lesser degree as debt levels are lower and some households are hedged due to sizeable FX deposits). There would also be knock- on effects on the financial sector, and a difficult-to-quantify impact on confidence from abandoning Croatia’s long- standing monetary anchor. At the same time, with Croatia’s goods exports accounting for only 15 percent of GDP, a relatively small portion of the economy would immediately benefit from better competitiveness. Croatia, 2008 Croatia, 2013 EU-27, 2013 Employment by Age Group, 2008 and 2013 Sources: ILO, Eurostat, Croatian Statistical Bureau, and IMF staff calculations. Page 10 while being mindful of fair burden sharing between creditors and debtors. The authorities explained that they are working on a personal bankruptcy regime for implementation later in 2014. Staff commended the authorities for substantial progress with growth enhancing structural reforms. Many of these have been taken in the context of a World Bank Development Loan (DPL). strategic investment law enacted in late 2013 and accompanying regulatory measures remove administrative hurdles at the local level and shift responsibility to the central government. Further, an investment promotion law improves investment incentives. The authorities noted that these reforms were already having an impact, pointing to a pipeline of projects—mostly prepared by non-resident investors—that were expected to materialize the latest from 2015. Staff argued that additional steps to strengthen the investment climate should include swift implementation of judicial reform and further restructuring of state- owned enterprises (see below). labor market reform currently in front of the assembly would lower the cost of work force restructuring and enhance working hour flexibility. According to World Bank computations, the reform—together with legislation enacted earlier in 2013 to ease hiring restrictions—would place Croatia in the mid-range of the OECD’s employment protection ranking, from displaying one of the highest levels of rigidity in 2011. The authorities and staff agreed that the reform is critical to enhance the economy’s ability to adapt to external conditions, although it would arguably take some time until benefits materialize in terms of higher growth and employment. welfare reform enacted in December 2013 merged several social benefits administrated by the Ministry of Youth and Social Welfare, and capped total benefit receipt at the gross minimum wage. Staff argued that the reform could only be a first step to reduce disincentives to work from the design of benefit schemes. Further measures were needed, such as eliminating overlap of transfers granted by the central and local governments, and extending means-testing to other programs, including for war veterans. More progress was also called for in reducing incentives for early retirement.