After six years of persistent recession, Croatia’s economy is finally showing signs of recovery. Robust retail sales, VAT receipts, and better consumer confidence suggest that private consumption has bottomed out. Employment has stabilized and corporate profits are recovering. Tailwinds from a favorable external environment have helped, notably lower energy prices, stronger euro area growth, and ample domestic and external liquidity that contain debt servicing costs. However, better exports, industrial production and foreign direct investment also suggest that the economy’s shift from inward orientation towards the tradable sector is making progress. This said, the economy is not yet out of the woods, with several structural impediments weighing on the recovery. Corporate investment is still contracting, as many companies struggle with high debt levels; and an end to this process is not yet in sight. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) continue to tie up a disproportionate part of economic resources. Together with a chronically weak business environment and wages that remain relatively high compared to peers (i.e., other new EU member states), this increases the costs of operation for private corporations, complicating the strengthening of competitiveness and the re-orientation toward markets with growth potential. Policy uncertainty—especially high in face of parliamentary elections that are due within the next nine months—weighs on sentiment (Box 1). In the wake of the long recession, large fiscal vulnerabilities have built up. Public debt has increased from 35 percent of GDP in 2008 to 85 percent at end-2014, reflecting fiscal deficits averaging almost 6½ percent of GDP since 2009—due in part to the assumption of debts from state-owned enterprises—and the economic contraction. At around 20 percent of GDP, public annual gross financing needs are large. Still, macro-economic and financial risks appear contained. Government financing. The government covers more than 80 percent of financing needs from domestic sources, notably banks. Ample global liquidity has kept risk spreads compressed. General government public debt Fiscal balance (RHS) Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Fiscal Developments 30%40%50%Jan-08Dec-08Nov-09Oct-10Sep-11Aug-12Jul-13Jun-14May-15Parliamentary elections Election Polls (Percent of electorate)Sources: IpsosAdria, http://www.ipsosadria.com/croatia; and IMF staff calculations. SDP led coalitionHDZ main opposition partyVoter movement since election Page 11 Risks of capital outflows and currency instability are contained by (i) prudential regulation compelling banks to maintain large liquidity surpluses in Croatia; (ii) the absence of foreign investors in the domestic currency securities market, limiting the risk of a destabilizing sell-off, and (iii) thin futures markets that render it difficult to build up positions against the kuna. Croatia is under both the EU’s Excessive Deficit (EDP) and the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedures (MIP). Implementation of the EDP started in 2014. For 2015, the European Commission (EC) has confirmed that the fiscal plan submitted in the context of Croatia’s convergence program meets EDP requirements. As for the MIP, the EC considers Croatia to have excessive imbalances. However it has not yet opened a formal corrective procedure, as some progress has been made with structural reforms (see below).