Staff encouraged the CNB to continue its conservative prudential policies and supervisory vigilance. The CNB has used the flexibility of the EU rules to maintain high capital buffers, which, on average would be sufficient to cover the un-provisioned part of NPLs. The current proposal includes three amendments: (i) the Parliament may approve the annual report of the CNB, rather than only discuss it; (ii) the six-year terms for board members would be limited to two terms; and, (iii) in addition to the current requirement of an independent external audit, the CNB would also be audited by the State Auditor. Page 18 The apparent stabilization of NPL levels is encouraging. The CNB noted that the strengthened provision requirements, introduced in 2013, have encouraged banks to sell NPLs or write them off. However, tax issues remain an obstacle, but the NRP includes measures to address these concerns and thus facilitate resolving the debt-overhang of many corporations. Staff also welcomed the objective of the new Consumer Bankruptcy Act, which came into force in January 1, 2016, and the incorporation of the Pre-Bankruptcy Settlement Law into the bankruptcy legislation. However, it is too early to tell if these changes will reduce the costs and uncertainty about future debt recoveries. Staff expressed concerns about the handling of the conversion of Swiss franc household loans into euros and advised against future across-the-board bailouts. As argued in the 2015 Article IV consultation, staff would have preferred that pertinent parties would have found a more balanced solution with a view to prevent moral hazard problems, while seeking other means to assist the neediest borrowers. Staff explored with the authorities underlying factors that may explain the continued subdued bank lending. The CNB and market observers believe that subdued lending is primarily a demand rather than a supply challenge. An exception to this view concerns small and medium-sized companies without sufficient collateral or a long track record to mitigate their, typically, higher risk. The Croatian Development Bank (HBOR) is filling an important gap in supporting exporters and SMEs, but is not subject to the CNB’s supervision. The authorities stressed that HBOR does not accept deposits from the general public and should thus not be subject to supervision by the CNB. Moreover, HBOR is subject to audits by independent external auditors and the State Audit Office. Staff acknowledged that HBOR’s main activities are different from commercial banks—it functions as an export credit agency, export bank, and as a development bank—but also noted that its direct lending is growing and may merit supervision similar to commercial banks. The authorities are considering an independent asset quality review of HBOR’s credit portfolio, which would be an important step to address this concern.