The authorities’ reform program contemplates steady consolidation to reduce the headline deficit to 2.6 percent of GDP in 2016 and 1.0 percent of GDP by 2019. The authorities expressed their strong commitment to achieve their deficit target to facilitate exiting the EDP. The NRP includes key fiscal reforms, such as introducing a modern real estate tax, making part of public servants’ compensation performance based, streamlining social benefits, reforming the pension system, and privatization (Annex V). The 2016 Convergence Program (CP) is based on many of the reforms listed in the NRP. However, the authorities’ fiscal effort this year is mostly focused on expenditure control, while working on building sufficient support for the structural measures planned under the NRP. Staff noted that the NRP will require implementation of specific measures, many of which involve legislative changes. Furthermore, the CP projects a gradual decline in revenue as a result of an anticipated lowering of some of the existing high taxes. Staff stressed that any tax reduction should be contingent on progress in expenditure consolidation and success in achieving the targeted fiscal deficit. Given the substantial downside risks outlined earlier, and absent concrete measures to fully support the NRP, staff’s baseline scenario reflects only partial implementation of reforms. Accordingly, staff projects that in this scenario the fiscal deficit would decline to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2016 and to 2.3 percent of GDP starting in 2019 (Table 3). Staff viewed the NRP adjustment path as adequate, and encouraged them to achieve it by decisive implementation of the required reform measures . Staff, therefore, recommended an adjustment scenario that is similar to the NRP’s path of fiscal consolidation, but that is somewhat different in the composition of that consolidation. Most importantly, staff recommended less reliance on across-the-board expenditure reduction and that more focus be placed on streamlining the high social spending. Staff also stressed that achieving the targeted deficit path would only be possible by decisively implementing the needed underlying reforms in a timely fashion. In addition, staff encouraged the authorities to achieve their 2016 deficit target (2.6 percent of GDP), including by implementing components of the NRP that can be readily introduced in the short run such as making part of civil servants’ compensation performance based and streamlining some of the overlapping social benefits. Furthermore, preparatory work for some of the more substantial reforms The size of government in Croatia has necessitated high tax rates. The standard VAT rate is 25 percent, and the income tax rate on earnings starting at about €1,800 monthly net of personal allowances is 40 percent. In addition there are pension, health care, unemployment, and injuries insurance contributions. 20152016201720182019Revenue43.744.143.743.743.1of which Taxes25.425.124.924.624.3 Social contributions11.911.811.611.411.2Expenditure46.946.845.745.344.2of which Wages11.411.211.010.810.5 Intermediate consumption8.17.87.67.67.4 Social payments16.416.216.015.715.5 Subsidies1.71.61.51.31.2Overall balance-3.2-2.6-2.0-1.6-1.0Source: Croatian authorities and European Commission. Composition of Fiscal Adjustment Under the Convergence Program (in percent of GDP) Page 15 (such as improving land registration and the cadastre, which are required for a modern real estate tax) could start immediately. Staff estimates that full implementation of the NRP reforms could yield up to 3 percent of GDP. Phasing-in this adjustment over the next few years would result in the 1.0 percent of GDP targeted deficit by 2019, while still creating space for reducing the high tax rates as committed in the CP. If necessary, the space could also be used to secure a faster exit from the EDP. With this strong adjustment path, public debt would be on a faster downward path and could decline to below 80 percent of GDP over the medium term. Furthermore, the NRP reforms would also improve the quality of fiscal revenue and expenditure, with a view to supporting growth, efficiency, and equity. Advancing civil service and social benefits reforms would be essential to achieve the fiscal targets, which improve both efficiency and equity . Staff welcomed the consensus reached between the authorities and social partners to contain the relatively large public sector wage bill and further postpone increases in public wages. Staff also welcomed the plan to make part of the Staff’s advice, including improving the quality of consolidation and an annual deficit reduction of about 0.6 percent of GDP (which translates to 1.5 percent of GDP total adjustment in the structural balance), are broadly in line with those of the EC, both with regards to the recommended adjustment path and reform measures. Assuming a smaller output gap than that estimated by staff, the EC recommends fiscal adjustment that is above 0.5 percent of GDP. In 2009, in reaction to the recession, the authorities and the public sector unions reached an agreement to postpone public sector wage increases until growth recovered. The trigger was supposed to be activated in the third quarter of 2015. The estimated budget impact of the wage increase is about 0.5 percent of GDP. An agreement was recently reached to further postpone any wage increase in view of the lack of fiscal space. Revenue Adopting property tax 1.0 - 1.5Health sector additional income0.3Other revenue measures0.2 Expenditure Savings on public sector wage bill0.2Savings on social spending0.6Other expenditure savings0.5 Total Key Fiscal Savings, 2016-21 (In percent of GDP) Structural Balance (% of GDP) Baseline scenario Adjustment scenario Public Debt (% of GDP) Baseline scenario Adjustment scenario Page 16 compensation performance-based in order to improve efficiency and the quality of public services. With regards to social benefits, staff noted the large size of social spending in relation to GDP (16.5 percent) and recommended accelerating the implementation of the one-stop shop for the numerous benefits to avoid duplication, while enhancing means-testing to improve targeting. Furthermore, staff pointed out that reforming the health sector—which currently suffers from large arrears, inefficient use of some hospitals, etc.—is key to reduce costs, while improving the quality of service. Staff welcomed the recent announced reform of the pension system, which has expedited the phasing of the increase in the retirement age and raised the early retirement penalty, in line with EC recommendations. The authorities expressed their determination to improve the absorption of EU structural and investment funds to boost growth. This will require improving implementation capacity and simplifying administrative procedures. Staff supported this intention and highlighted the need to maintain transparency to reduce the risk of irregularities. Staff also encouraged the authorities to expedite the transposition of the procurement directive in order to facilitate faster absorption of EU structural and investment funds. A determined effort to strengthen public sector management and advance the planned privatization—specially of inactive assets—in a transparent and fair fashion would help improve the efficiency of the economy and also put the large public debt on a steeper downward path. Staff noted that past experience would suggest that receipts from privatization might take longer to materialize than what is projected under the CP. In addition, staff pointed out that amending the Fiscal Responsibility Law, in line with best international practice, would be useful, including strengthen the link between annual budget planning and the multi-year fiscal strategy.