Diagnostic The analysis of fiscal policy is at this juncture complicated by methodological changes and shifts in the coverage of the public sector , reflecting Croatia’s adoption of the European Union’s statistical standards (Tables 4a-c, Figure 8). While these changes should eventually greatly improve the quality of fiscal statistics—including by reflecting fiscal risks more accurately than the Page 17 cash-based central government statistics used thus far—they trigger large revisions to fiscal aggregates in the short term. The 2014 general government deficit is now reported at 5.7 percent of GDP—a significantly larger number than was expected to result from these revisions—while public debt stands at 85 percent of GDP. The widening reflects inter alia the inclusion of additional agencies in the deficit computation, and the calling of a state guarantee by Croatian railroads. In terms of policies, expenditure-side consolidation efforts in 2014 were neutralized by weak revenue performance in the face of GDP contraction and deflation, especially in the first half of 2014. Domestic financing is expected to be the main funding source going forward, insulating the government somewhat from external market pressures. About 80 percent of the central government’s funding needs are covered from domestic issuance, of which more than half are short-term instruments such as t-bills that are mostly bought by Croatian institutional investors. As for external funding, in early 2015 the government issued a €1.5 billion bond with 10-year maturity at a low yield (3.3 percent), with no immediate plans for further issuance. Policy Discussions Staff and the authorities agreed that the challenge for fiscal policy remained striking a balance between sending a credible signal of consolidation on the one hand—even more important now in the face of the upward revisions of government deficits and debt—and the need not to overburden the still weak economy on the other (Box 6). Overall adjustment need and phasing. Staff’s analysis suggests that adjustment of close to 3 percent of GDP is needed to reach a structural deficit of about 1 percent of GDP, motivated by the general minimum balance in the EU’s fiscal framework. Stretching adjustment over three years appears appropriate, lest to overburden the still weak economy. In this case, the public debt ratio would peak at about 93 percent of GDP in 2017, before embarking on a sustained downward path (Annex II). The sustainability of this path is robust to a wide variety of shocks, including a delay in the recovery, and the drawing of additional state guarantees. For 2015, the path applies a (net) annual adjustment need of ½-1 percent of GDP. Adjustment in 2015. Given the fragility of the recovery, staff advocated measures with limited spillovers to private demand in 2015. In view of the dearth of structural expenditure measures that could be implemented right away (i.e., without accompanying structural reforms that require preparation), most of these should be on the revenue side, such as Further revisions are likely, as by end-2015 SOEs linked to local governments will be included into the general government. This is bound to increase reported public debt further. Primary deficit Real interest rate Real GDP growth Exchange rate depreciation Residual Public Debt, 2008 and 2014 1/ (Percent of GDP)2008 2014 Sources: Croatian Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Includes assumption of SoE debt Page 18 reducing exemptions from personal income tax and limiting a tax break for reinvested corporate earnings. Better absorption of EU structural and cohesion funds would also help mitigate the impact of consolidation. For 2016 and beyond, staff argued that the priority was to restructure expenditures, so as to render public spending more growth and employment friendly. In this regard, a comprehensive approach was called for, which should be based on a recent expenditure review conducted by the Croatian authorities. In particular, subsidies and transfers in Croatia are higher than in comparable countries, and are often poorly targeted, while public investment is low. Further, on the revenue side a shift to less distortionary taxation is called for, such as introduction of a modern property tax. Against this yardstick, staff argued that the amount of fiscal adjustment contained in the authorities’ 2015 fiscal plan was broadly appropriate, but the composition was not. 2015 budget contains an income tax cut of about 0.6 percent of GDP (through the realignment of tax brackets). In the 2015 convergence program submitted to the EC, part of the cut is offset by a couple of high-quality but low-yielding revenue measures, notably higher excises for gasoline and tobacco, and a new tax on interest earnings. But the larger portion is compensated by ad-hoc and incompletely specified spending cuts in line ministries and—especially—SOEs, concentrated in material expenditures and public investment. Overall, the program contains net consolidation measures of ½–1 percent of GDP (a precise assessment was not possible, as several measures are not yet fully specified), although few of them appear structural. The measures yield a headline deficit of 5–5½ percent of GDP. There are risks to the deficit forecast, as the projection for dividends collected from SOEs appears optimistic, while tax revenue could also disappoint in view of continued deflationary pressures. The authorities defended the income tax cut, arguing that it was needed to stimulate the economy. In this context, they claimed that the improvement in private consumption thus far in 2015 owed significantly to tax relief. The authorities also defended the emphasis on expenditure side consolidation in 2015, pointing to Croatia’s elevated level of government spending relative to peers. Staff followed up on health sector reform, especially efforts to reign in the persistent accumulation of arrears. Since the beginning of this year, the public health insurance fund operates outside the central government. Staff saw fiscal risks from loosening treasury control over health spending. The authorities underscored, however, that the health insurance fund was using the autonomy to engage in an ambitious reform that strengthens performance incentives and increases Revenue measures0.14 Personal income tax, threshold adjustment-0.60Tax on interest from savings, and lottery tax0.15Excise increases 2/0.22Health Fund contribution rate change 2/0.24Other 0.13 Expenditure measures0.55 Subsidies0.10Compensation0.08Other current expenditures0.11Capital formation0.06Savings from SOEs and Extra-budgetary Institutions0.20Source: Croatian authorities, and staff computations. Identified Fiscal Measures for 2015 1/ (percent of GDP)1/ As included in staff's baseline.2/ Includes carry-over from measures taken in mid-2014. Page 19 pressures on hospitals to stay within their budgets. Staff and the authorities agreed that the test for success would be whether the envisaged reduction in health arrears materializes.