The Central Bank and staff agreed that at this juncture there is no viable alternative monetary anchor to the quasi-peg to the euro, given the high degree of euroization. Staff encourages the CNB to continue to smooth sharp exchange rate fluctuations, while expediting structural reforms in order to enhance competitiveness. Staff estimated that the REER remains marginally overvalued by about 3 percent (Annex VI). Staff encouraged the CNB to continue to accumulate international reserves to cushion potential shocks . The reserve coverage is still somewhat below the IMF’s ARA (Assessing Reserve Adequacy) metric. The authorities noted that the virtual absence of foreign investors in the kuna securities market reduces the risk of destabilizing sell-offs. Moreover, the regulatory regime still The health sector arrears stood at kuna 2.5 billion (0.76 percent of GDP) as of end-2015, a slight decline from kuna 2.8 billion at end-2014. Page 17 mandates banks to maintain sizable FX liquidity buffers, which also alleviate risks. The CNB rarely purchases FX in the spot market except receipts from eurobonds issued by the government. Staff welcomes the CNB’s openness to look for further opportunities to boost reserves—given the strong current account surplus and the recent appreciation of the kuna/euro rate (about 2.8 percent from February 2015 to April 2016). Staff supports the CNB’s relatively accommodative stance within the limitations of the monetary regime. The CNB has adequately responded to the drawn-out recession and the loose global monetary conditions by gradually reducing interest rates and easing of required reserves. Staff welcomed the introduction, in February 2016, of a four-year structural reverse repo facility that is intended to provide stable long-term kuna funding. In principle, this should contribute to a gradual reduction of the high degree of euroization. Staff explored with the authorities the reasons behind the traditional high degree of euroization. Both loans and deposits denominated in foreign currency (FX) or indexed to FX have for decades fluctuated around 70 percent. The high degree of euroization is primarily supply driven by persistent preferences to save in FX—likely reflecting the experiences of hyperinflation in the 1990s—in spite of interest differentials. Banks, with a view to avoid having a net open position, have accordingly issued FX loans, including to un-hedged borrowers. Over time, the authorities have taken several measures to reduce euroization, including macro-prudential tools, some of which were given up with EU accession. Since mid-2015, banks have been required to offer alternative kuna loans to un-hedged households and to illustrate the potential impact of exchange rate changes. Staff pointed out that differentiating macro-prudential tools or increased capital requirements for more risky lending practices (pillar II) could prove beneficial for financial sector stability until Croatia adopts the euro in line with its intention. Staff stressed the importance of preserving the independence, accountability, and transparency of the CNB in line with Croatia’s commitment to the Statute of the European System of Central Banks The Parliament has been seeking to increase its oversight of the CNB, including by considering amendments to the Law on the CNB. The authorities concurred with staff that the independence of the CNB must be protected, while maintaining its accountability and transparency. Staff underlined that the wording of the proposed amendments to the Law on the CNB need to be carefully calibrated to avoid any unintended consequences.