Staff projects growth to strengthen slightly to about 1.9 percent in 2016 and then stabilize around 2–2¼ percent over the medium term. The growth projections are based on an anticipated solid export and tourism performance and a continued recovery in domestic demand (Table 2). Private consumption is expected to be aided by recovering wages, better employment prospects, and the deleveraging process gradually coming to an end. Both private and public investment will benefit from larger EU funds absorption. Reduced policy uncertainty, following the ongoing fiscal consolidation and the launch of the NRP, is expected to encourage both domestic and foreign investment. Export growth is anticipated to remain strong, but to decelerate, as benefits from EU accession peter out (Annex II). However, net exports will only contribute moderately to growth given the increasing imports. Inflation is projected to return to positive territory in late 2016, with the anticipated increase in energy prices. In 2015, effective October 31, the Lombard rate was halved from 5.0 percent to 2.5 percent, the CNB discount rate reduced from 7.0 percent to 3.0 percent, the rate on short-term CNB liquidity credits cut from 6.0 percent to 4.0 percent, and the penalty rate on required reserves was lowered from 12.0 percent to 8 percent. The CNB overnight deposit rate has been zero since April 24, 2013. Effective October 7, 2015, the CNB revoked the regulation relating to compulsory CNB bills. Effective January 13, 2016, the requirement to maintain part of the statutory reserves in foreign exchange was abolished hence providing banks more flexibility in managing their liquidity and reducing their regulatory costs. However, adjusted for exchange rate movements and write-offs of non-performing loans, the decline of bank claims on non-financial enterprises and households were much smaller (1.3 and 1.1 percent, respectively). Page 13 Staff projects the 2016 general government deficit at 2.8 percent of GDP, with a further steady decline to 2.3 percent of GDP over the next few years (baseline scenario). The 2016 budget targets a deficit of 2.6 percent of GDP. The targeted deficit reduction in 2016 reflects a combination of a cyclical revenue upturn and across-the-board freeze of expenditure, excluding items that are funded by the EU. However, absent concrete measures to underpin some of the planned reforms, staff projects a slightly higher deficit in 2016 and a slower pace of consolidation over the medium term. The cyclically-adjusted primary balance is estimated to improve in 2016 by about 0.3 percent of potential GDP. Vulnerabilities remain high due to elevated debt levels: Public debt , which stood at only 37 percent of GDP in 2007, is projected to stay high at over 86 percent of GDP during 2016–17, although the recent increase is exaggerated due to definitional changes. It will then slowly decline to 82 percent of GDP over the medium term, aided by fiscal consolidation, low interest rates, and sustained GDP growth (Annex III). External debt is expected to substantially decline from about 104 percent of GDP in 2015 to a still high 84 percent of GDP in the medium term, aided by the ongoing private sector deleveraging and fiscal consolidation. The current account surplus is projected to decline gradually over the next few years, while foreign reserves would continue to grow slowly (Annex IV).