Croatia has begun since the last quarter of 2014 to gradually recover from a six-year recession . In 2015 real GDP grew by 1.6 percent, driven by strong exports and tourism, a revival of private consumption, and higher public investment. Private investment growth also finally turned positive. The general government deficit narrowed due to both a cyclical upturn in revenues and some consolidation efforts. The external current account balance also improved due to strong export growth, a record tourism season, and low oil prices. Since February 2014, CPI inflation has largely been in low negative territory, mostly due to declining energy and food prices. Nevertheless, the economy remains rigid and vulnerabilities are high. Both public and external debt financing needs are large (about 16 and 19 percent of GDP, respectively in 2016). Structural reforms have been lagging. Unemployment remains high and the participation rate low. Medium-term annual growth is projected at 2 percent, significantly lower than peers, and per capita income has a long way to catch up with the EU average. The announced objectives of the new ruling coalition are to reduce vulnerabilities and boost growth. In late January—almost three months after the parliamentary elections—a cabinet, headed by a technocrat Prime Minister with strong corporate credentials, was established with a narrow majority (initially 78, now 76 of 151 seats in parliament) and is facing persistent political challenges. Nonetheless, the government was able to achieve its first task of passing the 2016 budget that broadly freezes expenditures with a view to reduce the deficit to well- Total public sector investment is larger than what is included in the budget under the ESA2010 definition. Nov-12Jul-13Mar-14Nov-14Jul-15Mar-16 5-Year CDS Spreads (Basis points) Hungary Romania Slovenia May-16 BEL BLG HRV CZEDNKESTFRA DEU HUNIRLITA LTVLTU NLD PLNPRT ROURUSSVK SVNESPTURGBR C D f il Fiscal Balance, % of GDP, 2015 CDS Spreads and Fiscal Balance Sources: Eurostat, IMF World Economic Outlook , Bloomberg, and IMFstaff estimates. Size of the bubble: Public debt as percentof GDP, 2015 Page 10 below 3 percent of GDP, contain public debt, and thus ultimately exit the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). The coalition’s election platform included numerous structural reforms as well as populist measures, although the latter have been scaled back. The recently launched National Reform Program (NRP) includes wide-ranging reforms, many of which will require political consensus.