Curaçao and Sint Maarten share many similarities but also important differences. Both are small open island economies but, while Sint Maarten’s economy is essentially tourism-based, Curaçao’s is more diversified, featuring also an international financial center (IFC), a transshipment port, a dry dock, and the oil refinery. Trading partners are also different: Sint Maarten relies mostly on tourists from the US and Europe, while Curaçao has important trade and tourism links also with close-by Venezuela and Latin America. Having been established as autonomous countries (out of the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles) as recently as late 2010, both need to right-size and increase the effectiveness of their administrations. But while Curaçao needs to extract efficiency gains from merging the two pre-existing levels of governments (the Netherlands Antilles’ central government and Curaçao’s island government), Sint Maarten needs to expand its capacity to perform some of the functions previously carried out by the Netherlands Antilles’ central government. Both countries face many of the challenges of other Caribbean islands (Figure 1), especially in terms of boosting growth while safeguarding external stability. This is particularly the case for Curaçao, which has trailed its regional peers at least since the early 2000s. Sint Maarten has done better, benefiting from a boom in cruise tourism which, however, may face diminishing returns and could also adversely impact the quality and appeal of stay-over tourism. On the plus side, both countries’ public debt is low, thanks to the 2010 debt relief, whereby the Netherlands took over all the Netherlands Antilles’ outstanding public debt in exchange for a significantly smaller amount of very long-term/low-cost debt issued by the two new countries. Against these challenges, staff’s advice is predicated on an analytical framework based on the fixed exchange rate. Curaçao and Sint Maarten form a currency union, whose currency— the Netherlands Antilles Florin, or guilder (NA.f)—has been pegged to the US dollar at 1.79 since 1971. Since the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles, there has been some debate whether the two countries should keep the currency union (the two island nations are far apart—over 550 miles—and trade between them is limited). This debate, partly economic and partly political, appears to have subsided of late in favor of the status quo . But even if, in consideration of their economic differences and geographic distance, the two countries were in the future to decide to adopt separate monetary arrangements, they would still be best served by a fixed exchange rate regime, given their small open economies. Such a regime helps by preventing unnecessary exchange rate uncertainty, but it also affords very limited scope for active monetary policy. It thus puts a premium on creating and keeping fiscal buffers, and requires maintaining competitiveness and flexibility primarily via structural reforms. Major data gaps hamper effective macro-economic analysis and surveillance . National account data are produced only with very long lags. In Curaçao, there is no official breakdown for Page 6 GDP into its demand components after 2009, while for Sint Maarten there are nominal series, but these often seem difficult to reconcile with all the available information. Balance of payments data for the union as a whole are not consistent with those for the two component countries, and there are no data on the two countries’ international investment position—a key input in the assessment of the sustainability of the union’s external position.