Background Both economies continue to operate below capacity, exhibiting low convergence towards potential growth. Labor productivity growth remains low, negatively impacting output growth and competitiveness (text chart), particularly in Curaçao, where labor productivity growth has averaged -0.2 percent over 2012-15. Meanwhile, broader competitiveness indicators are mixed, pointing to high labor costs, subdued inflation and a moderate increase in the number of stay-over tourist arrivals (but a decline in market share) in both countries (Annex II). Real growth one standard deviation lower and primary balance one half standard deviation lower than the baseline in 2017-18 = Page 19 Policy Discussions The mission welcomes the authorities’ ambitious plans to strengthen competiveness and reinvigorate their economies through important structural reforms. In Curaçao, the National Development Plan 2015-30 aims at encouraging foreign direct investment, stimulating priority sectors with potential for higher value added (including the free zone, maritime and aviation sectors), ensuring inclusive quality education, and promoting good governance. In Sint Maarten, where tourism represents the highest share of the economy, a tourism authority has been recently established and a development plan is currently being discussed, to diversify the tourism sector, reduce its seasonality, and increase value-added. Given the Union’s small population base, a flexible labor market equipped with appropriate skills is needed to improve competitiveness and growth potential. In Curaçao, labor market reforms should focus on addressing restrictive dismissal laws and protective work permit policies (for foreign labor) that hinder labor market flexibility (Box 2). Although the labor market in Sint Maarten is less restrictive, efforts are needed to improve efficiency and timeliness in granting required permits for foreign workers. To address mismatches in skills, the authorities in both islands have recognized the need to refocus the education system. The mission recommends renewed efforts to improve vocational education and develop targeted training programs to strengthen skills and improve productivity. The Sint Maarten authorities have recently embarked on a government-sponsored employment program to address high youth unemployment. Close monitoring and assessment of program deliverables will be critical to ensure the effective deployment of public resources. illi illi illi ç tt illi illi illi tt tt Page 20 Box 2. Labor Market Issues Low growth and high unemployment underscore the need to address declining labor market productivity and improve labor market flexibility in the Union. Unemployment remains high, especially among the youth in both Curaçao and Sint Maarten. At the same time, the work force cannot adequately meet the demand for labor. The focus of labor market policy, including on flexibility, has shifted frequently and contributes to uncertainty. Education systems and technical and vocational training are currently not fully aligned to meet the countries’ needs. This exacerbates issues related to small populations and migration, which also contribute to a mismatch between the supply and the demand for labor. There are also limited quality technical and vocational training institutions and no certifying institutions. The authorities also recognize the need for greater focus on building soft skills and on career mentoring to help better prepare young people for the work place. Generous welfare benefits act as a disincentive to employment in the formal sector contributing to a high reservation wage, particularly in Curaçao. Unemployment benefits in Curaçao often exceed the minimum wage, covering, among other things, housing, healthcare costs, and provide subsidies for water and electricity. This could incentivize persons to work in the informal sector while collecting benefits. Although Curaçao has implemented reforms to reduce fraud and now requires that persons receiving welfare undergo training and actively seek employment, controls are often weak. Sint Maarten’s welfare benefits are less generous at approximately 67 percent of the minimum wage. Restrictions on hiring foreign workers limit the ability to fill employment gaps. Both countries require that persons seeking employment are sponsored by an employer, and that the employer initiates the application for the work permit. In addition, the employer must show that the vacancy was advertised in the local market without success. In Curaçao, the Permit department is faced with a number of challenges, including an insufficient budget, understaffing, and inadequate office space, which has led to a backlog in permits, beyond the six weeks’ maximum required by law. While Sint Maarten processes work permits in 2 weeks, the process is lengthened by the need to first obtain a landing permit, which can take 3-4 weeks. Dismissal laws are also inflexible in both countries. This has encouraged the use of short-term contracts rather than the creation of stable employment. As such, even where the skills required are available locally, these posts may not be filled, given the limited job security they provide. Page 21 Staff emphasized that improving the business climate is critical to reigniting investor confidence, promoting private sector activity, and attracting foreign direct investment. The mission therefore welcomes the authorities’ efforts in both islands to rationalize business licensing requirements, reduce transportation costs, and promote fair competition. The mission also endorses the authorities’ plan to proactively address red tape through centralization and streamlining of business registration processes, and to improve efficiency in government services and reduce transaction costs. In addition, maintaining a stable political environment and ensuring policy continuity is critical to promoting long term business investment decisions. Staff urged the authorities to quickly advance implementation of energy sector reforms geared toward cost reduction and long term sustainability to improve competitiveness and build resilience. As in many other Caribbean islands, energy costs are high in Curaçao and Sint Maarten, where high reliance on imported-fossil-fuel-based generation increases their vulnerability to external shocks. The authorities in both islands have recognized, through their national development plans, the importance of diversifying the generation mix through the development of renewable energy. Follow through with steadfast implementation is critical to reducing energy costs and achieving a stable, sustainable and clean energy future. Moreover, the energy sector regulatory framework needs to be strengthened in Sint Maarten by introducing an independent regulator. Authorities’ views. The authorities concurred with staff about the importance of removing impediments to private sector activity by enhancing the doing business and labor market conditions. They stressed that vocational education and skills training are among the key priorities for addressing skills mismatches, unlocking growth, and improving competitiveness over the medium term. Regarding energy sector reforms, the authorities noted that several initiatives for renewable energy have been considered, including wind and solar power, seawater cooling, and “waste-to-energy”, under their national development plans.