Background As a quid-pro quo for the 2010 debt relief, both countries agreed to a rule-based fiscal framework. This consists of a “golden rule” (i.e., borrowing only for investment) and an “interest burden rule” (i.e., a cap on the ratio of debt service to revenue). Compliance with these rules is assessed by the Netherlands-headed Council for Financial Oversight (CFT in Dutch). Only once the CFT ascertains compliance does it permit borrowing, in which case the Dutch treasury stands ready to offer financing at long maturities and its own borrowing rates. 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Sources: CBCS; and IMF staff calculations. Flows from the Netherlands' debt relief will reverse in 2019 (% of Union's GDP) Page 9 Initially both countries failed to comply with the requirements of the framework because their budgets were not consistent with a current balance from a multi-annual perspective and/or because of deep procedural flaws (e.g. Sint Maarten’s budgets for 2011, 2012 and 2013 were approved by Parliament only very late in the year or even after the year’s completion). This led the CFT to issue a series of advices/warnings and, eventually, injunctions for remedial measures to both the government of Curaçao (mid-2012) and of Sint Maarten (September 2013). More recently, however, the framework has gained traction and helped steer both countries’ fiscal policies in the right direction: Curaçao has put its public finances on a sustainable footing, including by addressing decisively its age-related fiscal pressures. Following the CFT injunction, Curaçao reformed the basic pension system by increasing the general retirement age from 60 to 65 (with very limited grandfathering and a short transition period) and overhauled the health care system by (i) introducing a basic medical insurance scheme (now covering some 80 percent of the population), (ii) raising premiums by 2.9 percent, and (iii) lowering the medicine bill by some 16 percent (by favoring generics and changing the co-pay system). The authorities also embarked on an ambitious plan to gradually decrease the number of public servants from around 4200 (in 2011) to a target of 3350 in 2017, to exploit the scope for synergies and streamlining from the merger of the former Netherlands Antilles government and the Curaçao island government. The fiscal adjustment was completed on the revenue side by the introduction of an additional sales tax category of 9 percent for luxury goods and an overhaul of the property tax, including to increase its progressivity. In its 2013 annual report, the CFT estimates that this adjustment improved Curaçao’s long term fiscal position by some 10 percent of GDP, relative to a no-policy change scenario. Sint Maarten has brought its current budget in balance in the context of the 2014 budget, and achieved some improvement in its financial management. Faced with the daunting task of setting up a new administration, Sint Maarten initially needed some correction to achieve the current balance, even though it benefited from more benign demographics. The government increased the turnover tax rate (from 3 to 5 percent) in 2011, shifted its share of the health insurance premiums onto the employees, and tried to reign in the wage bill (by freezing bonuses and the cost of living adjustment in 2013) and expenditures on subsidies. The 2014 budget was also approved by Parliament in January of this year, which—while still not quite timely—represented a major improvement over previous years’ processes. These improvements have allowed the CFT to certify compliance with the framework and paved the way for significant borrowing by both countries from the “standing subscription” window offered by the Dutch treasury. In 2014, Curaçao plans to borrow some NA.f 436 million In 2001, population aged 20-59 was 8 times larger than that aged 60+ in Sint Maarten, but only 3 times in Curaçao. Page 10 (8 percent of GDP) to pre-finance the entire cost of the construction of a new hospital. Sint Maarten plans to borrow NAf143 million (8 percent of GDP), to finance planned investment (including the purchase of a new government building, which has laid incomplete and unused for many years) and to replenish its bank deposits, which were run down over the last three years when the government was not allowed to borrow by the CFT. Staff’s Views Both countries should entrench recent gains and overperform on the balanced current budget rule to build fiscal buffers. The current fiscal framework is beneficial for both countries, as it gives them access to an independent auditor and very cheap funding. However, since the current level of low borrowing costs cannot be taken for granted, the interest burden rule does not provide a sufficiently conservative benchmark to ensure continued debt sustainability. Thus both countries should aim at maintaining current surpluses in the order of ¾-1 percent of GDP over the medium- term. Based on current investment plans, this would ensure that public debt peaks under the baseline at about 37 percent of GDP in Curaçao and 32 percent of GDP in Sint Maarten (see DSA), thus creating the fiscal space that both countries need, given their vulnerability to sizeable shocks in the future (e.g., the renovation/clean-up of the refinery in Curaçao, or a weather-related shock to Sint Maarten). It is also important to ensure that public investments have a sufficiently high internal social return, irrespective of how low the costs of borrowing might be. Curaçao must extend the 2013 reform of the old age pension to the public sector workers’ pension system in a timely manner , given the latter’s fast deteriorating financial position. Sint Maarten’s needs in this area are less pressing, given its younger population. Nevertheless its government has appropriately set out to increase the general retirement age to 62, with a motion to this effect currently in Parliament. Considering foreseeable demographic pressures, a further gradual increase of the retirement age to 65 could be considered. Sint Maarten needs to strengthen tax collection. This is essential to sustain the necessary expansion of the administration in line with its increased responsibilities post-autonomy. Yet revenue, which stands at only 18.5 percent of GDP, compared to over 21 percent of GDP for other Caribbean countries, failed to keep pace with economic growth in the past few years. To tackle this apparent decline in tax compliance, the tax administration needs more suitably trained tax inspectors and administrators. Synergies could also be exploited with the strong collection efforts of social funds. The pension fund APC reports that its coverage ratio, which is currently just below 100 percent, would deteriorate by some 20 percent over the next 15 years with unchanged policies. Sint Maarten’s general basic pension fund is actually accumulating surpluses, because the system is based on the demographics of the former Netherlands Antilles, whereas Sint Maarten has a much younger population. On this basis the government has recently increased the pension level, as recommended by Sint Maarten’s Social and Economic Council. Even with this higher benefit level, the fund is projected to continue accumulating surpluses until 2020 with a pension age of 62 (2032 if the pension age is increased to 65). Page 11 Transparency and oversight of SOEs need to be improved and a clear dividend policy established. There is an obvious tension between keeping state-owned enterprises (SOEs) at arm’s- length, thus minimizing undue political interference, and ensuring that they maximize the interest of the public shareholder. Some SOEs have in practice soft budget constraints, and translate their accumulated inefficiencies and above-market wages into higher costs of doing business for the rest of the economy (e.g., Curaçao’s Aqualectra). Even when they are profitable, in the absence of a solid governance framework, SOEs might gear their operations towards maximizing their own short-term profits, including by minimizing their contribution to the public budget (this is, for example, the case for Sint Maarten’s airport and harbor companies). Therefore, the governance of SOEs must be improved, including—as a start—by ensuring the timely availability of reliable financial statements and establishing a clear dividend policy. A further shift from direct to indirect taxation in the medium term would be desirable. To boost competitiveness, both countries should consider a further and gradual shift of taxes from income to consumption, along the lines of the 2009 FAD technical assistance, and replace the existing turnover tax—with its negative cascading effects—with a value-added tax (VAT). This has served well many other Caribbean countries. Authorities’ Views Authorities in both countries agreed with the need to create fiscal buffers and strengthen their medium-term fiscal position: In Curaçao , they emphasized that negotiations on pension reform with public sector unions are ongoing, and that they see scope for further expenditure savings. They acknowledged that SOEs’ continued financial woes, despite the greater and timelier pass-through of their input costs to retail prices, imply that more work is needed in this key area, which has important implications for the economy’s overall efficiency and competitiveness. In Sint Maarten , they intend to strengthen tax administration by deploying new IT systems and additional tax inspectors, and centralizing the tax office. They also expect to enhance administrative effectiveness (and generate some savings) by moving most government departments into the new building. Finally, they see merits in staff’s suggestion to introduce a further gradual increase of the retirement age to 65 in the draft pension reform bill, and pledged to consider it carefully. Cebotari, Aliona, et al, 2013, “Enhancing Fiscal Revenue,” in The Eastern Caribbean Currency Union: Macroeconomics and Financial Systems , ed. by Alfred Schipke, Aliona Cebotari, and Nita Thacker (International Monetary Fund). The authorities expect to save an additional NA.f 130 million by 2017 (about 2 percent of GDP) by cutting personnel expenses (by NA.f 50 million), expenditures on goods and services (by NA.f 50 million), and subsidies (by NA.f 30 million) through such measures as centralizing procurement of goods and moving different ministries to a central government office (to be built). Page 12 Both authorities also agreed in principle with the merits of shifting the tax burden towards consumption and away from income. In Curaçao, however, they indicated that they intend to fully pursue their efficiency-enhancing reforms first, as these might provide scope for an overall reduction of the direct tax burden over time. In Sint Maarten they noted that it is essential to proceed with care, and as much as possible in close coordination with the French side, to avoid any revenue loss from implementation pitfalls, lack of reliable data, and/or tax arbitrage.