Background The Union has a rules-based fiscal policy framework monitored by the Board for Financial Supervision (Cft in Dutch). Each island submits its budget to the Cft, who verifies the realism of the assumptions and the adherence to the rules-based framework, and if necessary recommends changes to the budget. The Cft’s function is reviewed every three years, to ascertain whether there remains a need for continued oversight and the accompanying low-cost “standing subscription” borrowing arrangement, which allows both countries to borrow at prevailing rates in In both Curaçao and Sint Maarten, electricity generation is provided by a single government-owned company with a monopoly also on distribution. Although state-owned, no subsidy currently exists and the electricity tariffs comprise two components: i) the base component to cover all non-direct production costs, and ii) the fuel component that is determined by international oil prices and adjusted monthly. Energy pricing has been regulated by an independent regulator in Curaçao since 2010. Page 22 the Dutch capital market. The most recent review was undertaken in 2015, which extended the Cft’s function till 2018. Policy Discussions Staff proposed that the current rules-based framework be strengthened to ensure fiscal and debt sustainability. While the framework provides a strong basis for containing short- term fiscal risks, it does not provide a sufficient medium term anchor for debt sustainability. A strengthened fiscal framework is particularly important in the context of the upcoming 2018 review of the Board for Financial Supervision (Cft in Dutch) oversight function and the current low-cost “standing subscription” borrowing arrangement. If the agreement was to be discontinued following the review without an agreement for the refinancing of debt incurred under the current access to low rate financing, net flows from the Dutch borrowing arrangement could turn negative, resulting in higher interest costs going forward. The increase in borrowing costs, would over time erode the gains from debt relief and put public debt on an upward trend. Moreover, rising interest costs will make it increasingly difficult to satisfy the “interest burden rule” and accelerate debt accumulation. Hence, staff proposes that the rules be supported by adopting a medium-term macro-fiscal framework that includes a primary balance target consistent with a long-run debt anchor of 40 percent of GDP, which is around the median level of developing and emerging countries. The 40 percent of GDP target is also the benchmark debt ratio used in the standard Fiscal Monitor long-term adjustment needs scenario for emerging market economies, and is consistent with the debt norm proposed by the Cft for Curaçao and Sint Maarten. In addition, the fiscal framework should allow adequate flexibility and be complemented by improved effectiveness of public spending and capacity building to strengthen public institutions and fiscal discipline. Staff’s proposed strengthened framework would ensure the flexibility needed to accommodate the investment in skills development, crucial to unlocking growth, and allows adequate flexibility to accommodate temporary deviations over economic cycles and in the case of natural disasters and other emergencies. The fiscal framework should also include a corrective mechanism with clearly spelt out fiscal measures to correct for any temporary deviations from the target. There has been no formal commitment that the Cft oversight and the “standing subscription” arrangement will or will not be extended after the 2018 review. However, staff suggested to the authorities that a stronger fiscal framework would increase their ability to avoid and/or withstand a potential large interest rate risk. Page 23 (i) Curaçao To mitigate medium-term risks, staff discussed with the authorities a fiscal framework that envisages a 1.5 percent of GDP adjustment phased evenly over 2017-19. This framework is anchored by a 40 percent of GDP long term debt target, and is operated via targets on the primary balance. The adjustments in the primary balance needed for the public debt to gradually decline and stabilize at 40 percent could be achieved by: (i) improving tax compliance (0.5 percent of GDP), (ii) reducing personnel expenditure through attrition and implementation of merit-based salary increments (0.4 percent of GDP), and (iii) containing national health insurance expenses through cost restructuring (0.6 percent of GDP). In this respect, the authorities have made significant efforts to strengthen tax administration (¶29). Important progress has also been made in improving the financial performance of state-owned enterprises, except for the financially-challenged postal corporation, for which an action plan is being finalized (Box 3). However, despite recent reforms, the national health insurance fund (BVZ) remains in deficit and heavily reliant on budgetary transfers, which could pose a risk to medium- term fiscal sustainability (¶29 and Annex V). (ii) Sint Maarten Staff recommended that policy focus on building fiscal buffers for natural disasters, and strengthening institutional capacity to support prudent fiscal management and preserve fiscal and debt sustainability. As public debt in Sint Maarten is projected to remain below 40 percent of GDP under staff’s baseline scenario, staff does not envision a need for immediate upfront fiscal consolidation. However, unlike Curaçao, Sint Maarten lies within the Hurricane belt, underscoring the need to build fiscal buffers for natural disasters. The authorities agree with staff’s recommendation to set aside budget resources annually as precautionary savings for natural disasters, and indicate that while the annual budget already includes a buffer for natural disasters, unspent amounts are not saved. The staff recommended the authorities establish a dedicated account for this purpose to support immediate rehabilitation needs. The mission proposes that the authorities target saving a minimum of 0.1 percent of GDP per annum, relative to staff’s baseline projections, based on estimated damages from previous natural disaster events in the region. In this Gross public debt (baseline, rhs) Gross public debt (baseline with savings, rhs) Primary balance (baseline) Primary balance (active) Sint Maarten: Baseline vs. Baseline with Savings Scenarios (in percent of GDP)Sources: Staff projections. Page 24 regard, the authorities agree that this goal can be achieved through measures to improve tax administration, and mobilize revenues. In addition, future consideration could be given to replacing the sales turnover tax with an efficient and sufficiently broad based value added tax (VAT). While the authorities do not see much room to adjust expenditures, staff encouraged the authorities to explore measures to contain the wage bill, which remains above 10 percent of GDP, to make room for other critical spending, including on human capital development. Staff welcomes the authorities’ capacity building efforts, particularly to improve tax administration and public financial management (PFM), and achieve compliance with the fiscal rules. The mission welcomes steps taken by the authorities in Curaçao to improve tax administration, by reducing backlogs in tax assessments and the treatment of objections, rationalizing tax receivables, as well as efforts to improve compliance (including the introduction of fiscal cash registers). Staff encourages Sint Maarten to implement similar measures and, importantly, to take steps to develop human capacity in tax administration. Further efforts are needed in both islands to improve budget formulation and cash flow management, and other key areas highlighted in the 2015 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessments, supported by the Cft. Addressing these weaknesses will require a clear action plan supported by systematic technical assistance to assist the authorities to implement the plan. It is also critical that both governments implement measures to support the production of timely fiscal and macroeconomic statistics, essential to public policy formulation. Staff welcomed the progress made in reducing risks associated with state-owned- enterprises (SOEs) and social security systems. The financial position of SOEs has improved significantly, however, further steps should be taken to address deficit making institutions, in particular Curaçao’s post office, and to ensure transparency and good governance (Box 3). Recent reforms to the social security and pension systems have helped mitigate short term risks, but policy focus should shift toward addressing medium to long term system shortfalls, and ensuring their sustainability. Strong efforts are also required to reduce risks related to increasing healthcare costs. Page 25 Box 3. Fiscal Risks and State-owned Enterprises State-owned enterprises (SOEs) are a key source of fiscal risk for Curaçao and Sint Maarten. Risks related to unexpected changes in macroeconomic variables are relatively low, following the debt relief program, which assures low cost financing in local currency. However, SOEs present a potentially significant source of fiscal risk, underscoring the need to ensure transparency and accountability within these institutions, and for measures to address inefficiencies. At the time of the 2014 Article IV Consultation discussions, staff identified several issues related to transparency and oversight of SOEs. For Curaçao, above-market wages and other inefficiencies translated into a high cost of doing business. While in Sint Maarten, in the absence of a clear dividend policy, profitable SOEs minimized their contribution to the public budget. Since then, Curaçao has made significant progress in strengthening the financial position of SOEs. The financial situation in all but one of four high-risk state-owned enterprises has improved significantly over the last two years, based on reforms instituted by the authorities.  Aqualectra , the utility company, took steps to better align employee compensation with market norms, and to ensure that prices reflect the full pass-through of oil prices. Importantly, Aqualectra has been able to recover losses from previous years by adding a “recovery price” to the regular price. The authorities are also negotiating the return of assets, previously distributed to the refinery at no cost.  Analytic Diagnostic Center , the medical laboratory, in addition to realigning employee compensation, took steps to reduce overstaffing, improve the invoicing process, contain operational costs, and improve debt collection.  Curaçao Dry Dock Company (CDM) settled claims from previous employees, related to poor working conditions and underpayment, and prospects for the company have improved with the signing of a LOI with an international strategic partner. The partnership is expected to bring in new investments and increase the Dry Dock’s capacity to meet the demand for its main line of business, ship repair services.  CPost , the post office, remains a high-risk entity as the action plan, developed to improve its financial position, has not been fully implemented. The cost of providing services remains higher than revenues, with losses amounting to NA f. 3-4 million guilders (US$1.7 million – US$2.2 million) annually. This in part reflects discounts to the government and the Social Security Bank, making the plans politically challenging to implement. In Sint Maarten, SOEs have historically not been a drain on government resources. The authorities have recently drafted a dividend policy to provide a framework for remitting dividends to the government. While the draft policy identifies the relevant financial ratios that can be used to determine whether a dividend can be paid to the government, the decisions to pay a dividend and the amount are left to the shareholders. The authorities believe that the SOEs are better able to decide when they can pay a dividend, based on their position and future plans, and prefer not to set explicit terms. Page 26 Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed in principle on the appropriateness of staff’s proposed medium–term fiscal framework, but were of the view that, while 40 percent is a reasonable target, the decision on the level of the debt target should be left to the individual governing authorities. In the area of tax administration, the Sint Maarten authorities highlight human capital as the most significant challenge, and note that the need to balance the current budget constrains spending on skills development and capacity building, therefore limiting progress in this area. The authorities are taking steps to integrate the tax administration function, which is currently separated into two departments, the Tax Assessment Department and the Audit and Control Department. They are also exploring the possibility of utilizing the financial tax software system shared by the Dutch municipalities (Bonaire, St Eustatius, and Saba) and Curaçao. This would not only be an improvement over the current system, which is outdated, but would allow for shared costs. They recognize the potential benefits from adopting a VAT but indicate their first priority is improving tax administration.