Macroeconomic conditions in Curaçao and Sint Maarten are similar to those in the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) countries, with some important differences. Curaçao and Sint Maarten formed a currency union following the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles in 2010, and kept the guilder, which has been pegged to the U.S. Dollar at 1.79 since 1971. Both islands suffer from stagnant growth, with growth rates trailing regional peers for nearly a decade. Nevertheless, per-capita GDP remains among the highest in the Caribbean (US$26,457 for Sint Maarten and US$20,587 for Curaçao in 2015). While the Union’s current account deficit has steadily declined over the last few years, external sustainability continues to be challenged by persistent large current account deficits (predominantly from Curaçao). As in most ECCU countries, credit growth has been negative since 2013, despite ample liquidity in the banking system, which was in part fueled by large portfolio investment inflows from the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Both countries have made significant progress on fiscal consolidation and are now fully compliant with the legislated fiscal rules. After considerable assistance in the form of debt relief from the Netherlands in 2009-10, public debt ratios in Curaçao and Sint Maarten are now low by regional standards. Details on the debt relief operations are provided in the staff report for 2011 Article IV Consultation discussions (IMF Country Report 11/342). Source: WEO; and IMF Staff Estimates. Caribbean ECCU St. Maarten Curacao Real GDP (YOY percent change) Caribbean ECCU Curacao St. Maarten Current Account (Percent of GDP) Caribbean ECCU Curacao St. Maarten Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Dominica Grenada St. Lucia Curaçao and St. Maarten Credit to Private Sector (Index, 2008=100) Page 11 Efforts have been made to implement the policy recommendations from the 2014 Article IV Consultation discussions, however, progress has been slow (Box 1). Considerable progress in reducing risks associated with pension funds and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) has been made, and additional reforms are forthcoming. While neither island has formally adopted a VAT as recommended by the technical assistance provided by the IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department in 2009, the fiscal position has benefited from progress in keeping public wage developments in check. The central bank has also made steady progress in implementing monetary and financial policy recommendations to ensure financial stability. Less progress has been made however, in implementing recommendations to improve labor market conditions. Box 1. Progress on 2014 Article IV Policy Recommendations Page 12 Staff urges the authorities to implement measures to improve the quality of statistics, to better support effective macro-economic surveillance. There is significant room for improvement in the coverage and timeliness of data, in particular on national accounts, public finance in GFS format, and international investment positions (IIP). In both countries, staff noted large data gaps with GDP estimates, with lags as far back as 2006 for various expenditure components. Besides, with no reliable deflator, or deflators by sector, the real GDP series are derived based on the consumer price index. In addition, some components of Sint Maarten’s balance of payments (BOP) statistics have been compiled as the difference between the Union and Curaçao’s, inevitably resulting in large unexplained swings in the island’s BOP developments in certain years.