The improving global outlook is expected to support activity in the near term. Increasing tourism expenditure would boost activity in both countries, and especially in Sint Maarten, which could grow by about 2 percent, given the much larger share of tourism in its GDP. Curaçao may revert to positive growth (about ½ percent) this year if the planned construction of a new hospital starts without further delay. Growth should accelerate in the medium term, especially if structural bottlenecks are finally addressed . Curaçao could grow by around 1-1¼ percent as the decline in the IFC bottoms out, the tourism sector continues to expand, and a sizeable pipeline of budgeted large public infrastructure projects is implemented. Sint Maarten could grow by around 2½ percent in the medium term, based on current projections for growth in demand of the tourist origin countries. Faster and sustained long-run growth would require structural reforms that enhance both countries’ competitiveness and flexibility (see page 12). Risks are tilted towards the downside, especially for Curaçao (see Risk Assessment Matrix, RAM) . Both countries would be affected if the euro area recovery proves weaker than anticipated, for example as a result of recent geopolitical tensions. Further disruption of economic activity in Venezuela might affect Curaçao’s ability to raise funds for the necessary upgrade of the Isla refinery in time for the expiration of the current lease to PdVSA in 2019. Failure to overcome its institutional gaps could weigh on Sint Maarten’s growth potential. An orderly normalization of US interest rates would lead to some capital outflows and pressures on the union’s international reserves, but should be otherwise manageable in light of the banks’ ample liquidity (see below) and the two governments’ access to low-cost funding from the Netherlands. If US rates increase more rapidly, however, pressures on international reserves could prove more intense (as incentives to circumvent existing capital controls and bring money out of the country would increase) and may -1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.52013201420152016201720182019Sources: IMF WEO; and staff projections. Medium-term Growth Outlook(%) Average Caribbean Sint MaartenAverage Caribbean and main trading partnersCuraçao Page 8 require a sharp policy tightening, resulting in weaker growth. Upside risks, on the other hand, stem primarily from stronger than expected growth in the US and Europe and earlier and larger than expected benefits from ongoing attempts at diversification (catering tourism to faster-growing developing markets in Asia and Latin America, a revitalization of the dry dock and the ship repair business, or new activities such as Curaçao’s new data center for cloud computing). The peg appears solid but over time could come under pressure if competitiveness- and flexibility-enhancing reforms are not implemented. Curaçao’s (and the union’s) current account deficit is expected to continue to decline steadily, reflecting rebounding external demand, coupled with slightly declining oil and food prices and still subdued private domestic demand (Figure 2). It is essential, however, that this improvement is supported by reforms boosting both countries’ competitiveness and their capacity to adjust to shocks, since pressures on international reserves can be expected to increase over time. In particular, the debt-relief related inflows, which have thus far provided significant support to international reserves, are slated to decline gradually over the next few years and to turn into outright net outflows in 2019 (see chart to the right), as the debt issued by Curaçao and Sint Maarten as partial offset for the debt relief begins to mature. In 2019 the lease of Curaçao’s oil refinery to Venezuela—which currently accounts for some 16 percent of FX income—is also set to expire, as are some preferential tax treatments for companies in Curaçao’s IFC (another major source of FX for the union).