Background Ample bank liquidity has continued to fuel rapid credit expansion, especially in Curaçao, until late 2013 (Figure 3). Absence of government bonds to invest in, low interest rates prevailing abroad, and continued large inflows from the debt relief operation have resulted in ample and growing liquidity for domestic banks, fueling rapid credit growth. When this started to exert pressures on international reserves, the CBCS attempted to induce banks to reduce lending by raising reserve requirements multiple times (to 17.5 percent as of May 2014) and, as from March 2012, by imposing temporary bank-level credit ceilings, which have since been recalibrated and renewed every six months. These measures notwithstanding, credit growth continued unabated in Curaçao until late 2013, when it abruptly turned negative. Since banks kept excess reserves throughout and the ceilings were first not observed and then undershot, it would appear that the slowdown in credit reflects not CBCS measures per se but a reduction in credit demand (likely triggered by the reduction in disposable income from the fiscal adjustment) and a more cautious supply of loans by banks (including because of the acceleration in non-performing loans, NPLs, see below). Banks still have relatively healthy capital levels, but NPLs are on the rise. At end-2013, NPLs jumped to 11.9 percent, from 8.6 percent in 2010, and there is a growing concern about asset quality in general. So far, NPLs seem to be concentrated in certain sectors (tourism and air transportation), but there is anecdotal evidence—no hard data—that the sustained growth in mortgages, combined with steady inflows of Dutch retirees and IFC professionals, may have created froth in some segments of the real estate market in Curaçao. As of end 2013, banks report adequate capital (12 percent tier-1 capital ratio) and liquidity (30 percent liquid asset ratio), but one bank has been intervened (reportedly because of the stress caused by a defaulting airline). The situation warrants continued close monitoring by the CBCS. Staff’s Views The CBCS is appropriately trying to slow down credit growth, but should do so more consistently and rely on more standard sterilization tools: Dealing with excess liquidity: The CBCS should be prepared to pay a higher interest rate on its certificates of deposits even though this would lower its profits. It could also raise reserve requirements further, while simultaneously increasing the interest it charges banks Page 13 for liquidity. Finally, it could use macro-prudential tools to contain growth of specific types of loans, e.g. reducing maximum loan-to-value ratios to slow down the growth in mortgages. Over time, it should gradually eliminate remaining limits on outward investments by pension funds. This would allow the excess liquidity to flow out of the system gradually, removing distortions on domestic interest rates. Refraining from direct financing of non-financial companies: While raising reserve requirements and imposing bank-by-bank credit ceilings, the CBCS has continued to provide funding to private corporations and SOEs (the liquidity thus created is now bigger than the banks’ excess liquidity which the CBCS is trying to control— chart to the right). This funding is not part of a standard central bank toolkit and moreover is not justified in a situation where the central bank is concerned with excess liquidity resulting in overall excessive and subpar lending. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the thrust of the staff advice. They reported that they do plan to increase reserve requirements further and raise interest rates on their CDs, as needed, as well as to further alleviate over time the restrictions on outward investments by pension funds. On the financing of SOEs, CBCS management indicated that this policy was initially conceived as a way to facilitate the development of a corporate debt market, but that it has since been discontinued and that they intend to divest their holdings of non-financial companies’ debt as soon as market conditions allow.