The union’s current account deficit has declined since the last Article IV Consultation discussions in 2011, but remains a source of vulnerability. In part this improvement reflects tightened monetary and, especially, fiscal policies in line with staff advice (Annex I). Curaçao’s fiscal adjustment, in particular, appears to have triggered a significant retrenchment in private domestic demand—as witnessed, for example, in the imports of cars, which declined by 12 percent in 2013 after growing by 18 percent over the previous 3 years (Figure 2). At 16 percent of GDP, the current account deficit remains large (see left chart below), pointing to lingering competitiveness issues (Box). Individual country data, which the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten (CBCS) however cautions are likely incomplete, suggest that the deficit stems from Curaçao (right chart below). Despite double-digit deficits, there have been no pressures on the guilder and the union’s international reserves have consistently met the CBCS’ objectives in terms of coverage of imports of goods and services, reflecting strong capital inflows. However, these inflows are adding to net external debt, as non-debt creating FDI have averaged a modest 2 percent of GDP over 2009-13 (see Debt Sustainability Analysis, DSA). For example, official data, which use CPI as deflator, show only a shallow decline in real GDP in the wake of the 2009 global crisis, despite sharp drops in both cruise (10 percent) and stay-over (7 percent) tourist arrivals. Sources: CBCS, and IMF Staff calculations. For 2009 the low current account deficit reflects debt-relief inflows. p U G D Actual CAD Gross official reserves excl. Gold (RHS). The CAD is receding from its peak and reserves remain at healthy levels. Sint MaartenCuraçao The CAD in the two countries diverged (% of GDP) Page 7 Growth has remained lackluster in Curaçao, while a recovery from the global recession appears underway in Sint Maarten. Curaçao’s real GDP is estimated to have contracted by about ½ percent on average per year over 2011-13, reflecting—in addition to long-standing structural weaknesses (discussed below)—the continued decline in the IFC, the slow global recovery, and necessary fiscal adjustment in 2012-13. After contracting by an estimated 1¾ in 2011, Sint Maarten’s real GDP is estimated to have grown by an average of 1¼ percent over 2012-13, benefiting from the ongoing recovery in the US (which accounts for 60 percent of its tourists) and the construction of the Simpson Bay causeway. Private investment spending has reportedly remained subdued, including as a result of policy uncertainty (Sint Maarten has had three governments in the past three years and new elections are scheduled for August 2014).