GROWTH Increasing growth and resilience to shocks requires dealing with long-standing structural bottlenecks, including stifling red tape and inflexible and dysfunctional labor markets. Background Both countries suffer from a rigid labor market and high costs of doing business. Labor laws are very rigid. For example, laying off workers requires the approval of the labor ministry, even for bankrupt companies. Welfare support for the unemployed is quite generous (for example, in Curaçao it is reportedly roughly equivalent to what one would earn from a minimum wage job once free medical insurance, rent and other subsidies are factored in, and can be received for an 10M1011M211M611M1012M212M612M1013M213M613M10 Sources: CBCS and Fund staff calculations. Commercial banks' net excess reservesNet CBCS credit to privatesector Credit extended by the CBCS created additional liquidity (NA.f Million) Page 14 unlimited amount of time). And there are pervasive wage indexation clauses, which can lead wages to diverge from productivity, thus harming competitiveness. Employers in both countries, as well as independent observers, decry a cumbersome permit regime, with unclear procedures and responsibilities, which results in long and unpredictable delays. These structural weaknesses have been detrimental to economic performance, especially in Curaçao, whose more diversified economy needs greater scope for reallocation of labor from declining sectors to growing ones. Curaçao’s growth has been weaker than its regional peers’ since at least the early 2000’s (see Figure 1), and unemployment higher (currently at 13 percent). But limited price and labor market flexibility also adversely affect the competitive position of Sint Maarten, as underscored by the recent spell of high inflation, especially vis-à-vis the US, its key source market (see box). Little progress has been achieved on competitiveness- and flexibility-enhancing reforms since the previous consultations (Annex I): In Curaçao, many structural bottlenecks appear to have in fact worsened. The still incomplete merger of the two levels of government in the Netherlands Antilles’ structure, for example, has reportedly generated additional uncertainty as to which agencies retain the responsibility for processing business permits and licenses in the new setup. The capacity of the administration to audit and control also appears to have weakened, which is potentially leading to greater abuse of the welfare system. In Sint Maarten, there appears to be more focus on monitoring active job search and to improve training opportunities for unemployed. But the labor market remains overly regulated, especially when it comes to work permits for foreigners, and receiving permits to open and operate a business still takes a fairly long time. Staff’s Views Price and labor market flexibility are important avenues through which both economies are expected to adjust to external shocks , given that the fixed exchange rate regime and the current fiscal framework—both of which have served the countries well—constrain the scope for stabilization policies. The labor market must be rendered more flexible and dynamic, especially in Curaçao. Welfare support for unemployed should be limited in time and eligibility requirements (including active job search) enforced vigorously, as Sint Maarten has sought to do. Both countries should render labor dismissal laws more conducive to cyclical shifts in labor demand, so as to raise employment durably, and ease restrictions on hiring foreign workers while enforcing adequate labor conditions, to facilitate FDI and the associated inflow of financial resources and know-how. The costs of doing business need to be lowered . In particular, the business licensing and permit regimes should be substantially streamlined. This would also help bringing more activity out Page 15 of the shadow economy. Both governments could consider introducing automatic approval for some classes of permits/licenses if they are not processed in a set period of time. The efficiency and governance of public utilities and other SOEs need to be enhanced, to lower direct costs of production and reduce distortions, including in the labor market. Authorities’ Views The business environment needs to be strengthened. This is important also to support external adjustment. In Curaçao, the focus is on improving governance and performance of SOEs, and proposals are being considered to speed up license and permit procedures by tasking the Chamber of Commerce with the relevant issuing authority (staff cautioned that this may raise issues of conflict of interests, as incumbents would effectively be called on to authorize the entry of potential competitors). In Sint Maarten, the authorities are launching an online business license information system, which they expect will lead to a significant streamlining of the application procedures. Reduced red tape would also result into stronger competition and put downward pressures on domestic prices. While labor market regulations do result in suboptimal outcomes, reforming them is difficult and there is scope to make progress within the current system. Authorities in both countries, for example, noted that rigid labor dismissal laws in practice result in the proliferation of short-term contracts, with potential perverse effects on workers’ security. At the same time, they felt that forging the necessary consensus for reform is politically difficult given both countries’ heterogeneous governing coalitions and thin majorities. Nevertheless, Sint Maarten authorities reported that soon-to-be-released official survey results will show that unemployment has declined markedly, to around 8 percent as of 2013, and attributed this progress to their intensified controls of eligibility for various unemployment benefits (including active search for jobs) and greater focus on training for unemployed. Both authorities considered that further easing hiring of foreign workers would aggravate the domestic unemployment situation.