The Czech economy exited the recession in 2013. Notwithstanding an average annual decline of 0.9 percent in real GDP, quarter- over-quarter growth turned positive in 2013:Q2 and accelerated throughout last year. The recovery was triggered by exports (mainly of automobiles and machinery), but has been increasingly supported by domestic demand, with a strong contribution from investment in 2013:Q4. Household consumption has also buttressed the recovery, underpinned by improvements in labor income. As a result, year-over-year growth reached 2.9 percent in 2014:Q1. Moreover, high frequency indicators, such as industrial production and sentiment surveys, suggest that growth has remained strong in recent months. The labor market is poised for a recovery. Unemployment entered a gradually declining path in 2013 on the back of gains in employment, and reached 6.6 percent (seasonally adjusted) in 2014:Q1 compared with 7.2 percent a year earlier. While these employment gains were coupled Real GDP and Exports (QoQ, SAAR) Real GDP (percent) Exports (euros, RHS) Page 6 with lower hours worked per employee and declining real wages through 2013, this trend was reversed in 2014:Q1 with real wages recording a solid increase. Inflation has been falling, but is still in positive territory aided by the weaker exchange rate. Headline inflation declined from its September 2012 peak of 3.4 percent to zero in June 2014, in tandem with inflation in the euro area and in regional trade partners. About two thirds of the decline was accounted for by a moderation of food and energy prices. The decline in inflation has been mitigated by the exchange rate depreciation, which had a rapid pass-through to tradables prices—non-energy goods inflation (HICP basis) increased from -0.6 percent in November 2013 to 0.7 percent in June 2014, turning positive for the first time since 2008—and helped keep inflation at an average of 0.2 percent year-over-year in the first half of 2014. Various core inflation indicators also exhibit a trend towards normalization; inflation excluding indirect tax changes and fuels reached 1 percent, its highest level since 2011. Moreover, inflation expectations, as measured by analyst surveys, have also increased following the exchange rate move. A sharp fiscal adjustment led to an exit from the EDP and kept debt levels contained, but exacerbated the recession. The adjustment was driven mainly by a compression of capital expenditure, partly due to implementation bottlenecks, while an increase in VAT rates helped boost revenue. The fiscal stance continued to improve, with the structural deficit narrowing by 1.3 percentage points of GDP on the heels of a cumulative 2.4 percentage point consolidation during 2011–12. The decline in the headline deficit, from 4.2 percent of GDP in 2012 to 1.5 percent in 2013, was even more pronounced due to one-off factors in 2012, which had elevated that year’s deficit. The European Council abrogated the EDP in June 2014. Constrained by the zero lower bound, the Czech National Bank (CNB)—an inflation targeter—resorted to foreign exchange intervention to avoid deflation, consistent with Fund advice. The koruna had been strong in 2012–13, not responding significantly to the weak economy in the last few years, partly buoyed by strengthening capital flows since 2011. In November 2013, facing the zero lower bound for its policy rate and the risk of a persistent undershoot of its inflation target, the CNB decided to use the exchange rate as an additional instrument for inflation targeting and announced its commitment “to prevent excessive appreciation of the koruna below CZK27 per € Jan-08Jan-09Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14-1 Hungary Czech Republic Euro area Inflation (y-o-y, percent) Jan-12Jul-12Jan-13Jul-13Jan-14 Processed Food Unprocessed Food Energy Services Goods HICP Contributionsto Inflation (y-o-y, percent) Page 7 by intervening in the foreign exchange market”, implying a 6 percent depreciation that was expected to bring inflation to target in the monetary policy horizon. The exchange rate is currently around CZK27.5 per €, and there has been no intervention in the foreign exchange market since November 2013. In the last Article IV consultation, the Fund recommended foreign exchange intervention as preferable over purely quantitative easing through purchases of domestic financial assets given the systemic liquidity surplus in the banking system, scarcity of private financial assets to purchase, and the very low long-term interest rates for government bonds. The banking sector remains strong, but credit provision is lackluster. Banks have improved their already strong capital position reaching a capitalization ratio of 16.5 percent at end- 2013 compared with 15.6 percent in 2012. Profits moderated somewhat as net interest income was compressed, but banks continue to enjoy strong asset quality, low non-performing loans, and stable and cheap local deposit funding. At the same time, credit growth was subdued at 3.0 percent, mainly due to weak demand from corporates. Creditworthiness remains high. Czech Republic is rated investment grade with a stable outlook. Five-year credit default swaps have been remarkably stable at around 50 basis points. Bond yields increased somewhat in the second half of 2013 in line with global trends, but have recently approached historical lows: the 10-year bond yielded an average of 1.5 percent in June. The current account deficit is on a moderate narrowing trend . It remained broadly stable at 1.4 percent of GDP in 2013, as a growing income deficit balanced out the improvement in the trade balance. The improving trend of the latter is expected to continue this year supported by robust export growth, thus contributing to a narrowing of the current account deficit to 0.2 percent As a result, the de facto exchange rate arrangement has been reclassified from free floating to other managed effective November 7, 2013. Official Reserves (EUR billion) Interventions Jan-13May-13Sep-13Jan-14May-14 Exchange Rate (koruny per euro) CNB's FX floor Interventions Page 8 of GDP, a level staff assesses to be in line with fundamentals, including the ouput gap and still weak domestic demand. Staff’s assessment is that the real exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. Estimates based on the EBA methodology yield mixed results for the Czech Republic. Specifically, the Current Account Balance approach suggests that the current account deficit is still somewhat wider than the cyclically-adjusted norm of 0.4 percent of GDP deficit, indicating an overvaluation of about 5 percent in 2013. Benchmarked against the 2 percent of GDP deficit that would stabilize the net foreign asset position, the 2013 outturn suggests a very slight undervaluation. While the multilateral REER approach finds an 18 percent overvaluation, this appears too high in view of the current account-based assessment, and needs to be treated with caution as it may not capture factors such as an initial undervaluation, and rapid quality and productivity improvements. Other considerations also point to the absence of evident imbalances in the external position (Box 2) or of significant shortcomings in non-price competitiveness indicators (Figure 6). Overall, staff assesses the exchange rate to be in broad equilibrium, and the confidence level of this assessment has increased with the koruna now 6 percent weaker than the 2013 average.