The financial system is stable and resilient to shocks. Recent stress tests suggest that banks are sufficiently resilient against substantial shocks. The sector has a large capital buffer (a capital adequacy ratio of 16.7 percent in 2015), which should enable it to absorb significant adverse shocks. Bank profitability remains strong, notwithstanding the low interest rate environment, as the impact of the decline in net interest margins has been offset by strong credit growth and cost reduction. However, persistently low interest rates could negatively affect bank profitability going forward. The NPL ratio remained low at 5.5 percent in 2015, and the banking sector has long been self-financed with deposits, which have continued to increase, keeping the loan-to-deposit ratio below 80 percent. Capital buffers would remain sufficiently above the 8 percent regulatory minimum under an adverse scenario that includes a W-shaped recession, quantitatively similar to the 2009 and 2012 downturns. Page 18 Credit growth remains robust on the back of easy monetary conditions and improved market sentiment . Driven by strong growth in manufacturing, real estate, and energy, credit to non-financial corporations expanded by 6 percent last year. Household credit has been growing at 8 percent on account of strong demand for mortgages. Survey results suggest that credit standards for loans to non-financial corporations continued to ease in 2016:Q1 in most sectors on the back of increasing competition among banks and improving economic sentiment, while the ones for mortgages remained broadly unchanged. A strong housing market is becoming a potential source of risk. Mortgage rates are at historic lows and have boosted new mortgage lending to a 10-year high, thus putting upward pressure on prices. Residential housing offer prices increased by 10 percent y-o-y in 2015:Q4, despite a 16 percent increase in housing starts. A slight deterioration in the affordability-of-housing indicators has taken place recently despite strong wage growth and a continued decline in interest rates. On the other hand, the estimated average apartment price-to-annual wage ratio of 4 is still low by international standards. Interest Rates CNB policy rate Household deposit rate Corporate lending rate Housing loans rate Credit Growth Poland Slovakia EA Sources: CNB and HaverAnalytics 1501557075808590951001051101152011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q12016Q1 Apartment Price Sustainability Indicators (Average for 2000-07 = 100) Price-to-average wage Price-to-disposable income Mortgage repayments-to-average wage Price-to-rent (RHS) Source: CZSO, CNB, Institute for Regional Information. Source: CNB Inflation Report, 2016:Q1 12142014M12014M52014M92015M12015M52015M92016M1 Agriculture Services Construction Wholesale Transport Real estate activities Industry Loans to NFCs, total Loans to Non-Financial Corporations (Contributions in percentage points; y-o-y percent Page 19 Continued vigilance will be needed to prevent a buildup of vulnerabilities in the housing market. Staff welcomed CNB’s recommendations to tighten mortgage lending standards, but for them to be effective, they need to become legally binding. More broadly, the authorities should consider giving the CNB the authority to issue binding macroprudential regulations. Going forward, continued vigilance will be needed and, if current trends in the mortgages segment continue in the coming months, the macroprudential stance should be further tightened. Preference should given to targeted measures, including raising risk weights on mortgages, lowering LTV limits with possible regional differentiation, and issuing clear guidance on maximum debt-to income limits. Staff welcomed progress on improving the regulatory and supervisory framework. The authorities have largely implemented the 2012 FSAP recommendations. (Annex II). Moreover, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) was transposed into local law, making the CNB a designated resolution authority. The Deposit Guarantee Scheme Directive has been transposed via a change in the Act on Banks effective January 2016, in parallel with the BRRD transposition. The new harmonized resolution framework should allow the authorities to minimize taxpayer exposure to loss from solvency support when resolving financial institutions while maintaining financial stability. Finally, the Consumer Credit Act transposing the Mortgage Credit Directive that aims to create a Union-wide mortgage credit market with a high level of consumer protection is currently in the Parliament. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment and emphasized their readiness to address potential risks to financial stability . They noted that overall banking sector risks remained low, and pointed to recently-completed stress tests suggesting that banks have sufficient capital to cover two-year losses. They admitted though that potential systemic risk had increased, a fact they attributed to growing risk appetite of economic agents due to positive macroeconomic developments, expectations of low interest rates for a prolonged period, and a strong housing market. To mitigate this risk, they had increased the countercyclical capital buffer to 0.5 percent effective 2017, and they stood ready to increase it further if credit growth turned out to be faster than currently foreseen. As for the housing market, the authorities noted the risk from the potential feedback loop between real estate developments and mortgage lending, and pointed to strong credit growth in buy-to-let mortgages and to some estimates suggesting a mild overvaluation of apartments. To this end, the CNB has been monitoring developments closely, had started to collect data on a loan-by-loan basis, and was currently reviewing the need for and modalities of tighter prudential measures, including ways to make them binding.