The financial system is stable and resilient to shocks. Recent stress tests conducted by the CNB incorporated a scenario of Europe-wide debt deflation coupled with sharp declines in both domestic and external demand and a rise in long-term yields. These were found to be manageable with estimated system-wide capital shortfalls of just 0.4 percent of GDP. The relatively low potential capital need is mainly due to the high initial capitalization, which averages 18 percent across the system. Moreover, profitability remains strong by advanced country standards, notwithstanding the low interest rate environment. Among external risk factors, direct exposures to Russia are limited, and the recent losses of Export bank appear to be linked to problems with risk management and due diligence rather than economic developments. Although credit growth remains low, it is expected to be boosted by the strong recovery underway. Corporate credit demand is reportedly limited due to still-low investment levels, but also because of corporates’ tendency to utilize internal resources for investment and, to a lesser extent, other financing sources such as corporate bonds, rather than because of problems with access to bank credit. Household credit growth has been stable at a slightly higher level, mainly driven by continued demand for mortgages. At the same time, recent lending surveys point to easing lending standards and gradually rising demand for credit, which along with the healthy Country Report No. 15/98 discusses pros and cons of euro adoption and pre-requisites for a successful transition. The authorities have already taken measures to change management and strengthen controls. Page 17 balance sheets in the financial and non-financial sectors and signs of a strong recovery suggest that credit growth will likely rise going forward—a view shared by the banks. The regulatory and supervisory framework is being improved in the context of local and global initiatives. The authorities continued to make progress toward implementing the recommendations of the 2012 FSAP. In addition to the increase in supervisory resources for on-site inspections, a new law on credit unions brought limits to their size, deposit-interest ratio, borrower eligibility, and increased contributions to resolution and insurance funds among other provisions aimed at reducing risks from this small part of the sector. Moreover, the CNB has started implementing the macroprudential toolkit of the Capital Requirements Regulation IV by requiring across-the-board “conservation buffers”, supplemented by a “systemic buffer” targeted at the largest banks. The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive and Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive are expected to be soon transposed into local law and would help introduce new tools and harmonize resolution frameworks within the EU. The working group on Banking Union opted for staying out of the Banking Union for now, but decided to re-visit the issue on an annual basis The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment. They saw financial sector risks as mainly relating to domestic economic conditions, which have taken a turn for better in the last year, and reduced risks of a debt deflation. They noted a nascent recovery in lending activity, amidst higher demand, positive asset quality trends, tightening interest rate margins, and lower provisioning. The authorities saw the possibility of countercyclical macroprudential measures, if credit growth turned out to be much faster than foreseen now. As for external risks, they saw a euro area wide debt deflation as the main worry, but emphasized that direct linkages between the Czech financial sector and developments in Greece and Russia were limited.