The Czech economy is growing strongly. Real GDP expanded by 2 percent in 2014, with both exports and domestic demand, particularly investment, performing well. Investment benefitted from public resources, with local government activity and EU-funded projects being carried out at a higher-than- expected pace. Consumption growth was supported by robust labor income gains and reached the pre-crisis growth rate in 2014:Q4. The growth momentum continued this year, with output growth accelerating markedly to 4.2 percent y-o-y in 2015:Q1. While this performance was probably influenced by tobacco excise legislation that increased cigarette re- stocking early in the year, growth was broad- based and driven by domestic demand. Moreover, high frequency indicators provide further evidence of economic growth gaining a strong footing, with Purchasing Managers’ Indexes showing continued improvements in output, new orders, and employment. Momentum Indicators (Moving average over the previous 3 month, SA) Exports Retail sales Industrial production Source: Haver Analytics. Contributions to Growth Domestic demand Net exports Real GDPSource: CzechStatistical Office. Page 10 The labor market has been recovering fast. Employment growth gathered speed in the second half of 2014 and reached 1.3 percent y-o-y in 2015:Q1, while the unemployment rate has declined to 5.7 percent, the lowest level since 2009:Q1. Real wage growth also turned positive in 2014 (2.1 percent), boosted by the improving labor market as well as a 2 percent public wage adjustment in 2014 and a 6.3 percent increase in the minimum wage effective August 2013. The minimum wage was further increased by 8.2 percent in 2015. Inflation has been hovering just above zero. In the face of a drop in energy and food prices, headline inflation decelerated sharply to an average of 0.4 percent in 2014, and declined further to 0.1 percent in 2015:Q1, before picking up slightly to 0.7 percent y-o-y in May. Meanwhile, inflation adjusted for food, fuel, indirect taxes, and administered prices (core inflation) has remained stable at around 1 percent since mid- 2014. One-year ahead inflation expectations, which had been boosted by the introduction of the exchange rate floor, declined in early 2015, while 3-year ahead expectations remain stable at around the 2 percent inflation target, reflecting the credibility of the central bank (CNB). Fiscal policy has been supportive of the recovery. Following substantial pro-cyclical fiscal tightening in 2011–13, the general government deficit increased from 1.2 percent of GDP in 2013 to 2.0 percent in 2014, implying about a 1 percentage point deterioration in the cyclically-adjusted fiscal balance. The relaxation was mainly due to an increase in capital spending and a negative surprise in excise collections . The headline deficit widened further as a result of statistical changes to comply with ESA2010 methodology, which entailed, among other issues, the inclusion of the Deposit Insurance Agency that had a one-off payout in 2014 in the general government. Monetary conditions remain accomodative. In November 2013, constrained by the zero lower bound and facing deflationary pressures, the CNB decided to use the exchange rate as an additional instrument for inflation targeting and announced its commitment “to prevent excessive appreciation of the koruna below CZK27 per € by intervening in the foreign exchange market.” The exchange rate floor was considered preferable over purely quantitative easing through purchases of domestic financial assets given the ample excess liquidity in the banking system, scarcity of private Cigarette excises were increased in January 2014, leading to pre-stocking by retailers and lower-than-forecast sales under the new excises throughout 2014. Jan-13Jul-13Jan-14Jul-14Jan-15 Czech Republic Sources:Eurostat and Fund staff estimates. Jan-13Jul-13Jan-14Jul-14Jan-15 Euro area Contributionsto Headline Inflation, 2012-15 (Percentage-points contributions to 12-month growth rates of HICP) Food and energy (incl. adm. price and tax changes) Core inflation (HICP excl. food and energy) Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) Page 11 sector assets to purchase, and shallowness of secondary government bond markets. The exchange rate has been hovering above the floor without any further intervention in the FX market since the CNB purchases of euro in November 2013 with some limited volatility around the time of oil price declines (markets braced for the deflationary impact and possibly a weaker koruna) and ECB’s quantitative easing. The banking sector is stable, and credit growth shows some signs of a recovery. Czech banks are self-financed with a low system-wide loan-to-deposit ratio and strong capital and liquidity buffers. Despite a slight increase in the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio to 5.6 percent last year, due to an increase in NPLs of the government-owned Export bank, the ratio remains low. Credit growth accelerated to 3½ percent y-o-y in April, on account of a pickup in corporate-sector demand, while household credit growth remains robust. Funding costs remain low. Bond yields have declined to historical lows on expectations of prolonged monetary policy accomodation earlier in 2015 before starting to rise in line with euro area trends: the 10-year bond yield recently reached almost 1.2 percent compared with lows of 0.4 percent in April. Czech Republic is rated investment grade with a stable outlook, and five-year credit default swap rates have been steady at around 50 basis points. The current account turned to a surplus. Led by an improving trade balance, the current account registered a 0.6 percent of GDP surplus in 2014 compared with a 0.5 percent deficit in 2013. The trade balance improvement was driven by favorable terms-of-trade developments, notwithstanding strong import volume growth that outpaced that of exports. Meanwhile, the income deficit remained stable at around 6 percent of GDP. The gradual reserve accumulation during 2014–15 is due to EU funds and other fiscal inflows. The de facto exchange rate arrangement was retroactively reclassified from other managed to stabilized effective November 19, 2013. Official Reserves (EUR billion) Intervention and floor announcement Exchange Rate (EUR /CZK)CNB's FX floor appreciation Intervention and floor announcement Source: Haver Analytics. Page 12 Staff’s assessment is that the real exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. The EBA methodology yields mixed results for the Czech Republic, with current account balance- based approaches pointing to marginal undervaluation and the multilateral REER approach showing an overvaluation (Box 2). Other considerations also point to the absence of evident imbalances in the external position, or of significant shortcomings in non-price competitiveness indicators (Figure 6). Overall, staff assesses the exchange rate to be in broad equilibrium.