The authorities are committed to the medium-term objective of a 1 percent of GDP structural deficit, which will need to be embedded into a clear medium-term fiscal framework, enshrined in legislation. The Ministry of Finance has prepared an updated draft Fiscal Framework Reform (FFR) and plans to submit it to Parliament for discussion and approval later this year. The draft includes expenditure ceilings derived from the medium-term objective, a debt brake rule starting at 55 percent of GDP, and a Fiscal Council (Box 4). The proposed structural deficit rule strikes the right balance between reducing debt and creating fiscal space. It would also help eliminate the pro-cyclical bias of fiscal policy and would be consistent with EU fiscal framework requirements. While the debt brake has the potential to introduce a pro-cyclical bias, the current debt level provides an adequate buffer against this risk. Finally, an independent Fiscal Council with sufficient analytical and institutional capacity would further strengthen the fiscal framework. Staff urged the authorities to move expeditiously with the approval of the FFR to help anchor fiscal policy. Page 10 The authorities are still elaborating the timeline for reaching the medium-term fiscal objective and underlying policies. Latest official projections as published in the Convergence Programme (CP) are subject to sizeable upside risks on the revenue side, while expenditure pressures exist in several areas. Near-term policies thus carry some degree of uncertainty. The fiscal stance is projected to remain neutral in 2014. On the expenditure side, the budget foresees a sharp increase in capital spending to the pre-2013 levels, while other expenditure remains broadly unchanged as a share of GDP. Possible shortfalls in capital spending would be broadly neutral due to EU financing. However, the budget includes conservative revenue projections as they are based on an older vintage of macro assumptions. All in all, the CP includes a 1.8 percent of GDP projection for the headline deficit. However, in light of strong revenue performance so far this year and consistent with staff’s baseline macroeconomic framework, as long as the approved expenditure ceilings are respected, the general government deficit is projected at 1.2 percent of GDP in 2014. This would imply a broadly neutral fiscal stance. Fiscal plans for 2015 are still being elaborated. The CP includes a 2.3 percent of GDP projection for the headline deficit, although the actual target is likely to be lower. However, there is uncertainty regarding the structure of the budget and the deficit target, as the coalition partners’ priorities are still being elaborated. The government has approved a lower VAT rate for pharmaceuticals, books, and infant food, and promised to abolish the reduced pension indexation—both effective next year. Based on staff’s baseline macroeconomic framework and assuming that the expenditure allocations included in the CP are respected, the general government deficit is projected at 1.4 percent of GDP, thus implying a moderate structural easing of ½ percentage point. The CP includes a structural deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP in 2017 and reiterates the government’s commitment to the medium-term deficit objective. This fiscal path implies that public debt would decline to about 42 percent of GDP by 2019, thus reinforcing Czech Republic’s strong fiscal position (Appendix II). Fiscal Stance Primary Structural Balance (Net) Interest One-offs Cyclical Overall balance Output Gap Fiscal Adjustment (Change in fiscal balances in percent of GDP) Primary Structural Balance (Net) Interest One-offs Cyclical Overall balanceSource: IMF staffcalculations. Page 11 Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to the medium-term deficit objective, but noted the need for more clarity regarding the fiscal targets and underlying policies. Staff noted that, pending adoption of a medium-term fiscal framework by Parliament, fiscal targets should be consistent with the medium-term objective of a 1 percent of GDP structural deficit, ensuring that the chosen fiscal path strikes a balance between sustaining the economic recovery and creating space for addressing the country’s infrastructure needs. To this end, staff supported an increase in capital spending financed by a modest increase in the structural deficit to 1¼ percent of GDP during 2014–15. Moreover, staff recommended that better-than-expected tax revenues not to be channeled to re-current spending. Staff emphasized the need to improve the efficiency of capital expenditure. Higher utilization of EU funds should be the first step. Eliminating obstacles in planning and implementation of public projects without compromising governance would help in this respect. Within the envelope of a 1 percent of GDP structural deficit, increases in capital spending can also be financed through rationalizing re-current spending and stepped-up efforts to improve tax administration. In this connection, staff noted that the introduction of a new lower VAT rate was a much less efficient way to address social priorities than a more targeted measure would be, and also an unwelcome complication for tax administration. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to the medium-term fiscal objective, but not to a particular timeline to achieve it. They acknowledged upside risks to revenue that, were to materialize, would lead to a 2014 fiscal outturn better than the one projected in the CP. In fact, at end-July they revised their deficit projection to 1.5 percent of GDP. As for the medium term, the draft Fiscal Framework Reform foresees the medium-term objective of 1 percent of GDP structural deficit being reached in 2020. As of now, the authorities saw the 3 percent of GDP headline fiscal deficit threshold (i.e., the EDP limit) as the only binding requirement for fiscal policy. They noted that they would elaborate their position on the path and timeline for reaching the medium-term objective in the course of the preparation of the 2015 budget. To this end, they expected detailed discussions in the fall at which time coalition partners would have to agree on the government’s priorities. They admitted though that there were expenditure pressures in several areas, which may lead to an increase in expenditure ceilings. In particular, the authorities highlighted that the recent episode of fiscal consolidation has led to an undue compression of public investment and a resulting infrastructure deficit in several areas such as transportation and energy. They also saw benefits from a slight fiscal expansion in terms of insurance against downside macroeconomic risks. Finally, the authorities noted that the approval of the new fiscal framework by Parliament could take time, despite the government’s commitment to move expeditiously.