Under the baseline scenario, with the economic recovery gathering momentum, inflation is set to rise gradually toward the central bank’s target. While headline inflation Page 12 remains very low—weighed down by administered prices (e.g., gas and electricity) and food—core measures and demand-sensitive components of inflation are generally stronger and exceed headline inflation (Box 5). Demand for durables is strengthening, suggesting that the tail risk of a self-fulfilling deflationary spiral has been averted. Labor income growth is gaining momentum, underpinning solid consumption trends. Under staff’s baseline scenario, the effects of the weaker exchange rate and recovering demand conditions are expected to push inflation gradually toward the central bank’s 2 percent target over the monetary policy horizon. Moreover, inflation expectations have increased following the exchange rate move and CNB’s stated commitment to maintain the exchange rate floor into early 2015 as an instrument for achieving the inflation objective. In fact, inflation expectations have matched the CNB’s inflation forecast for a slight overshoot of the inflation target in the first half of 2015, before moderating to 2 percent by end-2015. With these considerations in mind, staff recommended that the CNB continue to focus on inflation targeting, and maintain the current supportive monetary conditions for now. There are still risks to the recovery mostly from external developments; the output gap is still sizable; and inflation remains very low, including in wage agreements. Therefore, staff suggested keeping in place the exchange rate floor for now, even though it has not been binding. However, staff recommended a return to a floating exchange rate once deflation risks recede, and the inflation forecast and inflation expectations, as well as wage developments, become entrenched around the central bank’s target. The pre-existence of a consistent monetary policy and inflation targeting framework, and a credible and transparent central bank, make the exit easier than in the case of traditional pegs. Moreover, the current monetary and exchange rate settings are consistent with broad macroeconomic equilibrium. In this context, staff recommended abolishing the exchange rate floor in one step rather than gradually. This is likely to be the first stage in the normalization of monetary policy, with interest rate hikes following in due course. The authorities broadly agreed with the inflation outlook and noted their commitment to inflation targeting, while for now continuing to use the foreign exchange intervention policy as an instrument for achieving their inflation objective. They were generally satisfied with the results of the intervention policy, and noted the underlying positive trends in the inflation data, which were overshadowed by still-low headline inflation. However, relative to their pre-intervention forecasts, negative price shocks have been more pronounced, and the hoped-for overshoot of inflation relative to target—to decisively break the inertia in inflation expectations—is now unlikely. As a result of a lower inflation profile, the authorities have decided to maintain the intervention policy as an instrument for achieving their inflation objective for longer, announcing in June that the policy will be in place until at least the second quarter of 2015. Nevertheless, once the conditions for exiting from the intervention policy were in place, they would return to a floating exchange rate. In this connection, the central bank would consider exit modalities in detail in the fall of this year. Page 13