Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to fiscal discipline and a continued reduction in public debt. However, the near-term fiscal outlook carries some uncertainty. In their 2016 Convergence Program (CP) the authorities are targeting headline fiscal deficits of 0.6 and 0.5 percent of GDP for 2016 and 2017, respectively. According to staff’s baseline scenario, this would imply a slight widening in the structural fiscal deficit to 0.8 percent of GDP in 2017 against the 1 percent medium-term deficit objective (MTO). This near-term policy stance is appropriate, in light of the expected growth slowdown and with inflation projected to remain below target well into 2017. Measures to fight tax evasion—e.g., electronic VAT reporting and the gradual rollout of electronic evidence of sales—are expected to begin bearing fruit in the near term. However, projected revenue gains would be more than offset by increases in public wages and child tax credits, new hires in education and police, and the topping-up of the automatic pension indexation. Staff acknowledged that the increases in the public wage bill and social security benefits incorporated in the CP reflected a welcome catching-up with the cost of living, following a prolonged wage and benefit freeze or even some decreases after the 2008 crisis. However, staff urged the authorities to resist pressures for additional wage and benefit hikes in the run-up to next year’s elections, until the effectiveness of the strengthening of tax collection becomes firmly established. Similarly, the authorities should resist shifting more items to the reduced VAT rate—following the cut in VAT on meals and non-alcoholic drinks that are served in restaurants—and other tax reductions. Future tax cuts should be part of a broader review of the tax system. The envisaged medium-term fiscal deficit objective is appropriate, but needs to be accompanied by a clear medium-term strategy. Staff’s baseline scenario projects that on current policies the structural deficit would decline to ½ percent of GDP over the medium term, which is below the 1 percent medium-term deficit objective. This, along with potentially sizeable tax administration gains still to be realized, provides the authorities space for maneuver and for Page 14 accommodating fiscal priorities, including higher public investment on much-needed infrastructure. Nevertheless, staff reiterated its recommendation for speedy adoption of fiscal framework legislation—currently under consideration by Parliament—to anchor fiscal policy, reduce pro-cyclicality, and enhance predictability. Government decisions and plans for the pension system could undermine its long-run sustainability. Recently-approved legislation creates the possibility for discretionary increases of pensions—in certain cases and up to a limit—beyond what would be indicated by the automatic indexation formula. In addition, plans are under way to cap the statutory retirement age, which is being increased by two months every year, but which will remain below the EU average over the medium-term. Moreover, the granting of early retirement benefits to miners employed by the now bankrupt mining company goes against the objective of improving the system’s efficiency. Staff therefore urged the authorities to refrain from ad hoc pension adjustments beyond what is implied by the standard indexation formula, and from putting an ex-ante limit on the maximum retirement age. The authorities’ focus on reducing tax avoidance needs to be complemented by other structural fiscal reforms. The challenge of rising health-care costs calls for further policy actions aimed at raising the efficiency of spending and improving health outcomes. Measures should aim at putting in place incentives for substitution away from higher-cost, hospital- based care to equivalent, typically lower-cost, outpatient services. The labor tax wedge— which is above the OECD average—would need to be narrowed to improve labor market outcomes, including by closing loopholes that allow abuse of the lower effective tax and contribution rates for the self-employed. Finally, with the quality of transport infrastructure lagging behind that of other advanced countries, staff recommended better planning and prioritization of such investments. Addressing weaknesses in public procurement likewise remains a priority. The level of public debt is moderate but consideration could be given to increasing its average maturity. Under current policies, public debt is expected to decline to around 36 percent of GDP by 2021, and would remain sustainable under alternative scenarios incorporating negative shocks to the debt-servicing capacity (Annex VII). The Ministry of Finance has carried out buybacks of limited amounts of bonds with short remaining maturities, financed by issuance of long-term bonds. However, the average maturity of public debt has decreased following the sizable issuance of two- and three-year bonds with negative auction yields. Going forward, public debt management could take advantage of the current low interest rate environment to increase the average maturity of debt and lower debt service. I x v b Public Capital Stock per Capita (Input) Quality of Infrastructure Advanced Economies All Other Countries FrontierSource: Making Public Investment More Efficient, 2015, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C Page 15 Strengthening the capacity to absorb EU funds is a key priority. Weaknesses in national management and control systems resulted in significant delays in absorption of funds from the 2007–13 program period, and the highest rate of financial accounting corrections in the EU (Annex III). The Ministry of Regional Development was recently given the powers to carry out centralized management and coordination of Operational Programs, resulting in significant improvement in outcomes. The absorption rate rose sharply in 2014–15, but there are concerns about a possible increase in the incidence of irregularities, as control systems had come under strain. Despite better planning for the 2014–20 program period, the start of projects has been slower than in the previous period. This is in part due to the incompatibility of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) with revised EU-wide standards. Staff urged the authorities to take all necessary measures to ensure compliance with EU requirements, with a view to launching large transport infrastructure projects as soon as possible. Furthermore, there is a need to systematically follow up and correct the systemic shortcomings identified in the Supreme Audit Office’s audits of utilization of EU Structural and Cohesion Funds. Authorities’ views The authorities re-affirmed their commitment to fiscal discipline. They pointed to their strong efforts to further reduce the deficit and noted that the structural deficit was already well below the medium-term objective. They considered the slightly expansionary near-term stance necessary to support the economy, also given the moderate level of public debt and its projected decline, and noted that in their view the structural deficit would reach the MTO already in 2017, on account of the larger than Fund staff’s estimates of the output gap, and remain at that level over the medium term. At the same time, they admitted that pressures for higher current expenditures and lower taxes would probably increase in the run-up to the elections, but were committed to adhere to the fiscal deficit targets of the Convergence Program. Moreover, they were hopeful that approval of fiscal responsibility legislation would take place expeditiously. The authorities agreed on the need to narrow the labor tax wedge and address the rise in health care costs. A number of measures were taken in the area of health care, including the introduction of centralized public procurement for selected pharmaceuticals, while the envisaged changes in the allocation of health premiums among insurance funds would better reflect the cost profile of patients. The authorities have been discussing with the European Commission ways to resolve the issue of incompatibility of existing EIA with revised EU-wide standards so that large transport EU-financed infrastructure projects could start soon. Finally, they were optimistic that the new Public Procurement Act would increase transparency and reduce administrative requirements.