Extreme deflationary risks have declined, and staff projects inflation to gradually rise toward the central bank’s target in 2016. Although the positive impulse from the exchange rate floor was counteracted by the slump in energy and other commodity prices, as well as by low core inflation throughout Europe, Czech core inflation remains stable at around 1 percent. At the same time, positive dynamics in the real economy and labor markets suggest that a scenario that involves Page 15 damaging second-round effects of low inflation—such as liquidity hoarding and wage depression— has become less likely. In fact, retail sales are growing at a healthy pace, and in the key automotive industry wage agreements have centered on 3–3½ percent wage increases, considerably higher than last year. Finally, empirical evidence suggests that inflation has been driven by external factors (accompanying cross-country Selected Issues Paper), while second-round effects have not contributed measurably to the post-2012 disinflation (Appendix I). Against this backrdrop and based on current policies remaining in place through 2016:H1 (including the exchange rate floor), inflation is projected to start rising gradually towards the target in 2016. Staff encouraged the CNB to maintain its focus on inflation targeting in its policy making and communication, and to consider carefully the timing and mechanics of the eventual normalization of monetary policy. The policy rate has been at the zero lower bound since November 2012, and the authorities have committed to maintain the exchange rate floor through 2016:H1, thus avoiding an open-ended arrangement. The floor has proven effective in supporting a return to the inflation target, as inflation expectations on current policies are consistent with achieving the target. With the current level of the exchange rate assessed to be broadly in line with fundamentals, and no interventions having taken place since the initial few days of the introduction of the floor, there is little economic reason to expect large moves in the exchange rate after the exit. Instead, the floor seems to be playing a supportive role both as a clear and credible signal of the CNB’s commitment to the inflation target and as a type of insurance policy against the risk of sustained safe-haven inflows in the event of an external shock that would undermine achievement of the target. The pre-existence of a consistent monetary policy framework and CNB’s continued transparent communication strategy—appropriately emphasizing the priority of the inflation objective and the temporary role of the exchange rate floor as an instrument to achieve it— should facilitate a smooth exit once justified by fundamentals like higher inflation outturns. Monetary policy would likely need to remain supportive. In staff’s view, given the only gradual closing of the output gap and asymmetric risks at the zero lower bound, monetary policy would likely need to remain supportive for some time even after abolishment of the exchange rate floor. Moreover, the CNB has sufficient tools to counter any unintended tightening of monetary conditions after the exit, including through discretionary interventions. To this end, modestly negative policy interest rates could be considered, but mainly to discourage capital inflows (amidst negative interest rates in other currencies). However, too deeply negative policy interest rates could risk cash hoarding and in turn reduce financial intermediation and weaken monetary transmission, especially if they were viewed as likely to persist for some time. At the same time, potential transmission from negative interest rates to activity is likely to be very weak. As for purchases of domestic assets, the scope for such purchases is very limited, given ample liquidity, already very low levels of domestic yields, and limited availability of domestic assets. The local bond market monthly turnover averages about CZK 8–12 billion, or 0.2-0.3 percent of GDP. Page 16 The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s inflation outlook, while noting that monetary policy decisions are becoming more data-dependent. They noted that the real economy has turned the corner, with domestic demand taking over as the engine of growth and core inflation trending upwards. Accommodative policies, including the exchange rate floor, have played a useful role in this regard. However, they noted that wages were growing more moderately than hoped, perhaps due to: second-round effects from low inflation expectations; greater-than- believed slack in the job market; and compositional effects that suppress average wage growth. Coupled with statistical noise from tax-related effects, it was difficult to settle the matter decisively. The authorities, therefore, leaned towards a wait-and-see attitude and careful observation of incoming data. They also repeated their commitment to inflation targeting and the floating exchange rate regime as soon as conditions allow normalization of monetary policy. They saw the koruna as fairly valued, and together with projected positive inflation differentials with the euro area, foresaw a smooth exit. The authorities were cautious regarding other unconventional monetary policies, such as negative policy rates and domestic asset purchases, as they assessed these to be relatively ineffective and prone to be misinterpreted as negative signals about the economy’s health. They did not see much scope for euro adoption to be advanced in this government’s term, amidst domestic unpopularity and ongoing changes in euro area policy frameworks