The 2015 fiscal stance is supportive of the recovery. The authorities plan to keep the 2015 fiscal deficit just below 2 percent of GDP, which appears feasible and would imply a fiscal impulse of 0.6 percentage points. Key expenditure measures include increases in investment financed by national sources, in addition to EU funds; salaries; and health care and mandatory social spending. The introduction of a second reduced VAT rate on pharmaceuticals, books and child nutrition, and tax credits for families with children will weigh on revenues. Although the projected fiscal stance is somewhat expansionary, given the remaining output gap, low inflation, and the fact that monetary policy is at the zero lower bound, staff did not advocate a tightening this year, but instead encouraged the authorities to allow automatic stabilizers to operate in both directions. The government’s medium-term fiscal objective is appropriate. The Convergence Program envisages gradual fiscal consolidation over 2016–18 aimed at reaching the medium-term objective (MTO) of a 1 percent of GDP structural deficit (from the projected 1.5 percent level in 2015). This adjustment relies to a large extent on gains from improvements in revenue administration, but also includes some savings from rationalization of spending owing to the introduction of a central purchasing system. Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to the MTO, which will put the debt ratio on a downward path while allowing adequate space for current fiscal policy priorities. Reaching this objective would require only modest and very gradual fiscal Page 14 consolidation beginning next year, which accounts for the relative absence of major deficit- reduction initiatives. Staff emphasized that embedding the medium-term objective in a comprehensive framework would enhance its effectiveness in anchoring fiscal policy. The updated government proposal of the fiscal framework reform—which includes expenditure ceilings to guide spending, a debt brake rule starting at 55 percent of GDP to gradually correct deficit overruns, and a fiscal council to promote transparency—is under consideration by Parliament. Timely adoption of this proposal would help anchor fiscal policy and guard against pro-cyclical tendencies in policymaking. Although the overall fiscal position is relatively strong, the budget composition could be improved, with higher capital spending to address infrastructure needs offset by efficiency gains in current expenditure and improved revenue administration. Total government spending is somewhat below the advanced economy average, but spending on social benefits is relatively high and has been rising (Box 3). Staff thus argued that expansion of means testing and adherence to the indexation rules for the adjustment of social benefits would help contain spending pressures. Moreover, health spending is high relative to outcomes, suggesting room for efficiency gains. To this end, staff welcomed the authorities’ envisaged measures to enhance the transparency of health insurance companies’ finances, the launching of newly-created standardized diagnostic and therapeutic algorithms, and improvements in data management and sharing. Conversely, sizeable infrastructure gaps push transportation costs above the OECD average, pointing to spending needs. On the revenue side, staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to strengthen tax administration through the introduction of electronic VAT reporting and electronic cash registers. However, budgeted revenue gains should be conservative to avoid putting pressure on deficit outturns. The authorities re-affirmed their commitment to gradual fiscal consolidation over the medium term and to the fiscal framework legislation. They considered the expansionary fiscal stance this year necessary to support the economic recovery and to lean against downside macro risks, especially given the moderate level of public debt. Nevertheless, they were determined to proceed with fiscal consolidation starting next year, in line with their medium-term fiscal objective. In this regard, their priority would be to increase the effectiveness of tax collections, and they were optimistic that their efforts—also benefitting from experiences of other countries—would bear fruit. Finally, they were hopeful that the approval of fiscal framework legislation by Parliament would take place expeditiously.