The financial sector is sound and resilient. Czech banks, which are largely owned by euro area banking groups, are self-financed with a low system-wide loan to deposit ratio and strong capital and liquidity buffers. Profitability moderated somewhat on the back of still-weak credit growth, but still helped to further strengthen banks’ capital to above 16 percent. Recent CNB stress tests indicate that aggregate bank capitalization would remain above 13 percent, significantly better than the regulatory minimum of 8 percent, even in a severe stress scenario with a large output drop and protracted stagnation. Many Czech bank parents are going through the ECB’s comprehensive risk assessment, but their Czech subsidiaries are self-funded and net creditors vis-à-vis abroad, and should thus be relatively resilient to shocks to parents. Credit growth is likely to be boosted by the recovery. Despite healthy bank balance sheets and moderate debt levels in the non-financial sector, credit growth remains subdued due to a combination of low credit demand and somewhat tighter lending standards. However, with healthy balance sheets in the financial and non-financial sectors, this is mostly expected to be a cyclical phenomenon—in fact, lending surveys suggest banks are turning cautiously optimistic, with the July lending survey showing that credit standards to corporates were eased for the first time since 2011. Approval rates for most loan categories remain high, and banks noted lack of fixed investment activity and financing from internal resources as limiting corporate credit demand, but they also saw initial signs of a recovery. Improvements in regulations and the supervisory architecture are continuing. Building on last year’s progress toward implementing FSAP recommendations, supervisory resources have been increased for on-site inspections. Moreover, a draft law on credit unions—a small but problematic sector of credit providers—has been prepared, and would help reduce reputation risks to the financial system. The implementing law of the EU Directive on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms has been approved by Parliament, and systemic banks have already been notified of upcoming capital buffer requirements, with which they would be largely in compliance at current capital levels. Finally, work on the EU-wide initiative for unified resolution schemes and deposit insurance framework is continuing. The authorities shared staff’s assessment of a healthy financial sector. They saw a domestic balance sheet recession as the main risk to the financial system, but attached to this a smaller likelihood than before. They also highlighted the ongoing follow-up on FSAP recommendations and supranational regulatory initiatives. Finally, the authorities are considering See Annex II of the Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation. Page 14 the pros and cons of opting into the euro area banking union ahead of euro adoption, and a detailed study is being prepared to be discussed in the fall.