With the balance of risks remaining on the downside, there was agreement on the need to maintain the current supportive monetary conditions for now. In recent years, the role of the output gap in explaining headline inflation dynamics has been reduced, whereas external factors, including spillovers from euro area inflation, commodity price changes, and exchange rate movements, have played a larger role. The positive dynamics of the real economy Page 16 and labor markets suggest that a scenario that involves damaging second-round effects of low inflation has become less likely. However, the positive price impetus from domestic demand and the tight labor market continues to face anti-inflationary headwinds including from declining import prices. There was thus agreement on the need to maintain the current accommodative monetary conditions until the inflation forecast and inflation expectations become entrenched around the inflation target. Against this backdrop and with current policies remaining in place through end-2016 (including the exchange rate floor), inflation is projected to reach the central bank’s 2-percent target in mid-2017. Staff urged the authorities to maintain their focus on inflation targeting and to begin laying the groundwork for monetary policy normalization The exchange rate floor was introduced as a temporary instrument in the inflation targeting regime and has provided a clear and credible signal of the CNB’s commitment to the inflation target. Moreover, staff analysis suggests that it has been successful in mitigating deflationary pressures (Annex IV). However, the CNB should begin to prepare for the eventual exit from the floor to a floating exchange rate. If downside risks for inflation materialize, the bank could employ other tools to counter an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. To this end, the bank should be ready to use discretionary interventions in case FX market conditions became disorderly, and to be prepared to reduce interest rates to a negative level. Clear communication about CNB’s focus on inflation targeting would be important for guiding expectations and reinforcing the credibility of the framework during the normalization process. Negative interest rates would help in the event that downside risks for inflation materialize Since mid-2015, appreciation pressures on the koruna have intensified and reserve accumulation has been fast although the FX reserve-to-GDP ratio (at 40 percent) is still moderate. Looking ahead, further monetary easing in the euro area and the growing positive interest rate differential with the ECB are likely to exacerbate speculative capital inflows and currency appreciation pressures. To this end, and to reinforce the consistency of the policy framework, in the event that downside risks for inflation materialize, the CNB should be ready to introduce mildly negative interest rates, with the timing depending on developments in inflation, capital inflows, and appreciation pressures, and following lessons from international experience (Annex V). In particular, given the reliance of Czech banks on domestic deposits as a funding source and the sizable excess liquidity at the central bank, According to both CNB’s and staff’s projections, absent the envisaged monetary accommodation until end-2016, inflation would fall short of the 2-percent target within the monetary policy horizon. Deposit Rates CNB ECBSources: CNB and ECB Page 17 negative rates could have a substantial impact on net margins for banks. To mitigate this, negative deposit interest rates could be applied in tiers, thus excluding certain parts of the deposit base. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed on the need for monetary policy to remain accommodative in light of the current anti-inflationary balance of risks . They shared staff’s view that underlying inflationary pressures should be building on account of strong domestic demand and tight labor market conditions. However, they noted that wages were growing more moderately than hoped, and were concerned that a prolonged period of very low inflation could start affecting wage agreements. In this connection, they emphasized the need to maintain the exchange rate floor till end-2016 and their readiness to raise it further if disinflationary pressures increase sharply. Nevertheless, they repeated their commitment to inflation targeting and the floating exchange rate regime as soon as conditions allow normalization of monetary policy. Regarding additional monetary policy tools, the authorities noted that the CNB board had been discussing the pros and cons of negative interest rates, and that the bank and commercial banks were operationally ready for their introduction. To this end, they did not see significant risks to the banking sector from the introduction of mildly negative policy rates. At the current juncture though, they did not consider the interest rate differential with the euro as the main driver of capital inflows. Finally, they assessed the koruna to be broadly in line with the long-term fundamentals, and thus they foresaw a smooth exit to a fully floating exchange rate but noted their readiness to intervene in the FX market to smooth excessive volatility.