Stability and Inclusion The development of an efficient monetary policy operational framework has been hampered by a number of factors. These include: (i) high dollarization of the economy; (ii) the weak financial position of the central bank; and (iii) capacity constraints. Furthermore, the lack of instruments and the high dollarization are also important limitations to the BCC’s ability to steer domestic currency short-term rates. In addition, the absence of an active money market in both dollar and domestic currency severely undermines the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Although the BCC strived to enhance staff technical qualifications on financial issues, capacity remains limited. Strengthening the financial and operational autonomy of the BCC is essential. Staff urged the authorities to: (i) finalize the BCC recapitalization process as soon as possible; (ii) adopt the draft legislation on the statute of the BCC to enshrine its independence while strengthening accountability; and (iii) apply the terms of 2011 agreement on the rate of interest on securitized receivables of the state held by the BCC. It noted the commitment of the BCC to disengage from the hospital before the end of 2015 and encouraged it to continue its efforts to reduce its operating costs. Financial intermediation, access, and market depth are limited. As underlined in the 2014 FSAP, financial deepening requires important structural reforms. These include enhancing supervision and strengthening crisis management practices, and improving the auditing and availability of credit information. Access to financial services compares poorly with peer countries. Furthermore, the limited role of microfinance institutions, a large part of which suffer from solvency problems and lack of capital, impairs access by small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The stability of the financial sector must be strengthened to limit its exposure to shocks . The 2014 evaluation report on the stability of the financial sector has indeed shown that the financial system is particularly vulnerable to shocks, the lack of a risk-based supervision, inadequate regulation and a lack of rigor in the application of the monitoring device. In line with the main findings of the 2014 report evaluating the stability of the financial sector, the mission recommended to: (i) adopt the Commercial Bank Law; (ii) implement a risk-based monitoring; (iii) strengthen the workforce and the training of supervisors; and (iv) finalize the guidelines for the strengthening of regulations on provisioning and classification of non-performing loans. In the context of a partial recapitalization of the BCC in 2011, it was agreed that the interest will be set by mutual agreement between the Treasury and the BCC. Credit to the private sector is well below the average for SSA’s resource-rich countries despite the recent acceleration. Page 20 Increasing access to financial services is necessary for inclusive growth. The benefits of financial inclusion are numerous and known. For households, access to financial services facilitates the accumulation of assets, risk management and consumption smoothing. For small and medium enterprises, financial inclusion is associated with an increase in investment, innovation and job creation. Staff encouraged the authorities to: (i) develop the financial infrastructure through the payment systems, making operational the new credit registry, increasing information on borrowers by setting up a credit bureau; (ii) support the reduction of costs of opening and managing accounts; and (iii) make the most of the opportunities offered by the development of new information and communications technology. Staff welcomed the adoption of the insurance code and called for its timely implementation to promote access to credit. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the need to strengthen the central bank . They concurred with the staff’s view on the urgency of enhancing the credibility of the BCC. They indicated that its recapitalization should be accompanied by a plan to cut its operating costs and improve its governance. Against the backdrop of low aggregate credit and deposit levels—six and nine percent in terms of GDP, respectively—the authorities also recognized the importance of increasing access to finance. To this end, a new foreign exchange swap facility—arranged with the International Finance Corporation—was implemented to enhance financing. Furthermore, building on TA provided by the Fund, the authorities are focusing on: (i) enhancing consumer protection and mobile banking and (ii) strengthening the financial stability framework by reinforcing the work on de-dollarization of the economy and banking supervision. OTHER ISSUES The DRC’s risk of debt distress remains moderate as in the 2014 debt sustainability analysis (DSA). However, the DRC will need to continue its prudent policy and borrow mainly on concessional terms while strengthening its debt management capacity (see DSA). Data quality needs to be improved. DRC’s data has some shortcomings but is broadly adequate for surveillance purposes. Staff urged the authorities to further strengthen capacity in data compilation, handling and, also, on capacities to perform statistical analysis. Staff also suggested the authorities to provide greater financial autonomy to the National Statistical Agency (INS). Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the staff assessment but stressed that progress is being implemented in this area. They mentioned plans to improve collaboration across ministries and with the BCC and INS to produce more reliable data. The authorities welcomed the technical assistance provided in all these areas and, in particular, on national accounts statistics. Page 21 STAFF APPRAISAL After years of high growth rates and a stable macroeconomic environment, the DRC is now at a crossroads . Staff commends the authorities for their steadfast pursuit of prudent macroeconomic policies, which was instrumental in the attainment of macroeconomic stability in DRC. It is noteworthy that such a performance was achieved despite DRC’s fragility and limited external financial assistance. However, there is no room for complacency given looming vulnerabilities and the unsettled political and security situation. The prevailing pervasive poverty and high inequality calls for stronger efforts to diversify the economy, promote inclusive growth, and improve the social indicators. The political and security situation remains challenging. DRC continues to exhibit the characteristics of a fragile state, which are exacerbating long standing vulnerabilities. Restoring lasting peace in the eastern provinces would help crowd in government expenditure for social sectors and infrastructure to support job creation. It is therefore important that the institutional reforms under the Addis Ababa Peace, Security, and Cooperation Framework, including the SSR be accelerated. Removing the political uncertainty related to the elections would help restore confidence of private investors. There is an urgent need to rebuild policy buffers and enhance domestic revenue mobilization . The authorities are to be commended for pursing prudent fiscal policy despite a difficult environment. Their continued commitment to the fiscal anchor calls for the creation of more fiscal space in the short term to ease the expenditure trade-offs, while financing of the elections. They need to move expeditiously to implement the revenue-enhancing measures identified by Fund TA missions, build up international reserves, and improve budget credibility. Strengthening of the central bank should not be delayed any further Recapitalization of the BCC and passage of the Central Bank Law need to move forward to enable the central bank to fulfill its mandate. Putting the BCC on a sound financial footing while increasing its accountability will enhance its credibility and improve the effectiveness of monetary policy. At the same, the BCC should focus on its core activities. In this regard, the planned divestiture from the hospital is noted and should be accompanied by a rationalization of the BCC’s operating costs. Promoting financial sector stability and development while improving inclusion will go a long way in sustaining strong economic growth. Enhancing supervision and crisis management practices, and improving auditing and availability of credit information could help expand financial deepening. Furthermore, the solvency problems and lack of capital of MFIs should be addressed to improve access by SMEs to financial services. It is also critical to reinforce implementation of the regulatory framework with effective on-site inspections; promote financial inclusion, and facilitate access to financial services. Page 22 Enhancing transparency and good governance in the mineral resource sector is critical for harnessing these resources for DRC development. The authorities are to be commended for the recent made progress in transparency of its extractive industries. Further measures are needed to strengthen the government’s oversight of the SOEs and ensure that they comply with the obligations to publish contracts of all mining operations and resort to competitive biddings when natural resource assets are sold. Enactment of a new mining code aligned with international best practices should lead to a higher contribution from the mining sector to government revenue. Data quality needs improvement . Staff commends the authorities for regularly providing data broadly adequate for surveillance. It is imperative that the lack of resources for the production of key statistical data receives immediate attention. The authorities are encouraged to allocate more resources to statistics and leverage the capacity building assistance being provided by the Fund and other development partners for better outcomes. Staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation with the DRC be held on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Page 23