Policy buffers are presently insufficient given DRC’s vulnerabilities and the prospects of adverse commodity price developments. While macroeconomic performance remained strong over the past years, the hard-won gains could be reversed in the event of significant negative shocks to copper prices. The resulting deterioration in fiscal performance would make adherence to the fiscal anchor strenuous. Also, the high dollarization of the economy constrains the effectiveness of monetary policy and hampers banks’ liquidity management. Furthermore, the low level of international reserves limits the BCC’s ability to respond in case of a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate. A faster reserve accumulation is needed to withstand shocks. Given the significant shortfall in DRC’s reserve holdings (see ¶3), staff recommended that the BCC accumulate more international reserves through active interventions in the foreign exchange market and be prepared to sterilize its purchases to limit the pass through to inflation. Staff encouraged a rapid recapitalization of the BCC, which together with the medium-term de-dollarization strategy adopted by the authorities will extend the reach of monetary policy and its effectiveness, and strengthen its lender of last resort function. It stressed, however, that success of the de- dollarization strategy is a long-term process requiring a stable macroeconomic environment, a credible central bank, effective banking supervision, and a sufficiently developed financial infrastructure. Strong macroeconomic performance, but weak social indicators and high inequality. DRC’s strong growth over the past several years did not lead to significant job creation; poverty remains pervasive and unemployment is high, particularly among the youth (see Box 1). Although social indicators related education, health, access to water, and infant mortality have improved in recent years, DRC will likely not achieve any of the MDGs by 2015. Development of non-mining activities necessary to promote inclusion is hampered by structural bottlenecks and a challenging business climate. The World Bank Doing Business 2015 Report ranks DRC 184 th (out of 189 countries), worse than most peer countries in the region The authorities’ recent data shows unemployment declined from a high of 60.8 in 2009 to 43 percent in 2014. Page 15 (Text Table 1). The most recent Human Development Indicator shows that DRC has the highest percentage of its population living on less than $1.25 a day when ranked among its neighbors in the Great Lakes Region (Text Table 2). Text Table 1. Ease of Doing Business Ranking, Text Table 2. Human Development Index, Selected Selected African Countries African Countries Diversification of the economy is a prerequisite to promote more inclusive growth Economic diversification in the DRC lags behind compared to other sub-Saharan African (SSA) economies (see Box 2). Staff urged the authorities to accelerate the needed reforms to promote economic diversification and sustain the ongoing structural transformation. In particular, measures aimed at improving the business climate should be implemented to enhance the private sector’s role in growing the economy. These include simplification of: (i) the tax system to support higher non-mineral activity and promote inclusive growth, (ii) the regulation for granting construction permits and transfer of ownership, and (iii) facilitating access to credit while enforcing contracts. Government expenditures should be prioritized in favor of basic infrastructure, the agriculture sector where labor is intensive, and improving human capital. Authorities‘ Views The authorities recognized the need to build policy buffers, but expressed concerns about the impact of a gradual depreciation of the currency on inflation as inflationary expectations could easily be rekindled given that memories of hyperinflation are still fresh. They pointed to some progress made in improving the business climate, particularly in the areas of starting a business and dealing with construction permits and legislations recently enacted, As pointed out in an independent evaluation of the Doing Business survey (see www.worldbank.org/ieg/doingbusiness), care should be exercised when interpreting these indicators given subjective interpretation, limited coverage of business constraints, and a small number of informants, which tend to overstate the indicators' coverage and explanatory power. A new Insurance Code and a law on leasing were adopted in March 2015, as was the Hydrocarbon Law in June 2015. Page 16 while recognizing that their efforts to promote private sector development are hindered by electricity bottlenecks. The authorities noted that the recent improvement in social indicators was the direct result of increased budget allocations to the education and health sectors and expressed optimism about the potential to develop agriculture based agro-industrial parks. They have liberalized the energy sector to allow production by independent power producers and are seeking financing for investments in power generation and transmission.