authorities’ EITI commitment by addressing previously identified shortcomings and improving data transmission from mining operators; and Reinforcing the role of the Ministry of Mines in the governance of the sector and clarifying the role of the state-owned enterprise Gécamines as a mining operator. The impact of government spending on inclusive growth and poverty reduction could be increased by resolutely improving PFM . The necessary decrees pertaining to the 2012 PFM law ( Loi sur les finances publiques ) needs to be adopted to accelerate its implementation. Other areas, including the medium-term budget framework, public investment management, decentralization (and related provincial PFM), budget tracking and execution, as well as management and planning of foreign-financed investments all require significant improvements (despite some noticeable successes). All these reforms require significant coordination and data sharing between numerous bodies (including foreign donors) and their slow progress is more a reflection of the organizational inefficiency of the DRC government rather than a lack of competence in any of the concerned agencies or ministries. Beyond technical issues, progress in the PFM thus hinges on the necessary political and administrative will. Delays in PFM reforms can also have a detrimental effect on revenue mobilization effort . Low or delayed execution, notably for provincial transfers, is a strong incentive for recipient Page 37 organizations to try meeting their spending needs by mobilizing their own revenue through various and possibly detrimental means, hence proliferating non-tax measures. Furthermore, difficulties implementing the revenue sharing formula for provinces (40 percent to the provinces) threatens the very cohesion of the country by increasing tensions between provinces and between Kinshasa and the provinces. Box II.1. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Tax Potential – Some Preliminary Results An international comparison can provide strong indications on the magnitude of the gap between existing and potential revenue collection. The literature points to a series of factors that are related to the share of government revenue in GDP. Income level, openness to international trade, public spending and debt, the presence of natural resources and access to oceans or sea should have a positive impact on revenue levels, whereas the importance of agriculture and international aid, should have a negative impact. Staff performed preliminary regression analyses based on a panel dataset of sub-Saharan non-oil African countries over the period 1984–2009, in which six measures of revenue (total non aid, of which non-tax and tax revenue, and in the latter, income tax, sales tax, and international trade taxes) were alternatively regressed on income per capita, various variables expressed as a share of GDP (agricultural sector, imports, international aid, public investment, external debt), and dummy variables for the access to sea and the presence of natural resources. The difference between the predicted values and actual DRC values represented the revenue gap. Econometric results were overwhelmingly significant and the direction of the impact matched expectations. A few key results detailed in Table II.1 are: (i) potential revenue and actual revenue for the DRC significantly increased over 1984–2013; (ii) the gap between potential and actual revenue narrowed after 2004; (iii) all types of revenue are below potential, except sales taxes; and (iv) proportionally larger gaps are noted for international trade taxes and non-tax revenue. Table II.1. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Revenue Potential Total 1/ Tax 1/ Non-tax 1/ Act. Pot. Act. 2013 /2 Gap in 2013 1/ All regres sions are s eparate, so that total and s ubtotals by column are not consistent. 2/ Potential revenue for 2013 is calculated bas ed on the 2004/2009 trend. Act. Pot. Pot. Income tax 1/ Act. Pot. Sales tax 1/ Act. Pot. Int'l trade taxes 1/ Act. Pot. Page 38