Monitoring Resource Rich Revenue (percent of GDP) Despite robust GDP growth and abundant natural resources, fiscal space remains too narrow and shrinking . DRC has one of the lowest revenue-to-GDP ratios in SSA as the natural resource sector, particularly mining, has not contributed its fair share through 2014 (see Box 3). Domestic revenue mobilization efforts slackened over the past two years with the revenue-to-GDP ratio falling from 14.4 percent in 2012— when a VAT was introduced with great initial success—to 13.3 percent in 2014. Taxes on goods and services fell the most due to weak revenue administration and an erosion of the tax base at customs. At the same time, spending pressures from stemming for the elections in 2015– 16 and infrastructure for the new provinces present short-term trade-offs and may crowd out spending on priority social programs and infrastructure projects, which are essential to promote more inclusive growth. Spending pressures for electoral politicking may affect the quality of public spending. Source: IMF staff estimates. DRC SSA Stepping up domestic resource mobilization is critical. Increasing fiscal space will preserve the level of investments in basic infrastructure and priority social sectors and still ensure adequate financing of the elections. Efforts to increase revenues in the short term should start with improving the performance of the VAT, which deteriorated from 4.5 percent of GDP in 2012 to 2.9 percent of GDP in 2014. The administration of the VAT must be strengthened by the effective application of existing standard procedural rules, as well as by the modernization and simplification of procedures. Risk-based tax audits would allow better control of VAT credits and A pilot farm (Bukanga-Lonzo) started producing corn this year with the potential of reaching 250,000 tons annually by 2020 and a total investment of $500 million. However, it is capital intensive with modern farming techniques. Page 17 accelerate legitimate refunds. Staff urged the authorities to adhere to the fiscal anchor, given the political context and implement the measures included in the 2015 Finance Act aimed at aligning the current taxable customs values of petroleum products with their market values. It also recommended swift passage of a new mining code, strengthening oversight of SOEs, and implementing targeted anti-money laundering measures to optimize revenues from the natural resources sector. Budget credibility is low . The large gap between actual and forecasted revenue and expenditures weakens the credibility of the budget (see Box 4 and Figure 2). Over the past five years, frequent budget overruns in some areas and revenue shortfalls have resulted in ad-hoc adjustments to spending in other areas and therefore in significant fluctuations of budget execution rates. The resulting reprioritization of expenditures by the executive branch without the legislative branch’s approval through supplementary budgets as provided by the Public Finance Law, undermines the latter’s role in the budget process. Revenue Measures, 2014–19 Text Table 3. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Cumulative Impact of Realistic resources projections are essential for budget credibility. To minimize the risk of discrepancy between projections and outcomes, it is necessary to use past outturns as a basis for budget projections. Use of supplementary budgets is also a means to strengthen the credibility of the budget process. Tax measures attached to the draft budget must be adopted simultaneously with the budget law or otherwise the related resources deducted from the draft budget. Staff recommended including annual budgets in a medium-term budget framework (MTBF) aligned with the priorities in the poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), and better information sharing with donors to reduce discrepancies between budgeted external resources and outturns to enhance budget credibility. Eliminationn of tax expenditures Tighter control of VAT base in non-resource sectors Strengthening of border controls Better control of natural resource tax base Total Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections. (Percent of GDP) Measure An alternative scenario with better outcomes. The main assumptions are that the authorities adopt staff policy advice, implement TA recommendations, and accelerate the stalled structural reforms, particularly the reforms of the central bank (expected to be completed by 2016). Under this scenario, growth would be higher, averaging about 9 percent during 2015–19 compared to 8 percent in the baseline; inflation is targeted to average Adoption of an anchor that excludes mineral resources will be discussed in the context of the next Article IV consultation. The IMF is helping build capacity targeting critical surveillance areas such as domestic revenue mobilization (including extractive industries), PFM, central bank modernization, and national accounts. Page 18 2.9 percent against 2.2 percent in the baseline and the exchange rate to depreciate gradually. The external current account improves, averaging 8 percent of GDP during 2015–19 against 9 percent of GDP in the baseline. A gradual depreciation of the exchange rate would allow for the much-needed reserves accumulation to increase resilience (Figure 2 and Table 5). The significant improvement in the revenue-to-GDP ratio is predicated on a steadfast implementation of recent the Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) TA recommendations, namely (i) broadening the tax base, (ii) introducing e-procedures beginning with the VAT at the large taxpayer office, and (iii) developing risk-based compliance program for large- and medium-sized businesses. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment of the potential for revenue generation over the medium term. For the short term, they pointed to the weakness and governance problems plaguing the revenue administration and noncompliance by some taxpayers. They noted the recent progress made in implementing the recommendations of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and the National Conferences on Mineral Resources Management that would improve revenue from the sector. The authorities concurred with Staff’s views on the need to strengthen budget credibility by improving resources forecasts. They indicated that the budget allocations are based on the priorities of the PRSP. In addition, they emphasized that the medium-term expenditure framework is being strengthened. To this end, they are finalizing a decree on Fiscal Governance in the DRC that will be adopted soon. They underscored that efforts are being made by the CENI to reduce the cost of the elections to lessen pressures on the budget and, in this regard, may submit a supplementary budget to Parliament. Text Table 4. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators. Baseline and Alternative Scenarios, 2014–19 Sources: Congolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections DRC became EITI compliant in 2014 and started a pilot project on disclosure of beneficial ownership of extractive companies. Page 19