The financial sector is large and interconnected . Total system assets are over 650 percent of GDP, with the banking sector accounting for two-thirds of this amount. The large size reflects a high degree of domestic interconnectedness. Household assets and liabilities are among the highest in the world, with pension assets amounting to about 140 percent of GDP. Institutional investors, in turn, hold large amounts of covered bonds (150 percent of GDP) which are a key funding source for the banks. Bank lending to households is at 130 percent of GDP. The banking system also has important linkages with Nordic neighbors, with Danske Bank being a large regional player and with Sweden-based Nordea the third-largest bank in the domestic market. Housing Sector Policies The return of tight conditions in segments of the housing market calls for vigilance. With structural impediments holding back housing supply and procyclical housing taxes and favorable credit conditions pushing up demand, house prices have been rising rapidly. In large cities early signs of overvaluation are starting to reappear. While household debt has not seen commensurate growth, it remains at a high level and household-level data suggests that first-time home buyers take out very sizable loans relative to their income. A potential future bout of renewed house price adjustments could, through its negative effects on household balance sheets, have a substantial impact on the real economy with knock-on effects on banks. The authorities have taken welcome measures to restrain mortgage lending. In particular, in 2015, the financial supervisor (DFSA) introduced a “Supervisory Diamond” for Selected Issues Chapter “The Great Divergence: Regional House Prices in Denmark.” Page 14 mortgage-credit institutions. This includes guidance to limit lending growth, large exposures, reliance on short-term funding, and borrowers’ interest rate risk, and to promote loan amortization even though the new measures will come into effect only during 2018–20. A minimum down payment requirement of five percent for new mortgages was also introduced. In addition, the recent establishment of “Seven Best Practices” for lenders in areas with rapid house price increases should strengthen banks’ risk management practices. DFSA Supervisory Diamond for Mortgage-Credit Institutions But a new tax measure risks amplifying the house price cycle. A new freeze on land tax valuations for tax purposes was introduced in 2016—analogous to the freeze on real estate valuations that has been in effect since 2002. The measure will further increase the procyclical impact of taxes on house prices as the freezes imply that the rate of taxation falls when property and land prices rise. More is needed to mitigate medium-term risks. Noting that early action would help the authorities stay ahead of the curve, staff urged coherent action across several policy areas.  Supply policies. More could be done to alleviate regional supply constraints which have a significant impact on price levels in some markets. For instance zoning regulations and spatial planning could be made more responsive to housing demand conditions—especially in urban areas. Easing the strict regulations in the rental markets could also help alleviate housing pressures by facilitating a more efficient use of the existing housing stock. Selected Issues Chapter “House Prices in Denmark’s Cities: the Role of Supply.” < < < < < z < pp pp Page 15  Tax policies. The procyclical valuation freezes for land and property taxes should be ended.  Macroprudential policies. As noted in the 2014 FSAP recommendations, there is scope for additional macroprudential instruments. The early preparation of an adequate macroprudential “toolbox” is key to ensure that measures can be implemented without delay when needed. Specifically, staff suggested considering limits on the overall debt-to-income ratio, which would help keep household debt and debt service capacity in check, especially in a context where house prices rise faster than incomes. In addition, it recommended raising the new minimum down payment requirement to at least 10 percent to increase households’ buffer in case of adverse house price shocks. These measures would complement the existing MCI supervisory diamond as they help protect households and the economy more broadly, and address risks from loans by commercial banks. If regional markets continue to diverge, consideration could be given to applying policies with different stringency across regions. Such policies could target high-risk areas—e.g., Copenhagen—without hampering the nascent recovery in other regions. Authorities’ views The authorities are monitoring the housing market and household debt closely. On the supply side, they concurred that zoning regulations and planning constrained housing supply. However, they noted that these regulations served multiple objectives, including safeguarding the quality of housing and living conditions. The political appetite to loosen restrictions was believed to be low. The authorities acknowledged the procyclical impact of housing tax freezes, but they pointed to flaws and inequities in the current property assessment system, which had necessitated its effective suspension. The government is working on a new valuation system, with new valuations expected to be available in 2019. While additional macroprudential measures were not planned at this juncture, the Danish Systemic Risk Council had urged caution in relation to low interest rates and house price developments, and the DFSA stressed its readiness and the ability of the Danish political system to act swiftly when needed. The DFSA believed that regional differentiation of future measures—similar to its “seven best practices”—could help their acceptability and would avoid criticism that overly strict regulations stifled growth. Other Financial Sector Issues Good progress has been made on the recommendations of the 2014 FSAP (Annex 3). With the implementation of EU regulations, the DFSA has implemented several changes to regulatory and supervisory practices, including those related to CRD IV/CRR and Solvency II. Also, with the transposition into Danish law of the European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, the resolution regime is being strengthened. The DFSA has further indicated it will increase the frequency of on-site inspections for smaller banks and insurance companies. The supervisory diamond for MCIs and the seven best practices also address several FSAP recommendations. Selected Issues Chapter “Macroprudential Policy in Denmark.” Page 16 Staff welcomed the progress and urged follow up on remaining FSAP advice. This includes in particular—in addition to the recommendations for macroprudential policy discussed above—further efforts to strengthen the operational independence of the DFSA, including by lengthening the terms of board members and introducing strict fit and proper appointment criteria. An internal audit function should also be established within the DFSA to ensure integrity and consistency of supervisory work. The DFSA should continue to have adequate resources to execute its expanded set of tasks, including regarding the supervision of the pension and insurance sectors. Regional coordination on financial stability issues should deepen. Given the high interconnectedness of the Nordic banking sector, deeper cooperation with other Nordic supervisors remains critical. The issue is particularly pertinent in the context of advanced plans by Nordea to convert its Nordic subsidiaries into branches—including its commercial banking operations in Denmark (Nordea’s mortgage credit arm will remain a subsidiary to facilitate the local issuance of covered bonds). In response to Nordea’s plans, the regional supervisors and governments have started work on updated agreements to guide the treatment of systemically important branches. Staff welcomed this work and underscored that agreement will be needed on information sharing, cross-border supervision, depositor protection, and resolution arrangements. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that strong regional coordination is key. They thought it would be particularly important that a level playing field was secured for all banks operating in the respective national markets and that the oversight of systemically important branches would be closely coordinated with host supervisors. On the operational independence of the DFSA, the authorities underscored that the DFSA Board was strong and independent and that there was no history of political interference. They also believed it was too soon after the establishment of the board to discuss changes to its setup. Work on an internal audit or control function in the DFSA is underway, though the precise modalities are yet to be decided.