The economy continues to grow slowly. After recording 1.3 percent growth in 2014, the economy grew by 1.2 percent in 2015, driven mostly by private consumption on the back of rising employment and real incomes (Figure 1, Table 1). However, relatively strong performance in the first half of the year was partly undone by flagging exports in the second half of the year. Staff estimates that an output gap of about -1 percent of GDP remains, but uncertainty surrounding this assessment is large. Meanwhile, headline inflation has stayed low at 0.5 percent on average in 2015. This reflects partly the impact of falling food and energy prices, with core inflation at 1.2 percent. Unemployment continued its gradual decline, reaching 6.2 percent at end 2015. Fueled partly by negative interest rates, house prices have been on the rise. Following speculative pressures on the exchange rate in early 2015, Danmarks Nationalbank (DN) lowered its deposit policy rate—which first broke through the zero bound in 2012—deeper into negative territory (Box 2). In the resulting environment of DNK FIN DEU NLD SWE NOR Real GDP Levels in Selected Countries (Index, average 2003-2005 = 100)Sources: Haver analytics and Fund staff calculations. Policy rate Long-term mortgage rate, rhs Policy and Mortgage Rates (Percent) Sources: Danmarks Nationalbank and Fund staff calculations. Page 10 historically low mortgage rates, real house prices rose over 6 percent in 2015 (Figure 2). Prices rose particularly rapidly in segments of the market (e.g., flats, which were up 11 percent) and in the big cities (with prices in Copenhagen up 14 percent) where economic activity has been strongest and housing supply most constrained. Continuation of the recent trend would bring prices for flats and in Copenhagen back to the peak of the previous boom in about one year’s time. Meanwhile, a 27 percent rise in the stock market in 2015—over six times the gain of the EURO Stoxx index— suggests other assets may have experienced tailwinds from low interest rates as well. The current account surplus has reached a historically high level (Figure 3, Tables 2 and 3). Denmark has consistently run current account surpluses in recent decades, mostly reflecting structurally high retirement savings in the context of its funded pension system. Since the crisis, the surplus has further increased—peaking at 7¾ percent in 2014 before edging down to about 7 percent in 2015—reflecting depressed investment activity and the rebuilding of balance sheets by households. Based on the average estimates of the EBA methodologies as well as key Denmark-specific factors (e.g., the importance of merchanting trade) staff assesses that the exchange rate remains broadly consistent with fundamentals (Box 3). The underlying fiscal position improved moderately in 2015 (Tables 4 and 5) The headline fiscal balance has seen large swings in recent years and fell to a 2.1 percent of GDP deficit in 2015 as a large share of the impact of massive one-off revenues related to changes in pensions taxation—which had brought the fiscal balance temporarily into surplus in 2014—wore off. Abstracting from the impact of these one-offs, however, the structural balance improved, on staff’s estimates, by about ¼ percent to -1.1 percent of potential GDP. The debt-to-GDP ratio, at around 45 percent of GDP, remains well below the Stability and Growth Pact benchmark. Banks remain resilient, despite negative interest rates and low credit demand. Danish banks remain liquid, well-capitalized, and profitable (Box 4, Table 6). Higher fee income—including on account of an increase in the volume of mortgage refinancing—has by and large compensated for slightly reduced interest margins. The ongoing reduction of impairment charges—reflecting both low interest rates and the diminishing impact of last decade’s housing bust—has further boosted banks’ profits. Private savings Gross fixed investment Current account, right Savings, Investment, and Current Account (Percent of GDP) Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. -40-30-20-1001020304050H1H2H1H2H1H2H12012201320142015 Impairment charges on loans and guarantees Value adjustments Other profit and loss account items (excl. tax) Net fee income Income from administrative margins Net interest income (excl. income from adm. margins) Profit before taxes Systemic Bank Earnings (Bil. DKK) Sources: Danmarks Nationalbank and Fund staff calculations. Page 11