Monetary policy is anchored on a peg to the euro. DN conducts foreign exchange interventions and sets policy interest rates with the objective of maintaining the peg. These policies have taken the DN’s certificates of deposit (CD) policy rate into negative territory for most of the period since 2012. Following strong appreciation pressures in early 2015, however, the policy rate was lowered further to an unprecedented -0.75 percent, creating a sizable spread with the ECB policy rate. In recent months, reflecting the substantial easing of pressures, DN has allowed the spread with the ECB to gradually narrow again: in January, it raised the CD rate to -0.65 percent and it left this rate unchanged when the ECB further reduced policy rates in January and March. Staff suggested that a normalization of rates should continue as exchange rate pressures allowed. Should a further lowering of ECB policy rates, or a change in market conditions, necessitate a renewed reduction in Danish policy rates, the DN could seek to mitigate the impact on banks by raising the limits for the current account (i.e., tiering) as it did in early 2015. The authorities have planned for a gradual fiscal consolidation. The fiscal stance in Denmark is difficult to assess owing to large one-off measures that have caused wide swings in the headline balance in recent years and continue to impact the balance in 2016. Also, the authorities’ estimates of the structural balance differ substantially from staff’s, including on account of different assessments of output and employment gaps. On the authorities’ estimates, the structural deficit was 0.6 percent of GDP in 2015 (compared to the staff estimate of 1.1 percent and an EC estimate of 1.8 percent). The government’s medium-term fiscal plan is to eliminate the structural deficit by 2020. The envisaged consolidation largely reflects the lagged impact of past labor market reforms (¶27), which are expected to yield a gradual reduction in benefits and increases in labor participation. No additional discretionary measures are envisaged except for possible cuts in public consumption as needed to offset higher-than-budgeted costs related to refugee inflows. For 2016, the authorities project a ¼ percent tightening, which, on their count, will bring the structural deficit to 0.4 percent of GDP—thereby complying with the budget law, which mandates that it may not exceed ½ percent of GDP in the budget proposal for any given year. Meanwhile, reflecting the volatile path of one-off revenues, the headline deficit is forecast to peak at 2.3 percent in 2016—well below the SGP deficit limit—and to decline thereafter. The planned fiscal tightening is appropriate, but uncertainties surrounding the outlook call for nimble policies. Considering that Denmark’s moderate level of public debt leaves room for maneuver (Annex 2), and in the absence of an independent monetary policy, staff noted Page 13 that fiscal policy should continue to act as the main stabilizer of cyclical fluctuations. Thus, if downside risks materialize automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate. In addition, short- term fiscal support would be called for—for instance via higher productive public investment or by not offsetting further refugee-related spending with cuts elsewhere in the budget. Conversely, a faster fiscal tightening may be needed if the recovery were to gather pace faster than expected. Authorities’ views The authorities believe macroeconomic policies are adequate for the circumstances. On monetary policy, the DN emphasized that maintaining the peg was the single policy objective. The DN also underscored that it had demonstrated it had both the necessary tools and the resolve to safeguard the peg. Looking forward, the DN noted that in their assessment the lower bound for interest rates had not yet been reached and that policy rates could be lowered further if needed. The overall impact of negative rates on the broader economy had been manageable thus far. On fiscal policy, the authorities emphasized the presence of large automatic stabilizers, but also acknowledged the need for flexible policies if risks to the economic outlook materialized.