The baseline outlook is for a gradual further recovery. Supported by low interest rates and oil prices, private consumption continues to be the main driver for growth in the short term. However, investment is also projected to pick up, reflecting the diminishing impact of firm deleveraging and the strong recovery in the housing market. Export growth is likely to remain low, in line with the weak external environment. On these trends, the economy is forecast to grow by 1.3 percent in 2016 and 1.6 percent in 2017, and the output gap is expected to close in 2019. Inflation will remain subdued in 2016, reflecting lower oil prices, but is forecast to rise steadily, reaching 2 percent in the outer years reflecting a tightening labor market and closing output gap. But risks are tilted to the downside (Annex 1). A sharper than expected slowdown in Europe or in emerging markets could derail the modest recovery, given Denmark’s deep integration in the world economy. Also, in view of exceptionally high household gross debt (260 percent of disposable income) and a high share of adjustable rate mortgages, volatility in global financial conditions leading to a spike in market interest rates could abruptly raise households’ debt service and depress consumption. The disruption of trade and financial flows that are likely to accompany a “Brexit” would compound these risks. There is also potential for spillovers from Nordic neighbors (e.g., if Sweden’s housing market were to cool), given the interconnectedness of the regional banking system. Domestically, an unchecked continuation of rapid house price increases would heighten the risk of a correction in the medium term, with knock-on effects on consumption. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with the staff’s outlook and risk assessment. On Brexit—in addition to a likely large negative impact on trade—the authorities noted the possibility of sizable capital inflows as Denmark could find itself on the receiving end of safe haven flows, as during the euro crisis. Regarding domestic risks, the authorities agreed that rising housing prices and the high level of household debt bear close watching. However, they believed that for the moment house price developments largely reflected underlying fundamentals, including rising disposable incomes, ongoing urbanization, and low interest rates. They also stressed that, in contrast to past booms, overall household debt levels have recently not been rising. The authorities noted a smaller-than-estimated output gap (i.e., lower potential output) as a key risk factor).