Economic growth is expected to remain strong in the medium term, driven by the investment boom. Staff’s baseline scenario assumes that current macroeconomic policies will continue in the medium term and planned reforms will be successfully implemented, including comprehensive tax reform, improved business climate, strengthened debt management, and other reforms (discussed in paragraphs 24 28 and 35 38). Growth is projected to increase to 7 percent in 19 supported by large public investments, in particular the railroad and the multipurpose port, which should stimulate private sector activity and FDI. Inflation will remain below 3 percent reflecting moderate world food and commodity prices. The 2017 fiscal deficit is targeted at 2 percent of GDP with the completion of the rail road project. Over the medium term, the fiscal deficit is projected to decline further and stabilize at around 1 percent of GDP under the assumption there will be no new major debt-financed investment projects undertaken by the government, and with the core infrastructure in place, new projects would be financed mainly by FDI. The current account deficit will drop to 21 percent of GDP in 2017 and will decline gradually and stabilize at around 18 20 percent of GDP in the medium term, financed primarily by FDI and public sector borrowing, mainly to complete the ongoing investment projects. International reserves are projected to remain at 3 months of imports. In this scenario, with high and sustained growth of 6-7 percent in 2017-21, the debt-to-GDP ratio reaches a maximum of 87 percent in 2018-19 (Figure 3). The outlook is subject to considerable risks, both on the downside and upside (Table 2). First, if the efficiency of investment is low and expected growth dividends are not realized, fiscal liabilities and the risk of debt distress may increase further. Second, a slowdown of international trade or economic growth in Ethiopia —the main client of Djibouti’s ports and the new railroad— would adversely affect growth, fiscal revenues, and the external position. Third, continued regional tensions and refugee/migrant inflows could weaken public finances, investors’ confidence, and social cohesion. Finally, a major economic slowdown in China could have a negative effect on financing for major projects, both in Djibouti and Ethiopia. On the upside, a potentially higher impact of economic reforms (see paragraph above) and a favorable external environment would yield strong and inclusive growth more quickly and enable debt ratios to be reduced. An alternative scenario illustrates the potential impact of downside risks . It assumes that growth does not exceed 4.5 percent due to negative shocks if downside risks materialize or reforms are delayed, and public sector external non-concessional borrowing continues at $350 million annually (about 17 percent of GDP) over the next five years to finance future projects. In this scenario, the debt ratio increases further and exceeds 110 percent of GDP by 2021. The budget deficit would increase to 5-6 percent of GDP and debt service would absorb up to 17 percent of budget revenue, putting pressure on social and poverty-reducing spending and becoming a serious constraint for development (Figure 3). Page 14 Figure 3. Djibouti: Alternative Scenarios, 2014 (In percent) Figure 1. Djibouti: Scenarios, 2014-21 Source:IMF staff estimates. Lower growth, higher borrowing Baseline Debt-to-GDP Ratio Lower growth, higher borrowing Baseline Debt Service to Fiscal Revenue Ratio Lower growth, higher borrowing Baseline Fiscal Deficit Excluding Water Pipeline and Railway Projects (In percent of GDP) Page 15