Eradicating widespread poverty and unemployment remains Djibouti’s fundamental development challenge. In addition to a stable macroeconomic framework and fair tax regime, the following reforms are critical: Improving the business environment : Djibouti ranked 171 st out of 189 countries on the World Bank Doing Business Index 2016, reflecting a difficult business environment. A key priority is reforming the judicial system to improve contract enforcement and property rights protection and strengthen anti-corruption efforts. Lowering the cost of utilities and improving the quality of service delivery : Improving the supply of basic utilities and reducing their cost would stimulate investment and boost competitiveness. Electricity tariffs are among the highest in the region, while telecommunications costs are high and service quality relatively poor. Investing in human capital : To equip Djibouti nationals for the job opportunities created by the investment boom, reforms to the educational system and professional training are needed to improve the match between the available skills and needs of the labor market. Economic diversification into labor-intensive sectors like fishing and tourism would reduce the risks associated with reliance on the ports while creating jobs and generating fiscal revenues. The reforms proposed in this section would help promote diversification. Social safety nets are needed to protect the poor and vulnerable population. Encouraging small businesses. These tend to be labor-intensive, relying on domestic labor. Yet, they have been disadvantaged by the current development strategy of according tax Page 20 concessions to attract foreign investment, and face additional obstacles, such as limited access to credit. Figure 3. Djibouti: Business Environment and Governance Indicators Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators 2014 (government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption); the line is the OLS trend for all countries. The authorities launched in 2015 the Accelerated Growth Strategy for Promoting Employment (SCAPE). The SCAPE, which encompasses ongoing public investment projects, translates “Vision Djibouti 2035” into five-year rolling plans. Vision 2035, the authorities’ long-term development vision, envisions Djibouti as Africa’s commercial and logistics hub, and aims to triple per capita income by 2035. The SCAPE aims to enhance diversification of economic activity through a wide range of projects, for which funding has been secured, including: (i) port and transportation facilities: the ongoing Addis-Ababa Djibouti railway project, and construction of new ports and expansion of existing ports; (ii) energy: a second electricity supply line with Ethiopia, a geothermal project involving a consortium of seven donors, and construction of a new power plant close to Djibouti-ville, the capital city (iii) water supply: the ongoing construction of a water pipeline between Djibouti and Ethiopia, and a desalination plant funded with an EU grant. Funding for some of the other projects is yet to be secured. DjiboutiLICMENAP -Oil Importers MENAP -Oil Exporters EM > 2010-2015 Improvement Ease of Doing Business (percentile rank) Sources: World Bank Doing Business (2015), and IMF staff calculations. EM = Emerging Market Countries. Starting a BusinessDealing with Construction PermitsGetting Electricity Registering Property Getting Credit Protecting Minority InvestorsPaying TaxesTrading Across Borders Enforcing ContractsResolving Insolvency Djibouti MENAP -Oil Importers Firm-level Business Constraints (distance to frontier) DJI CCA LICEM MENAP H W il > Higher GDP per capita ---> WGI-4 and GDP per capita (log PPP)Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators 2014 (government CCALICEMMENAPDJI H W il > Changes in WGI-4, 2000-2014 (percentile rank) CCA = Caucus and Central Asian Countries Page 21 The authorities have launched initiatives to protect the welfare of the poor. Some 16,400 low-income households are scheduled to receive allowances of DF 18,000 ($101) per quarter over twelve months under a cash transfer program. The universal health insurance scheme, which was initially limited to the public sector, has been extended more widely. Other support programs include free vaccination for children from poor households, and allowances to university students from outside the capital city. Authorities’ views. The authorities are aware of the challenges facing them in the area of job creation and poverty reduction. They concurred with staff on the reform priorities and expressed confidence that the ongoing investment projects would foster inclusive growth by generating jobs and hence income, and meeting the basic needs of the population, such as access to water supply, health facilities, and education.