Access to financial services remains low in Djibouti despite the increase in the number of banks from four in 2006 to ten today. Less than 20 percent of the adult population possesses a bank account. Some banks require a relatively large minimum deposit to open a bank account. Only 4 percent of adults could obtain a loan from a formal-sector financial institution in 2011, while 18 percent of adults had obtained credit from their circles of family or friends. Certain requirements constrain access to credit such as the 2 percent tax for the registration of collateral for mortgage loans, and another 2 percent tax for the release of collateral. Credit to small and medium enterprises represents only 12 percent of total bank credit to enterprises. High-risk premia undermine financial inclusion and development: Lending-deposit rate differentials exceed 10 percentage points. Djibouti banks require high levels of collateralization: 228 percent of the loan amount, compared with 190 percent in other MENA countries and 179 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa. Such low levels of financial inclusion in Djibouti suggest that the economy may be operating well below its potential because productive activity by a large share of the population would be constrained by limited access to financial services. Management problems have stymied the development of microfinance since its emergence in 2008. The Caisse populaire d'Epargne et de Crédit, the leading microfinance institution was under central bank receivership from 2012 to 2015 because of management problems. This institution, with a membership of over 14,000 (about less than 3 percent of the adult population), accounted for less than 0.12 percent of bank credit. Its lending interest rate was 26.8 percent a year, which is almost 10 percentage points higher than the average of commercial banks’ rates. The microfinance institution did not pay interest on deposits. The central bank is pursuing measures to enhance financial inclusion and development. It has set up a guarantee fund to facilitate access to finance for small companies and established a Sharia Board for Islamic banking. It is also pursuing plans to modernize the payment The cash transfer program drew on data from a 2013 household consumption survey. Page 22 system, develop the electronic payment system, and modernize the credit information system, with support from the World Bank. Developing the financial infrastructure is crucial for financial development: The credit information system needs to be strengthened and developed. An effective information system that enables real-time access to information on credit applications reduces risks emanating from information asymmetries between lenders and borrowers. Implementation of the credit guarantee fund for SMEs needs to be accelerated. The fund would enable partial risk sharing, which should encourage financial institutions to lend to perceived high-risk groups such as small businesses. Technological innovation would promote financial inclusion. Mobile telephony—more than half of the adult population are subscribers—can offer low-cost financial services relative to traditional banking. The central bank’s banking supervision capacity and commercial banks’ risk management capacity require strengthening to enhance financial stability, in light of the expansion of the banking system and the high level of NPLs in commercial banks’ loan portfolio. Rising NPLs in recent years combined with declining provisions to NPLs and banks’ profitability suggest that the banking sector may be facing a deeper problem and therefore strengthened banking supervision is required. Persistently high NPLs could undermine financial and economic stability. A continuing deterioration in asset quality could adversely affect banks’ profitability and result in a tightening of credit to the private sector. This would hurt economic activity at a time when banks are solicited to support private sector development and economic diversification. The September 2015 follow-up reserves management TA mission made concrete proposals to bolster central bank reserves management. The ultimate aim of the proposals is to enhance central bank independence by increasing its income from reserves. In recent years, low international interest rates have reduced significantly central bank income from reserves. The proposals are focused on writing an investment policy, drafting a framework for risk management, implementing a decision-making process for reserves management, and strengthening institutional capacity through training. A review of mortgage procedures and conditions is warranted. The authorities should consider reducing or eliminating the 2 percent tax for the registration of collateral for mortgage loans and the other 2 percent tax for the release of collateral. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed with staff on the need to improve access to financial services for the majority of the population. They expect that the reformed Caisse populaire d'Epargne et de Crédit, the main microfinance institution, and ongoing projects such as the modernization of the credit information and payment systems, would play a key role in promoting financial inclusion in Djibouti. Page 23