A number of factors account for widespread poverty and unemployment in Djibouti. Investment has been narrowly concentrated. Although the current development model— which exploits Djibouti’s strategic location along one of the world’s busiest shipping routes—has transformed Djibouti into a vibrant service economy centered on port activities, it has fostered reliance on a single sector catering mainly to Ethiopia, leaving the economy vulnerable to external shocks. In addition, services—the main driver of growth in recent years—and construction activities account for only about 13 percent of formal employment. Much of the current investment boom is also narrowly concentrated on port and transportation services, reinforcing the need for reform to broaden the base and spread the benefits of growth (See Annex 1: Risk Assessment Matrix). The business environment has been challenging. Djibouti ranked 155th out of 189 countries on the World Bank’s Doing Business 2015 Index. The country ranked 171 or lower in getting electricity, getting credit, and enforcing contracts. These are major obstacles, especially for labor-intensive small businesses. On the control of corruption index of the Worldwide Governance Indicators, Djibouti’s percentile rank (out of 200 countries and territories) improved steadily to 51.5 in 2008 and then deteriorated to 41.6 in 2013. Djibouti’s demographics pose additional challenges. First, the low labor force participation rate, because of the low female participation rate, increases the dependence on the working population. Second, the population is relatively young—almost 75 percent is less than 35 years old—meaning a large proportion of the labor force are job market entrants who lack the experience (and skills) needed for employment. Youth unemployment standing at about 60 percent is much higher than the overall unemployment rate of 48 percent. Third, large-scale migration, exacerbated by refugees fleeing conflict in neighboring Somalia, is exerting additional pressure on basic social services and on the already tight job market. The domestic skills base is weak. More than a third of the labor force has no education; those with some education have been trained mainly for white-collar jobs, resulting in a significant skills mismatch. Financial inclusion remains low. Despite a relatively high bank deposit-to-GDP ratio of 80 percent, and private credit-to-GDP ratio of 30 percent, the bulk of the population and most small and medium size enterprises lack access to banking services. These are still concentrated on a few enterprises and individuals. Only about 14 percent of the adult population has a bank Page 16 account. Interest rate spreads are high, with the average deposit and lending rates at about 2 and 12 percent respectively. The high lending rate reflects banks risk aversion. Absent reliable credit and financial status information to support loan applications, banks impose a high lending rate or demand large collateral. Micro-finance remains underdeveloped. The Djibouti Savings and Credit Fund, the main micro-finance institution, has, since 2012, been under conservatorship by the central bank due to management problems. Figure 3. Djibouti: Business Environment and Governance Indicators DjiboutiLICMENAP - Oil Importers MENAP - Oil Exporters EM E f d b u ss 2010-2015 Improvement Ease of Doing Business (percentile rank) Sources: World Bank Doing Business (2015), and IMF staff calculations. EM = Emerging Market Countries. Starting a BusinessDealing with Construction Permits Getting ElectricityRegistering PropertyGetting CreditProtecting Minority InvestorsPaying TaxesTrading Across BordersEnforcing Contracts Resolving Insolvency MENAP -Oil Importers Firm-level Business Constraints (distance to frontier) CCALICEMMENAPDJI h W G I il Changes in WGI-4, 2000-2013 (percentile rank) CCA = Caucus and Central Asian Countries DJI CCA LICEMMENAP h W G I il Higher GDP per capita ---> WGI-4 and GDP per capita (log PPP) Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators 2013 (government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption); the line is the OLS trend for all countries. Page 17 The authorities have articulated their overarching framework for addressing the country’s development challenges in Vision Djibouti 2035. Vision Djibouti 2035 envisions Djibouti as Africa’s commercial and logistics hub. It aims to triple per capita income, and reduce the unemployment rate from 48 percent to 10 percent, by 2035. The vision consists of five pillars: (i) peace and national unity, (ii) good governance, (iii) economic diversification, (iv) human capital development, and (v) regional integration. A rolling five-year Accelerated Growth Strategy for Promoting Employment (SCAPE) and a National Employment Policy 2014-19 have been developed to realize the vision. The employment policy emphasizes youth and female employment, and the development of small and medium enterprises. The authorities are pursuing several initiatives to improve electricity and water supply. High electricity costs and limited water supply are regarded as major constraints to investing in Djibouti. Electricity: Geothermal project, sponsored by a consortium of seven donors. The recruitment process for the consultant to oversee the project is underway. The project is expected to be completed in A second power interconnection with the Ethiopian electricity grid (which now supplies about 65 percent of Djibouti’s electricity consumption). A second thermal plant in Djibouti-ville, the capital city. Wind-generated electricity project: A joint venture is being considered. The first phase is expected to be completed in 2017. A solar project. To avoid possible duplication and inefficient use of scarce resources in these initiatives, the EU is undertaking a study to develop a strategic vision for the energy sector. Water supply: Two major initiatives are being launched. The first is the water pipeline that will be constructed between Djibouti and Ethiopia, permitting the importation of 100,000 cubic meters of water a day free of charge from Ethiopia (Annex 2 contains more details). The second initiative is a €45 million water desalination plant which will be built with a €40.5 million grant from the EU. The remaining €4.5 million will be provided by the Djibouti government or other donors. The project is expected to generate 45,000 cubic meters of water a day and to be completed in 2018. A number of poverty alleviation and social welfare initiatives have been launched. First, compulsory health insurance will be introduced for all government employees starting in 2015. The cost is being covered from the government budget and with additional funding from the African Development Bank. Health insurance will be extended subsequently to other beneficiaries. Second, the government has announced the construction of 5,000 social housing units. Third, connection Page 18 fees and consumption tariffs for water supplied by the state-owned water company have been lowered for poor neighborhoods. Fourth, a stone cutting project that employs 2,800 unskilled workers has been launched. Last, the authorities are developing a social register (database) to identify the poor and facilitate coordination of poverty alleviation initiatives. Rationalizing development initiatives and improving donor coordination. To ensure efficient resource allocation, development initiatives should be pursued within a well-defined global or sectoral strategy, especially in sectors with multiple initiatives such as electricity. Staff welcomes the authorities’ plans to improve coordination of donors and government institutions. Improving the business environment and competitiveness. Reducing red tape, stepping up anti-corruption efforts, and improving contract enforcement through administrative and judicial reforms should help create a more business friendly environment. Moreover, improving the supply of basic utilities and reducing the cost of electricity would boost competitiveness. Reform of educational curricula and training programs. The emphasis should be on ensuring that the labor force is trained for the needs of the job market, and that Djibouti nationals— rather than expatriates—take the jobs created during the investment boom. Economic diversification. Diversification is essential to exploit opportunities in sectors with high growth and employment potential such as tourism and fishing, and reduce the risks associated with relying on a single sector (services) catering mainly to one client (Ethiopia). To this end, improving the business climate is indispensable. Promoting financial inclusion and stability. Given the importance of financial stability for financial inclusion, staff stressed the need to strengthen banking supervision, reduce credit concentration, and monitor non-performing loans. Staff urged the authorities to increase the number of onsite bank inspections, focusing on internal risks and controls. Furthermore, staff reiterated the importance of strengthening the AML/CFT framework, particularly elements related to the financing of terrorism, the supervision of cross-border activities, and the detection of cross- border transportation of currency. Staff strongly encouraged the authorities to adopt the following measures to facilitate access to credit for individuals, and small and medium enterprises (SMEs): Accelerate the implementation of the national strategy for modernization of payments and credit reporting systems (project document has been completed with World Bank assistance). Set up a framework for mobile payments to make financial services accessible to low-income groups. Operationalize the SME Partial Credit Guarantee Fund (project study has been completed with World Bank assistance). Page 19 Diversify sources of SME financing by establishing an appropriate regulatory framework for specialized financial institutions such as leasing and Islamic financing institutions. (The authorities have requested Fund technical assistance to improve the regulatory framework for Islamic banking.) Simplify the taxation system to encourage SMEs to migrate to the formal sector. Simplify access to land and improve mortgage procedures. Authorities’ views: The authorities generally concur with staff recommendations. They highlighted the various ongoing economic reforms and initiatives—aimed at improving water and electricity supply, providing safety nets for the poor, and providing improved training for the labor force—to reiterate their commitment to economic diversification, job creation, and poverty reduction. They consider Vision Djibouti 2035 and its Accelerated Growth Strategy for Employment Creation as a well-defined overarching framework for development. They expect that the recently established committees will improve coordination and management of development initiatives. The authorities agree with staff that financial stability is critical for economic stability and growth in Djibouti, and that central bank supervisory capacity required further strengthening. While accepting that higher commercial bank provisioning requirements should be enforced, they perceive the deterioration of nonperforming loans as largely due to changes in classification procedures.