Weak governance undermines the operational efficiency and financial soundness of public enterprises (PE) and poses risks for the budget and banks. Insufficient operational independence and constraints on decision making, weak government oversight, and lack of transparency weigh on PE performance. These factors have contributed to high prices for utilities, persistent losses, domestic arrears, and budgetary costs. As part of reforms to address these weaknesses, the authorities approved in April 2016 a Code of Good Governance for PEs to improve their performance. The authorities are strongly encouraged to strengthen the management and supervision of public enterprises . The authorities are taking steps to implement the Code of Good Page 18 Governance. In early 2017, they plan to adopt the implementing regulations and a management training guide. They also intend to appoint new executive boards and sign performance contracts — based on organizational and financial audits with five public enterprises by June 2017. The authorities are advised to put in place a joint supervision and audit framework for PEs, involving both the Ministry of Economy Finance and line ministries; prepare consolidated income statements and balance sheets of PEs every six months and establish a risk management framework to evaluate and mitigate possible budget risks. Other measures include implementing the Code of Good Governance, stepping up anti-corruption efforts, and phasing out tax exemptions for PEs. Fiscal implications and risks of PPP projects should be evaluated and factored into medium-term fiscal projections. Eliminating the monopoly status of PEs and opening key sectors to private operators, in particular in telecommunications, would improve competitiveness. The authorities generally shared staff’s view on the urgent need to improve the efficiency of public enterprises and their capacity to manage large projects . In particular, they intend to strengthen supervision of PEs. However, they noted the difficulty of opening public monopolies to private sector competition, and preferred reforming PEs first. Importantly, the authorities have liberalized renewable energy production and are preparing an institutional and legal framework for PPPs.