Greater domestic revenue mobilization is imperative to generate fiscal space and achieve greater budgetary flexibility . Additional revenue from sustainable, fair and non- distortionary taxation is necessary to finance social and growth-enhancing projects, and to service public debt. However, the potential for revenue mobilization under the existing tax regime remains limited because of widespread tax exemptions and special regimes, such as tax free zones. The authorities have made significant efforts to implement some of the recommendations of the 2015 National Tax Conference . The 2016 budget included measures to streamline and simplify the tax structure. Key changes included: exemption of the lowest income earners from income tax; broadening of the capital gains tax on real estate; reduction of import license fees; introduction of a differentiated scale for company registration fees; revision of the stamp duty and licensing fees; elimination of the excise tax on fruit and vegetable juices and carbonated beverages. The authorities also continued to gradually reduce the consumption tax (TIC) by replacing it with the VAT and excise taxes. Further tax policy and tax administration measures are planned in 2017 . The authorities plan to install cash registers in businesses subject to the VAT; transfer the management of the business license tax and local real estate taxes to the regional authorities; appoint customs commissioners to enable customs officers to focus on inspection work; expedite customs clearance procedures by introducing a risk analysis system; and adopt a code of ethics for customs personnel and an inspection charter. The authorities plan to assess the impact of these changes to ensure that they improve revenue or at least remain revenue neutral. However, fundamental issues such as tax exemptions and special tax regimes, have yet to be addressed. Tax exemptions and other special tax regimes under the investment code, including the free zone system and the regime for foreign military bases, reduce the tax base, create distortions to competition between economic operators, and lead to sizable revenue losses. In 2017, the authorities plan to establish a tax policy unit and a reform steering committee tasked with devising, promoting, and coordinating tax reforms. In addition, the authorities should take immediate steps to review tax expenditures and exemptions in line with the recommendations of Page 17 World Bank technical assistance. The objective of the reforms should be to make tax incentives part of the common law, convert the investment code into an investor charter to level the playing field for investors, and reassess the tax regime for free zones. Furthermore, the distortive consumption tax should be phased out and replaced by the VAT and excise taxes. There is considerable room to improve tax and customs administration . To mobilize revenue and improve efficiency, the authorities should reform the tax directorate, including by strengthening its human resources and control systems, introduce an integrated information and risk analysis systems, gradually expand online tax payments, establish a dispute management system, and improve local tax collection and management. As for customs, priority should be given to strengthening customs valuation, introducing risk analysis, and improving dispute mechanisms. On expenditures, better prioritization and stronger financial management are needed. To contain the wage bill, the hiring freeze outside the health and education sectors should be complemented by functional expenditure reviews to identify over- or under-staffed sectors. Spending on goods and services could also be better prioritized. For the investment boom to lead to strong and inclusive growth, the authorities should preserve and significantly increase targeted social transfers and invest in human capital by providing better access to education and health care. Sufficient resources need be allocated to ensure sound maintenance of the large externally financed infrastructure. While there are currently no fuel subsidies because of the relatively low world oil prices, a mechanism for the automatic adjustment of energy prices should be introduced to avoid a recurrence of fuel subsidies in the future. In the area of public financial management, the efforts to set up a treasury single account and a medium-term budgetary framework should continue. The authorities broadly shared staff’s recommendations on revenue mobilization, phasing out exemptions, and energy price adjustment . They realize that the ongoing tax reforms, albeit important, cannot substantially increase revenue unless complemented by a comprehensive review of tax expenditures, and plan to take steps to review tax expenditures and exemptions. They noted, however, that planned reforms will likely face strong opposition from vested interests. The authorities appreciated past technical assistance on tax reforms and have requested additional assistance, including on tax expenditures.