The present fiscal path appears unsustainable. To satisfy its inter-temporal budget constraint without default, a government must achieve primary surpluses whose present value should be sufficient to cover the present value of debt service. For Djibouti, over the period 2015–34, primary balances, based on current policy assumptions, are almost always negative and lie way below debt service requirements. For instance, starting in 2021, the shortfall in the primary balance relative to debt service requirements exceeds, on average, 6 percentage points of GDP a year. Given the limited scope for domestic borrowing, the debt service requirements would have to be met through continued foreign borrowing, if available. This raises the prospect of abrupt and large adjustments to government spending or large tax hikes. Fiscal reform is needed to enhance fiscal sustainability and achieve inclusive growth. Additional revenues will be needed to ensure that the government is able to meet its financial obligations, which are growing rapidly as a result of the on-going debt-financed investment boom. Projections suggest that, given widespread tax exemptions under the current tax regime, fiscal Primary balance Debt service Djibouti: Primary balance and Debt Service Requirements, 2015-34 (in percent of GDP) Sources: Staff projections Page 17 revenues would decline as a percent of GDP over the medium term. Djibouti’s growth strategy, based on attracting foreign investment through generous tax concessions, is widely perceived to have sacrificed fiscal revenue without generating commensurate benefits in terms of employment. Furthermore, current fiscal policy could undermine pro-poor inclusive growth. Tax exemptions have created an uneven playing field for investors, sidelining smaller domestic, typically labor-intensive enterprises. Also, implicit subsidies on energy products through reduced taxes—which were intended to cushion the impact of rising international prices—have resulted in forgone fiscal revenues, while benefiting higher-income groups disproportionately. The fiscal situation could be exacerbated by a reduction in aid inflows, which could lead to difficulties in funding planned expenditures: about 10 percent of government expenditure was financed through grants in 2014, and a further 23 percent through loans. In addition, delays in implementing public investment projects for which loans have already been contracted would generate costs to the budget. This has been the case for the water pipeline project which carries a 0.5 percent commitment fee on the undisbursed loan amount. Large-scale external borrowing by public enterprises also poses contingent liabilities to the budget. Lastly, an increase in global oil prices could generate fiscal costs if the authorities do not adjust domestic prices. The government-sponsored June 2015 tax conference is a key step towards a comprehensive reform of the tax regime. The conference launched a broad consultative debate involving the tax administration, the business community, academia, and civil society on the main pillars of tax reform. The guiding themes were: (i) simplifying the fiscal regime; (ii) enhancing fiscal equity; (iii) improving tax efficiency; and (iv) securing fiscal revenues. The conference generated support for reform and promising short, medium, and long-term reform proposals. During the mission, in response to the authorities’ request for Fund technical assistance, an FAD expert worked closely with the authorities to synthesize the conference recommendations. Below are the main recommendations made by the expert, drawing on the wider set of conference recommendations. Some recommendations with modest revenue implications might be introduced in the 2016 budget. Staff urged the authorities to expedite the initiation of measures with stronger revenue prospects since these would take longer to produce the expected revenues. Reduce tax exemptions for the free zone. All new companies would be exempt from income tax in the first ten years of operation, and subject to an income tax of 15 percent starting in the th year. Existing companies would be exempt from income tax in the first ten years of operation, and subject to an income tax of 5 percent starting in the 11 th year, 10 percent starting in the 15 th year, and 15 percent after 20 years. Enhance efforts to ensure that companies meet their tax obligations including the requirement to submit income statements, and pay the 5 percent dividend tax introduced in 2015. The decline in fiscal revenues as a percent of GDP is partly driven by a declining ratio to GDP of rents from the military bases, which accounted for 13 percent of total revenues in 2012–14. The rents are exogenous to economic activity. They determined by negotiation with governments of countries using the bases. Similarly, some other revenue sources such as taxes from petroleum products are also exogenous to economic activity. Page 18 Repeal the investment code, one of three channels through which tax concessions have been granted. The other channels are the free zone, and discretionary exemptions granted by the authorities. It is recommended that existing exemptions be honored and, starting in 2017, no new exemption should be issued under the investment code. Remove the domestic consumption tax on investment goods (and raw materials). This tax penalizes investment because it is due at the time of investing, before the returns on investment are realized, and without any refund in the event of a loss. Raise the lump sum minimum tax from 1 percent to 1.5 percent. All enterprises (including those benefiting from exemptions) are subject to this tax on their business turnover. Increase the threshold for the tax on wages and salaries from DF 5,000 ($28) a month to DF 50,000 ($280). Set up a system of electronic tax filing and payment. Fiscal consolidation is imperative to return the economy to a sustainable fiscal and debt path. Over the medium term, given the restraint already imposed on current spending and the authorities’ determination to pursue their investment plans, there is little scope for cutting aggregate spending. While information is insufficient for a full assessment of the likely quantum of additional revenues from the new investment projects, much of the prospective additional revenues are expected over the longer term. Thus, prospects for additional revenues from this source over the medium term are limited. Scope does exist, however, for increasing tax revenues by broadening the tax base, revising the investment incentive framework (discussed above), and strengthening tax administration by reinforcing human resources and modernizing tax collection processes. Furthermore, improving the performance of public enterprises would enhance their fiscal contribution. Opening up the monopoly telecommunications sector could also generate revenue, and improve efficiency, as experience from other countries shows. Ultimately, cutting investment spending may be necessary to return the economy to a sustainable fiscal and external debt path. The fall in international oil prices offers an opportunity to introduce a market-based pricing mechanism for energy products without increasing domestic prices. Implicit subsidies on kerosene, gasoline and diesel in the form of a reduction of pre-existing tax rates were introduced in the wake of the 2007–08 global financial crisis to cushion the impact of high international oil prices on domestic consumers. The forgone revenues were estimated at about 2 percent of GDP in 2011. The authorities have kept domestic prices largely unchanged while international oil prices have dropped by over 50 percent since the end of 2014, resulting in a de facto elimination of the implicit subsidies. Staff advice has been to introduce a price adjustment mechanism that allows a full pass-through of international prices together with safety nets to protect the welfare of the poor and vulnerable population. During the mission, staff advised that the fall in international oil prices offers an opportunity to introduce the market-based pricing mechanism without increasing domestic prices. Page 19 Strengthening fiscal and public financial management remains a priority. Several key past staff recommendations are yet to be fully implemented. These include the transition to a medium-term budget framework, and merging the VAT administration and that of other taxes into a large tax payers’ unit which will administer all taxes for large taxpayers: VAT, income tax, etc. The authorities have indicated that work with the large taxpayers’ unit is progressing. New staff are being recruited and the unit is expected to be operational in 2016. Authorities’ views. The authorities acknowledged the need for a far-reaching tax reform to return the economy to a sustainable fiscal and debt path, and foster inclusive growth. They indicated their intention to start implementing the recommendations of the tax conference in the 2016 budget and highlighted the measures implemented to restrain public spending such as the hiring freeze in the public service outside of the health and education sectors. The authorities reiterated their willingness to revise the pricing formula for energy products to eliminate implicit subsidies, but underlined the need to develop beforehand a registry of the poor and vulnerable population which is required for the safety net program.