Djibouti is undergoing a debt-financed investment boom. Major investments currently in progress include an extension of facilities at the state-owned ports as well as the building of new ports, financed in part by private investors; and the construction of a railway linking Djibouti and neighboring landlocked Ethiopia, and a pipeline to transport potable water from Ethiopia (Annex II). The government is financing both the railway and water pipeline projects mainly through non- concessionary foreign debt, aggravating medium-term fiscal and external debt vulnerabilities. Poverty and unemployment remain widespread despite economic growth of about 5 percent in 2006–13. The latest poverty profile shows that 41.9 percent of the population lived in extreme poverty in 2012, compared with 42.2 percent in 2002; and the unemployment rate was 48 percent in Economic growth has been driven by capital-intensive investment in the ports and related activities, with limited trickle-down effects. Many of the jobs created have been taken by expatriates, because of a low domestic skills base. Other activities remain underdeveloped. Agriculture, the primary source of livelihood in most low-income countries, is miniscule because the climate is unfavorable. The business environment is challenging, mainly because of high production costs, weak contract enforcement, red tape, and low access to finance. Security concerns have risen following the May 2014 terrorist attack. Two suicide bombers attacked a restaurant popular with Westerners in Djibouti-ville, the capital city. One expatriate and the two terrorists were killed. The Al-Shabaab terrorist group, which claimed responsibility for the attack, repeated its threat to conduct similar attacks in retaliation for Djibouti’s decision to contribute troops to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which is fighting the group. The government and opposition have signed an agreement to end the deadlock over the disputed February 2013 legislative elections. The opposition won seats in parliament for the first time in the elections, ending a 10-year election boycott. The opposition won 10 seats and the ruling party won the remaining 55 seats. Eight of the 10 elected opposition members of parliament refused to take up their seats, alleging electoral fraud. After violent protests, the government and the opposition opened a political dialogue to end the deadlock. Under the agreement signed in An update of the 2012 poverty profile is to be released shortly. Djibouti: UnemploymentRates LICs MENAP U m l y m A Total Unemployment All Countries LICs MENAP Total Unemployment vs. Youth Unemployment, 2012 (Percent of labor force) Sources: Djibouti authorities, International Labor Organization. Unemployment data provided by Djibouti authorities may not be perfectlycomparable to those ILO due to difference in methodology. LIC = Low Income Countries;MENAP= Middle East, Afghanistan, and Pakistan Page 9 December 2014, the opposition will end its parliamentary boycott; and reforms would be introduced to establish a free and independent electoral commission to ensure that the 2016 presidential elections are free and fair. The authorities have reiterated their interest in a new program, but program discussions were suspended owing to concerns about a deterioration of debt vulnerability. An October 2013 program discussion mission was suspended when the authorities informed staff that two loans had been contracted on nonconcessional terms to finance the railway and water pipeline projects with Ethiopia (Annex II). Preliminary analysis showed that the loans would significantly degrade Djibouti’s external debt situation, which was already at high risk of distress.