Slowing the pace of government borrowing and avoiding non-concessional loans are urgent priorities . The DSA indicates that further non-concessional borrowing would exacerbate the already high risk of debt distress, while 2017 35 primary balances are projected below debt service requirements. In this situation, it is important to slow the pace of new public sector borrowing, and limit new borrowing, including by public enterprises (PEs), to concessional loans. Furthermore, there is limited space for financial participation in public-private partnerships (PPP). The authorities are encouraged to finalize their debt strategy promptly. Staff encouraged the authorities to hold a national debt conference, similar to the 2015 National Tax Conference, to reach a broad-based consensus on the debt policy, priorities, and management. Moreover, introducing an explicit debt anchor, for example by targeting a specific debt-to-GDP ratio in the medium term, would help benchmark the implementation of a sustainable debt policy. Performing regular DSAs would also help. Debt management should be strengthened. Coordination in contracting new debts remains weak. Line ministries and other government agencies are typically in the lead in negotiating loans and the budget and finance ministries are often involved only at a late stage. To address this issue, the authorities plan to establish a national public debt committee to act as a clearing house for all new public sector loans, thereby ensuring a centralized and coordinated control over new borrowing, including an evaluation of its costs and risks. In light of the risks and costs of debt and contingent liabilities of public enterprises (PE), staff recommended establishing a database to monitor PE debt, government guarantees, and collateral; regularly publish comprehensive public and private sector debt data; and consolidate PE borrowing and debt explicitly in the public sector accounts. Finally, the authorities should avoid the recurrence of debt service arrears, both external and domestic, develop a time-bound plan for clearing existing arrears, and give priority to staying current on all debt service obligations. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s con cerns over debt sustainability . They acknowledged that rising external debt, including contingent liabilities of public enterprises, poses risks. While underscoring the importance of their debt-financed investment program, which they saw as critical to economic development, the authorities acknowledged the need to seek alternative means of financing. In this respect, they aim at financing the next wave of projects (e.g., new specialized ports, airport, gas pipeline, toll roads, and business district) mainly through FDI and PPPs. Page 16 The authorities also emphasized that they are working at a technical level on a draft debt law and are considering appropriate debt anchor, although setting explicit debt targets would require substantial additional technical work. Given concerns over risks of debt distress, staff called for strengthening and consolidating debt management expeditiously. The authorities expressed interest in working with staff on a macroeconomic framework to ensure debt sustainability and asked for assistance on debt policy and debt management, and the evaluation of PE contingent liabilities. On external arrears, the authorities explained that the recurrence of short-term arrears in 2016 owed to treasury cash-flow pressures, and did not consider them to be indicative of a fundamental payment incapacity. They were also optimistic that appropriate terms would be agreed for the arrears under negotiation.