Performance of the banking sector is weak and financial inclusion remains limited despite recent efforts. The sector is characterized by a high level of nonperforming loans, excessive credit concentration, and insufficient profitability, and remains vulnerable to adverse shocks. The central bank is building up its supervisory capacity. Financial inclusion is limited as only 25 percent of adults possess a bank account and access to credit is difficult. In response, the authorities are setting up a guarantee fund to facilitate access to finance for small companies and established a Sharia Board for Islamic banking. In addition, the CBD has launched projects to promote mobile banking services to facilitate financial inclusion and plans to develop electronic payment procedures and modernize the credit information system Efforts to strengthen the financial sector and enhance financial inclusion should continue. Important reform steps include strengthening risk-based bank supervision and the enforcement of prudential ratios, introducing a CAMELS bank rating system, introducing a minimum reserve requirement, and establishing a bank resolution mechanism. The authorities should take corrective actions to address the problems of banks in difficulty, including improving loan classification, writing off unrecoverable loans, increasing provisions, and establish a strategy for bank recapitalization without the use of public resources. On financial inclusion, the authorities are encouraged to strengthen the credit information system, reduce excessive credit concentration, operationalize the recently approved credit guarantee fund for SMEs, expand mobile banking, and develop further the framework for Islamic banking. The CBD should also strengthen its framework for anti-money laundering and combatting the financing of terrorism (AML-CFT), join the MENA- FATF, and intensify supervision of cross-border activities to reduce the risk of further withdrawal of correspondent bank relations. Implementation of the recommendations of the 2012 safeguards assessment of the CBD should accelerate. The CBD recently published its audited financial statements for 2013 thereby addressing a priority recommendation from the 2012 assessment. The authorities have also Page 20 confirmed that an internal audit function has been established. The CBD has yet to provide management letters on internal controls, in line with the IMF’s safeguard’s policy.