Djibouti is expanding its transportation and utilities infrastructure to leverage its strategic location as a shipping hub and host to military bases. A small state in the arid Horn of Africa, neighboring land-locked Ethiopia, Djibouti largely depends on its deep-water harbor. The authorities’ development strategy, Vision Djibouti 2035 , aims at transforming the country into a logistics and commercial hub for the whole of East Africa and a middle-income economy. The strategy targets medium-term growth of 7.5 10 percent per year, tripling per capita income, and reducing unemployment. It includes five pillars: peace and national unity, good governance, economic diversification, human capital development, and regional integration. To achieve their development goals, the authorities have launched a large-scale investment program financed by external debt, which has raised public external debt from 50 to 85 percent of GDP in two years (Figure 1). At end-2016, 32 percent of the external debt was owed by the central government, while 68 percent consisted of government-guaranteed debt of public enterprises 77 percent of which was owed to China ’s EximBank. Many of the existing loans are concessional or include near-concessional terms; in 2016, the grant element of new debt was estimated at 36 percent. Despite the investment boom, poverty and unemployment remain very high and widespread. About 41 percent of the population is poor, 23 percent live in extreme poverty, and the unemployment rate is 39 percent. Thus far, the large investment projects have had a limited impact on jobs as they employ high-skilled, often foreign, labor. Sectors with high employment potential, such as fishing, tourism, and telecommunications, remain underdeveloped. Agricultural activity is minimal because of the unfavorable climate. Djibouti faces large humanitarian needs and is negatively affected by regional tensions. Donors and UN agencies estimate that about a quarter of the 1 million population requires assistance. This number includes not only Djiboutians living in extreme poverty, but also about 60,000 refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants, mainly from neighboring countries and Yemen, who put significant additional pressure on limited social services and infrastructure. The direct impact on the budget has been limited as most humanitarian expenditure are covered by donors. Limited progress was made in implementing the recommendations of the 2015 Article IV Consultation (Box 1) This reflects low capacity, the 2016 election cycle, and the overall slow pace of reforms. Page 10 Figure 1. Djibouti: Investment Boom, 2011