The current fiscal stance appears unsustainable. The current fiscal stance is unlikely to generate the substantial revenues needed to service the growing public debt and to help translate the benefits of the investment boom into sustained and inclusive growth. The main elements of current fiscal policy are (i) generous tax exemptions for investors; (ii) tax exemption or low tax rates on fuel and basic food imports; and (iii) a hiring freeze in the public sector outside the education and health sectors (resulting in decline in the wage bill as a percentage of GDP). As a result of tax exemptions on investment, while the investment boom is expected to generate growth, the impact on revenues over the medium term would be modest, with the share of tax revenues to GDP declining and large budget deficits arising over the medium term. To ensure fiscal sustainability, reforms are required in public management, tax policy—especially the investment incentive framework—and debt management. Public management capacity is lagging behind investment spending. This is reflected in difficulties in effectively coordinating development projects, and the lack of appropriate appraisal for some projects. The institutional arrangement, including revenue sharing, for the joint railway project with Ethiopia—which is expected to be operational in 2015—has still not been finalized. Staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to set up a committee to assess the macroeconomic implications of the mega investment projects and expects that the committee would provide much-needed information on the projects’ expected economic impact. Regarding public financial management, Page 20 the authorities informed staff that a resident expert provided by the US government has been working with staff of the Ministry of Budget to set up the medium-term budget framework which is expected to be operational in 2015. Lastly, the authorities informed staff that they have launched a public enterprise reform program covering ten enterprises including the water company (ONEAD) that will manage the water pipeline project, and the monopoly electricity provider (EDD). Investment risks loom large while contingent liabilities are expanding. Delays in implementing projects for which loans have been contracted would be costly to the budget. This holds for the delayed water pipeline project—the government would be obliged to service the loan, including the commitment fee of 0.5 percent on the undisbursed amount. Also, a rise in world interest rates would increase servicing costs for debt subject to variable interest rates. Meanwhile, the total amount of explicit public guarantees to the non-financial public sector is projected to increase from US$265 million (15 percent of GDP) in 2013 to over 60 percent of GDP over the next few years. This amount excludes debt contracted by public companies without explicit government guarantees and liabilities of public financial companies, which also represent implicit contingent liabilities to the government. With few exceptions, requests by public enterprises for government guarantees are approved even though the central government is unable to evaluate, monitor or manage the projects. Other risks linger. Political and security risks: Renewed political unrest could raise spending pressures, and undermine revenue collection efforts. Further terrorist attacks in Djibouti could delay or disrupt economic activity, particularly investment. Global recession. A recession in donor countries could result in reduced aid inflows. A global recession, leading to a decline in world trade and shipping, could reduce the use of Djibouti’s ports, and ultimately hurt government revenues. It could also undermine the ports’ ability to service the debt contracted to fund their ambitious investment program. Fiscal consolidation is imperative to: (i) reduce the large fiscal deficits, (ii) generate the resources required to service the growing public debt and create liquidity buffers, (iii) rationalize expenditure to create fiscal space to finance poverty alleviation initiatives, and (iv) reduce aid dependence. Over the medium term, in light of the authorities’ commitments, there is little scope for reducing investment expenditures, or for further tightening of current expenditures (dominated by wages) beyond the current freeze on public sector employment outside the education and health sectors. Consolidation would therefore have to focus on increasing revenues through fiscal reform, and reform of public enterprises to increase their profitability. Strengthen public management capacity. The timely execution of the investment projects, and, when operational, the capacity to generate revenues to meet their operating costs and service the associated loans are critical for fiscal sustainability. At present, the required public management Page 21 capacity is limited. Considering these constraints, staff recommended that the authorities: (i) undertake only economically viable investment projects, integrated in an overarching development framework to ensure consistency with Djibouti’s development objectives; (ii) prioritize the execution of the projects, taking into account absorptive capacity and resource constraints; and (iii) reform the public enterprises that will administer the mega investment projects to improve their efficiency and profitability. Staff stressed the importance of expediting the setting up of the institutional framework for managing the joint railway project with Ethiopia—including the revenue- sharing arrangement—before the railway becomes operational. In the area of public financial management, staff urged the authorities to: (i) implement the action plan for the medium-term budget framework to improve budget planning; and (ii) establish the treasury management system to ensure timely payment of government financial obligations and avoid accumulation of arrears. The authorities concurred with staff views and recommendations. Reform the investment incentive system. There is broad consensus that the investment incentive system creates an uneven playing field for investors, has been abused—some firms operating in the free zone are not engaged solely in export activities and others shift activity to the free zone to avoid paying taxes—and entails large fiscal costs. Thus, with current policies the fiscal benefits of the investment boom are likely to be modest, with the share of tax revenues in GDP projected to decline over the medium term. The authorities assured staff of their commitment to reform the investment incentive system towards greater transparency and efficiency, and that reform proposals would be deliberated at the proposed tax conference (paragraph 31). Other reforms to generate revenues. The authorities and private sector stakeholders pointed out that the tax base is narrow, comprising mainly firms not benefiting from fiscal exemptions and formal sector employees. Recognizing the need for reform, the authorities plan to organize in 2015 a tax conference ( Assisses Fiscales ) to deliberate reform proposals with various stakeholders. The reform proposals are yet to be developed. Meanwhile, the authorities and the private sector have set up a high-level Public-Private Partnership forum to discuss fiscal and other issues of common interest. The authorities informed staff that a new strategy has been developed for the monopoly telecommunications sector, with World Bank assistance. The strategy recommends opening up the mobile telephone market to a second operator. Staff would welcome this decision, as its implementation would generate fiscal revenues, and over time, help broaden the tax base. Last, the authorities stated that the legislation is being drafted to unify administration of the VAT and other taxes for large taxpayers, as recommended by an FAD technical assistance mission. The authorities indicated that a large taxpayers’ directorate—rather than a unit—is now planned. Policies to protect the poor and vulnerable population from high cost of living. In the wake of the global food price hikes of 2007-2008, the authorities removed import duties on five basic foodstuffs to help protect the welfare of the poor. They also acquired land in Ethiopia to cultivate crops and sell the products back in Djibouti at subsidized prices. Furthermore, to restrain domestic prices, the authorities introduced a negative tax adjustment to the existing taxes on Page 22 kerosene, gasoline and diesel. The negative tax adjustment lowers—but does not eliminate—net taxes collected on the products. The authorities informed staff that the fall in world fuel prices has obviated the need for this implicit subsidy on gasoline, and reduced the negative tax adjustment on diesel and kerosene. Nevertheless, this could be reversed by a rise in world prices. In line with past staff advice, the authorities reiterated their commitment to eliminate the negative tax adjustment mechanism, and set up a safety net program to protect the poor from any ensuing price increases. They stated that they have developed a timetable for the removal of fuel subsidies and are awaiting the preparation of the social register to set up the safety net program, which would involve cash transfers. Authorities’ views. The authorities acknowledge the scale of the fiscal challenges facing the economy and concur with staff that reform is indispensable to help address them. Their reform plans are based on the following pillars. First is reform of public enterprises and the budget framework. They have launched a public enterprise reform program to improve the performance of key enterprises including the enterprise that will manage the water pipeline project. They are also working towards implementing the medium-term budget framework by 2015. The authorities recognize their limited capacity in public management at present, and underscore the importance of technical assistance to enhance it. Second is tax reform. The authorities share staff concerns about the limitations of the tax regime, especially the investment incentive framework. They expect the fiscal conference planned for 2015 to generate concrete reform recommendations that would pave the way for a more efficient and transparent regime. Third is subsidy reform. The authorities remain committed to reforming the fuel subsidy system and intend to put in place social safety nets to protect the poor. Last is the need to restrain spending. Given their commitment to their investment strategy, the authorities plan to maintain the hiring freeze in the public sector outside the education and health sectors.