The business environment remains relatively unfavorable for private sector development. The private sector is small, includes only a few registered private enterprises, and much activity is informal. Djibouti is ranked only 171 out of 190 countries in the World Bank’s Doing Business report, with particularly low scores for enforcing contracts and protecting investors, getting bank credit, starting a business, getting electricity, and registering property. Consequently, unless the business environment improves considerably, the impact on growth and employment of large-scale and highly capital-intensive investments will likely be limited. Poverty and inequality remain high in Djibouti, and growth has not been inclusive . An analysis of income distribution features of growth (Appendix II) shows that: (i) while the overall poverty declined, extreme poverty remains high and has changed little in the last decades; (ii) inequality remains high and may be increasing; (iii) in the last decade, growth has not been inclusive and has benefited mostly the upper bracket of the income distribution, while the poorest brackets have become poorer in relative terms. Improving the business environment and strengthening social safety nets will be key to promoting inclusive growth and reducing unemployment and poverty. Policies to support economic diversification to tourism, fishing, transport, and telecommunication sectors offer the potential for substantial untapped growth and employment opportunities. These would require significant sectoral and business environment reforms with the view to advancing a private sector- led growth model, including through greater use of PPPs. Staff encouraged the authorities to address the weak business environment in a decisive and coordinated way, and pointed to recent Page 19 successes, such as in Mauritania. The development of a regulatory framework for PPPs will also be essential. To strengthen social safety nets, the authorities should provide targeted cash transfers to the most vulnerable. The authorities concurred and are developing sectoral programs in education and healthcare with the help of development partners. The authorities confirmed their intention to improve the business climate . The soon-to- be-established one-stop shop for business registration and the ongoing tax reforms are expected to have a positive impact on the Doing Business ranking. Efforts to rationalize regulations and the introduction on the Code of Good Governance for PEs will also help improve the business climate, and will be complemented by stepping up anti-corruption efforts. On inclusion, the authorities are preparing the 2017 household survey and plan to use its results to inform further policy decisions. The authorities are also establishing a database of beneficiaries of social programs, with a view to rationalizing and improving targeting.