Economic activity has remained buoyant, boosted by an investment boom financed primarily by external borrowing . Growth is estimated to have reached 6.5 percent in 2016, driven by major public sector projects, in particular the railroad to Ethiopia, the construction of several new ports and a water pipeline from Ethiopia. Inflation rose to 3.7 percent year-on-year in November, reflecting mainly increased food and service prices. The investment boom continues to exert considerable pressure on public finances. The central government budget which under the authorities’ definition does not include two large investment projects, the water pipeline and railroad, undertaken by public enterprises aimed at a Multipurpose port of Doraleh, port of Goubet, port of Tadjourah, and crude oil terminal of Damerjog. The authorities’ definition excludes these two projects on the ground that the government would service these debts only for the next 2-3 years until the projects become profitable. On-lending agreements with a government guarantee for the years thereafter have yet to be signed. In the debt data as reported in the LIC-DSA accompanying (continued) oo Page 11 small deficit of 0.4 percent of GDP in 2016. Including the two projects, the overall fiscal deficit is estimated at 16 percent of GDP, having declined from 22 percent of GDP in 2015 reflecting the disbursement profile of the railroad project. In 2016, the budget turnout was affected by lower non-tax revenue and grants . While tax revenue slightly exceeded projections, non-tax revenues are estimated to have underperformed by about 1.5 percent of GDP because of lower dividend transfers by the port operator due to an ongoing dispute with the government. Moreover, delays in disbursements led to a significant revenue shortfall in grants (1.8 percent of GDP). To address the revenue shortfall, the authorities cut expenditure in 2016. Domestically- financed capital expenditure and transfers were reduced. The wage bill was contained at 10.2 percent of GDP, with the hiring freeze outside the health and education sectors. Some overruns in spending for goods and services are explained largely by additional security expenses. Interest payments reached 1.4 percent of GDP (compared to 0.6 percent in 2015), mainly due to debt service temporarily assumed by the budget on external loans for the railroad and water pipeline projects. Some domestic and external arrears continue to be incurred. Domestic budget arrears remained steady at 0.5 percent of GDP, reflecting a stock of about one month of the wage bill accumulated over previous years. The authorities’ strategy is to absorb this stock gradually over the medium term. Mixed progress was made in clearing external debt arrears in 2016. In May, outstanding arrears to India (0.6 percent of GDP at end-2015) were cleared under a restructuring agreement. However, as of end-November 2016, external debt arrears still amounted to 0.7 percent of GDP. These arrears were owed mainly to Iran (0.3 percent of GDP), and discussions to reschedule them are ongoing. Also, arrears have accumulated since late 2011 with Belgium, Italy, and Spain (0.2 percent of GDP) due to the suspension of payments pending the conclusion of negotiations to convert the related debts into development projects. During 2016, short-term arrears have been periodically incurred and subsequently cleared vis-a-vis several other creditors. As a result, at end- November such short-term arrears amounted to 0.2 percent of GDP, and were owed to Arab Development Funds and India. The current account deficit remains large, fueled mainly by investment-related imports. After rising to 32 percent of GDP in 2015, the current external account deficit is estimated to have declined to 29 percent of GDP in 2016. The large deficit is explained by a major increase in imports of investment goods, despite healthy export growth. Over the medium term, the deficit should gradually decrease as investment-related imports abate and exports of services rise substantially. The deficit has been financed mainly by public sector borrowing (about two thirds) related mainly to infrastructure projects, and net FDI (one third), primarily for free economic zones. The currency board’s coverage remains comforta ble . In 2016, the ratio of reserves to base money is estimated to have reached 109 percent and official exchange reserves reached this report they are classified under government- guaranteed debt to be consistent with the government’s debt recording and given the intention to sign on-lending agreements with respect to these two loans. Page 12 3.4 months of imports. Although the real exchange rate appreciated by about 1.2 percent in August 2016 y-o-y, it stayed close to its 2010 level reflecting favorable inflation differentials with trading partners. While the exchange rate is somewhat overvalued based on the EBA-lite methodology, the currency board arrangement has helped instill confidence and improve predictability in international transactions (the authorities broadly agreed with this assessment, Appendix I). Furthermore, the sensitivity of the current account to changes in the real exchange rate is low. Exports consist mainly of the use of port services by Ethiopia and services and rents related to foreign military bases, and the high dependence on imports for food and fuel results in a low price elasticity of imports. Djibouti continues to be at high risk of debt distress, as all debt sustainability indicators are above their thresholds for a prolonged period. The risk of distress worsened significantly with the large increase in the debt- to-GDP ratio from 50 percent at end-2014 to an estimated 85 percent of GDP at end-2016, primarily reflecting disbursements from newly contracted loans (Figure 2). Much of the debt consists of government-guaranteed public enterprise debt. The DSA indicates that the solvency and liquidity risks are high and have increased since 2015, especially in the short run. Debt service falling due is scheduled to rise significantly over the next few years, and the scope for additional borrowing is low. ommercial banks’ loan portfolio deteriorate d over the past few years. Non-performing loans (NPLs) increased from 14 percent in 2013 to close to 23 percent in June 2016. This increase was driven mainly by the bankruptcy of two private oil companies and a stricter loan classification required by the Central Bank of Djibouti (CBD). Although provisions declined to 56 percent of NPLs, the authorities confirmed that banks hold collateral on the rest. Bank profitability also dropped over the past few years, and loan concentration is high; in this regard, all banks had to obtain exemptions from single borrower exposure limits. Finally, banks have recently experienced payment difficulties as some international banks have discontinued their correspondent bank relationships. Intensive cooperation with China continues. Chinese investors are involved in many investment projects and are the main source of foreign loans (Table 1). In early 2016, Djibouti signed a cooperation agreement with China on a new free economic zone aimed at establishing an See the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) supplement to this report. The guarantee stems from the fact that these debts were contracted by the government but will be on-lent to public enterprises, which bear the responsibility to pay debt service on the debt, when the projects become profitable. However, for the creditor the government remains the payer of last resort in the event of non-payment by the public enterprise. Page 13 international transshipment hub, including for Chinese companies, and setting a legal framework for a fast-track entry of Chinese banks in Djibouti.