Fiscal policy should be calibrated to allow space for reconstruction expenditure within fiscally sustainable bounds. The fiscal consolidation measures identified since the RCF amount to 6.7 percent of GDP, sufficient to reduce public debt to 67 percent of GDP by 2030. This debt trajectory is higher than in the RCF mainly because it now includes the stock of Petrocaribe obligations which are guaranteed by the government (estimated at 9 percent of GDP). This consolidation includes a provision of 1.5 percent of GDP per year to build fiscal buffers to address future natural disasters, which are also accounted as a fiscal cost in the active scenario. New measures with a total yield of 0.7 percent of GDP have already been passed in FY2015/16. The Excluding the estimated Petrocaribe debt stock the debt trajectory would decline to below 60 percent of GDP by 2030. This amount of fiscal measures is higher than committed in the RCF, mainly as a result of additional measures not included in the RCF and also as a result of progress in tax administration mentioned above. Page 17 measures planned for the FY2016/17 budget, including a review of fuel excises, a presumptive tax, and a solid waste charge, would yield an additional 1.3 percent of GDP. The remaining measures amounting to 4.7 percent of GDP have been identified, and the authorities are working to introduce them in the near term. Staff recommends a gradual adoption of the measures within the next five- year period to smooth their impact on economic activity (Table 1). The expansionary impact of the increase in public investment for reconstruction during this period would alleviate the drag on economic activity. Table 1. Dominica: Fiscal Measures and Expected Yields, FY2015/15 (Cumulative; in percent of GDP) Staff recommended focusing on the full implementation of the fiscal measures already identified, and considering the introduction of additional measures once the recovery is on solid footing to meet the ECCU debt objective. Reducing the public debt to the regional target of 60 percent of GDP by 2030 (including Petrocaribe) would require additional fiscal consolidation of 0.8 percent of GDP. However, given the weaker recovery prospects compared with the RCF, introducing additional measures before 2021 could be counteproductive from cyclical and structural perspectives – especially if more consolidation crowds out investment for reconstruction. The authorities effort should focus on delivering the fiscal consolidation plan that has already been tt W dg ee dg ill dg W dd q q H mm Page 18 identified, and if the government debt target commitment is to be reached before 2030 (inlcuding Petrocaribe), then the remaining amount of measures could be identified and made effective after 2021. Given this, and in light of the significant risks outside the government control (significant financing gaps could emerge depending on the performance of grants, ECP revenues or the ocurrence of another natural disaster; see text charts), the authorities’ strategy to seek debt relief from bilateral creditors should continue; including at the Paris Club creditors meetings and also by way of bilateral negotiations on Petrocaribe debt service. The progress in the implementation of the fiscal consolidation plan is commendable, but maintaining the reform momentum is crucial. The measures passed so far are not sufficient to achieve fiscal sustainability. For example, if no further measures were adopted, public debt would be on an upward trajectory (left text chart). The outlook assumes the gradual adoption of the remaining measures in line with the government plan, including the gradual unwinding of storm- related reconstruction investment and social assistance; further capital projects re-prioritization; wage restraint; and an update of off-shore bank licenses. The government should also start with no delay the specification of the second-generation fiscal measures, which are relatively more complex and require more time to develop. These include the rationalization of tax expenditures, a property tax reform, and a review of cost-recovery charges in the provision of health services. Technical assistance has already been requested for these reforms, as needed for a timely implementation. The medium term fiscal outlook also benefits from a new ECP investment option , and from the approval of parametric changes to strengthen the sustainability of the pension system, which has been a significant contingent liability (right text chart). Staff has supported the Dominica government request at the recent Paris Club meetings for debt cancellation and extension of maturities. Debt service payments on Petrocaribe obligations that were due in the past three years have been either rescheduled or cancelled. In 2015 the government revised the ECP by introducing a new real estate option that grants citizenship in exchange for making investments in Dominica. ECP revenues lower by 50 Hurricane shock in 2018 Dominica:Cummulative Fiscal financing gaps under various shock scenarios (in percent of GDP) Grantslower by 50 percent Dominica: Public debt under various shock scenarios (in percent of GDP) Grants lower by 50 percent ECP lower by 50 percent Hurricane shock in 2018 Active policies scenario Page 19 Given the numerous and significant risks, staff recommends a prudent approach in the assessment of the fiscal balance required to achieve debt sustainability. In practice, this implies the need to remain flexible to adjust the public investment program, adopt additional measures or step up efforts to attract private investments, should grants or ECP revenues fall below expectations. In order to make this prudent approach operational, the progress of the fiscal consolidation should be measured in terms of the central government primary balance excluding ECP revenues and transitory factors (see text chart above with the underlying primary fiscal balance of the active scenario). This would support a more solid fiscal consolidation strategy, as it implies that any additional revenues from the ECP should not substitute for fiscal consolidation. Staff strongly recommends increasing the transparency of the ECP to protect the program’s integrity and the sustainability of this important source of revenue, including by ensuring the effectiveness of the background check process, publishing periodic reports of its financial flows and balances, and elevating the risk profile of economic citizens through enhanced due diligence requirements, in particular for politically exposed persons. Staff advises the creation of a savings fund financed with ECP revenues to support the fiscal consolidation strategy . Until a savings fund can be created, ECP revenues should initially be used to reduce public debt. Once the savings fund has been created, the scope of the fund could then be broadened to also allow some allocation for reconstruction after natural disasters. This would provide a cushion against future natural disasters while ensuring that unpredictable ECP revenues are not used for recurrent spending (which are more difficult to adjust) and as a result strengthening fiscal sustainability. To this end, it is critical that the savings fund is supported by a strong institutional design, including unambiguous budget contribution and disbursement rules, with triggers based on verifiable criteria, a clearly-stated objective, and strict information disclosure requirements to ensure the transparency of its operations. Staff simulations indicate that budget savings of about 1.5 percent of GDP per year and a saving fund of about 8-10 percent of GDP are Dominica: Public debt develpments(in percent of GDP) Public debt (active policies scenario) Public debt (no adjustment) Page 20 appropriate to ensure the financial sustainability of the savings fund with a low probability of depletion, while supporting public debt sustainability (text charts). The adoption of structural fiscal reforms is important to make fiscal consolidation gains durable. The structural fiscal measures should focus on strengthening and supporting the budget process and its execution within fiscally sustainable parameters with a solid Public Financial Management framework. The framework should include a medium-term fiscal plan. Consideration should also be given to the adoption of fiscal rules. Establishing a system to better monitor the financial position of the State Owned Enterprises would also contribute to reinforce the durability of the fiscal consolidation gains (Box 2). The expected path of public debt projections in the fan chart shows a decline to 60 percent of GDP by 2030, including Petrocaribe obligations, which is below the projected value in the active policies scenario. This is based on estimated equations for output and government revenues and expenditures that mimic the cyclical behavior in the historical data. dg 95 percent confidence 90 percent confidence 75 percent confidence 50 percent confidence Expected ECCU commitment by 2030 Public Debt Dynamics with a Fund for Natural Disasters 1/ (In percent of GDP) 1/ Assumes a probability thresholdof natural disasters of 20 percent, and annual budget savings of 1.5 percent of GDP in years with no ND.Assumes fiscal consolidation in line with active policies scenario assumptions nnu dg q mm nnu = Page 21 Box 2. Structural Fiscal Reforms