2015 Current Account and REER Gaps The current account and the real exchange rate are broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals and desired policy setting . Lower oil prices have strengthened the external balance above its predicted value based on medium-term fundamentals and current policies. However, when taking into account a partial recovery of oil prices over the medium term and the desired policies to support further reserve accumulation and fiscal consolidation, the gap between the actual Current account norm (% GDP) Current account gap (% GDP) Real exchange rate gap (+ is over-valuation) ) Actual current account (% GDP) Adjusted current account (% GDP) 1/ EBA-Lite Methodology Real Effective Exchange Rate 1/ Adjusted for the partial recovery of oil prices over the medium term. Current Account Medium term current account (% GDP) 0.7%\ Sustainability External Page 19 current account and the predicted value narrows significantly, indicating no major misalignment. Direct estimates of the equilibrium real exchange rate are broadly consistent with this assessment, suggesting only a marginally weaker currency than that consistent with fundamentals and desired policies. Over the medium term, while the current account deficit is expected to widen, it will remain consistent with a level that stabilizes the net foreign assets position (see Annex III). The narrowing of the external current account deficit provides a good opportunity to strengthen the reserve buffers. Reserves have risen significantly since the 2003–04 financial crisis, and are deemed broadly sufficient against a number of standard reserve adequacy benchmarks, including short-term debt and import coverage ratios (see Annex III). However, despite recent improvements in the current account, continued foreign exchange interventions prevented faster accumulation of reserves, which remain notably below the Fund’s risk-based reserve metric. The latter requires coverage not only for short-term, but also longer-term liabilities, and current reserves only cover about 60 percent of the implied adequacy level. At the same time, the dominant share of public debt in long-term external liabilities (with about half of it owed to official creditors and a protracted schedule of amortization) and the relatively diverse sources of foreign exchange inflows mitigate the need for such high reserves. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly concurred with staff’s external sector assessment and reiterated their commitment to continue accumulating reserves and enhance resilience to shocks. Moreover, the authorities recognized that further reserve accumulation is needed, but also emphasized that reserve levels have steadily increased since the banking crisis in 2003 and that a faster pace of accumulation is constrained by high sterilization costs.