Output growth is expected to remain subdued in 2016 at 1.3 percent as the economy slowly recovers from the storm and investment in reconstruction picks up. This growth, however, is largely conditional on donor grants proceeding according to expectations –now revised to about two-thirds of the projection at the time of the RCF. A partial recovery of tourism and agriculture would also contribute to growth in 2016. Inflation is projected to remain subdued in the near term due to lower oil prices, notwithstanding the increase of several excise taxes. Output growth is projected to accelerate in 2017 as the economy recovers towards potential, and to stabilize at 1.7 percent per year over the medium-term. This outlook is affected by weakening expectations on global growth, and the recent appreciation of the US dollar, which could slow tourism exports going forward – including through the indirect effects from other Caribbean countries, the main origin of Dominica’s visitors. On the domestic front, credit to the private sector is projected to continue to decline as a percent of GDP given banks’ need to provision for NPLs, as they repair their balance sheets. The lending activities of the large credit unions sector, however, would ease private financing constraints. On the upside, the outlook could benefit from persistently low oil prices and its pass-through to electricity costs; and the construction of two large hotel projects that could boost construction activities and employment in the near-term while also increasing potential output. ECP revenues could also be higher than expected if the recent surge in demand persists, and also after recent changes to the program with a new investment option at a higher fee. The fiscal consolidation continues in line with the discussions in the RCF. The strong implementation of measures so far and the formal requests for technical assistance for the second- generation reforms signal the authorities’ commitment to the fiscal consolidation targets discussed in the RCF. The authorities are finalizing the details of measures for the FY2016/17 budget, including mm tt )( il il K K mm tt Page 12 a review of fuel excises, a presumptive tax, a departure tax, and a solid waste charge, while maintaining the efforts on tax compliance. The cumulative estimated yields to FY 2016/17 could reach 2 percent of GDP, which is above the RCF target of 1.1 percent of GDP. Given the strong implementation of measures, the fiscal outlook includes a gradual fiscal consolidation of 6.7 percent of GDP by FY 2020/21, in line with the continuation of the authorities’ fiscal consolidation plan and with the RCF. This would entail reaching a primary surplus of 3.5 percent of GDP by FY2020/21, equivalent to an underlying primary surplus of 1.7 percent of GDP In this context, the external and fiscal deficits are projected to deteriorate before improving in the medium-term. Fiscal and external imbalances would initially deteriorate on the back of the increase in reconstruction investment, and then gradually improve as exports of agriculture, tourism and remaining manufacturing activities recover. Staggering the implementation of the fiscal measures in line with RCF commitments would result in a smooth improvement of the underlying fiscal and current account balances over the medium-term (text charts). The medium term fiscal outlook also benefits from a new investment option in the ECP , and from the approval of parametric changes to strengthen the sustainability of the pension system, which has been a significant contingent liability. The imbalances are expected to be financed primarily with external capital grants and official concessional loans. The projected improvement of the fiscal and external imbalances, however, is conditional on the full implementation of the government’s fiscal consolidation plan. This amount of fiscal consolidation is 0.5 percent higher than in the RCF, reflecting the additional measures taken by the authorities and the base effect of the improvements in tax compliance. The underlying primary balance is calculated as the primary balance excluding ECP revenues, one-off collection of tax arrears, temporary storm-related reconstruction and social assistance spending, and the transitory increase in grants projected after tropical storm Erika. Any additional revenues from the higher fees would materialize starting in FY2018/19. W oo Page 13 The road ahead remains challenging and subject to significant risk. That, plus the significant time required for investment planning under significant capacity constraints , could delay reconstruction and reduce growth. Natural disasters will remain a recurrent threat (see SIP). ECP revenues are subject to increasing scrutiny from advanced economies, and are also facing increasing regional competition. However, they can also turn out better than projected in the active policies scenario if the higher demand observed in recent months is more durable than anticipated. Administrative capacity constraints and political resistance could delay the implementation of more complex structural fiscal reforms that have been committed to, especially the rationalization of tax expenditure and restraining the wage bill . Additional appreciation of the US dollar may reduce competitiveness further. Petrocaribe inflows could come to a halt, especially given economic difficulties in Venezuela and the recent victory of the opposition in Congressional elections which supports the termination of the program. An important upside risk is the geothermal electricity project, which has been revised to a smaller but more realistic scale, and could boost investment above the current projections in the near term and increase potential output as result of lower electricity costs and additional export revenues. Persistently low oil prices is another source of upside and downside uncertainty. Finally, two large hotel projects are currently planned, and could boost activity conditional on the identification of financing (Box 1). The outlook for fiscal sustainability is highly dependent on the availability of grants and on the stability of ECP revenues. Donor grants, which are critical to finance reconstruction Resilient reconstruction requires topographic and hydrologic studies, which need the identification and hiring of specialized consultants. Staff recommended the discontinuation of retroactive wage compensations during discussions for the RCF disbursement. This project has been under preparation for several years, but protracted negotiations among the interested parties and the need to identify financing have delayed the start of investment activities. This refers to projects for which the government is seeking financing (including with the new ECP investment option), which are expected to be administered by Kempinski and Hilton. und ud nd nd nd Page 14 expenditure within fiscally sustainable bounds, have so far remained below expectations . The outlook assumes grant financing of reconstruction expenditure in the range of 5-6 percent of GDP per year, which then tapers off to historical levels of about 3 percent of GDP. The underlying assumption is that grants already committed by the donor partners are disbursed over the first half of the reconstruction period, and a similar amount is disbursed in the later second half. It should be noted, however, that the fiscal outlook is highly sensitive to the performance of grant financing and ECP revenues, which are inherently uncertain and subject to a sudden stop. Deviations from the projected flows have sizable implications on the need for fiscal consolidation and the space for public investment. For example, should grants be 30 percent lower than projected, public debt would stabilize at around the current level with the projected amounts of fiscal consolidation and public investment for reconstruction (text chart). The financial sector is also a source of risk with potential fiscal costs. The full impact of the storm on NPLs is yet to be fully reflected in the data given the recording lags, and could be higher than anticipated. The effect on the National Bank of Dominica (NBD) could also have fiscal implications in the case of a recapitalization –the asset quality review conducted in 2015 by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) already points to elevated recapitalization needs of around 3 percent of GDP. The protracted decline in the share of time deposits in favor of demand and saving deposits, if sustained, implies a higher liquidity risk for banks, which could further slow credit to the private sector. The growth of the credit union sector, which is taking a larger share of the overall domestic financial business (total assets are approaching 50 percent of GDP ), implies that financial intermediation is becoming increasingly subject to weaker regulatory and supervisory standards, a characteristic of this sector. Should a failure in the credit union sector occur, a government bailout of depositors remains a possibility even without explicit legal requirements. Also, a liquidity problem in the credit unions could spill over to the banking sector and ultimately to the real economy (see selected issues paper on credit unions). De-risking by banks operating in Dominica could result in the loss of correspondent banking relations (CBRs), affecting the ability to make international transactions. A donor conference was held in December 2015. See the selected issues paper on credit unions. Page 15 Box 1. Risk Assessment Matrix Likelihood Impact Policy response High High Implement credible multi-year fiscal adjustment strategy in line with the active policies scenario. High High High High Build buffers and optimize insurance policies, with the assistance of the World Bank. Identify alternative sources of financing while maintaining fiscal consolidation momentum. High Medium Take advantage of favorable conditions to High Medium Medium High begin fiscal adjustment when reconstruction needs permit. Improve competitiveness with public sector wage restraint, which may signal to the private sector; reduce energy prices; improve access to finance of small firms; improve labor productivity and the functioning of labor markets. Promptly implement remaining elements of regional strategy to strengthen indigenous banks in the ECCU. Strengthen regulation and supervision of credit unions. Medium High Continue improving the business environment. Source of risk and direction if materialized Poor fiscal policy implementation (↓) Remaining fiscal adjustment may be delayed either due to weak capacity or political resistance. Natural disasters (↓) Extreme events could disrupt external and fiscal sustainability. Petrocaribe financing (↓) Support from Venezuela could come to a halt Persistently lower energy prices (↑) Costs may be kept down if supply factors reverse gradually or if demand weakens. Surge in US dollar (↓) Improving U.S. economic prospects versus the rest of the world leads to a further dollar surge. This could also lead to real effective appreciation in Dominica, weakening competitiveness. Financial sector instability (↓) Persistently high NPLs and low earnings may further weaken the capital base which could precipitate a systemic event. Large-scale hotel constructions (↑) Two planned large-scale hotel projects could boost activity during construction and increase the tourism revenues. Page 16 Box 1. Risk Assessment Matrix (Conclusion) Citizenship program demand (↑/↓) If citizenship revenues are high, and the program is managed prudently, it could reduce fiscal risks and debt overhang. A sudden stop could create a financing gap. Medium Medium to High Create a government fund to direct receipts towards debt reduction, infrastructure investment, and reconstruction after natural disasters. Reduce sudden stop risks by maintaining strict governance standards and further strengthening its integrity. Bank’s de-risking (↓) Loss of correspondent banking relations can affect international transactions. Medium Medium Strengthen the implementation of customer due diligence requirements in line with the FATF standard. Medium Low Implement credible fiscal adjustment; prioritize grant financing; and seek to lower borrowing costs by maintaining a high the share concessional borrowing in public debt. Sharp asset price decline and decompression of credit spreads (↓) Investors reassess underlying risk and respond to unanticipated changes in growth and financial fundamentals in large economies, Fed policy rate path, and increases in U.S. term premia, with poor market liquidity amplifying volatility. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the active policies path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the active policies scenario (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly.