A strategic plan should be devised to achieve a gradual reduction of NPLs, which should be implemented without delay. The recent passing of the new Banking Act and Eastern Caribbean Asset Management Company (ECAMC) are important steps to enhance the regulatory and supervisory framework of the banking sector and address the NPL problem. The Banking Act includes higher capital requirements, a more effective bank resolution framework, and stronger protection for small depositors. The ECAMC Act will provide extraordinary powers to resolve NPLs. The financial institutions are taking some measures to address the NPL problem, typically including bilateral workouts with creditors in distress and significant provisioning. However, the bilateral workouts can result in loan rescheduling or restructurings that delay an appropriate resolution. More decisive action by the regulation authorities to enforce regulations with time-bound actions and capitalization requirements when needed is important for a credible NPL reduction strategy that addresses financial risk and supports growth. In order to facilitate NPL reduction further, the government could also use its representation power at the ECCB to eliminate the deposit rate floor. This would strengthen banks’ profitability and facilitate a NPL provisioning. It would also reduce incentives for higher risk taking on loans as banks search for higher returns. De-risking by international banks and the loss of CBRs by local institutions is an important risk that also requires action. CBRs are essential to carry out international transactions, ● ee pp nnu dg ● nnu dg nnu dg oo ● dg dg ee ● ’ nnu nnu ee ● dg oo ● ● il ● il ● dg dg dg Page 22 and are therefore important for international trade and investment transactions. In addition, the loss of CBRs could affect ECP revenue prospects. Although this risk has not materialized in Dominica, it has affected some of the ECCU members, especially in countries with significant participation of major US banks. In order to reduce this risk, the government should (i) monitor for possible termination or increase in cost of correspondent banking transactions; (ii) continue strengthening AML/CFT legislation and remove possible constraints for an effective implementation; and (iii) encourage banks to explore opportunities for mergers, since an important reason for the loss of CBRs has been the relatively small volume of business for the international banks. In light of the high NPLs, the lending criteria of the NBD should be strengthened. In recent years, the NBD has exhibited an erosion of its capital base and a significant increase in NPLs (text chart). The implementation of the recommendations from the Asset Quality Reviews (AQRs) by the ECCB is a priority in order to limit financial stability risks. Also, a recapitalization of the NBD should be considered, as needed to set it on a solid footing. In order to minimize the fiscal impact, the government could explore options for private shareholding participation. The Agricultural and Industrial Development (AID) Bank should narrow its focus to lending activities affected by missing or incomplete credit markets , in consonance with national development strategies. This development bank provides financing to credit constrained sectors, including small farmers and small and medium enterprises. As such, this agency is not subject to the relatively stricter regulatory framework of the ECCB, and its loans are guaranteed by the government (8.7 percent of GDP). However, despite its development role on paper, it engages in commercial lending activities in search for profits, including mortgages and personal loans, which can distort the allocation of credit in the broader economy. In addition, it can be a source of implicit subsidization that is not transparently accounted in the budget. Although the AID Bank is legally required to remain financially sustainable, its asset portfolio quality is poor (NPLs are equivalent to 17 percent of total loans), which can result in fiscal costs. The strategic plan for NPL reduction should also be applied to the AID Bank. Also, consideration should be given to the consolidation with the NBD of the productive and commercial lending portfolio that cannot be justified on the basis of market failures or credit constraints; or alternatively seek the divestment of this share of the lending portfolio. The scope of AID Bank lending programs should be narrowed to ensure it targets specific development objectives in line with national strategies. Strengthening the regulation and supervision of credit unions is imperative. The credit union sector is growing in size and it is taking an increasing share of total financial intermediation (over 50 percent of total lending in the financial system), supporting growth by offsetting weak L L L H CC mm W = Page 23 lending in the banking sector. However, the expansion of credit unions also increases the overall risk to financial stability given the weaker regulation and supervision of this sector. The regulatory legislation should be strengthened to allow for automatic, nondiscretionary, and effective regulatory responses to financial distress in non-bank institutions. The powers of the FSU should be increased to enforce timely and automatic issuance of penalties for non-compliance with the regulations. Given the significant size of this sector and its interconnections with banks (credit unions account for about one-third of the stock of banks’ deposits) the FSU should consider developing a framework to monitor and manage macro-financial spillovers from this sector to banks and to the rest of the economy, including explicitly the possibilities of liquidity and solvency problems, in coordination with the ECCB. Strengthening the regulatory framework of the off-shore banking sector is also important. To this end, the government should expedite the approval of the revisions to the Offshore Banking Act recommended by Caribbean Technical Assistance Center (CARTAC), which includes a rise of capital requirements; a reform application process; and the enactment of regulations. This would also contribute to moderating the risk of loss of CBRs.