The neutral monetary policy stance is currently appropriate, and policies should remain vigilant to guard against the risks of higher inflation. With inflation expected to return to the target by end-2016, staff and the authorities agreed that the current neutral stance is warranted. At the same time, the widening positive output gap, the tightening labor markets, and the possible depreciation pressures related to the beginning of the normalization cycle in the U.S. merit vigilance against the risks of higher-than-expected inflation going forward. Staff therefore welcomed the tightening bias adopted by the central bank and its readiness to tighten monetary policy if signs of stronger-than-anticipated inflationary pressures emerge. Further strengthening the monetary policy framework will help improve macroeconomic outcomes. Exchange rate. Staff noted that allowing greater exchange rate flexibility would strengthen the credibility of the inflation targeting regime, increase the economy’s ability to absorb external shocks and, at the current juncture, help achieve the inflation objectives and build up reserves. The authorities indicated their intention to upgrade the infrastructure of the foreign exchange market by introducing an electronic trading platform in 2016, and to develop foreign exchange hedging instruments to support a gradual move towards more exchange rate flexibility. A rule- based foreign exchange intervention mechanism will also be considered to foster changes in exchange rate expectations while guarding against excessive volatility. The interventions could be based on gradually widening the tolerance thresholds, with an asymmetric band that allows more intervention to accumulate reserves. Monetary policy and quasi-fiscal deficits. With a large stock of legacy bank recapitalization bonds (around 10 percent of GDP) still managed by the central bank along with domestic liquidity, a number of challenges remain to be addressed. Under the current setting of recapitalization of the central bank, a stronger coordination between fiscal and monetary Technical assistance (TA) on both issues has been requested from the regional TA center CAPTAC. The quasi-fiscal deficit of the central bank stems from the large interest cost of bonds it issued to recapitalize banks during the 2003-04 financial crisis. Page 18 Recapitalization transfers Quasi-fiscal deficit Claims on government (rha) Central Bank Quasi-Fiscal Deficit (percent of GDP) authorities is needed to ensure more efficient public debt management. In particular, coordination on the term structure of bonds issued by the two authorities including focusing issuances for monetary liquidity management on shorter-term instruments would help deepen the maturity buckets, further develop the domestic bond markets, and reduce financing costs. At the same time, the legal and institutional arrangements for gradually recapitalizing the central bank need to be strengthened, to ensure continued transfer of bank recapitalization costs to the fiscal authorities and promote a move towards a unified public debt management. Source: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment and reiterated their commitment to price stability and strengthening of the inflation targeting framework. They indicated that they are closely monitoring both external and domestic developments, and adopting a neutral-to-tight monetary policy bias. They noted that while moving towards a more flexible exchange rate regime has advantages, current efforts are focus on first strengthening the market infrastructure to manage exchange rate fluctuations, especially in the context of fairly dollarized balance sheets. Both the central bank and the fiscal authorities recognized that current arrangements to recapitalize the central bank are not effective and indicated that they are analyzing alternatives to strengthen it. The issues that will be considered are the consistency of the transfer size with the fiscal envelope, the speed of the recapitalization, and accountability for managing fiscal resources.