The growth momentum remains strong, but the pace of expansion is set to gradually slow to potential . Growth accelerated to 7.3 percent in 2014 and remained at a robust 7 percent in 2015 according to preliminary data, propelled largely by domestic demand. Employment recovery and the decline in oil prices boosted disposable income, while the consumption-led recovery in the U.S provided tailwinds through linkages from tourism and higher remittances. Strong growth in private investment, supported by robust credit and external inflows, dovetailed the expansion in consumption. Staff estimates that the recent strong growth closed the output gap by 2014, placing it in a ½–1½ percent positive range by end-2015. While the favorable external backdrop will continue to support demand, the recent tightening of financial conditions will temper growth going forward. Staff projects growth to soften to about 5 ⅓ percent in 2016 as the economy converges to the potential growth of about 4½–5 percent. The authorities broadly share this outlook. Growth in Emerging Markets 2014 Growth in Dominican Republic Potential growth C H V h K h k U K j z z h Despite strong growth, inflationary pressures remained subdued. Lower fuel prices pulled headline inflation to an average of 0.8 percent during 2015, below the central bank’s target of 4±1 percent. Second-round effects have also dampened core inflation, prompting several rounds of interest rate cuts by the central bank in early 2015. As oil prices begin to stabilize, the positive output gap, recent spikes in food prices following a severe mid-2015 drought, and the incipient pressures on real wages are beginning to add upward price pressures. As a result, inflation picked up to 2 ⅓ percent by end-2015, and both staff and the authorities project it to return to the target range in 2016. The incidence of recent price developments has been regressive, as the highest income quintile faced a slight deflation in the year to November and prices for the lowest income quintile increased by over 4 percent. Since the last Article IV consultations, the national accounts have been rebased from 1991 to 2007. Under the revised accounts, released in August 2014, real growth averaged 0.4 percentage points lower and nominal growth about 0.1 percentage points higher over the period 1991-2013. The revision affected the ratios to GDP, with the public debt ratio for 2014 about 0.5 percentage points lower post-revision. Real wages in the private sector have remained stagnant over the past five years, declining after the crisis and beginning to recover more meaningfully following the mid-2015 round of biennial minimum wage negotiations. With labor productivity outpacing real wage growth since the crisis, the economy’s competitiveness has strengthened. The regressivity has been driven by the fact that (i) fuel constitutes a larger share of the consumption basket for high-income earners, and its price has dropped significantly, while (ii) food and beverages constitute a larger share of low-income earners’ consumption basket, and their prices have increased over the same period. Page 11 Inflation (percent, year-on-year; contribution to growth) Food Energy Core Headline (yoy) Official target range Inflation per quintiles (index Sept. 2014=100) Quintile 1 Quintile 5 CPI Sources: BCRD, WEO database, and staff estimates. 2014M9 2014M11 2015M1 2015M3 2015M5 2015M7 2015M9 Sources: BCRD and staff estimates The monetary policy stance remained broadly neutral during 2015, while financial conditions tightened . Faced with declining inflation, the central bank reduced policy rates in three consecutive moves from 6¼ to 5 percent during March–May 2015. These reductions offset the earlier policy tightening through increased reserve requirements, keeping the monetary stance broadly neutral during 2015. Financial conditions tightened, however, as falling inflation increased real interest rates and the peso appreciated in real effective terms. Interest rates and reserve requirements (in percent; interest rates: 15-day moving average) Reserve requirements Deposit rate, weighted average Lending rate, weighted average Monetary Policy rate Fiscal consolidation over the past three years helped reduce macroeconomic imbalances . The widening of the consolidated public sector deficit in 2012 to 7¾ percent of GDP, while boosting needed infrastructure investment, created significant uncertainty about the direction of fiscal policies and worsened the current account deficit. The subsequent adjustment during 2013–14 to a deficit of 4½ percent of GDP has been critical in restoring confidence. Preliminary estimates suggest that the underlying fiscal deficit remained at broadly similar levels in 2015 despite Reserve requirements were increased in February 2015 by 2 percentage points to stem what were deemed artificial depreciation pressures in a tight foreign exchange market. The consolidated public sector includes the central government, some decentralized entities, the electricity holding company, and the central bank. (continued) Page 12 the loss of one-off and gold-related revenues, largely due to careful prioritization of spending on goods, services, and transfers. The headline fiscal deficit in 2015, on the other hand, reports a significant fiscal consolidation owing to the capital grant from the restructuring of the Petrocaribe debt (3.1 percent of GDP; Box 1). Despite the restructuring operation, the consolidated public sector debt is estimated to have increased marginally to 48½ percent of GDP in 2015. Consolidated Public Sector Balance and Debt (percent of GDP) Underlying balance One-off receipts* Consolidated overall deficit Consolidated public debt (RHS) 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Proj. * Include one-off tax receipts, capital grants and tax amnesty. Box 1. Restructuring of the Petrocaribe Debt In January 2015, the Dominican Republic restructured its debt with Venezuela’s state-owned oil company PDVSA under the Petrocaribe agreement. It bought back US$4 billion of its debt with PDVSA at a discount of about 52 percent. The operation was financed with a sovereign bond placement of US$2.5 billion of 10-year and 30-year maturities, of which US$1.9 billion was used to buy back the debt. Although the terms of the new issuance (US$1 billion 10-year bonds at 5.5 percent interest, and US$1.5 billion 30-year bonds at 6.85 percent interest) are not as beneficial as those under the Petrocaribe agreement (25-year maturity, 2- year grace period at an interest rate of 1-2 percent), the government still achieved savings of 12 percent in net present value terms, assuming a 6 percent discount rate. With this operation, the country bought back some 98 percent of the debt accumulated with the PDVSA during 2005-14, which reduced public debt by US$2,094 million or 3.1 percent of GDP. Petrocaribe Debt Buyback* Petrocaribe Debt (6.0% of GDP) Bonds issued (2.9% of GDP) to buyback Petrocaribe Debt Total debt (pre-buyback) Total debt (post-buyback) *illustration based on debt stocks at end-2014. The fiscal adjustment has been supported by wide-ranging fiscal structural reforms. Tax administration efforts focused on the fight against tax fraud and evasion, risk management and coordination between collection agencies. In public financial management, reforms covered the transparency of public accounts, extending their coverage to other decentralized entities and their inclusion in the treasury single account. Public debt management has also helped mitigate risks, especially through notable maturity extension. The underlying deficit is the headline fiscal deficit net of one-off tax receipts, capital grants and tax amnesty collections. Reflecting these efforts, the Dominican Republic recorded one of the largest regional improvements in its Open Budget Index score between 2012 and 2015. Page 13 The external position strengthened with lower oil prices and a favorable external environment. Preliminary estimates suggest that the current account deficit narrowed to 2 percent in 2015, the lowest in a decade and a half, due to the sharp fall in oil prices, buoyant tourism receipts and remittances, and the expansion of gold exports. Reserve coverage increased to ⅔ months of imports (excluding free-trade zones) by end-2015. However, the net international investment position has continued to deteriorate, primarily due to FDI inflows and to a lesser extent public borrowing. Over the medium term, the current account deficit is projected to widen gradually to some 3 percent of GDP as oil prices recover and interest payments on external public debt rise. The banking system continues to show healthy capitalization, profitability, and asset quality . The system-wide capital adequacy is well above regulatory requirements, at about 15 percent as of September 2015. The rapid increase in private credit over the past year was driven mainly by a pickup in credit from the public bank as part of its strategy to diversify away from public sector lending and as it pre-financed projects in the electricity sector and has therefore not translated into pressures on non-performing loans. The latter declined to 1.5 percent of the banking system’s loan portfolio by September 2015 and have a healthy provisioning coverage, while profitability and liquidity in the system remain strong. In November 2014, an insolvent non-systemic bank (Peravia, 0.2 percent of bank assets) was intervened and is being wound down. The financial position of state-owned Banreservas, which accounts for a third of the market, also improved. Following its 2013 restructuring plan, the profitability of the bank strengthened, non-performing loans remained far below the level of recent years, and the capital was increased at end-2014. The bank’s capitalization is broadly in line with the private banking system, but capital adequacy is lower once the concentration of zero-weighted lending to the government is accounted for. Capital (as of September 2015, in percent) Banreservas Private commercial banks Capital-asset ratio (percent of risk-weighted assets) Capital to total assets (percent) Page 14 Social outcomes have improved along with the economy’s performance, but pressing social needs persist. Strong economic growth and targeted social spending over the last three years helped reduce unemployment to about 6 percent by end-2015, the share of households living in poverty by a fifth (to about 35 percent of the population), and the share of those living in extreme poverty by a third (to about 7 percent). However, poverty remains among the highest in LAC. Labor income inequality measured by the relative dispersion between the upper and lower deciles of the wage distribution remained broadly unchanged over the past decade, resulting in a widening gap between the high and low-income earners. Risks to the outlook are moderate and somewhat tilted to the downside (Annex I). On the downside: Weaker growth in advanced and emerging economies may dampen the outlook through trade channels, FDI, tourism receipts, and remittances. Spillovers from a slowdown in the U.S. would be particularly detrimental given close integration. Geopolitical developments in the region present some downside risks, but these are likely to be low-impact or materialize in the long-term. The recent policy to regularize illegal immigrants to the Dominican Republic and the subsequent ban on overland exports of a number of Dominican products to Haiti (the country’s second largest importer) has generated tensions that could affect exports and labor markets, although it is early to quantify these. The reopening of the U.S.-Cuba diplomatic relations could pose risks of potential diversion of tourism, exports, and FDI inflows, although its effect is likely to be protracted. Finally, the possible discontinuation of the Petrocaribe agreement with Venezuela may result in less favorable fiscal and external financing terms, although the effect is likely to be negligible (Annex II). Other downside risks include tighter or more volatile global financial conditions, which may increase financing costs, dampen demand, and put some pressure on the exchange rate. Given relatively weak financial integration of the Dominican Republic with the world financial markets, the effect of this risk is estimated to be moderate, unless accompanied by a slowdown in the U.S. Page 15 On the upside, a greater boost to demand may come from persistently lower-than-anticipated oil prices or a faster recovery of the U.S. economy.