The authorities have signaled their intention to continue the fiscal consolidation, but plans are likely to be firmed up after the 2016 presidential elections. The 2016 budget targets a mild narrowing in the central government deficit (by ½ percent of GDP) over the next three years, with measures remaining to be identified. This adjustment will be insufficient to prevent an upward creep in the consolidated public debt, given the anticipated pressures on the fiscal position. Staff’s baseline scenario suggests that in the absence of policy measures and with the increase in debt servicing costs following monetary policy normalization in the U.S. the consolidated public sector deficit would hover around 5 percent of GDP over the medium term, pushing the debt ratio from 48½ percent estimated for 2015 to about 53 percent by 2020. Although risks to this baseline fiscal outlook are largely tilted towards better-than-projected outcomes under plausible macroeconomic shocks (Annex IV), these are partly offset by downside risks from larger spending needs in the electricity sector, contingent exposures in the banking sector, and public sector’s exposure to exchange-rate risk (Annex VI). G f Consolidated Public Sector Overall Balance The favorable cyclical conditions provide a good opportunity to pursue a more ambitious and frontloaded adjustment . Staff estimates that an adjustment of around 1½ percent of GDP over one year is needed to stabilize debt at current levels, and an adjustment of 2-2½ percent of GDP over the next three years would put debt on a downward path towards reaching 40–45 percent of GDP by 2020. The larger fiscal effort is desirable, as it will ensure more adequate buffers to safeguard debt sustainability in the face of rising external risks and would help open additional fiscal space needed to reduce poverty, inequality, and infrastructure gaps (especially in the electricity sector). *The deficit for 2015 excludes notional capital grants that reflect the restructuring of PetroCaribe debt. More ambitious adjustment Baseline Historical Constant debt to GDP Public Debt G f Future consolidation efforts should be underpinned by both tax reforms and expenditure rationalization. In the near term, the weakening of the fiscal position will also be driven by the ongoing construction of two coal plants (Box 2). Page 16 The tax base remains very narrow for the country’s level of income due to numerous exemptions and tax incentives. The tax ratio was about 14 percent of GDP in 2014 (excluding one-off revenues), one of the lowest in the world, while tax expenditures accounted for 6½ percent of GDP. The widening of the tax base should therefore be a policy priority, with revenue mobilization efforts focusing on substantively eliminating VAT and excise exemptions, rationalizing tax incentives, and boosting personal income tax collections through lowering the tax threshold. These measures would not only open fiscal space for needed infrastructure and social spending, but would also make the tax system more equitable, less distortive, and easier to administer. Efforts should focus initially on eliminating exemptions for upper-income taxpayers, while maintaining exemptions aimed at protecting socially vulnerable groups. The need to expand the fiscal envelope, while undertaking the fiscal consolidation, will require further expenditure rationalization. This would need to focus on reducing subsidies to the electricity sector, rationalizing spending on inefficient public institutions, and improving quality of spending. In particular, subsidies to the electricity sector averaged 2–2½ percent of GDP in recent years, which now fell to 1½ percent in 2015 due to lower oil prices. Adjusting tariffs to cost recovery levels (at least 11 percent higher than current tariffs, according to existing methodologies) or, as a first stage, allowing automatic tariff adjustment going forward to lock in recent savings is critical; social safety nets should be strengthened at the same time to mitigate the effects on the most vulnerable. A credible medium-term fiscal framework would be important to further strengthen fiscal institutions . The upcoming discussions of the fiscal pact required by the national development strategy would provide an opportunity to strengthen the fiscal policy framework going forward, including potentially through transition to a rule-based framework. The latter could provide a medium-term fiscal policy anchor to facilitate the improvement in the fiscal position and strengthen credibility of fiscal policies, but would have to rely on simple rules that allow for flexibility to absorb cyclical fluctuations. Authorities’ views. The authorities reiterated their commitment to fiscal discipline, demonstrated by the considerable fiscal consolidation undertaken since 2012, especially in the context of the mandated doubling of spending on education. They noted that the fiscal pact deferred to the next administration given the proximity of the elections and the still ongoing As a result of the relatively high income tax thresholds, only 14 percent of formal employment pays personal income taxes. Page 17 discussions of the electricity pact (Box 2) will be an important component of the government’s medium-term fiscal strategy and plans to reduce public debt over time. The authorities also noted the need to increase revenue to address challenges related to debt sustainability and a narrow fiscal envelope. They pointed that the electricity sector and the quasi-fiscal deficit of the central bank continue to be important drivers of consolidated public sector debt dynamics. In this regard, they emphasized the importance of resolving the challenges in the electricity sector and strengthening the arrangements for central bank recapitalization and management of the quasi-fiscal deficit. Cognizant of past election-related pressures, the authorities affirmed their commitment to fiscal discipline and to the targets set out in the 2016 budget.