GROWTH A faster improvement in living standards will require sustaining high growth and making it more inclusive. While robust economic performance in recent years has allowed some catch-up of per capita income relative to other LAC economies, it still remains at 25 percent of the U.S. levels and 85 percent of the average LAC levels, in PPP terms. Potential growth, estimated at 4½–5 percent, may of itself not be sufficient to ensure a fast convergence to higher per capita income and substantially reduce poverty. Page 20 Despite notable improvements in cost and structural competitiveness, there are a number of areas where reforms could boost the economy’s potential. The electricity sector remains the main bottleneck for growth, but the Dominican Republic also lags behind its regional peers in the quality of infrastructure and institutions, education and health outcomes, and resolving insolvency (Figure 5). Electricity sector . Long-standing challenges in the electricity sector absorb substantial fiscal resources and pose significant obstacles to economic development (Box 2). Recent policy action focused on enhancing generation capacity and reducing generation costs through the construction of two coal power plants that are expected to come on stream in 2017. The authorities also took actions to clear most of the arrears with the generators, reflecting efforts to strengthen financial discipline. Ongoing discussions of the Electricity Pact among the social partners are expected to generate a comprehensive package of measures to: (i) reduce electricity losses, especially through investments in the distribution network; (ii) gradually adjust tariffs to cost recovery; and (iii) ensure a stable and predictable regulatory framework to facilitate private energy investments. Infrastructure gaps . Despite robust investment over the past few years, poor infrastructure continues to constrain the economy’s growth potential (Figure 5). Investment needs in the electricity sector alone are estimated at an additional ⅓ –½ percent of GDP per year over the medium term. Despite consolidation needs, spending on infrastructure needs to be sustained at adequate levels to ensure continued increases in the country’s capital stock, through revenue reform and expenditure prioritization. Institutional strength and governance . Institutional quality and governance have long trailed the country’s regional peers (Figure 5). Meaningful advances were made over the past decade, but continued efforts are essential to strengthen governance, enhance the culture of institutionalism, and improve the rule of law. Bankruptcy reform . An obsolete insolvency framework had limited investment opportunities and discouraged business activity. The recently adopted Bankruptcy Law aims at addressing identified deficiencies in terms of defining a business restructuring framework, reducing time and costs associated with bankruptcy procedures, as well as improving recovery rates. Product and labor markets . Rigid severance pay regulation and high transportation costs, largely as a result of strong unionization in the sector, push up the cost structures throughout the Page 21 economy. Addressing these rigidities in the labor and product markets would support a stronger competitive environment. Box 2. Electricity Sector: Issues and Reforms The electricity sector remains a major fiscal drag and a key bottleneck for the economy. Notwithstanding recent improvements, distribution losses in the electricity sector remain among the highest in the region and tariffs fall short of costs. A confluence of factors has contributed to this, including insufficient investments in the distribution grid, governance weaknesses at state-owned distribution companies, high share of unbilled energy (about half of clients are not metered), as well as a relatively unfavorable energy matrix, with about half of total electricity generated using fuel oil. This has given rise to annual deficits of 2–2½ percent of GDP in the public electricity distribution and transmission sector (down to 1½ percent in 2015 due to lower oil prices), which are covered with fiscal transfers or accumulation of arrears to private electricity generators. At the same time, unstable electricity supply and common blackouts adversely affect economic activity, disrupt production processes, and generate additional costs for companies, as many of them had to install their own electricity generators. New power plants. The public electricity holding company started construction of two new coal plants, estimated to cost about US$2 billion (3 percent of GDP) and expected to enter into operation in 2017. Their completion is projected to increase the share of coal in the electricity generation matrix by about 11 percent, mainly by reducing the share of fuel oil. While the recent collapse in world oil prices would substantially reduce the savings expected earlier, savings would still remain under the current commodity price outlook and the diversified energy matrix will provide protection against future volatility of oil prices. Electricity Pact. In line with the National Development Strategy 2030, a comprehensive social consultation process was started in 2015 (with participation from various government institutions, energy companies, civil society organizations, and experts) on a National Pact to Reform the Electricity Sector. The pact is expected to entail a broad consensus for actions to address the decades-old challenges in the electricity sector. The authorities expect the pact to be concluded in early-2016. The government’s policy agenda prioritizes social inclusion and poverty alleviation, but additional fiscal space is needed to safeguard this spending. Education. Reforms in education have been underpinned by a National Education Reform Pact, agreed between the government and the civil society in April 2014. Spending on pre-university education roughly doubled as a result, to 4 percent of GDP, in support of large-scale programs to build new schools, extend teaching hours (from 4 to 8) and improve learning outcomes, where the Dominican Republic has traditionally lagged behind regional peers. Beyond improving the productive capacity through higher human capital, the reforms may provide a boost to labor participation as more female workers substitute reduced household duties with formal employment. Page 22 Social safety nets were also strengthened with better-targeted, categorized, and coordinated social assistance programs for the most vulnerable. While the authorities have taken steps to extend basic health coverage to improve inclusion of socially-vulnerable categories, a major area remaining to be addressed includes access to health and social security insurance by the informal sector (including self-employed), which accounts for about half of the labor force. Financial inclusion. Gaps in financial inclusion remain particularly acute at the household level due to inadequate number of bank accounts in lower income segments, and low usage of debit cards and ATMs. The authorities launched a number of programs aimed at addressing financial inclusion and promoting financial education: (i) the institution of “bank agents” (currently about 2–3 thousand commercial entities that are allowed to provide limited services on behalf of financial institutions) has opened access to financial services for most vulnerable groups; (ii) the administration of social benefits through payment cards is also promoting financial inclusion; and (iii) several programs have been directed at the financial education of the public and the press. Authorities’ views. The authorities largely concurred with staff’s view on the economy’s potential and the need to continue structural reforms. While strong foreign direct investment flows continue to attest to a favorable business environment, they reiterated their commitment to continue actions aimed at strengthening competitiveness. They noted in particular the setup of the joint private-public Competitiveness Roundtable in May 2014, aimed at identifying policy measures to improve competitiveness and strengthen the overall business environment. The authorities largely agreed that key challenges remain in the electricity sector, and pointed out that the Electricity Pact will aim to address them. The authorities also emphasized that reducing poverty and making growth more inclusive continues to be one of the key socio-economic challenges and remains very high on their policy agenda.