INCLUSION Stress tests suggest that financial buffers are adequate to contain most risks . The largest banks are international banking groups, which currently enjoy access to foreign financing, and the system is characterized by very limited interbank exposures, which reduces the risk of internal contagion. At the same time, this structure exposes the sector to external risks. The central bank (BCR) and the Financial Superintendent (SSF) have run credit and liquidity risk sensitivity tests which suggest adequate resilience of the system to stress scenarios. The authorities have made good progress on implementing the financial reforms recommended in the 2010 FSAP, the 2014 Financial Stability Strategy, and other TA reports but a substantial agenda remains Emergency liquidity backstops . While dollarization helps contain currency and interest rate risks, it can amplify liquidity risks. Importantly, in the absence of sufficient lender of last resort (LOLR) capacity and robust bank resolution structures, institution-specific liquidity shocks could have systemic repercussions. And relying on high institution-specific buffers reduces the capacity of banks to lend to the economy. A plan for a liquidity fund based on a partial pooling of the banks’ liquid assets is nearing completion, which could be helpful in addressing non-systemic liquidity needs, but coordination and governance issues need to be fully resolved. Staff encouraged the authorities to credibly increase annual budget allocations to the LOLR, revive and expand an IDB credit line for the LOLR that has expired, and resolve the remaining hurdles to establishing the liquidity fund in consultation with stake-holders. Also, given the key role of the central bank in the operation of the LOLR its financial position should also be protected. Regulation and supervision . Coordination between the financial supervisor and the central bank has improved. Risk-based supervision is being implemented, and the implementation of Basel III has been initiated. The process of extending the supervisory perimeter to smaller and cooperative banks and savings and loans associations (to encompass 90 percent of deposits in that sector) is ongoing and will need to be completed. Bank resolution and crisis management. In line with staff advice the authorities are finalizing a strategy to mitigate weaknesses while comprehensive legislation that thoroughly addresses the key challenges is developed. Staff encouraged the authorities to expedite progress in both areas, noting that the legal reforms should make the Systemic Risk Committee permanent, strengthen crisis prevention and bank resolution authority and procedures, clarify procedures for the cooperative financial institutions, abolish the three-day notification to a bank before taking resolution measures, and strengthen legal protection for supervisors. Also, domestic interagency coordination as well as cross-border cooperation should be strengthened with clear and comprehensive MoUs between relevant agencies. The preparation of contingent bank-by-bank recovery and resolution plans should be accelerated. Finally, the deposit insurance agency Page 19 should be strengthened by increasing bank contributions and clarifying protocols for its role in a crisis. There was agreement that financial deepening and advancing financial inclusion could have a meaningful impact on both growth and poverty (Figure 5). Household access to financial services is relatively low with only 34 percent of individuals holding bank accounts. Steps to increase mobile banking and improve dispute resolutions mechanisms could boost the penetration of banking services, and in this regard staff welcomed the recent passage of the Financial Inclusion Law. However, staff also stressed that recent legal changes limiting the acquisition, transfer, and storage of debtor information in credit bureaus increase credit risks and intermediation costs in the financial system, and should be reconsidered. A modern law and improved corporate financial reporting standards are needed to support the expansion of the securities market, which could help pension funds increase returns and improve pricing and liquidity of government debt. El Salvador. Use of Financial Services in Households and Enterprises To date the loss of correspondent banking relationships has been manageable . Some larger international banks have left, but have been replaced by other, regional, banks, with the overall nominal value of the correspondent lines broadly unchanged thus far. The authorities continue to work to maintain sound AML/CFT standards, and maintain active engagement with the US Treasury in this area. A recent bank collapse in Honduras amid money laundering charges by the US government appears to have had no impact on El Salvador, but has heightened concerns and increased regulators’ supervisory vigilance. Staff argued for quickly undertaking contingency planning to delineate the authorities’ response in the event of a broader loss of correspondent banking relationships. Chapter V of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper examines financial inclusion in El Salvador. Y J MM X Z X Y Z Y J AA X Page 20