There was agreement that without assertive fiscal consolidation public debt will continue to rise . A frontloaded primary balance adjustment of at least 3 percent of GDP over 2017- 19 is the minimum needed to reverse the upward debt dynamics over the medium term, with more needed over a longer horizon to entrench sustainability. Under plausible multipliers the adjustment could reduce growth below 2 percent in the short run. However, a more solid and credible fiscal position, combined with vigorous structural reforms, would create the conditions for a rebound in growth toward 3 percent over the medium term. Incorporating longer-term factors, staff estimates indicate a fiscal sustainability gap of about 4–5 percent of GDP, the result of the significant structural primary deficit and rising demographic pressures in pension and health spending. Still more adjustment would be needed to create fiscal space to fully implement the authorities’ crime prevention strategy and credibly fund the authorities’ LOLR facility. Successful consolidation will require both revenue and expenditure measures, and a stronger fiscal framework. The authorities agreed in principle, and noted that their Medium-term Fiscal Framework targets adjustment of 2½ percent of GDP, although no specific set of measures have been agreed upon. However, they considered that this adjustment, at least in non-pension fiscal accounts, was close to the maximum feasible given low growth and pressing social needs. The fiscal sustainability gap is the total amount of fiscal measures that (if immediately implemented) would assure a non-explosive path for government debt over the long run. Kanda (IMF WP/11/164) describes the methodology underpinning the estimates. Page 15 Given the need to increase growth, revenue-raising measures should be accompanied by cuts in distortionary taxation . Raising the VAT rate to 15 percent, broadly around the regional average, would increase revenues by 1¼ percent of GDP. Efforts to establish a property tax should be strengthened. A corporate tax rate of 35 percent appears too high given low investment and high informality, and should be reduced significantly, while limiting incentives and loopholes to broaden the tax base. There may also be scope for less-distortionary progressive taxation by introducing a wealth tax, taxing (highly inequitable) pensions, or increasing personal income tax rates for the highest earners. The bank transactions tax and telecommunications tax have relatively low yield but significantly hamper financial intermediation and inclusion, and should be reduced or phased out. Also, all other taxes should be reviewed, phasing out those with low yield but high distortionary effects. Finally, plans to boost tax collection should be carefully calibrated to avoid dampening the investment climate. The authorities were supportive of property, wealth and progressive individual income taxation. However, they believed that the distortionary effects of the BTT and telecom tax were modest and indicated that raising VAT would be politically difficult because of its effects on the poor. They were however optimistic about the yield from several administrative initiatives that were underway to strengthen tax collections. il Y dd pp ee illi ll dg oo " " pp nu – – ii iii pp pp ee cc Page 16 The authorities agreed that durable consolidation will require addressing the sources of expenditure pressures . Recent revenue-based consolidation has largely been offset by increased spending, notably on the wage bill which has risen by 1 percent of GDP in the past 5 years, and is projected to rise by a further one percent of GDP by 2021 without measures. Addressing wage pressures will require eliminating the generous wage indexation mechanism (escalafon) in the health sector, limiting general wage indexation to increases below the rate of inflation, and curbing nontransparent bonuses. Also, hiring in all sectors—except security—should be significantly reduced. There is need to strengthen the efficiency of expenditure across a range of functions (notably reducing the fragmentation of the health system and improving the targeting of school assistance programs to protect the needy). There is scope for further rationalizing LPG and electricity subsidies. However, public investment should be increased to alleviate infrastructure bottlenecks, and the social safety net should be enhanced. The authorities were open to considering measures in all these areas, but were not yet prepared to commit to specific steps along those lines. The authorities are continuing efforts to upgrade the fiscal framework to support consolidation efforts, including developing a fiscal responsibility law (FRL) El Salvador’s fiscal framework: (i) has incomplete coverage of different government levels; (ii) allows higher spending with routine legislative approval if new financing becomes available; (iii) has highly rigid spending (80 percent of spending is deemed rigid); (iv) incompletely identifies general government financing needs and sources in the annual budget (excludes short-term debt, tax refunds, and some future debt issuances and repayments); (v) lacks a medium-term (MT) orientation, and (vi) is typically based on optimistic macroeconomic projections. These problems have contributed to an upward drift in spending, high deficits, and periodic financing strains. A draft FRL is currently under discussion and should Adopt strong procedures to increase transparency and comprehensiveness of budget presentation, improve forecasting and spending control, and reduce the upper limit on LETES issuance. Ideally, the regular budgetary process should also include the pre-approval of all the necessary financing for the budget year, thereby reducing the probability of financing crunches. Include a formal numerical target. One option could be a budget balance rule with countercyclical properties, incorporating a clear link to a prudent debt objective and corrective mechanisms to achieve it, which appears appropriate for El Salvador’s political and economic circumstances. An expenditure-based rule, or a combination of expenditure and deficit-based rules, could also be options should they command bipartisan support. The authorities’ current draft FRL contains many of the above elements, including a combination of deficit-based and expenditure-based rules. However, it still lacks clarity on the hierarchy of procedural and numerical rules and, as currently framed, the draft does not garner broad political and societal support. Chapter III of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper discusses the fiscal framework and rules for El Salvador. Page 17 Pension reforms are essential to ensure fiscal and social sustainability. The transition to a fully funded defined contribution (DC) system has sputtered due to inadequate asset returns that have led the government to periodically top up and guarantee pension benefits. The pension deficit is currently about 2 percent of GDP and will rise substantially in the next decade without policy change. Unfunded liabilities are estimated at almost 100 percent of GDP in NPV terms; future replacement rates under the DC system are projected to almost halve; coverage, participation, and contribution payments are low; benefits are highly unequal across pensioners; and there is poor diversification and low financial returns, partly because the private pension funds are mandated to buy government pension bonds at very low rates, although a recent Constitutional Court decision to raise those rates would change this going forward. Faced with a difficult political environment, the authorities’ pension reform proposed in February seeks to buy time but does not secure the long run sustainability of the system The proposal would (i) reverse some of the recent benefit top-ups, (ii) transfer to the public sector over half of contributions and private pension system assets (reducing measured deficits and debt), and (iii) offer lower-income contributors a flat pension. However, preliminary calculations suggest that it would not materially reduce the NPV of future unfunded pension liabilities, while introducing legal risks given public opposition to nationalization of private assets. There is an urgent need for the following additional steps to secure the sustainability of the pension system in the face of looming population aging pressures Parametric reforms to increase the retirement age and contribution rates (key to supporting long-term fiscal sustainability in the PAYG component and social sustainability in the DC component). Steps to better-align the number of years of contributions with benefits would also be important, especially if they are accompanied by measures to encourage formal employment. Greater coverage through an expansion of the means-tested basic universal pension and incentive schemes and other steps to encourage labor force formalization. A credible commitment to fund projected pension deficits from general revenue sources. The evolution of pension deficits over the long run would depend on the strength of the parametric reform package and coverage objectives. Chapter IV of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper examines the pension system of El Salvador and explores options for reform. illi ll Page 18