Low oil prices helped growth and the current account improve in 2015 alongside low headline inflation (Table 1) . GDP grew 2½ percent in 2015, up from 1½ percent in 2014, supported by steady growth in the US which increased remittances, robust export growth to the rest of Central America, and a stimulus from lower oil prices. Investment also increased significantly, helped by better corporate balance sheets (also in part a consequence of low oil prices). Headline inflation was slightly negative (-0.7 percent), anchored by the fully dollarized regime and lower energy prices. The current account deficit fell 1½ percentage points to 3½ percent of GDP (Figure 3). The fiscal deficit fell by 0.1 percentage point to 3.4 percent of GDP in 2015 (Figure 2) Fiscal expenditure remained broadly constant as a percent of GDP. The wage bill increased slightly by 0.1 percent of GDP, largely reflecting ingrained indexation in selected sectors, and the interest bill also rose marginally. However, the authorities took advantage of low oil prices to reduce energy subsidies. Capital expenditure remained subdued at 2¾ percent of GDP. Revenues were helped by the banking transactions tax (BTT) adopted in the second half of 2014 but were lower than expected. New taxes on telecommunications services and large enterprise profits were introduced in late-2015 to finance a needed increase in law enforcement and security spending. However, fiscal risks are rising. Reflecting a parliamentary impasse over approval to access external financing, domestic financing rose sharply in 2015 and early 2016, pushing up yields on government short term domestic securities (LETES). Without a resolution of the impasse, the authorities are likely to reach the limits of the domestic system to finance the budget toward the end of this year, raising the prospect of disorderly adjustment. Moreover, despite recent declines EMBI spreads relative to other emerging markets remain elevated, raising risks that external financing could be more expensive than earlier envisaged. The tightening liquidity position of the budget has increased difficulties in making timely payments to suppliers and exporters (for VAT refunds). J J J J illi illi Source: BCR, IMF Dec-15Nov-13 Banks' Liqudity Position (Percent of deposits and securities) Deposits at CB Deposits abroad Gov't securities qu Page 13 The financial sector is stable but is exposed to the rising sovereign risks (Figure 4) Banking sector capital remains high (17.2 percent of risk-weighted assets), substantially above the minimum statutory level of 12 percent. Provisioning is adequate (nearly 115 percent of NPLs) and asset quality continues to improve. Banking system liquidity appears ample. However, bank profitability is relatively low due to a narrowing loan to deposit rate spread and high liquidity. Deposits and credit to the private sector grew by around 6 and 5 percent, respectively, in 2015 as corporate credit picked up and household credit slowed. Credit to the private sector nudged up to nearly 45 percent of GDP. Financial sector credit to the public sector, on the other hand, increased by nearly 15 percent and now accounts for about 35 percent of private financial system assets, increasing the exposure of the financial sector to fiscal shocks such as a repricing of sovereign risk. GDP growth is expected to be 2.3 percent in 2016 and 2.4 percent in 2017, falling over the medium-term toward a potential growth rate of 2 percent (Tables 2-7) There is some near-term upside risk if several significant investment projects get underway (notably a large gas project). However, US growth (with which Salvadoran growth is highly correlated) is projected to decline over the medium term. Moreover, oil prices are expected to trend upwards over the medium term, tempering the recent boost to demand. Inflation is expected to remain anchored by the fully dollarized regime. Given the rise in oil import prices and difficult prospects to strengthen and diversify exports the current account deficit is expected to rise to 5½ percent of GDP by 2021. The fiscal deficit is expected to widen to 4 percent of GDP in 2016, with further increases over the medium term absent measures . While revenues are expected to increase, reflecting full-year impacts of recent measures and rising import taxes as oil prices rise, expenditures are projected to rise faster. In addition to wage pressures and higher interest payments, the authorities plan additional security-related expenses of 0.6 percent of GDP over 2016–17 to counter the recent uptick in crime. Public investment is also assumed to recover from recent lows. Alongside, public debt is expected to exceed 70 percent of GDP by 2021 (see the DSA). Risks to the outlook are significant and tilted to the downside Increased global financial market turmoil could limit access or raise the cost of external fiscal