GDP growth has averaged 2 percent over 2000-2014, well below the Central American regional average of 4½ percent (Figure 1) . Alongside, GDP per capita has risen slowly and well behind the frontrunners in the region. While the underlying causes of the low growth are complex, a key channel through which they are expressed appears to be low investment. El Salvador’s investment rate has averaged only 15½ percent of GDP since 2000. Data gaps preclude strong conclusions, but the available evidence suggests that the likely culprits include: political polarization; high crime; rising unit labor costs; worsening terms of trade (until recently); high energy and logistics costs; barriers to entry and expansion of business; high exposure to natural disasters; fiscal and regulatory uncertainty; and limited human capital. However, along many of these dimensions El Salvador does not appear materially worse than its faster-growing neighbors aside from the inter-related forces of high levels of outward migration and violent crime. Most likely, it is the complex interaction of all of these factors that is at the core and, as such, resolving low growth will require action along multiple fronts. Chapter I of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper examines the causes of low growth in El Salvador, and the macroeconomic effects of remittances. N ll Page 10 Factors Underlying Low Growth in El Salvador The adverse effect of high emigration on growth goes beyond its impact on investment . Emigration since the civil war, triggered in part by insecurity, reduced labor supply, particularly among the more flexible and potentially productive young workers, restraining growth. And while there was a concurrent surge in remittances that supported consumption, this also likely raised reservation wages and limited competitiveness. Moreover, in recent years the growth of remittances has been lower than in neighboring countries, reflecting the earlier start of migration and more mature family unification process. DD CC nd und J z il nd nd il nd ndu il mm nn mm CC GTM PAN CRI NIC SLV MEX Labor Cost Index Sources: ECLAC, nationalauthorities, and Fund staff estimates. GTM SLV HND PAN DOM CRI NIC Terms of Trade Index in CAPDR Source: National authorities.Note:A lower TOT index means a worse TOT. Page 11 The low-growth feeds a number of vicious cycles . First, it hinders efforts to reduce the high crime rate and improve educational attainment, which in turn deters investment and growth. It also encourages emigration, which limits labor supply and in turn dampens growth. Low growth also creates fiscal pressures, as social demands continue to increase while fiscal revenues remain subdued. The resulting adverse trends in public debt increase macroeconomic instability and undermine investor confidence. Breaking these vicious cycles will require strong concerted efforts. El Salvador’s competitiveness problem has been exacerbated by the run-up in the U.S. dollar (Annex III) . Staff’s estimates using the three EBA-lite methodologies suggest REER overvaluation close to 10 percent. International reserves are broadly adequate by traditional metrics but fall short against more suitable risk-weighted benchmarks that are tailored to a fully dollarized economy. And after an initial post civil war spurt El Salvador’s export performance has been stagnant since 1998, with its share of world goods and services exports flat at 0.03 percent. Political gridlock is an obstacle even to incremental reform . The authorities’ 5-year plan puts growth as the overriding priority, and many growth-promoting measures have been pursued. However, while there is broad agreement on the need to increase inclusive growth and public sector efficiency, and to reduce crime and corruption, the main political parties are far apart on how to achieve these objectives, resulting in legislative stalemate on many important initiatives. qu nd und ll × + × + × + × ili ud qu qu nd qu und ii nd nd iii EE EE EE EE EE EE il mm ll ili z II + illi Page 12