Preliminary estimates indicate that GDP declined by 0.3 percent in 2014 (Figure 1). The oil price shock appears to have had a limited impact as it materialized late in the year. Overall GDP growth in 2014 was driven by the continued decline in hydrocarbon production (accounting for about 70 percent of GDP), which moderated slightly thanks to higher-than-expected yields in mature fields. Growth in the non-hydrocarbon sector is estimated to have slowed to 1.9 percent. The key recent driver of non-hydrocarbon growth, construction, fell 2.3 percent (y-o-y) as public investment under shifted away from infrastructure. Utilities growth remained strong with continued modernization and extension of the electricity network. Other sources of growth included transportation, trade, and hospitality sectors, partly benefiting from several large conferences and preparations for the African Cup of Nations tournament in early 2015. Hydrocarbon production includes both crude oil and gas condensate production (classified as primary sector output) and oil and gas derivatives, such as liquefied natural gas (secondary sector output). Page 11 Figure 1. Equatorial Guinea: Economic Developments, 2007–14 Hydrocarbon production has averaged 480 thousand barrels per day in recent years… … and has been the main growth driver, supported by government-related construction. … taking the overall balance from surplus into deficit… Reserves remained healthy thanks to FDI and withdrawals of offshore deposits. Fiscal performance has suffered as the investment program gathered pace… … and leading to steady erosion of the government savings buffer. Sources: Equatoguinean authorities and IMF staff estimates. Hydrocarbon Production (Thousands of oil-equivalent barrels per day) Hydrocarbon derivativeproduction Crude oil andgas condensate production Others Construction Oil&gas derivatives Growth rate GDP Growth Contribution (Percent) p l Revenue Expenditure Overall balance Budget Law and Outturn Offshore deposits Deposits in BEAC Overall fiscal balance Government Deposits Official reserves (month of imports) Current account balance (% of GDP, RHS) Current Account and Official Reserves Page 12 The fiscal deficit target was somewhat reduced in 2014, but remained high at 6.8 percent of GDP . The budget target for revenue was met. However, spending slippages recurred, despite phasing out fuel subsidies to commercial buyers. The overrun was due to public investment, although controls introduced in mid 2014 appear to have helped reduce the overrun to 1.8 percent of GDP, against overruns averaging 10 percent of GDP in 2012–13. Furthermore, the overall deficit does not capture challenges to cash flow management which led to unbudgeted spending equivalent to 3.3 percent of GDP to clear unpaid bills on capital investment undertaken in 2013. This required central bank financing to avoid withdrawals from the Fund for Future Generations and offshore fixed term accounts. Public sector debt was about 12 percent of GDP at end-2014, increasing from 8 percent at end 2013 due to the recourse to the Bank of Central African States (BEAC) overdraft facility. The current account deficit grew to 10 percent of GDP, reflecting the trend decline in hydrocarbon exports. The level of reserves remained high at 8 months of prospective imports. Inflation stood at 4.3 percent in December 2014, above the regional Economic Community of Central African States (CEMAC) convergence ceiling of 3 percent, due to food price pressures early in 2014. weakening of the euro (against which the regional currency, the CFA franc, is pegged), partly offset by a relatively higher inflation rate than its trading partners, resulted in a negligible 0.3 percent depreciation of the real effective exchange rate.