has enhanced infrastructure, but the impact on non-oil growth has been limited. The first phase (2008–12) of the development plan focused on road networks, energy, water, and ports. The second phase of the plan, which was launched in 2014, emphasizes improving governance and fighting corruption, the business climate, and human capital formation. To date, there has been limited movement on structural reforms, and weak governance and corruption remain a serious impediment (Figure 3). However, large-scale prestige projects are still ongoing, including the new capital city at Oyala. As a result, non-oil activity and exports have remained stagnant. The authorities’ efforts are now focused on promoting agriculture, fisheries, tourism, and financial services. To foster private sector activity in strategic sectors, the authorities: (i) intend to establish a national committee composed of chambers of commerce, educational institutions, banks and several members of the government by end-2016 to spearhead reforms; (ii) are placing emphasis on education, including building eight vocational schools to train youth; and (iii) are developing a tourism sector policy to leverage recently constructed hotel facilities, building on the expertise of foreign professionals. For a detailed discussion of , see IMF Country Report No. 15/260. Page 18 Figure 3. Equatorial Guinea: Business Environment and Governance Ease of Doing Business 2016 (Percentile rank; 100= best s s s f s E Equatorial Guinea CEMAC Emerging Countries SSA Oil Exporters SSA Governance Indicators (WGI) (re-scaled, 0=worst, 5 best), 2014 estimate Control of Corruption Voice and Accountability: Estimate Political Stability Rule of Law Regulatory Quality Government Effectiveness Equatorial Guinea Emerging Countries CEMAC SSA Oil Exporters Doing Business Indicators 2016 (Ranking; 189=last place) Resolving Insolvency Enforcing Contracts Starting a Business Paying Taxes Protecting Minority Investors Dealing with Constructio n Permits Getting Electricity Registering Property Getting Credit Governance and GDP per Capita (log PPP) c v s w T EM GAB GNQ COG CMR TCD NGA Sources: Doing Business Report 2016; Worldwide Governance Indicators, 2014; EIU Democracy Index 2015; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ SSA oil exporters = Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Nigeria, Republic of Congo. 2/ WGI overall governance indicator is calculated as the simple average of control of corruption, government effectiveness, rule of law, regulatory quality, political stability, and voice and accountability. Despite significant data limitations on the external sector, existing evidence suggest that the real exchange rate is significantly overvalued . The real effective exchange rate has appreciated in past years considerably more than in other CEMAC countries due to consistently higher CPI inflation (Annex IV: External Stability Analysis). The Araujo et al. (2013) and the Bems- Carvalho (2009) methodologies suggest an overvaluation of the real exchange rate of 8–33 percent. This underlines the urgent need to implement wide-ranging structural reforms that reduce factor costs, including through fiscal consolidation, as well as to foster human capital development and address significant weaknesses in the investment climate. Page 19 Discussions with the authorities focused on measures to improve the nonoil sector’s competitiveness and facilitate export diversification: Address current real exchange rate overvaluation, a fundamental prerequisite to promote non-oil growth. Beyond fiscal consolidation, it requires reducing costs and productivity-boosting structural reforms. The government wage bill is relatively small and the ongoing retrenchment in the construction sector means that wages will remain depressed. Therefore, measures to reduce factor costs, such as external trade facilitation, easing barriers to FDI inflows and lowering telecommunication charges, should be a priority. Improve the business climate and efficiency of public services to foster private sector development. While staff welcomed the authorities’ plan to establish a “one-stop shop” for investors, it underscored that in itself this was insufficient to address the weak business climate. As an initial step, they could finalize discussions on business climate diagnostics and reforms with the World Bank. Advocate further integration with CEMAC by lowering trade policy barriers through behind-the-border measures. Equatorial Guinea could tap into economies of scale by encouraging regional integration. Promote tourism by leveraging existing infrastructure. Hotel occupancy rates are very low. This is in part due to visa entry requirements to Equatorial Guinea that are onerous and unpredictable, and need to be streamlined. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s recommendations. They concurred with the need for structural reforms, made more urgent in light of oil price and output declines. In addition to vocational training for construction workers, the authorities stressed the catalytic potential of a CFAF 100 billion Co-investment Fund to support small- and medium-enterprises in these sectors, although no suitable projects have been identified to date. They noted that external advisers had been contracted for the establishment of the “one-stop-shop” to facilitate investor entry, which could be operational by 2017. On tourist visa requirements, while acknowledging the problem, they noted that any streamlining would need to balance the need to ensure national security.