Deepening 23 While the overall financial sector is well-capitalized, liquid, and resilient to macroeconomic shocks, high credit growth and weak asset quality pose significant vulnerabilities. A recent FSAP review (Annex V) determined that the overall financial system remains resilient against shocks to credit quality, liquidity, interest rates, and the exchange rate. However, NPLs rose from 5.8 percent of gross loans (December 2012) to 21 percent (February 2015), with increases occurring at four of five banks. The deterioration in asset quality reflects a slowing construction sector, which in turn is experiencing delays in payments from the government. The payment delays also fueled high levels of credit growth in 2013–14 (averaging 26 percent), as companies sought bank financing to maintain operations. The financial sector is shallow, highly concentrated, and characterized by limited inclusiveness (Figure 4). Physical outreach is limited, with one-third the numbers of bank branches and ATMs per head relative to comparators. Financial deepening, as measured by deposit- and loan- to-GDP ratios, is also less than a third of peers. Limited information on potential borrowers’ credit history limits the supply of credit. The banking sector is supervised by the regional agency, Central African Banking Commission (COBAC), which has limited capacity to properly conduct its mandate. Equatorial Guinea is moving toward implementation of CEMAC’s AML/CFT framework. The national agency for financial investigations, ANIF, is not yet fully operational. Staff capacity building is underway. A regional peer review of Equatorial Guinea AML/CFT legal framework is scheduled for 2016 to align it with key recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). The mission made the following recommendations Launch a detailed assessment of the deteriorating asset quality. The potential weaknesses are exacerbated by strong macro-financial linkages stemming from recurrent delays in government payment to the construction sector, which is heavily reliant on the government for contracts. The weaker government and oil companies’ balance sheets could also weaken the deposit base for banks. Fiscal consolidation efforts should accommodate the necessity to promptly clear domestic arrears and strengthen cash management to avoid undermining economic activity and heightening risks to financial stability. A bank restructuring program may well be necessary to address any identified weaknesses and limit the fiscal impact. Page 23 Figure 4. Equatorial Guinea: Financial Development and Inclusion Physical outreach both in terms of ATMs per head and km … …and the number of bank branches per head is much weaker than in frontier markets and EMs Financial inclusion measured by deposits is weak and relatively little progress has been made since 2004. Credit supply per 1000 adults by the banking sector is very low. Deposit-to-GDP ratio in Equatorial Guinea is about the third of the EM average. The ratio of loans to GDP has remained low relative to peers. Sources: Financial Access Survey, IMF and IMF staff calculations. 40Equatorial GuineaCEMAC AvgFrontier MarketsEmerging and Developing Countries Number of ATMS, 2013(per 1,000 km2 and 100 thousand adults) ATMS per 100,000 adults ATMS per 1,000 km2 Commercial Bank Branches(per 100,000 adults) Equatorial GuineaCEMAC AvgFrontier MarketsEmerging and Developing Countries Depositors with Commercial Banks(per 1,000 adults) Outstanding Deposits with Commerical Banks Equatorial GuineaCEMAC AvgFrontier MarketsEmerging and Developing Countries Borrowers from Commercial Banks, 2013(per 1,000 adults) Outstanding Loans from Commerical Banks(in percent of GDP) Page 24 To deepen financial intermediation and inclusion, the focus should be on modernizing banking infrastructure by upgrading of credit and collateral registries ; undertaking reforms to strengthen contract enforcement; and encouraging the development of microfinance and mobile banking. For the latter, a greater promotion of electronic money by banks and the endorsement of more flexible regional regulations by the government—similar to those adopted in East Africa—could spur innovation and increased access. Credit reporting system should be developed and access to registries by SMEs should be enhanced to reduce asymmetric information. In this context, the recommendations of the International Committee for Credit Reporting (ICCR) on facilitating SME financing through improved credit reporting could serve as a guideline. Strengthen the AML/CFT regime in line with the 2012 FATF standard, notably by implementing at the national level CEMAC’s AML/CFT framework, operationalizing ANIF and ensuring on a risk-basis compliance with AML/CFT measures by regulated institutions. Authorities’ views The authorities do not see immediate systemic financial sector risks related to the rise in NPLs. They noted the comfortable capitalization, liquidity and profitability of the banking system and attributed the general deterioration in asset quality to the weakening economic conditions and the infrequent meetings of the NPC. While NPL levels were being closely monitored, they would largely be resolved with the progressive clearing of government obligations. The authorities agreed with the recommendation to support financial intermediation. In line with their objectives to become a regional financial hub, the authorities indicated their priority to develop the overall banking system, with a lesser focus on the micro financial institutions. Initiatives are underway to create a center to monitor payments incidents to centralize information relating to customer solvency, and the newly introduced (at the CEMAC level) e-Business collateral registries would have a positive impact on financial intermediation.