The near-term outlook is very challenging (Figure 2). The baseline scenario assumes depressed energy prices and a deeper near-term decline in hydrocarbon production than previously projected, as oil companies continue to minimize operating expenditures (Text Figure 3). In 2016, weak oil revenues and limited buffers will require further cuts to public investment, leading to a deep contraction of the large construction sector and public administration. As such, overall economic activity is expected to decline by nearly 10 percent. Beyond the near-term, investment in current and new hydrocarbon facilities is expected to recover, suggesting a return to production declines of around 5 percent annually. Ongoing fiscal adjustment is envisaged through 2021 (the “active scenario” discussed below) to contain the pace of debt accumulation. The overall economy is unlikely to grow much in the medium term given the still large weight of hydrocarbons. The reduced aggregate demand from lower hydrocarbon income combined with the impact of fiscal consolidation will have a negative impact on non-hydrocarbon activities. Credit growth is projected to decelerate as lending positions to the construction sector are unwound. Staff considers that non-hydrocarbon growth of over 3 percent could be achieved by 2021, if the national development strategy shifts toward pro- growth social development. Sources: Equatorial Guinea authorities and IMF staff estimates Text Figure 3. Equatorial Guinea: Hydrocarbon production (Thousands of barrels per day) Current AIV 2015 Projections Substantial risks to the outlook highlight the need for proactive policy measures (Annex III: Risk Assessment Matrix). The key short- to medium-term downside risk is an insufficient fiscal adjustment to prolonged weakness in the oil market. This could lead to a faster depletion of available deposits, risking a rapid accumulation of arrears and public debt. Further domestic risks concern a faster-than-expected decline of oil production, uncertain prospects for a rebound in non- hydrocarbon growth, and a slow improvement in the reorientation of public investment. An upside risk for future hydrocarbon production concerns the Fortuna Floating Liquefied Natural Gas (FLNG) project, for which the final investment decision is expected by end 2016. The FLNG project could increase biogenic gas production by as much as half over from the end of the forecast period. Page 13 Figure 2. Equatorial Guinea: Baseline Projections, 2015–21 …and recover slowly as other sectors (services, utilities, agriculture) benefit from new infrastructure. GDP Growth Contribution Crude oil Others Oil&gas derivatives Real GDP growth Construction …but falling deposits and external borrowing will result in a further deterioration of the net asset position. Government Net Financial Wealth (Billions of CFAF) Deposits Debt (-) Net financial wealth Banking activity is focused on construction, and private sector credit growth will slow alongside overall economic activity. Credit Situation (Percent of GDP) Net Credit to the Central Government Credit to the Private Sector Domestic Credit Real GDP is expected to trend down with slowing resource production and public investment … GDP (Constant price, billions of CFAF) Crude oil Construction Oil&gas derivatives Others Frontloaded spending adjustment would reverse the deterioration of the overall balance from 2017… Fiscal Situation ( Billions of CFAF, unless otherwise indicated) Capital expenditure Current expense Non-hydrocarbon revenue Hydrocarbon revenue Overall balance (percent of GDP, RHS) Non-resource primary balance (percent of GDP, RHS) Falling import-heavy spending helps to rebuild reserves. Current Account and Official Reserves 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Official reserves (month of imports) Current account balance (% of GDP, RHS) Sources: Equatorial Guinea authorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 14