BEAC’s accommodative monetary policy has temporarily eased the government and banks’ difficulties, but there is little additional room given the CEMAC currency peg. The use of BEAC statutory advances at end-2015 reached CFAF 518 billion (over 6 percent of GDP), the maximum allowable. This puts a premium on fiscal adjustment. While banks appear well capitalized and liquid, profitability is in decline. Capital and liquidity appear relatively unaffected by the oil price shock so far, and remain adequate (Text Figure 6). Stress tests of CEMAC countries’ banks show Equatorial Guinea as relatively resilient to solvency and liquidity shocks (SIP: Macro-financial Linkages). However, return on equity Liquidity shocks consist of deposits withdrawal and solvency shocks of increase in nonperforming loans. Page 20 contracted to 8 percent in 2015, mainly related to falling non-oil economic activity, and banks appear vulnerable to asset quality shocks (Text Figure 5). Text Figure 5. Equatorial Guinea: Banks’ Financial Buffers and Stress Tests Capital, Liquidity, and Profitability (Percent) Liquid assets to short-term liabilities Regulatory capital-to-risk weighted assets (RHS) Return on equity (RHS) Q Q Q Q Effect of Liquidity and Solvency Shocks (Percent of the total) y c v l S Liquidity ratio after shock Min. liquidity ratio Solvency ratio after shock (RHS) Min. Solvency ratio (RHS) Percentage deposits withdrawal or increase in NPLs (RHS) y q L Sources: BEAC; country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Notes: The minimum liquidity ratio requirement is 100 percent, and the minimum solvency ratio is 8 percent. The high level of nonperforming loans threatens financial sector stability. Amid disorderly adjustment of the PIP and slowing economic activity, nonperforming loans increased to 20 percent of total loans in 2013 (Text Figure 6). Nonetheless, credit growth has averaged more than 20 percent over the same period, suggesting potential distortions due to evergreening of loans—mostly in the form of overdrafts for some of the construction companies—that could undermine bank asset quality in the future. NPLs have remained high, sustained by the 2014 oil price shock. Financial sector weakness stems from fiscal-financial linkages, as fiscal consolidation and government arrears to suppliers and contractors affect firms’ ability to service loans, as well as possibly lax loan classification. An additional concern is the potential for under provisioning; although the ratio of provisioning is stable around 50 percent of NPLs, it does not cover loans guaranteed by the government. Amplifying the shock is highly concentrated bank lending, with around 80 percent of loans extended to large enterprises and construction firms depending on government contracts. The latest regulation on provisioning and loans classification was effective from January 2015. Besides concentrated loans, the negative effects of oil-price shocks on financial stability in commodity-exporters tend to be more pronounced for countries with undiversified export base, weak governance, low fiscal buffers, shallow financial systems, and weak macro-prudential framework (Kinda, Mlachila and Ouedraogo, 2016; Gabon SIP, 2016). Page 21 Text Figure 6. Equatorial Guinea: Nonperforming Loans Oil price and non-performing loans (Percent of total loans and USD per barrel) Oil-price shock Crude oil price Nonperforming loans to total gross loans (RHS) Credit and Nonperforming Loans (Percent) Construction Commerce and tourism State-owned enterprises Utilities Non-resident Tansport & communication Others Extractive industries Housing Manufacturing Primary sector Sectoral NPLs/ Total NPLs Sectoral credit/ Total credit Sources: BEAC; country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The 2015 regional FSSA report notes a need to continue to strengthen the quality of supervision and enforcement. The crisis resolution mechanism is improving, giving the supervisor (COBAC) the power to intervene, notably by appointing administrators without prior approval of the BEAC Board. Furthermore, BEAC’s monetary policy committee has increased the frequency of its monitoring of liquidity developments to a quarterly basis, as has the frequency of on-site commercial bank inspections to prevent under provisioning. Even so, bank supervision is constrained by limited capacity, and complicated by banks exposed to spillovers from potentially distressed parents in the CEMAC region. The financial sector is shallow and characterized by limited inclusiveness (Figure 4). Equatorial Guinea’s financial development gap is the highest among African oil-exporters, at one-fifth the level predicted by its income and other fundamentals (Text Figure 7). Similarly, financial deepening, as measured by deposit- and loan-to- Text Figure 7. Financial Development, Actual vs. Benchmark (1 = most developed; 0 = least developed) G q E p R C h C m C G N l FD, actual FD, benchmark Source: Sahay and others (2015) and IMF staff estimates IMF Country Report No. 15/222. Although the overall CEMAC banking sector is sound and resilient, stress tests suggest that banks with CEMAC- based parents appear relatively more vulnerable to liquidity and solvency shocks (See SIP on macrofinancial linkages). See sub-Saharan Africa REO, April 2016 for details. Page 22 Figure 4. Equatorial Guinea: Financial Development and Inclusion Physical outreach both in terms of ATMs per head and km … …and the number of bank branches per head is much weaker than in frontier markets and EMs Financial inclusion measured by deposits has improved since 2004, but more progress is needed to reach the average of emerging and developing markets. Credit supply per 1000 adults by the banking sector is very low, similar to other CEMAC countries … Commercial Bank Branches (per 100,000 adults) Equatorial Guinea Frontier Markets CEMAC Avg Emerging and Developing Countries The deposit-to-GDP ratio in Equatorial Guinea is also well below the average for emerging and developing countries average. Outstanding Deposits with Commerical Banks (in percent of GDP) Equatorial Guinea Frontier Markets CEMAC Avg Emerging and Developing Countries … and the ratio of loans to GDP is also low relative to peers. Outstanding Loans from Commerical Banks (in percent of GDP) Equatorial Guinea Frontier Markets CEMAC Avg Emerging and Developing Countries Sources: Financial Access Survey, IMF and IMF staff calculations. Page 23 GDP ratios, is less than a third of the EM average. Limited information on potential borrowers’ credit history and high collateral requirements remain significant bottlenecks to financial development. In addition, high volatility of banks’ deposits—mostly driven by large and irregular government payments to service providers—appears to constrain credit supply. Financial inclusion remains limited by the small size of the microfinancial sector. Equatorial Guinea is moving toward implementing CEMAC’s AML/CFT framework. The national agency for financial investigations, ANIF, is not yet fully operational. Staff capacity building is underway. Internal regulations and reporting standard have been finalized. The ANIF has started processing suspicious transaction reports, and has referred files to the State Attorney General’s office for possible prosecution. A regional peer review of Equatorial Guinea’s AML/CFT legal framework against the 2003 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standard is being conducted. The mission made the following recommendations Promptly tackle domestic arrears to avoid negative repercussions on financial stability through default by government contractors and suppliers on bank loans Maintain adequate financial buffers in the banking sector, critical to mitigating exposure to weak economic activity. Stress tests show that liquidity and solvency are highly sensitive to macroeconomic shocks. Given the protracted oil shock, Equatorial Guinea should encourage the regional supervisor to put in place action plans to ensure continued bank compliance with prudential norms and provisioning against accumulated NPLs, and cooperate with the COBAC on an asset quality review and in closely monitoring government-guaranteed loans. Advocate a coordinated regional approach for developing bank supervision on a consolidated basis. The COBAC and the BEAC should improve the quality and timeliness of financial stability indicators, and develop a regional strategy to better monitor and tackle macro- financial spillovers through parent-subsidiary linkages. Implement crosscutting financial sector structural reforms to close the financial development gap which would allow banks to play a supportive role in economic growth. Given limited capacity, high priorities are establishing credit bureaus and upgrading collateral registries. Other recommended policies to boost financial inclusion include greater promotion of microfinance notably by increasing financial literacy and facilitating mobile banking. Strengthen the AML/CFT regime in line with the 2012 FATF standard, notably by implementing at the national level CEMAC’s AML/CFT framework, providing the ANIF with adequate resources to carry its mandate autonomously and independently, and ensuring a risk- based implementation of AML/CFT measures by regulated institutions. The national payment committee meets infrequently, which leads to large payments when they occur. Page 24 Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff’s analysis of macro-financial linkages. They noted that recent efforts by COBAC to increase staffing have increased its effectiveness and would underpin higher frequency monitoring. While acknowledging the vulnerability of the banks to cross-border spillovers, the authorities also noted that regulations adopted in 2015 on cross-border supervision would strengthen regional surveillance on a consolidated basis in line with Basel II protocols. Although the oil shock would likely hinder financial development, they stressed the importance underlying structural impediments, notably weak entrepreneurial skills and a lack of bankable projects.