The oil-price shock since 2014 is exacerbating Equatorial Guinea’s economic contraction (Figure 1 and Tables 1–5). Overall GDP declined by 7½ percent during 2015. Hydrocarbon activity declined by 8.9 percent with both price and production playing a role. Lower oil prices prompted producers to adjust by cutting operating costs by an average of 40 percent, which partly mitigated the fall in value added in the sector, but also resulted in lower-than-expected production. Non-hydrocarbon activity slumped by 5.2 percent, as fiscal adjustment slowed public investment and private sector construction. Fiscal adjustment in terms of the improvement in the non-resource primary balance has fallen short of what is needed, so debt levels are rising and fiscal buffers are deteriorating rapidly. Outturn data for 2015 show a further decline of the overall deficit (cash basis) to 3.2 percent of GDP, reducing the overall fiscal deficit by half. The authorities proactively sought to mitigate the resource revenue shock through a revised 2015 budget involving measures to mobilize non- resource revenues and a freeze on new capital projects. Nonetheless, investment spending exceeded the revised budget target by nearly 8 percent of GDP, so the decline in the deficit was mainly thanks to better-than-expected resource revenues. The true deficit may be larger given delays in settling payments to suppliers. To finance the deficit, the government relied upon domestic borrowing and accumulated savings. Recourse to statutory advances from the BEAC equivalent (1.8 percent of GDP in 2015), contributed to a rapid rise in total public debt to 14 percent of GDP at end-2015. The government’s deposit buffer declined by 1.9 percent of GDP in 2015. As a result, the trend decline in government deposits continued, which have fallen from 24 percent of GDP in 2011 to 10.6 percent in 2015. Higher-than-expected resource revenue stems from deep spending cuts by oil companies, which buttressed income tax revenue. Page 11 Figure 1. Equatorial Guinea: Economic Developments, 2009–15 Hydrocarbon production has trended down since peaking in 2008… … which is driving the contraction, with spillovers to construction and other activities (commerce, hospitality, and public administration). Hydrocarbon Production (Thousands of oil-equivalent barrels per day) Hydrocarbon derivative production Crude oil and gas condensate production While budgets have sought to rein in expenditure, slippages remain a chronic issue… Budget Law and Outturn (Billions of CFAF) p l Revenue Expenditure Overall balance … leading to steady erosion of the government savings buffer… Government Deposits (Billions of CFAF) Offshore deposits Deposits in BEAC Overall balance GDP Growth Contribution Crude oil Others Oil&gas derivatives Real GDP growth Construction … so the non-resource deficit has remained stubbornly high… Fiscal Situation ( Billions of CFAF, unless otherwise indicated) Capital expenditure Current expense Non-hydrocarbon revenue Hydrocarbon revenue Overall balance (percent of GDP, RHS) Non-resource primary balance (percent of GDP, RHS) … and contributing to a deterioration of the current account and official reserves. Current Account and Official Reserves 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Official reserves (month of imports) Current account balance (% of GDP, RHS) Sources: Equatorial Guinea authorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 12 The terms-of-trade deterioration resulted in a widening of the current account deficit to 16.8 percent of GDP. The drawdown of usable external reserves was faster-than-expected, declining by some 40 percent since end-2014. Including the government’s offshore deposits, the useable external resources are equivalent to 6.4 months of projected imports, down from 6.9 months the previous year. Inflation is very low at 0.6 percent during the second quarter of 2016, down from over 4 percent in 2014. Despite weak economic activity and bank asset quality, private credit growth decelerated only slightly to 14 percent, indicating possible “evergreening” of loans to the badly-hit construction sector.