Following a long hydrocarbon-fueled boom, Equatorial Guinea’s economy is in the midst of a protracted decline. From 2000 to 2008, average real growth exceeded 30 percent, as the country grew to become the third-largest hydrocarbon producer in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Activity slowed with the onset of a secular decline in production in 2008, but the economy rebounded thanks to high commodities prices and massive infrastructure investment (averaging 25 percent of GDP per year) under the national development plan— . Since end-2012, with fiscal buffers under pressure, investment cuts and resource output have led to an overall contraction of GDP of some 30 percent. With bleak prospects for a recovery of resource revenues, the authorities’ efforts to restore fiscal sustainability largely hinge on further cuts to investment, as well as extracting more value for money. However, changing course is a challenge with several long-term projects still mid-stream. Text Figure 1. Equatorial Guinea: Gross National Income per Capita (US Dollars) The boom lifted Equatorial Guinea to one of the highest average per capita incomes in SSA. A recent rebasing of the national accounts to 2006 as base year better captures the changing structure of the economy in recent years. The new series also incorporates new and more robust methodologies. As a result, there has been an upward revision of the size of the economy by roughly 30 percent (Annex I: GDP Rebasing). Nonetheless, high levels of public investment have yet to deliver significant economic diversification, and the economy remains heavily dependent on a resource sector in decline. Based on the recent census results, income per capita now lies below the World Bank threshold level for high-income countries (Text Figure 1); at the same time, poverty incidence is only marginally lower than the average for SSA countries. Text Figure 2. Equatorial Guinea: Selected Social Indicators Latest Figure Reference Year SSA (latest) GDP per capita (US$) UN population estimate National authorities' estimate Poverty incidence (percent) Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000) Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000) Primary school enrollment ratio (percent, net) Life expectancy (years) Access to clean drinking water (percent of population) Human Development Indicator ranking Doing Business report overall ranking Sources: Equatoguinean authorities, UN (Millennium Development Goals Indicators, 2015); World Development Indicators 2015; and Doing Business Indicators 2016. Equatorial Guinea: National Household Survey (2006); percentage living below national poverty line of US$2 a day. Sub-Saharan Africa: UN MDG Report (2013); percentage living below US$1.25 a day in 2010. Equatorial Guinea: Health and Demographic survey (2011). Resource wealth has helped improve social indicators over the past 15 years, but progress has been uneven, with Equatorial Guinea falling below the SSA average in many areas (Text Figure 2). The government has built schools, technical colleges and healthcare centers under the plan, helping to improve The size of the public administration sector is now roughly eight times larger in 2014, given better estimates on the consumption of fixed public capital. Similarly, informal activities are better captured in the measures of trade and commerce, which is now five times larger in 2014. Population (millions) United Nations estimate National authorities' estimate Page 10 school enrollment and indicators of maternal and infant health. While development indicators that depend on infrastructure, e.g., access to water and electricity, have improved markedly, low overall spending on health and education delivery has led to vaccination and primary school completion rates that have fallen well short of the achievements of other SSA countries with much lower per capita incomes. In the face of significantly reduced oil revenues, the authorities need to shift limited resources to health and education sector, particularly to prevention and outreach programs, in order to promote more inclusive and equitable growth (Annex II: Progress on Social Indicators). The traction of IMF policy recommendations is improving. In the past year, the authorities have acted on recommendations to better monitor investment spending, and shift the focus to human development. They have been implementing IMF technical assistance toward increasing tax revenue. Significant steps have been taken to address weak statistical data, including the adoption of a national statistical development strategy and the decision to subscribe to the IMF’s enhanced General Data Dissemination System (e-GDDS). However, there has been little progress on recommended business climate reforms.