Text Figure 4. Equatorial Guinea: Deviation of Budget and Actual (Percent of GDP) Fiscal performance in recent years has suffered from weaknesses in budget management. Issues identified by previous FAD TA include incomplete and poor quality data, ad hoc procedures, fragmented decision-making, and extra-budgetary spending. As a result, expenditure and revenue deviations relative to budget targets have been large, ranging from 5–10 percent of GDP on the large capital expenditure budget (Text Figure 4). Source: Equatorial Guinea authorities and IMF staff estimates. Fiscal adjustment is under way, but progress is slow. The authorities are dealing with a serious shock to hydrocarbon revenues (accounting for 90 percent of total revenue through 2014). With the forecast of continued low oil prices and no scope for further central bank credit, remaining fiscal buffers are at risk without substantial additional consolidation. The broad lines of the authorities’ adjustment strategy have been in place since mid-2015, and it was enhanced with the adoption of a presidential decree in November 2015, focusing on mobilizing non-hydrocarbon revenue and progressively reducing the public investment budget. However, key revenue measures remain in early stages of implementation, including the audit and rollback of ad hoc VAT and income tax exemptions, and customs modernization. On expenditure, the authorities have succeeded in containing current spending, and have imposed a freeze on new public investment projects, but action plans are still being developed to reform the public investment plan (PIP) and review ongoing projects. To illustrate the risks posed by a slow unwinding and reform of the PIP, a passive scenario posits gradual expenditure consolidation and weaker growth due to a slow improvement of investment efficiency. Under this scenario, fiscal buffers are depleted and financing requirements would push indicative public debt to about 50 percent of GDP over the medium term (Text Table 2). Page 15 Text Table 2. Equatorial Guinea: Active vs. Passive Scenario, 2015–21 (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified) Source: Equatorial Guinea authorities and IMF staff estimates. Staff recommended accelerating fiscal policy reforms with a view to forestalling the depletion of buffers. Fiscal policy should be anchored on a non-resource primary deficit of less than 20 percent of GDP over the medium term. This target is consistent with a gradual increase in non-resource revenue and sustained spending adjustment around 2 percent of GDP per year over the medium term, and would safeguard a minimal level of government deposits (Tables 1–5). Equatorial Guinea’s debt would remain manageable if fiscal adjustment is continued over the medium term, but would grow rapidly in the absence of additional adjustment (DSA). This underscores the importance of accelerated fiscal policy reforms. The debt trajectory is vulnerable to unfavorable shocks from real GDP growth and the primary balance. In line with this scenario, the mission made the following recommendations: Ensure continued fiscal consolidation with a revised 2016 budget. The 2016 budget as adopted applies an optimistic oil price assumption and makes no provision for arrears clearance. A new 2016 budget should be based on conservative oil price assumptions and revised expenditure projections with adequate allocations for maintenance and social development. Implement priority non-hydrocarbon revenue mobilization measures. Equatorial Guinea generates minimal tax revenue that is not directly linked to hydrocarbon activity. Despite a three- fold increase in imports since 2005, customs taxes generate revenue of 0.2 percent GDP, well below Gabon (4.2 percent) and the Republic of Congo (3.7 percent). This underperformance stems from evasion, ad hoc exemptions, and poor administrative practices. Immediate priorities for reform include: operationalization of the Large Taxpayer Unit, which will help focus collection efforts on The active scenario is based on the authorities’ established policies, and policies likely to be implemented. The level of the fiscal anchor is now significantly higher than past estimates, due to the upward revision of GDP. Page 16 the biggest tax payers, introduction of a single taxpayer identification number; streamline tax filing procedures; and better tracking of exemptions. Exemptions should be vigorously eliminated when not established by law. The authorities should also advance the reorganization of the customs services, notably by finalizing customs clearance procedures for the installation of ASYCUDA World software. The authorities should embark on a comprehensive review of tax policy, including non- resource tax revenues ; reform efforts to date have focused on tax administration measures. A well-designed tax system would increase the non-resource tax base and avoid distortionary fees that partly explain the increase in non-resource revenues in 2015. The IMF stands ready to provide technical assistance. Accelerate public financial management (PFM) reforms focusing on the public investment program ( PIP) and domestic arrears. The targeted fiscal adjustment requires that the PIP be halved over three years. The authorities should develop action plans with the World Bank to strengthen public investment management, focusing on centralized project selection and monitoring, aligning it with priorities identified by the national development plan, and developing expenditure projections integrated with the medium-term fiscal framework. With regard to ongoing projects, the authorities should avoid inefficient across-the-board spending cuts, which could harm the poor disproportionately. Clear criteria should be developed to prioritize efficient investment projects based on expected economic and social impact, emphasizing state of completion, service delivery, and maintenance requirements. Support inclusive growth by increasing the share of spending on social programs and public service delivery. Expenditure composition is currently 2:1 in favor of capital spending, whereas it is the inverse in other CEMAC countries, contributing to low provisions for health and education service delivery. Budget allocations should be better aligned with the national development program’s social priorities. Given widespread payment delays, the authorities should proceed quickly on an audit of the stock and preparation of a clearance strategy. To underpin confidence in the strategy, the annual budget should transparently provision for retiring these debts—which may require additional recourse to the regional debt market. PFM measures to avoid the emergence of new arrears should include more frequent National Payments Committee meetings and an action plan to bring budget classification and reporting in line with CEMAC directives by end 2016. Develop debt management capacity. In 2015, Equatorial Guinea entered the regional T-bill market with a successful test issuance of CFAF 15 billion at an interest rate of around 1 percent. In order to further develop this potential source of financing, the authorities should strengthen capacity and develop a sound debt management strategy, as recommended by previous World Bank and IMF technical assistance. Although the National Payments Committee is scheduled to meet quarterly, the schedule of meetings is not always maintained due to capacity constraints. Page 17 Advocate for a tighter region wide policy stance. Given its contribution to the regional reserves pool, the Equatorial Guinean authorities should seek to contain monetary financing of the budget, and work with regional bodies to rein in fiscal dominance and safeguard external reserves. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that, given the unfavorable outlook for hydrocarbon revenue, ongoing fiscal adjustment would be needed to regain fiscal sustainability. They concurred that, absent active policy measures, debt levels would rapidly rise, as shown in the DSA. They underscored their commitment to fiscal consolidation by pointing to the wide-ranging measures in the presidential decree of November 2015, foremost being the elimination of ad hoc tax exemptions, and noted that sizeable fiscal adjustment had been achieved in 2015. The authorities were optimistic about the potential for tax administration measures to raise revenue in the short-term especially in customs. They also argued that the planned tax amnesty program would incentivize taxpayer registration. Nevertheless, they agreed that an IMF-supported comprehensive tax policy review could help identify potential reforms. On public investment, the authorities’ stressed the recent success in reducing the PIP budget by 30 percent since 2014, and that substantial efforts have been made, with World Bank assistance, to construct an open platform to actively monitor and manage the PIP. Work is underway on prioritization criteria for ongoing projects, and the government is in discussion with contractors on the scope to delay or curtail elements. A strategy for rescheduling unpaid bills is also being discussed with service providers and commercial banks.