Risks to the banking sector remain, but appear contained. The risks on the domestic side stem from possibly weak output growth which may negatively affect credit quality. However, the stress test conducted by the authorities suggests that potential impacts from macro shocks would be largely absorbed by high capitalization. Externally, financial stress in the Nordic banking system, possibly due to the tensions in global funding markets or a correction in housing prices, could induce banks to pull funding from Estonia. However, strong deposit growth in Estonia provides a substantial portion of local funding for now. The Estonian authorities are implementing the new capital and liquidity provisions under Basel III. The capital conservation buffer, the systemic risk buffer, and the countercyclical capital buffer will be implemented shortly after pending legislation is enacted. The capital conservation buffer (of 2.5 percent EU-wide) is expected to be immediately adopted without a transitional period. The systemic risk buffer is expected to be set at 2 percent and the countercyclical buffer is expected to be set at zero initially. The liquidity coverage ratio is to be implemented by January 1, 2015. These actions are not likely to substantially affect the banking sector which is already highly capitalized and liquid. They would complete most of the outstanding domestic agenda on the Basel-III reforms and go a very long way toward ensuring financial sector stability. Estonia is now well advanced in the process of establishing a more complete and stronger macroprudential toolkit. The draft amendments to the Eesti Pank Act and the Credit Institutions Act would establish the Eesti Pank as the macroprudential authority, give it the macroprudential tools specified in the CRD IV, and provide the authority to set macroprudential limits such as loan-to-value and debt-service-to-income ratios requirements rather than guidelines. Implementation of the EU Banking Union will require cooperation between Estonia, the ECB, the Nordic home country supervisors of Estonia’s major banks, and the Nordic-Baltic financial structures . With the implementation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in November 2014, the three subsidiaries (SEB, Swedbank, and DNB) will come under direct supervision Page 13 of the ECB. The Nordic bank branches (Danske and Nordea) would remain under the supervision of the Swedish and Danish authorities respectively. Then, modalities should be in place for close consultation between the Estonian authorities, ECB regulators and the Nordic regulators of the parent banks, both on supervision and on setting regulatory capital and liquidity requirements. The current framework of Nordic-Baltic cooperation on bank supervision and policy (including Nordic- Baltic Stability Group and Nordic-Baltic Macroprudential Forum) will need to be adapted to the Banking Union. Authorities’ view The authorities’ view is that the banking system is sound, but they also feel the need to closely monitor it. The early adoption of the capital conservation buffer reflects the authorities’ confidence on banking sector soundness, while they plan to assess SSM banks (SEB, Swedbank, and DNB), as well as small local banks with relatively rapid credit growth, through the ECB-led asset quality review later this year. The authorities value the importance of the more complete and strengthened macroprudential toolkit for banking supervision. The authorities believe that the Banking Union will create a positive confidence effect on Estonia’s banking sector and that Nordic- Baltic cooperation has worked well and needs to be preserved.