Competitiveness Labor productivity growth has been worryingly weak in the past three years. It has stagnated since mid-2013 and turned negative more recently, lagging the performance in regional peers. Poor total factor productivity growth is chiefly responsible—growth contributions of employment have been small everywhere and investment in Estonia has historically been higher than in peers, although it has declined relatively strongly more recently. Detailed analysis shows that catching-up of firms with initially poor performance indicators has been a major driver of productivity growth in Estonia. There is also evidence that firms with larger productivity gains had lower employment growth, implying that some of the labor saved from productivity gains might have been reallocated to low productivity segments of the economy, dragging down average productivity in the economy. Only the moderate productivity gains in the high-tech services sector went together with relatively large employment gains (Box 2). Estonia’s policy settings are already conducive to productivity growth, but could nonetheless be optimized further. Predictable and stability-oriented policies are important assets. The business environment is ranked the best in Central and Eastern Europe, although there remain a few issues that should be addressed. This leaves three main areas for further policy action: Making existing growth-promoting programs more efficient. Estonia has a large number of programs in place, but the outcomes appear not to be commensurate with the scale of the Estonia is the highest ranked country in Central and Eastern Europe in the World Bank’s Doing Business Report (rank 16 out of 189 countries) and the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index (rank 30 out of 140 countries). Areas for further optimization include: (i) shortening bankruptcy procedures and increasing recoveries; (ii) strengthening the position of minority shareholders; (iii) reducing exclusive rights for accountants and engineers; (iv) allowing non-residents to invest in law firms and registering ships; (v) updating the Labor Code to allow modern forms of employment, such a job sharing; (vi) better connecting transportation modes; (vii) raising weight limits for timber trucks; and (viii) streamlining environmental inspections. EE ll Page 14 efforts expended. A productivity unit housed at the highest executive level in the Prime Ministry should be established to oversee and guide these programs in a coherent and comprehensive manner. A report on growth commissioned by the previous Prime Minister was a positive step. Filling gaps and selectively scaling-up growth promotion. There are numerous entities that offer innovation support, including competence centers, university technology transfer centers, science parks, and regional competence centers, but take-up by Estonian firms remains limited. Similarly, commendable offers for re-education and training of adults in the context of Estonia’s life-long learning strategy have still to attract more applicants. This may suggest a mismatch with companies’ needs and insufficient demand incentives. Program design needs to take fully into account that traditional firms still dominate the economy, despite a sizable ICT sector, and are responsible for the bulk of productivity growth and employment. Take-up incentives could be strengthened through an expanded voucher program that allows the purchase of more application-oriented services from a wider range of suppliers. The new Company Development Program is a welcome initiative and should be scaled up. Active labor market programs also remain too small with spending of only 0.2 percent of GDP. Restoring high public investment. Estonia’s public investment has traditionally been among the highest in Europe, but has come down in recent years. Its envisaged reinvigoration in the 2017 budget and medium-term fiscal plans is welcome and should help fill remaining infrastructure gaps, provided that it is geared toward projects with high economic returns. Despite stagnant productivity, wages have been growing rapidly in recent years, which is starting to undermine competitiveness. Since 2011, labor compensation has risen by 5.6 percent annually, pushing up nominal unit labor costs by 3.1 percent per year for the whole economy and by 5.1 percent in manufacturing. In contrast, unit labor costs were essentially flat in Central and Eastern Europe and the EU (Box 3). At the same time, export market shares have started to slip, profit margins are falling and economic resources are reallocating toward nontradable activities. So far, the current account has remained strong though, because declining investment has helped hold down import growth and because terms-of-trade have moved in Estonia’s favor. Estonia scores only 23 rd out of 28 European countries on “Integration of Digital Technology,” despite being a leader in e-government services, according to the European Commission’s Digital Economy and Society Index. AEs EMDMs Estonia Estonia excl. Russia Other Baltics CEE4 Export Market Shares: Goods and Services (2003 = 100)Sources:IMF, WEO; Statistics Estonia; and IMF staff calculations. Four-quartermoving average Long-termaverage Profit-to-Turnover in Manufacturing, 2003-16 (Percent) Sources:Statistics Estonia; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 Box 2. Characteristics of Productivity Growth at the Firm Level Productivity growth has slowed significantly since 2005, despite a sizeable productivity gap with Western Europe. Labor productivity registered only a modest increase according to macroeconomic data. Similarly, firm- level data point toward disappointing labor productivity and total factor productivity developments. Like in most countries, productivity growth slowed markedly following the 2008/09 crisis, but the extent of it in Estonia is surprising, considering the still very sizeable productivity gap of over 50 percent with Western Europe. Exploring sectoral and firm-level data offers important clues about what drives aggregate productivity, as well as associated employment trends. Sectoral data help disentangle within-sector productivity developments from what is due to shifts between sectors with different productivity levels. The sectoral makeup of the Estonian economy changed significantly over the past decade, but this composition effect was nonetheless quantitatively of little importance for aggregate productivity developments. Analysis of firm-level data reveal which firm attributes, such as size, age, export-orientation, or high technology, are conducive to productivity growth. One can also explore the implications of these same attributes for employment generation. Catching-up in the more traditional sectors accounted for the bulk of aggregate productivity gains. Low initial productivity and unfavorable performance metrics were key characteristics of firms with strong subsequent productivity growth. It was not the high-technology sectors that registered particularly large productivity gains, but rather the more traditional sectors within manufacturing and agriculture. The role of firm age changed over time—younger firms no longer posted superior productivity growth after 2009. This may be an indication of reduced economic dynamism. Firms that witnessed greater productivity gains were more labor intensive and had lower average labor costs. Firms that increased productivity the most had lower assets per employee, and higher labor cost shares than firms that increased productivity the least. The labor costs per worker—a proxy for workers’ skill levels—was lower for firms belonging to the high productivity growth group, suggesting that firms that did well relied more on lower-skilled labor. High productivity gains were associated with low employment reduction growth. Firms with relatively higher productivity growth tended to feature relatively lower employment growth—an association also visible in other countries but particularly strong in Estonia. This can be seen by looking at the elasticity of labor productivity with respect to the employment-share elasticity, calculated from sectoral data provided by Eurostat for Estonia and Western Europe. These elasticities are larger for Estonia. In line with the above findings, they are particularly large in the more traditional sectors. ______________ 1/ Based on Selected Issues Chapter “Productivity Developments in Estonia: Evidence from Firm-level Data.” ll 1001502010-20142005-2009Change in employment Firms that increased productivity the most Firms that increased productivity the least Difference statistically significant Employment Change (Percent of average indicator level) Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations. Page 16 Box 3 Developments of Unit Labor Costs and Implications for Competitiveness Unit labor costs (ULCs) are a key indicator for assessing developments in external price competitiveness. Defined as the ratio of labor compensation per employee and real output per employed person, they are identical to real effective exchange rates when compared to ULCs in trading partners and expressed in a common currency. The concept has its shortcomings, primarily because of its crude measurement of productivity. Empirically, catching-up economies often feature faster ULC growth without losing competitiveness and the association between ULC and export developments is not straightforward to establish. Therefore, supplementary indicators need to be invoked. Powerful ones include: (i) real ULCs, which relate labor compensation to nominal productivity and resemble the labor share of income; (ii) export market shares; and (iii) exporters’ profitability. ULC developments in Estonia raise a red flag. Over the last three years, they have risen by 17 percent, but were stable in the EU and declined slightly in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE). Conceptual shortcoming in ULCs do generally not bias results against Estonia, except for income convergence that might explain some 30 percent of the gap in ULC growth with the EU. Recent real ULC growth also looks rather worrisome. In manufacturing, they have risen by 10 percent over the past three years, compared to a 5 percent decline in the EU and in CEE. Case studies for Korea and Italy suggest that sustained increases of real ULCs above 10 percent could begin to undermine growth and income convergence. It is mainly developments in wages rather than productivity that set Estonia apart from the rest of CEE. Labor productivity growth has been somewhat weaker than in CEE, but wage developments have diverged much more. They accounted for two-thirds of the difference in ULC growth since mid-2013. Strong wage growth reflects labor market tightness, but is further fueled by wage policies and momentum. Empirically, wage developments are closely linked to economic growth and the business cycle. But public sector and minimum wages also play a role, contributing one percentage point each to annual wage growth in Estonia in the past three years. Contrary to popular perception, Estonia’s unfavorable demographics do not emerge as an important wage-push factor. Wages by sector of economic activity seem rather unrelated to sectors’ performance or sectors’ vacancy rates, suggesting that labor market tightness is far from the only reason why wages grow so rapidly in Estonia. ________________ 1/ Based on Selected Issues Chapter “How Worried Should We Be About Fast ULC Growth in Estonia?” Estonia-total economy Estonia-manufacturing Other Baltics-total economy Other Baltics-manufacturing CEE-4-total economy CEE-4-manufacturing EU-total economy EU-manufacturing Real Unit Labor Costs, 2003-2016:Q2 (Four-quarter moving average, 2002=100)Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Estonia-total economy Estonia-manufacturing Other Baltics-total economy Other Baltics-manufacturing CEE-4-total economy CEE-4-manufacturing EU-total economy EU-manufacturing Nominal Unit Labor Costs, 2003-2016:Q2 (Four-quarter moving average, in euros, 2002=100)Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. CEE-4 comprises the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia, and Hungary. Estonia-total economy Estonia-manufacturing Other Baltics-total economy Other Baltics-manufacturing CEE-4-total economy CEE-4-manufacturing EU-total economy EU-manufacturing Nominal Unit Labor Costs, 2013:Q2-2016:Q2 (Four-quarter moving average, in euros, 2013:Q2=100) Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. CEE-4 comprises the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia, and Hungary. Estonia-total economy Estonia-manufacturing Other Baltics-total economy Other Baltics-manufacturing CEE-4-total economy CEE-4-manufacturing EU-total economy Real Unit Labor Costs, 2013:Q2-2016:Q2 (Four-quarter moving average, 2013:Q2=100)Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Page 17 Efforts to contain wage growth need to complement measures to raise productivity. The current divergence between labor cost and productivity developments is unsustainable. Cooling wage growth requires both measures to address genuine labor market tightness by enhancing labor supply and measures to address wage dynamics where they are detaching from fundamentals. There are three levers to directly influence wage growth: Government wages. Government wage policies have strong direct bearing on the average wage in the economy as sectors that are dominated by government employment account for almost a quarter of employment. They spill over to private-sector wages, because the average wage is a “household number” in Estonia serving as a key reference point for all wage agreements. Wages in the general government have been front-running general wage developments in the last few years with raises of 9 percent in 2013 and 8 percent in 2014 and 2015 each. This was partly deliberate policy as pay for certain occupational groups was seen as in need of catching up. It also reflects Estonia’s newly decentralized expenditure allocation system whereby government entities are given autonomy to raise wages at the expense of employment or sometimes even other current expenditure. Moreover, in some subsectors, such as health care, government is inadequately represented in wage negotiations. Going forward, the government should phase in relative raises for specific occupational groups more slowly and balance the effect on average government wages through lower increases for the rest of the government sector. Wage decentralization should be accompanied by strict performance targets for government entities, overall spending envelopes that anticipate efficiency gains, and safeguards that ensure equal pay for equal work across the general government. Government representation in wage negotiations should also be strengthened as needed. Minimum wages. They are primarily determined in negotiations between social partners, but government representatives are present, minimum wage agreements are given legal force by government decree, and minimum wages feature in parties’ political platforms. Minimum wages have risen by 10 percent each year since 2013 and a further 10 percent increase has already been agreed for 2017. Even though only a small fraction of workers earns the minimum wage in Estonia, there are important knock-on effects for other wages that help fuel general wage dynamics. The government should exert its influence to cool minimum wage growth. A formal role for independent experts in minimum wage formation could also be useful. Communication. Wage growth in Estonia seems to go much beyond what can be explained by labor market tightness alone. Effective government and Central Bank communication to the public on the risks of unmitigated wage growth when productivity stagnates could help break this momentum. Efforts to boost labor supply are key to addressing genuine labor market tightness. With unemployment low by historical standards, employment at record highs, and the labor force declining for demographic reasons, there are genuine wage pressures. Mobilizing additional labor These sectors comprise public administration, defense, compulsory social security, social works, health, and education. Page 18 supply for the private sector and making the most of existing labor resources are the main avenues to alleviate them. Possible measures include: Reducing general government employment. Employment in sectors dominated by the government is higher than in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as in Western Europe when social work activities are excluded. While a commendable policy to cut government employment in line with the declining labor force is in place, there seems to be room for a faster reduction that would free up labor resources for the private sector. Boosting labor force participation of younger women. Estonia’s total and female labor force participation rates are above the EU average, though not as high as in the Nordic countries. But this reflects primarily high rates for the older cohorts, presumably because of limited pension benefits. Rates for women in the age bracket 20–39 years are actually below the EU average. The design of parental leave, which is for 3 years with 18 months at full pay, may play a role. The recent reform that allows parents returning to work earlier to keep at least half the benefits they would otherwise be entitled to goes a long way toward reducing disincentives to work, but it will be important to monitor the results with a view to identifying other impediments, such as the unavailability of child care facilities, or to improving the design of parental benefits further. Reforming the disability system. The authorities are rolling out their commendable “Work Ability Reform.” It will strengthen assessment of the capacity to work, step up activation measures, tie the receipt of benefits to the use of activation measures, compensate employers for workplace adjustment costs, and subsidize social security contributions for those with partial work capacity. The authorities expect the reform to raise employment by around 1.5 percent by Allowing more immigration from outside the EU. It is currently capped at only 0.1 percent of the population and immigrants must be paid at least 1.24 times the average wage. Social security contribution cuts would provide useful relief from competitiveness pressures. With social security contributions paid by employers, cuts would initially help counteract pressures from wages on profits. In the longer run and as wage contracts are renegotiated, the The government has pledged to keep government employment in full-time equivalent terms pegged at 12 percent of the population aged 15–74 years. W EE W Page 19 benefits would be shared by employers and employees. The previous government had embarked on a program to reduce social security contribution rates by 0.5 ppts annually in 2016, 2017, and 2018, which should be accelerated, but the new government reversed course and plans to leave rates unchanged. Views of the Authorities The authorities shared the concerns about stagnant productivity and agreed on the need to boost labor supply. While composition effects may have dragged down labor productivity, underlying dynamics have also been weak and the low take-up of innovation promotion programs is an issue. The new government has not yet formed a view on the establishment of a productivity unit in the Prime Ministry or how to make innovation programs more effective, but plans a number of steps to boost growth: (i) a cut in corporate income taxes; (ii) reduced taxes and minimal red tape for small companies and startups; and (iii) additional public investment worth 0.5 percent of GDP from 2018 onward over and above the increase envisaged by the previous government. The authorities underscored their determination to keep the government sector lean, targeting a yearly staff reduction of 0.7 percent, which has been overachieved in the past 12 months. They will follow up on staff’s finding regarding the size of government. The reform of the disability pension system should make more labor resources available. The planned lowering of the personal income tax for low-wage earners may also boost labor supply. On wages, the authorities are keenly aware of their rapid rise, but see little scope for the government to influence them directly. Wage growth looks worrisome and needs close monitoring, but it may partly be a natural byproduct of an economy advancing out of labor intensive activities. Company closures have been rare so far, and, where they happened, displaced workers mostly secured other jobs with relative ease. The authorities maintained that minimum wages are outside the government’s control. They agreed in principle that the government should not front-run general wage developments, but underscored their determination to bring pay for teachers to 120 percent of average wages by 2019 and noted that labor turnover in the government sector has become very high. Wage decentralization was designed to incentivize efficiency gains in government entities. The authorities were skeptical about social security contribution cuts. While they conceded that the proposal has some logic, the new government has opted to direct fiscal resources to lowering personal income taxes instead. Both approaches would reduce Estonia’s still relatively high labor tax wedge, but the planned personal income tax cut also helps address income inequality.