Estonia has been pursuing market-oriented and disciplined economic policies under stable political conditions. A three-party coalition government took office in April 2015 headed by the free-market oriented Reform Party and also comprising the center-left Social Democrats and the center-right Union of Fatherland and Res Publica. Its program seeks to strengthen national security, increase support to families with children, lower labor taxes, reform state and local administrations, and increase support for low-income earners. Increasing labor productivity to 80 percent of the EU average and raising R&D expenditure to 3 percent of GDP are central planks of Estonia’s competitiveness strategy, “Estonia 2020.” Estonia’s economic and institutional fundamentals are strong. The macroeconomic imbalances of Estonia’s credit- driven boom-bust cycle are a thing of the past and unlikely to re-emerge amid credit aversion and strengthened macroprudential tools. The current account has been broadly in balance in recent years and unemployment is nearing its structural level. The business environment and government effectiveness earn high marks, the financial system boasts enviable soundness indicators, public finances are the strongest in the EU in terms of debt and deficits, and Estonia is a leader in e-government. In 2014, per-capita income reached 74 percent of the EU average in purchasing-power parity terms. Yet, economic growth has been sluggish in recent years and income convergence has slowed. Following a setback due to the 2008/09 crisis, income convergence has restarted, but at a slower pace. Since mid-2012 the economy has expanded at a moderate annual rate of only 2 percent, a little slower than the Central and Eastern European (CEE) average of 2½ percent over that period and leaving real GDP still slightly below its peak in 2007:Q3. Adverse external conditions are partly responsible, with Estonia being particularly affected because of large exposure to the poorly performing economies of Finland and Russia. Growth came to 2.9 percent last year and 1¼ percent in the first 9 months of 2015. Private consumption was the main driver, as real wages continued to rise at a robust 5 percent and unemployment declined by 2.2 ppts over the past 18 months, falling to 6½ percent. Exports are barely growing and investment, especially for machinery and equipment, is contracting amid weak and uncertain external conditions. Inflation is hovering around zero, but low inflation is unlikely to become entrenched because of brisk wage growth and forthcoming excise tax hikes. The output gap is likely still slightly negative. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Real GDP growth (percent) PPP per-capita GDP (percent of EU average, RHS) Per-capita GDP (percent of EU average, RHS) Estonia: Income Convergence, 2003-14 Sources: Statistics Estonia; and Eurostat. Page 10 Estonia’s external position has improved and is solid. In 2014 and 2015:H1, the current account started recording surpluses of 1.0 and 1.4 percent of annual GDP, respectively, reflecting low import growth related to weak investment and inventory drawdowns. Over the past two decades, export market shares have generally been on a rising trend, though gains seem to be flattening out more recently. The net international investment position has improved from -80 to -40 percent of GDP since 2009, reflecting capital account surpluses and the GDP rebound, and is now stronger than in most of the region. Gross external debt is still quite high, but often owed to parent companies, net external debt is negative, and net inward FDI explains the net international investment position two times over. The real effective exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 1). Public debt is close to zero in net terms, and the budget has recorded structural surpluses for several years. Gross public debt is around 10 percent of GDP and is broadly matched by general government liquid financial assets. In addition, second-pillar pension funds have set aside over 10 percent of GDP in assets. The budget has been in structural surplus since 2009. In 2014, public finances overperformed, recording a surplus of 0.8 percent of GDP compared to a budgeted deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP as tax administration improved and public investment fell short with the transition between the 2007–13 and 2014–20 Multiannual Financial Frameworks for EU funds. Indicators of financial soundness are exceptionally strong in Estonia, especially in the large Nordic-owned banks that account for the bulk of the banking system. The capital adequacy ratio averages 27 percent, the liquidity coverage ratio stands at 250 percent, and the non- performing loan ratio has declined to below 2 percent. Strong deposit growth has reduced loan-to- deposit ratios to just below 100 percent and parent bank funding to a historically low 16 percent of bank liabilities. The three banks covered by the ECB’s comprehensive assessment and EBA’s stress tests passed comfortably. Estonia is continuing to emerge from the bottom of the financial cycle. Credit growth firmly moved into positive territory in mid-2014 and loans of credit institutions to non-financial companies and households are now expanding at a rate of 3¾ percent annually. This reflects improved balance sheets of banks, non-financial companies, and households, along with the low- interest environment and recovering house prices. Following a drop by over 50 percent, they are currently growing by 10 percent and are closing in on the 2008 peak in nominal terms, but in real terms or relative to wages they remain 30 and 40 percent lower, respectively.