Thanks to strong institutions and determined market-oriented reforms, Estonia’s economic fundamentals remain solid. The business environment is one of the best in the region, there is no net public debt, and financial soundness indicators are exceptionally strong. The macroeconomy is broadly in internal and external balance, with labor force participation historically high, inflation running slightly above 1 percent, and the current account in small surplus. Some limited economic slack remains, mainly in the export and energy sectors. There is likewise some room for unemployment to decline further from its current rate of 7.5 percent and for hours worked per employee to increase. Economic growth has, however, disappointed in recent years. Since mid-2013, growth has only marginally exceeded that of the euro area and labor productivity has been flat. During 2015 and the first three quarters of 2016 income convergence went into reverse. Adverse shocks are partly responsible, such as the particularly weak external environment, an investment hiatus related to the transition between the 2007–13 and 2014–20 Multiannual Financial Frameworks (MFF) for EU-funds, and more recently challenges for the oil shale sector from sharply lower global energy prices. But considering the rather long stretch of weak growth, it likely reflects not only adverse shocks, but also soft underlying dynamics. Private consumption was and remains the main engine of growth on the back of rapidly rising wages and expanding employment. Exports have started to recover, but contracting investment has not yet turned the corner. Inflation is rising moderately, but remains contained amid muted euro area price dynamics. In November, headline inflation stood at 1.35 percent, compared to an average of 0.7 percent for the first eleven months of the year—a pickup reflecting primarily base effects, excise tax increases, and some pass-through from higher wages. But with core inflation hovering around 1.5 percent for the past 12 months and pass-through limited by the low inflation environment in Europe, price pressures remain well contained. The ECB’s monetary policy stance is broadly appropriate for Estonia. Estonia mainly benefits indirectly through higher growth in the euro area and hence better export opportunities in its most important market. Since 2013:Q2, trading partner import growth has averaged only 1.2 percent per year, compared to 3.2 percent for the euro area. The gap has been even larger since 2015:Q1 with 0.1 percent against 3.0 percent. The oil shale sector accounted for some 3 percent of GDP in 2014, through mining, electricity generation, and crude oil production. Its contraction reduced annual growth by an estimated 0.5 ppts during 2015:Q1–2016:Q2. However, during 2013:Q3–2016:Q2 the sector performed in line with the rest of the economy, neither subtracting nor adding to overall growth. Page 9 Wages are rising rapidly, partly reflecting a tightening labor market. Wage growth picked up to 7.6 percent in the first 9 months of 2016, from 5.9 percent in 2015, and 5.5 percent in 2014. With employment close to record highs, a tightening labor market is a key driver, but strong wage growth in the government sector and large minimum wage hikes are also important factors. In addition, wage growth seems to feed off expectations for a rapid narrowing of the pay gap with neighboring Finland. Strong wage growth is eroding competitiveness, but poses no immediate threat to Estonia’s external position. With productivity stagnating, unit labor costs are sharply up, eroding Estonian firms’ profit margins and diminishing their ability to compete abroad. Export market shares have started to slip and resources are shifting toward nontradable sectors, where higher labor costs are easier to pass through to prices. However, despite subdued export growth, Estonia’s current account recorded a surplus of 1.7 percent of GDP in the first three quarters of this year—moderately stronger than consistent with medium-term fundamentals. Imports have been weak in recent years because of a decline in investment, which is currently some 6 ppts of GDP below its historical average. The real effective exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 1). Public finances remain extraordinarily strong and are overperforming this year. Estonia’s fiscal policy has been firmly stability oriented and subject to a stringent fiscal rule. Gross public debt stands at only about 10 percent of GDP and is broadly matched by liquid fiscal reserves. The budget has been in structural surplus since 2009. Estonia’s Stability Program targeted a general government deficit of 0.4 percent of GDP this year, but so far fiscal outturns have been stronger than expected, mainly on account of buoyant revenues. Estonia’s banking sector is sound and adequately supports the economy. Capital adequacy above 30 percent, liquidity coverage ratios of over 200 percent, and returns-on-assets running at 2 percent are all well above regulatory minima and readings in peers. Credit and leases to households and nonfinancial companies are expanding at a rate of some 6 percent, remaining prudent while providing adequate financing for investment, although companies chose to use much of the funding to retire foreign debt instead of investing. The loan-to-deposit ratio has been brought down sharply in recent years, but recently picked up mildly again to 110 percent when one bank discontinued accepting non-resident deposits. There are no immediate risks to financial stability, but the largely Nordic-owned banking sector remains subject to potential spillovers from vulnerabilities in parent banks. Estonia’s new government has pledged to boost output growth and make it more inclusive. The coalition government headed by the pro-market Reform Party fell in November when the junior partners, the Social Democrats and the conservative Pro Patria and Res Publica Union, switched sides to form a new collation government with the Center Party. This is the first time an Estonian government has been led by a Prime Minister from the Center Party, ending a 17-year stretch of Reform Party governments. A coalition agreement sets out the new government’s policy intentions. In some areas reforms have already been spelled out in specific terms while other issues Page 10 are addressed only in broad terms, pending further elaboration. The new government will retain the broad policy thrust of its predecessor, but: try boost growth through (i) corporate income tax reform to lift investment; (ii) additional public investment of 0.5 percent of GDP in 2018, 2019, and 2020; (iii) raising labor supply by lowering the personal income tax for low-wage earners; (iv) yet to be specified plans to simplify and lower taxes and the administrative burden for small enterprises; and (iv) demand stimulus associated with somewhat looser fiscal policy. try redress income inequality, primary through a more progressive personal income tax schedule, as well as moderate increases of child allowances and yet-to-be-specified spending on social benefits. Box 1. Estonia: External Stability Assessment In 2016, the external position was assessed moderately stronger than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals. The EBA-lite methodology finds a positive current account gap of 3.8 percent of GDP, more than half of which reflects current policy settings. Because the rest of the world is running a significantly looser fiscal policy than its norm, while Estonia is running a somewhat tighter fiscal policy than its norm, the current account is unusually strong. In addition, there are a number of temporary factors that boosted Estonia’s external balance in 2016: (i) investment was some 6 ppts of GDP below its long-run level; and (ii) Estonia’s current account is benefiting from substantial inflows of EU funds, which could decrease by over 1 percent of GDP in the 2021-27 MFF. Staff expects these factors to unwind over time with the current account deficit settling at just under 3 percent of GDP. The 2017 current account surplus is projected to decline to 0.2 percent of GDP. Considerable uncertainties surround the exchange rate assessment, but there is no clear indication of a sizable over- or undervaluation. The EBA-lite methodology estimates an undervaluation of 7.5 percent based on the unusually strong current account in 2016. But at least half the factors identified above that are behind this strength should unwind and deteriorate the current account without a need for the exchange rate to adjust. Moreover, undervaluation is not confirmed by the supplementary direct assessment of the equilibrium real exchange rate using the EBA-lite REER model, which suggests a small overvaluation of around 7 percent. On balance, this points to the exchange rate currently being broadly in line with fundamentals. Nonetheless, the exchange rate could become overvalued over time should the current wage and productivity trends persist. Estonia’s net international investment position is improving and compares well with regional peers. Substantial inward direct investment is chiefly responsible for a position of -37 percent of GDP. At over 90 percent of GDP, gross external debt is high, but concerns about sudden withdrawals are largely mitigated by much of it being owed to parent companies or parent banks (Country Report No. 10/4, Box 2). Moreover, Estonia has large external debt claims, including from investment of the fiscal reserve and second-pillar pension funds abroad. Net external debt is negative, standing at about -12 percent of GDP by end- September 2016. The projections and government policies of this staff report reflect the policy intentions of the new government as of mid-December 2016 to the extent that they have been articulated. tt j j mm ili Page 11