Estonia’s long-term growth record is impressive, but the main growth engines are losing steam. Growth since 1995 averaged 4.4 percent per year—together with Lithuania the highest rate in CEE. But growth has come down sharply in recent years and, while external adversities played a role, potential growth is estimated to have fallen to 2¼ percent annually during 2011–14. Total factor productivity (TFP) growth declined to 0.8 percent annually, as relatively “easy” productivity gains from sectoral reallocation, imitation, and upgrading in the nontradable sector have been increasingly exhausted. With capital-output ratios higher and investment ratios lower, capital formation also contributed less than in the past. Considerable effort will be needed to secure strong and sustainable growth for the long haul. One challenge is to cope with demographic headwinds and make the most of a working- age population whose rate of decline will triple to almost 1 percent a year. Raising TFP growth requires structural transformation of an economy that still relies heavily on low-to-medium technology industries with limited absorptive capacity of spillovers from the frontier. More fully restoring Estonia’s traditionally high investment and ensuring its efficient use will also be important. Three scenarios illustrate possible quantitative outcomes for potential growth over the next two decades. The central scenario puts potential growth at 2.9 percent during 2015–20 and 2.7 percent over the longer horizon. It assumes that government’s pro-growth policies will lift TFP growth slightly above the 2001–14 average, enhance the labor force, and boost investment. Income convergence with Western Europe will continue, but at only about half its historical pace. pessimistic scenario with growth averaging just 2.4 percent during 2015–20 and 2.2 percent over the longer horizon, reflecting a more modest pickup in TFP growth and investment, which could arise for example if the planned measures are less effective than expected or are not implemented as comprehensively as envisioned. See Selected Issues Paper “Estonia: Income Convergence and Medium-term Growth Potential.” Page 15 A stretch scenario that would require a combination of higher TFP growth and investment and rapid convergence toward the labor force participation rates of Sweden—the highest in the EU— to secure growth of 3.7 percent over the longer horizon. Estonia’s current policy setting is conducive to growth and additional supporting programs are planned. They should go a long way toward mitigating the forces that weigh on future growth, thereby underpinning the central scenario. Among the current attractions , Estonia already has one of the most business friendly environments according to the World Bank’s Doing Business Report or the World Economic Forum’s Competitiveness Ranking and highest public investment ratios in the region. Its educational standards are also high. Government policies put an emphasis on promoting R&D and ICT. Almost all classrooms were connected to the internet as far back as 1998. Estonia is a leader in providing integrated electronic government services and is home to a number of prominent IT startups. Private companies can draw on the expertise of government-supported “competence centers” for advice in six scientific areas. A number of new initiatives are under preparation, mostly in the context of the new programming period for EU funds. Enterprise support is to be revamped to put more emphasis on innovation and entrepreneurship, increasingly backed by financial instruments rather than grants. Life-long learning is set for an upgrade under a new strategy. Already adopted legislation on “work capacity reform” seeks to put more disability pensioners to work, who currently make up 10 percent of Estonia’s working age population. Further state reforms are also on the agenda, to consolidate the large number of local governments, merge central government agencies, enhance e-government to reap efficiency gains, and reduce government employment in line with the shrinking working age population. Yet, Estonia has room to further enhance pro-growth policies. This would help bring potential growth closer to the rates in the stretch scenario. In the short run, the government should concentrate on getting the planned new initiatives off the ground and making them a success. But to support implementation, which exhibited some deficiencies in the past, and boost the effectiveness of existing and new programs, it will also be critical to now start strengthening the operational policy focus on fostering productivity growth. Boosting productivity should be articulated as the overarching economic policy objective. A strong unit in the Prime Minister’s office should be mandated with overseeing implementation through line ministries; evaluating the relative merits of programs in terms of their contribution to productivity growth; scaling back ineffective programs, boosting successful ones, and initiating promising new initiatives; and keeping track of government spending on productivity support. Page 16 Figure 1. Estonia: Central Scenario for Potential Growth, 2001–33 Potential growth per worker Labor Input Growth TFP Growth LFPR excl. disability reform 1/ LFPR incl. disability reform Labor Force Participation Rate (Percent, 15-74 years of age) Investment ratio Capital stock growth (RHS) Investment and Capital Stock Growth (Percent of GDP and percent) Excluding disability reform 1/ Including disability reform Structural Unemployment Page 17 Figure 2. Estonia: Pessimistic Scenario for Potential Growth, 2001–33 Potential growth per worker Labor Input Growth TFP Growth LFPR excl. disability reform 1/ LFPR incl. disability reform Labor Force Participation Rate (Percent, 15-74 years of age) Investment ratio Capital stock growth (RHS) Investment and Capital Stock Growth (Percent of GDP and percent) Excluding disability reform 1/ Including disability reform Structural Unemployment Page 18 Figure 3. Estonia: Stretch Scenario for Potential Growth, 2001–33 Potential growth per worker Labor Input Growth TFP Growth LFPR excl. disability reform 1/ LFPR incl. disability reform Labor Force Participation Rate (Percent, 15-74 years of age) Investment ratio Capital stock growth (RHS) Investment and Capital Stock Growth (Percent of GDP and percent) Excluding disability reform 1/ Including disability reform Structural Unemployment Page 19 A number of programs could be scaled up and expanded in scope. In the area of human resources , more resources could be devoted to life-long learning, to address deficiencies in adult skills and help raise the effective retirement age. Spending has been very small in the past and will remain below 0.3 percent of GDP even under the new strategy. Spending on active labor market programs currently stands at just 0.4 percent of GDP and planned increases will go predominantly toward implementation of the work capacity reform. The envisaged strengthening of apprenticeship programs to around 800 participants could go further. It would also be important to raise the statutory retirement age further once the ongoing increase to 65 years is fully phased in by 2026, to bring female labor force participation rates closer to those of Europe’s best performers, including by improving child care provision, and to consider increased reliance on foreign labor. In the area of innovation support , the planned new Company Development Program will cover only up to 300-400 out of the over 60,000 companies currently operating in Estonia. More generally, Estonia’s RDI polices follow very much a science-based approach, which risks leaving behind the more traditional sectors that still make up the bulk of employment and value-added creation in the economy. Supporting the upgrading of traditional industries as a second leg of innovation policies should be considered. Also, RDI programs are currently almost fully financed from EU funds. Mobilizing more own funds is imperative for long-term sustainability and would increase flexibility, for example in terms of maximum support for projects and international initiatives, such as cross-border clusters, which are well suited for a small country like Estonia. In the area of capital formation , high investment has served Estonia well. It should be maintained, including in the government sector, considering that Estonia’s capital stock per worker is still much lower than in Western Europe. In this context, the Rail Baltica project, further upgrading of the road network, and efforts to improve the intermodality in the transport sector are welcome. R&D expenditure is on par with the EU average, but it is a concern that investment in intellectual property rights, which covers R&D expenditure and also technology imports, is relatively low. The authorities agreed that securing robust convergence with Western European living standards was the main economic policy challenge. Growth potential seems to have indeed slowed materially in recent years and the high growth rates of the boom years are in any case not a valid reference point for the period ahead. But the authorities noted that adverse external conditions were likely also partly responsible for the recent spell of low growth. Moreover, potential growth calculations are complicated by uncertainties in the measurement of capital accumulation, with measured investment in Estonia curiously much higher than in neighboring countries without seemingly delivering materially better growth. With investment potentially overstated, productivity growth could have been better, implying brighter prospects for the future. Overall, the authorities estimate long-term potential growth to be in the range of 3 to 4 percent per year. EstoniaEUEstoniaEU Estonia: Spending on Innovation (Percent of GDP, average 2011-13) Source: Eurostat. R&D ExpenditureIntellectual Property Investment Page 20 Growth-supporting policies are important, with the authorities confident that the existing and planned measures broadly covered all the bases and would deliver important gains. They saw compensating for adverse demographics and moving to a more sophisticated output mix as the main challenges. The environment is generally conducive and the new initiatives will fill most of the remaining gaps, in their view, which they saw as underscoring the importance of implementation. They agreed that domestic resources would need to mitigate the eventual decline of EU funds. They are considering broadening the training mandate of the Unemployment Insurance Fund beyond those unemployed or at imminent risk of losing their jobs. Improving child care support will also need attention in order to boost female labor supply. While the authorities agreed that the upgrading of Estonia’s traditional industries was central, some counterparts were doubtful whether this was a task for the government. But they stressed that universities are important conduits of innovation and that the government should ensure the appropriate availability of financial instruments for the private sector.