The labor market is tightening. Labor market entries are declining with the population aged 20–29 years shrinking by over 2 percent a year since 2012. Wage convergence with neighboring Finland also contributes to pressures. Over the last 36 months the unemployment rate has fallen by 4 ppts and real wages increased by 4.6 percent per year on average. Increases pervade all sectors of the economy. The current pace of wage increases is unsustainable. While current real wage growth is not materially higher than the average since 2002, GDP and productivity growth are now lower. Minimum wage hikes are steep—40 percent over the past three years and 10 percent each for 2016 and 2017 already agreed. The minimum wage will reach 42 percent of the average wage by then and could increasingly weigh on formal-sector employment prospects of the low-skilled, in less developed regions, or labor-intensive industries. Minimum wages are negotiated between unions and employer associations, but government representatives attend the negotiations, the union- employer agreement is extended to the whole economy by government decree, and minimum wage issues feature prominently in political discourse, with the current coalition agreement proposing that social partners raise it to at least 45 percent of the average wage over four years. Public sector wages have also increased disproportionately in recent years and now command an unusually high premium over average wages, although their growth may moderate next year, with the central government granting wage increases only to selected groups of employees. In this context, it will be important to guard against minimum wage hikes unduly spilling over and pushing broader wage growth ahead of productivity growth. Currently Estonia’s external position is solid and the exchange rate broadly in line with fundamentals, but there is a risk for prospects in the tradable sector to become clouded and the exchange rate overvalued unless wage growth and productivity developments align better going forward. Enterprise profitability is declining, including in the manufacturing sector. Profits currently account for a smaller share of value added not only compared to the boom years, but also compared to 2002, when the economy had not yet overheated. Gains in export market shares have also started to peter out, although the downturn of trade with Russia is also partly responsible. This underscores the importance of boosting productivity growth and achieving the structural transformation and the upgrading of human capital that can sustainably support robust real wage growth. But it will also be important for wage growth to cool until the various measures to this effect come to fruition. The authorities agreed that the current wedge between wage and productivity growth was unsustainable. Wage developments of recent years were supporting household incomes, but Total Manufacturing Wholesale and retail trade; and repairs Estonia: Company Profitability, 2002-15 (Profit in percent of value added) Sources: Statistics Estonia; and IMF staff calculations. Page 23 were also eroding companies’ buffers and could soon start denting competitiveness. Nonetheless, the authorities project that wage growth will come down only very gradually going forward because labor supply shortages will persist. Wage developments may induce companies to invest in labor- saving technologies and gradually move out of labor-intensive industries. In this spirit the government’s planned state reforms seek to economize on labor and reduce public employment, which should help alleviate the squeeze on the private sector. The authorities explained that large hikes in the minimum wage were motivated by their low levels coming out of the crisis and the perceived need to bring them closer to average wages. In their view, minimum wage developments are largely outside the government’s control, with government essentially only endorsing what social partners negotiate.