Estonia has been governed by coalitions led by the center-right Reform Party since 2005, but a new coalition of center-right and center-left parties was formed on March 26, On March 4, Prime Minister Andrus Ansip announced his resignation after nine years in office, and the center-right senior partner in the previous coalition has replaced its more conservative junior coalition partner with the center-left Social Democrats. There is broad consensus within Estonia on a conservative fiscal policy stance, and the change in the ruling coalition is not expected to result in substantial changes to economic policy apart from some changes in social benefits and employment taxes. New elections are due in March 2015. Estonia: Inflation and Unemployment (Percent) Estonia’s recovery from the crisis continued in 2013 but at a slower pace. Preliminary data indicate that growth was 0.8 percent in 2013, with a deceleration during the year (Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2). Private consumption provided the main support for growth, while net exports made a negative contribution. Inflation declined gradually to about 3½ percent (period average) in 2013, but remains above the euro average. Some of the slowdown is due to one-off factors, and there are unexplained anomalies in the national accounts data (e.g., a large deflator and unusual changes in implied taxes and subsidies). These anomalies and other indicators from tax revenue and labor market data have led most official and private analysts in Estonia to believe that the actual 2013 growth rate was higher than the current official figure. Inflation rate (y/y) Unemployment rate Source: Haver. Growth of Wages and Labor Costs (Percent change) Unemployment continued to fall in 2013. The period average unemployment rate dropped 1.4 points to 8.6 percent in 2013 (based on the labor force survey) with the number of registered unemployed persons falling by a similar proportion. The unemployment rate is now roughly half of the 2010 peak. In contrast to many other advanced economies, this has taken place against a backdrop of a rising participation rate since the boom, encouraged in part by enhanced benefits for the Nominal wage growth Real ULC growth Sources: Haver; and national authorities. Annex I of the 2013 Article IV Staff Report discusses Balassa-Samuelson and other factors that might influence the inflation differential. Page 6 unemployed. The Eesti Pank estimates that the unemployment rate would be near 5 percent had the participation rate remained at 2006–07 levels. Wage growth accelerated and outstripped productivity growth as labor market conditions tightened. Nominal wage growth accelerated to 7.6 percent in 2013, resulting in an increase in real unit labor costs of 2.5 percent relative to 2012. On balance, the economy seems to be roughly at its potential level. Estimates of potential using a production function method and official national accounts data show a small output gap, while evidence from the labor market suggests that the economy may already be below the NAWRU. However, the conflicting signals between national accounts and other data create more than the usual amount of uncertainty as to where the economy is relative to the potential output level, in particular whether it is closer to potential than the measured level or even above potential. The external sector balances are broadly appropriate and the net international investment position (IIP) is strengthening (Table 3 and Figure 3). The current account deficit is small and shrinking and exports and export market shares have been growing steadily. The key factors influencing exports are moving in different directions; exports based on processing fuels imported from Russia have declined sharply, although value added is low in fuel processing. Exports excluding these goods for processing rose, although their growth rate decelerated in 2013. On the other hand, export market shares and value added in exports are increasing. But the trade balance deteriorated slightly in 2013 due to weakness in demand from some key export markets, notably Finland, and rising imports from robust private consumption demand in Estonia. Gross external debt fell sharply in 2013 and net external debt of the economy is now negative, although the IIP position remains negative due to the large stock of FDI. Indicators of competitiveness are generally good, but rising wages and producer prices are putting pressure on price competitiveness . Real effective exchange rate indices based on unit labor costs remain well below their pre-crisis peaks (particularly for manufacturing) but they have been rising in 2012–13 (Figure 4). The exchange rate is broadly appropriate and in line with macroeconomic conditions and policies. EBA estimates are not produced for Estonia, but team estimates based on CGER-like methodology show mixed results with some indicators suggesting an overvalued rate and others suggesting an undervalued rate. These results, together with the evidence on external sector flows and stocks, and competitiveness indicators, point to a generally stable and sustainable external position as well as a broadly appropriate exchange rate. Fiscal policy has remained conservative throughout the cycle (Tables 2 and 3 and Figure 4). The deficit never exceeded 3 percent of GDP during crisis, and the budget has been in near balance from 2010 onwards, with the 2013 deficit at 0.2 percent of GDP. Gross public debt was largely unchanged at just under 10 percent of GDP while net public debt is near zero. While this near-balanced budget policy has kept public debt low, it has also added a pro-cyclical bias to fiscal policy. Page 7 levels of non-performing loans. The capital adequacy ratio remains high at 20 percent of risk- weighted assets at end 2013, and non-performing loans have fallen to 1.5 percent of the portfolio. With the loan-to-deposit ratio now just close to one, the banking system appears to have reached a sustainable equilibrium (Figure 6). Estonia’s banks and their Nordic parents are well capitalized, liquid, and have low Estonia: Debt and Deficit General government net debt Fiscal deficit Credit growth has resumed, but credit demand remains subdued . Credit growth has been positive but modest for non-financial corporations since mid-2012. While the banks have the capacity to increase lending, both business surveys and balance sheet data indicate that corporations are being cautious in their investment plans, and they are generally able to finance investments from retained earnings. Source: National authorities. Residential Housing Price Index (2010=100) The housing market is recovering from a very sharp decline during the crisis, but prices and household leverage are well below their peak levels. The housing market peaked in 2007 before house prices lost roughly half of their value by 2009. Prices have risen since then, but they are roughly midway between the peak and the trough. Loan-to-value ratios on new loans have fallen from roughly 100 percent of the purchase price before the crisis to roughly 60 percent since 2010. More generally, households are repairing their balance sheets and are cautious about new borrowing, although credit growth turned positive for households in late 2013. Gross household debt is still high, even after declining sharply since the crisis, but household net financial assets are positive (Table 7). Source: BIS. Estonia generally gets very high scores on cross-country evaluations of structural reform. For example, the flexibility of the Estonian labor markets cushioned some of the impact of the crisis and euro area recession on employment through downward flexibility in nominal wages in 2009–10. However, structural unemployment remains high. An analysis of credit growth across the Baltic countries and a discussion of alternatives to bank financing can be found in the Chapter II of the Selected Issues paper for the Baltic Cluster Report. Page 8 Box 1. Estonia: External Stability Assessment Estonia’s real exchange rate has remained broadly in line with the fundamentals, although with some vulnerabilities on the horizon. Models based on medium-term equilibrium current account balance point to undervaluation, while direct assessment of the equilibrium real exchange rate suggests an overvaluation. An average of these estimates indicates a small overvaluation (about 5 percent). If the equilibrium real exchange rate estimate is discounted given the view that it might exaggerate overvaluation, the margin of overvaluation would shrink. However, the wide range of values from different approaches imply large confidence intervals that would preclude a firm conclusion on over- or under-valuation. REER Assessment (percent) Macrobalance approach External Sustainability approach Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate approach REER deviation from historical average Mid-point overvaluation range Memorandum items (% GDP) Underlying current account Equilibrium current account (MB) Equilibrium current account (ES) Mitigating factor Source: IMF staff estimation. Current assessment 2013 Art IV Price-and cost-based indicators confirm gentle decrease in competitiveness. Having declined significantly in 2010–11, the ULC has been climbing again as real wage growth has outpaced productivity increases. Consequently, both ULC- and inflation-deflated REER have been slowly appreciating, with REER-CPI increasing by 2.7 percent in 2013. After running large current account deficits during the boom, Estonia’s current account has been near balance with a deficit of 1 percent of GDP in 2013. Exports continue to perform well, although demand remains weak in some of Estonia’s main trading partners. In 2013, the trade deficit widened slightly, while the services surplus decreased slightly to 6.7 percent of GDP. Net export of services dominates trade balance, as Estonia capitalizes on its highly-skilled and competitive wages as well as well-developed telecommunication network. Estonia gained market share in each of its top export markets in 2013 (Finland, Sweden, Russia and Latvia). Net FDI and transfers from the EU cover most of the current account deficit. FDI has been declining, but remained positive with reinvested earnings accounting for most FDI inflows. EU transfers are expected to pick up again in late 2014 or early 2015 with the implementation of the new EU budget for 2014–20. Gross external liabilities are declining and net debt of the economy became negative in 2013. Net IIP liabilities were halved from the peak during the crisis years to 46 percent of GDP in 2013. Page 9