The 2015 budget is headed for another surplus. Thanks to a revenue-friendly composition of growth and further improvements in tax administration, a small surplus of 0.1 percent of GDP is likely, compared to a budgeted deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP. Corporate income tax collection received an unanticipated boost worth ½ percent of GDP from a superdividend distribution by Swedbank, but the effect on the budget balance will effectively be moved into 2016 because of an offsetting postponement of dividend payments by state-owned enterprises. Investment is lagging behind plan because of delays in unlocking EU funds, but with a strong effort in the remainder of the year it could still come close to last year’s level and reach 4.9 percent of GDP. The structural surplus should decline somewhat to 0.8 percent of GDP, exerting a timely fiscal stimulus. The 2016 draft budget envisages labor tax cuts and more generous family benefits financed by excise tax hikes, as well as higher investment. These measures are part of a multi- year plan to lighten the labor tax burden, especially for low-income earners, and provide relief to families with children, all paid for by higher excises on energy, alcohol, and tobacco. They provide a welcome reduction of the labor tax wedge. Investment would climb to 5.3 percent of GDP next year as the new Multiannual Financial Framework for EU funds comes fully on stream. The budget surplus should increase to 0.5 percent of GDP. But, due to the one-off nature of revenues related to the superdividend, the structural surplus is projected to decline to 0.5 percent of GDP—which would provide a useful moderate fiscal stimulus as insurance against the downside risks in the growth forecast. Estonia’s public finances are guided by a strict fiscal rule. The State Budget Act mandates the budget to be at least in structural balance annually. However, in practice the rule generates surpluses because of an asymmetric correction mechanism—deficits need to be compensated by subsequent surpluses while surpluses generate no “credit” that can be spent later on—and because uncertainties in budget execution and structural balance calculations prompt policy makers to build Page 21 in safety margins and target ex-ante surpluses. Indeed, Estonia’s latest Stability Programme envisages structural budget surpluses through the medium term. Estonia should consider deploying fiscal space to finance additional measures in support of productivity growth while preserving fiscal prudence. With Estonia’s public finances already exceptionally strong, promoting productivity growth should at the margin be the higher priority than strengthening the fiscal position further. In the shorter run, room under the existing fiscal rule should be utilized. This could be achieved by implementing the fiscal rule so that budgets are close to structural balance each year and on average in structural balance over a multi-year period, rather than systematically in structural surplus. For 2016, the focus should be on fully executing the budget, especially regarding investment and the planned pro-growth measures. The government should not hesitate to pre-finance these outlays from domestic sources if it takes longer than expected to access EU-funds that are envisaged to finance them, thereby running down the projected structural surplus. In the longer term, a moderate relaxation of the fiscal rule could be considered , to unlock additional resources for the promotion of productivity growth or to compensate for declining EU funds. The rule could be aligned with European rules that allow for medium-term objectives of up to a deficit of 1 percent of GDP for countries with strong public finances, such as Estonia. For both the shorter and the longer run, it will be important to ensure that fiscal resources are indeed used for the intended purpose. It is therefore crucial that the accounting and monitoring of productivity promoting programs is strengthened first, for example in the context of the establishment of the strong dedicated productivity unit in the Prime Minister’s office. The authorities stated that Estonia’s fiscal framework should not be changed anytime soon and maintained that a structural balance should remain a target for fiscal policy. They had a somewhat more conservative take on likely near-term fiscal developments, projecting a balanced budget for this year and a deficit of 0.1 percent of GDP for 2016. Regarding the fiscal rule, they underscored that strong fiscal discipline has been a feature of Estonia’s fiscal policy that long predated European fiscal rules. Fiscal reserves were instrumental in successfully steering Estonia through the crisis of 2008/09. Reopening the debate on the fiscal rule that was only introduced in 2014 was considered premature. With regard to increasing productivity-promoting spending, the authorities noted that they prioritize spending that increases productivity, highlighting that Estonia’s public investment has been one of the highest in the EU. They argued that productivity-promoting spending can be increased further, even without changing the current fiscal rule. Furthermore, EU funds are already being re-directed toward innovation in the new programming period. They argued against weakening of the fiscal rule, which they considered too risky given the high volatility of growth and fiscal revenues. However, some counterparts conceded that the surplus bias in the fiscal rule was unintended and that there may be a case to revisit the fiscal rule once EU funds decline, but this is many years away and does not warrant opening a discussion at this juncture. Page 22