The government should be prepared to respond to further evidence of deteriorating competitiveness from real wage increases . While the first of three roughly 10 percent annual increases in the minimum wage in 2013–15 probably had minimal effect on average wages, the two subsequent increases may become more binding on actual wages. Also, while wages are very largely market determined in Estonia, the minimum wage increases and public health and education wage increases may have had a demonstration effect beyond their direct impact. Until it is clear that recent signs of worsening price competitiveness are not undercutting net exports, the government should refrain from large public sector wage hikes or agree to minimum wage increases after 2015. Estonia’s high level of structural unemployment needs to be addressed. While there is considerable evidence that the Estonian economy is now at or near the level of structural unemployment, the fact that this is taking place with the unemployment rate still above 8 percent suggests scope for medium-term policies to reduce the structural rate. Estonia has a very flexible labor market, but still structural unemployment remains higher than in countries with similar labor market policies. Mismatches in workforce skills and education and the background sought by employers seem to be keeping unemployment high even in good economic times. Some active labor market policies to address skills mismatches and keep people in the labor force are already in place. The authorities are addressing education through several initiatives, including eliminating university tuition for full-time students. The work of the Unemployment Insurance Fund on training The three largest banks (local banks or subsidiaries of foreign banks) in each euro area member will come under ECB supervision. For Estonia, these are SEB, Swedbank and DNB. Page 14 and counseling to encourage effective labor force participation by youth, the disabled, and the long- term unemployed has been expanded very substantially to integrate these more difficult segments of the working age population. Specifically, active labor market expenditures per unemployed person rose sharply between 2010 and 2012 in almost every category, with training expenditures (the largest category) rising to more than eight times the 2010 per person level by 2012. More efforts are needed to change the composition of specialization in secondary and tertiary education, but this is inherently a long-term project. Taxation Rates (Percent) Labor taxes and contributions may be an obstacle to reducing unemployment, particularly for low wage workers. The tax wedge is high in Estonia even relative to the Nordics and much higher than in the “Anglo-Saxon” (i.e., majority Anglophone) OECD countries. Labor taxes as a share of business income are particularly high relative to profit taxes for Estonia and this is true in comparison to both the Nordics and Anglo-Saxons. Evidence from other countries suggests that reducing the labor tax wedge would be likely to reduce structural employment. In this context, lowering the tax wedge on lower-wage workers (where unemployment is highest) should be given serious consideration. The fiscal costs could be offset by tax reforms, in particular through elimination of regressive tax exemptions or the introduction of property taxes) that preserve the fiscal targets. Lowering the tax wedge would also contribute to containing unit labor costs and improving competitiveness. Profit tax Labor tax and contributions (%) Source: World Bank Doing Business. U x C G K B Authorities’ views The authorities noted that the active labor market policies that have been gradually introduced since 2010 have contributed to the sharp decline in unemployment since then. The Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) has developed various assistance programs to help the registered unemployed in their job search, including counseling, disability employment services, and training. They also noted efforts being made by the Ministry of Education and Research to improve life-long learning at all skill levels for those already employed in order to foster productivity growth, and increase the number of people coming out of the education system in technical fields (e.g., science and engineering), including through cooperation between universities and the private sector. Finally, the authorities indicated that they are preparing a reform of disability benefits that would strengthen the possibilities of disabled people for (part-time) work thus increasing This is discussed for Estonia and the other Baltic countries in the Baltic Cluster Staff Report prepared in conjunction with this report and in particular in Chapter IV of the Selected Issues Paper for the Baltic Cluster Staff Report. Page 15 employment and at the same time tighten the eligibility criteria for disability benefits and limit abuses (the number of people receiving disability benefits is close to one-sixth of the labor force).