Growth should reach 1.6 percent in 2015, pick up to 2.5 percent in 2016, and average 2.8 percent during 2015–20. Robust consumption growth should continue, residential construction is already picking up in response to rising house prices, and investment should benefit from strengthening credit growth and increased availability of EU funds. Russia’s export demand should bottom out after declining sharply, thereby reducing the drag on growth. Medium-term prospects are predicated on potential growth being lifted by the implementation of the government’s pro- growth policies. Inflation should rise with euro-area wide inflation, retain a small premium typical of Page 11 catching-up economies, and be boosted by between ½ and 1 ppt each year during 2016–19 on account of excise tax hikes. The current account is likely to move into moderate deficit as investment recovers and unusually low imports in 2015:H1 dissipate. Risks to the outlook are predominantly to the downside. A slower recovery in the euro area or unanticipated further declines in the Russian economy would both pose risks to Estonia’s exports. Direct effects from global financial turmoil would likely be limited considering the absence of marketable public debt, Estonia’s small financial markets, and euro area membership. But potential spillovers through the Nordic banks that account for much of Estonia’s financial sector could curtail credit supply. On the domestic front, strongly rising wages could dent competitiveness. If the government’s pro-growth policies are not fully implemented or fail to have the expected effects, medium-term growth could be lower and undermine income convergence. The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and saw risks mainly in external conditions and strong wage growth. Macroeconomic growth projections by the Ministry of Finance for budget purposes are close to those of staff, while the summer forecast of the Bank of Estonia was somewhat more optimistic. There was agreement that private consumption would remain the main engine of growth and that the external drag would diminish. The external environment remains a risk and export diversification to offset losses in Russia will take time. The authorities saw wage growth in excess of productivity as a risk to competitiveness if it were to continue for much longer. However, the authorities underscored that wage developments were largely outside the government’s control and were also influenced by the much higher pay in Finland, which is only a short commute away. They were not overly concerned about direct financial spillovers through Nordic banks, but stressed that a house price or financial shock to the Nordic economies would simultaneously hit Estonian exporters and their financial standing. Developments in the domestic housing market are also on the authorities’ radar screen. Page 12 Box 1. Estonia: External Stability Assessment The EBA-lite methodology concludes that Estonia should normally run a current account deficit rather than the surplus that is projected for this year. However, the gap between the actual current account balance and its norm can be largely explained by a number of special and transitory factors. The special factors make the gap appear larger than it really is. Temporary factors should automatically wash out over time and diminish the gap without significant exchange rate adjustment. Policies contribute little to the gap, though there is some room to relax fiscal policy. Three main factors overstate the strength of the actual current account: As a specific feature of Estonia related to the corporate income tax regime, profit remittance of foreign firms often takes the form of discrete “superdividend” payments every few years. This year, they amounted to 2 percent of GDP. Unlike regular profit remittances, they are classified as negative FDI rather than a debit in the current account. Its balance hence appears better than it really is. The current account balance in 2015 likely benefitted from a drawdown of inventories that satisfied buoyant private consumption in lieu of imports. This is not sustainable and therefore improves the current account balance only temporarily. Eventually, EU funds will decline and support the current account by less. Estonia receives about 2¼ percent of GDP in EU funds in the 2014–20 programming period per year on average, but the available amount could be significantly smaller under the next Multiannual Financial Framework. Two main factors understate the cyclically-adjusted current account norm: Important legacies of Estonia’s boom-bust cycle are not picked up by the cyclical correction in the EBA-lite exercise. Very high investment in the boom phase is offset by unusually low investment currently —the investment ratio in 2015 is some 4½ percent of GDP below its historical average. With domestic absorption and imports of machinery and equipment lower, the current account balance is better until these legacies run their course. In the case of Estonia, the EBA-lite current account norm may not accurately capture demographic effects. High dependency ratios are usually associated with low savings, but in former transition economies the old may not have much savings to draw on. And low future replacement rates under Estonia’s public pension system may induce higher savings by the currently young than elsewhere. Limited dissaving by the old and high saving by the young imply a better current account than in other countries with similar demographics. An alternative approach to reflecting demographics in the current account norm would raise it by 1.6 percent of GDP to -2.2 percent of GDP. * Exchange rate assessments based on different methodologies also conclude that the real effective exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. Models based on medium-term equilibrium current account balance point to a small undervaluation, while direct assessment of the equilibrium real exchange rate suggests an overvaluation. ————————— *Demographic parameters (dependency ratio and aging speed) contribute -2.3 percent of GDP to the EBA-lite current account norm. Models taking into account population growth and the interaction between dependency and aging calculate a much lower contribution of -0.6 percent of GDP. Summary Table CA-Actual2.2%CA-Fitted-2.9%CA-Norm-4.1%Residual5.1% CA-Gap6.3% Policy gap1.1%Cyclical Contributions-0.2% Elasticity -0.52Cyclically adjusted CA Norm-3.9% Real Exchange Rate Gap (adjusted for demgraphics)-8.5%CA Norm adjusted for demographics-2.2% Exchange Rate Assessment using EBA-lite methodology Page 13 Republic of Estonia: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Impact on Estonia Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions: Nordic cross-border banks are exposed to a number Sharp asset price adjustment and of risks that could spill over to Estonia through decompression of credit spreads as investors credit supply and trade channels. But strong lines of reassess underlying risk and respond to High defense for parent banks, reduced reliance on unanticipated changes in growth prospects, Fed parent bank funding, and strong domestic deposit policy rate path, and increases in U.S. term growth would be important mitigating factors. premia, with poor market liquidity amplifying Existing platforms for cooperation between home the effect on volatility. and host country authorities are another asset. Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies (the “new mediocre”): Estonia would be affected through trade, Euro area : Weak demand and persistently low inflation in euro area/Japan leading to low medium-term growth and accumulation of High financial imbalances. confidence, and FDI channels. Economic growth and employment would suffer. Political fragmentation erodes the globalization process and fosters inefficiency: Estonia would be affected through trade and Russia/Ukraine : the mounting conflict confidence effects from direct exposure to Russia depresses business confidence and heightens and indirect exposure through third countries. In the risk aversion, amid disturbances in global medium run, effects could be mitigated by trade financial, trade, and commodity markets. reorientation. Risks to competitiveness from a further Medium/High tightening of the labor market: The external sector, critical for Estonia’s small open Wage growth continues to significantly economy, would suffer. Lower exports, less FDI, and outstrip productivity growth for an extended slower productivity growth would damage income period. External competitiveness is adversely convergence prospects and worsen the current affected. account. Weakening of medium-term growth: Policies to foster innovation and productivity Convergence to EU average living standards would growth are not fully implemented or prove less slow with annual real GDP growth some ½ percent effective than envisaged. lower than in the baseline. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Page 14