The economy should gradually strengthen in the remainder of this year and next. Growth is projected at 1.3 percent in 2016 and 2.3 percent in 2017, with private consumption remaining robust and exports and investment befitting from the dissipation of the effects of adverse shocks. Medium-term growth could settle at around 3 percent despite adverse demographics, but this would require successfully implementing productivity-promoting policies, unlocking additional labor supply, and reining in wage growth. These projections imply reinvigorated convergence with living standards in Western Europe. Inflation is set to rise to 2.5 percent next year, reflecting a large contribution from further excise tax hikes together with a moderate pickup in underlying price dynamics. The current account should swing into moderate deficit as investment gathers steam and consumption continues to be strong. Risks to the outlook are mainly to the downside. Compared to baseline projections, economic developments in trading partners are more likely to be weaker rather than stronger, partly because of political fragmentation risks, which if realized would pull down prospects for Estonia’s highly open economy. Direct effects from potentially more volatile global financial conditions would likely be limited, because of Estonia’s low public debt, its small financial markets, and euro area membership. But spillovers through more exposed Nordic banks cannot be ruled out and would likely affect credit supply and growth. On the domestic front, there is a risk that productivity growth fails to pick up and wages continue growing rapidly, undermining competitiveness and pulling resources into the less dynamic nontradable sector. On the upside, growth and productivity could rebound more forcefully as adverse shocks run their course and firms make the most of their existing work force. Views of the Authorities The authorities broadly concurred with the outlook and the risk assessment, but put more emphasis on the role of shocks in depressing growth. The Finance Ministry’s macroeconomic projections for the 2017 budget is close to those of staff, while the Bank of Estonia’s December projections revised growth down to a somewhat more pessimistic 1 percent for 2016. The authorities shared concerns about the disconnect between wage and productivity developments, although competitiveness effects are difficult to discern so far, perhaps because firms have sufficient liquidity to satisfy wage demands, and there is no convincing evidence of exchange rate misalignment. There was agreement that recent disappointing economic performance partly reflected weak underlying dynamics, but the Bank of Estonia put more emphasis on headwinds from feeble external demand, especially from Finland, and low energy prices that hit the oil shale sector hard. Moreover, adverse shocks affected primarily capital intensive sectors, pulling down the economy’s productivity through composition effects and helping explain simultaneous labor market tightness and growth weakness. It saw little to no slack in the economy and, to the extent that it existed, it was in sectors where domestic demand could not unlock it. Accordingly, the ECB’s monetary policy stance was seen as somewhat on the loose side for Estonia. The new government expressed concern about the “economic standstill.” Addressing it is a central plank of its program. Page 12 Estonia: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks, Likelihood, and Time Horizon Impact on Estonia Recommended Policy Response Economic fallout from political fragmentation: Medium Participate in global and High (short to medium term) Rise in populism and nationalism in large economies —especially those with near-term elections—could slow down or even reverse policy coordination and collaboration; international trade liberalization; financial, and labor flows; and lead to unsustainable policies, weighing on global growth and exacerbating financial market volatility. Medium (short to medium term) Protracted uncertainty associated with negotiating post-Brexit arrangements could weigh on confidence and investment more than expected—most prominently in the UK and the rest of Europe with possible knock-on effects elsewhere. Increased barriers could also dampen the longer- run economic performance of affected countries more than expected. High (short term) Heightened risk of fragmentation/security dislocation in part of the Middle East, Africa, and Europe , leading to a sharp rise in migrant flows, with negative global spillovers. As a highly open economy, Estonia European policy responses. would be affected, primarily Diversify risk by pushing through trade channels, including ahead with export indirect ones, as well as confidence diversification. effects. But with the functioning of the European single market— Estonia’s main export destination— fundamentally unchanged, the fallout from Brexit should be limited. Trade with Russia in value- added terms has already fallen to very low levels. High (medium term) Medium / High Participate in coordinated Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies: Estonia would be affected through policy response at the Weak demand, low productivity growth, and persistently low inflation from a trade, confidence, and FDI channels. European level. Allow failure to fully address crisis legacies and undertake structural reforms, leading Economic growth and employment automatic fiscal stabilizers to to lower medium-term path of potential growth (the Euro area, Japan, and the would suffer. United States) and exacerbating legacy financial imbalances especially among banks (the Euro area). operate. If shock is of large magnitude, consider discretionary fiscal action. Medium (short to medium term) High Moderate government sector Risks to competitiveness from a further tightening of the labor market. Exports are critical for Estonia’s and minimum wage policies, Wage growth continues to significantly outstrip productivity growth for an small open economy. Increased mobilize additional labor extended period, starting to affect external competitiveness and to shift reliance on the nontradable sector resources, and boost resources from the tradable to the nontradable sector. could weaken economic dynamism productivity growth. and deteriorate the current account. Medium (medium term) Medium Strengthen pro-growth Disappointing potential growth performance. Policies to foster innovation, Convergence with living standards policies, if necessary by productivity, and labor supply are not fully implemented or prove less in Western Europe would slow. mobilizing additional fiscal effective than envisaged. Potential growth fails to pick up toward long-term Coping with demographic aging resources and letting the levels. would become more difficult. fiscal balance deteriorate. Additional pro-growth measures by the new government are reassuring. Medium (short to medium term) Medium Preserve high capitalization Risks to vulnerable Nordic parent banks. They could come under pressure Curtailed credit supply, confidence and liquidity. Strengthen from a decline in domestic housing markets or tighter global financial loss, and liquidity pressures in local cooperation with home- conditions with lower risk appetite. affiliates. Strong local financial country authorities. soundness is strong line of defense. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Page 13