Growth should pick up in 2014 and the medium-term. Staff project growth of 2.4 percent in 2014 supported by both external and domestic demand rising toward expected potential growth (estimated at 3 to 3.5 percent in the medium term, using a production function approach that accounts for demographic factors). The downward trend in inflation is expected to continue, toward 2 percent over the medium term, but could be slowed by increased wage pressure. This is above the euro-area average, but it is consistent with what would be expected for a country converging with its higher-income partners in the euro area. Risks are tilted moderately toward the downside and mostly relate to trade. Continued contraction in Finland, or lower-than-expected growth in Sweden or Latvia could slow Estonia’s growth through lower exports or FDI. Trade or other shocks from Russia and other CIS countries could also drag down exports or otherwise depress growth. Trade with Russia is dominated by energy imports, much of which is fuels that are re-exported after processing and natural gas for which Russia is the sole supplier, and food exports, some of which are already subject to import restrictions in Russia. On the upside, higher than expected growth in Nordic-Baltic countries or other trade partners could also boost Estonia’s growth. A rise in interest rates from a shock in the Nordic banking system could also adversely affect Estonia. With household debt dominated by adjustable rate mortgages, such a shock would pass through quickly into household debt service, and this could lower consumer demand. Businesses would be less affected as they are increasingly self financed for their investment needs or able to get funding from foreign parent companies. However, a financial market shock outside the Nordic region would have only a limited effect on Estonia given the strong financial position of the Nordic banks and their dominance in the Estonian banking market. The main domestic risk is labor market overheating . Signs of this are already evident as real wage growth is exceeding productivity growth, and this could undercut competitiveness and export growth. With a flexible labor market legal regime and low levels of unionization, these wage increases represent market outcomes. Page 10 Estonia: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks Side-effects from global financial conditions:  Surges in global financial market volatility (related to UMP exit), leading to economic and fiscal stress, and constraints on country policy settings  Distortions from protracted period of low interest rates: excess leverage, especially for corporates; delays in fiscal and structural reforms Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies: larger than expected deleveraging or negative surprises on potential growth Relative Likelihood High Medium High (advanced) Medium (elsewhere) Risks to competitiveness from real wage increase: rising unit labor costs could undercut exports if current trends continue. Medium Increasing geopolitical tensions surrounding Ukraine lead to disruptions in financial, trade and commodity markets Financial stress in the Nordic banking system: tensions in global funding markets or the realization of risks from weak output or a correction in housing prices in Nordic markets could induce banks to pull funding from Estonia. Medium Low Impact on Estonia Low Spillovers would be mitigated by the financial strength of the Nordic banks. Medium Estonian households could return to the excessive borrowing patterns as observed in the run up to the crisis. Medium Estonia could be affected indirectly through its trade exposure to Western Europe with knock on effects on output, employment, and ability to service debt. EM spillovers involving Russia could be significant. Medium Rising ULCs could undercut competitiveness and weaken the export growth that has led Estonia out of the recession. Medium Russia accounts for a modest share of Estonian exports (11 percent), but is the sole supplier of natural gas. Medium A negative shock to the Nordic banks might result in tightened credit conditions in Estonia. If passed through to interest rates, this could depress private consumption. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 11 Authorities’ views 18. While broadly agreeing with the outlook, the authorities were mostly concerned about rising wage rates in excess of productivity growth. They also expect that growth will rebound in 2014, and that inflation will decline in 2014 and over the medium-term. They agree that excessive wage growth threatened competitiveness and growth, but they noted the strong influence of much higher wages elsewhere in the EU, particularly Finland, and the ease and frequency with which Estonian workers can move to Finland as exogenous factors influencing Estonian wages that are beyond the control of the authorities. They agreed that potential fallout from events in Russia and Ukraine could affect trade with Russia, but they had not observed much immediate effect; the wide margins of uncertainty as to future developments in this conflict rendered any assessment of any economic impact highly speculative.