Public finances are likely to record a surplus in 2016. Considering the good performance during the first nine months of this year and the revenue-friendly growth composition with strong wage and consumption growth, a surplus of 0.8 percent of GDP is likely, corresponding to a structural surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP. An additional contributing factor is the low execution rate of investment, due to delays in unlocking EU funds from the 2014–20 MFF. Page 20 The 2017 draft budget targets a small headline deficit and a structural surplus, but better results are likely. It was largely prepared by the previous government with only limited and budget neutral changes added by the new administration. Public investment is to rise from 4.2 percent to 4.9 percent of GDP, especially at the local government level and as EU-funds from the 2014–20 MFF are coming fully on stream. Excise tax hikes finance higher family benefits, a moderate increase of the basic income tax allowance, and higher agricultural subsidies. Previously planned social security contribution rate cuts, diesel excise hikes, and increases in the VAT for accommodation services will not go ahead, which is broadly revenue neutral overall. According to the Ministry of Finance, the fiscal balance will deteriorate to a deficit of 0.6 percent of GDP, corresponding to a structural surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP. However, revenue projections are on the conservative side and higher-than-budgeted revenues in 2016 will carry over into next year. In staff’s view, a headline surplus of 0.3 percent of GDP and a structural surplus of 0.9 percent of GDP are more likely. This corresponds to a small and unproblematic fiscal stimulus, especially as much of the reduction of the structural surplus reflects higher investment, which has a high import content. The new government plans to implement more far-reaching fiscal policy changes from 2018 onward. They comprise a variety of initiatives: Tax policy. Under the corporate income tax firms will have the new option to avail themselves of a reduced rate of 14 percent (instead of 20 percent) if they regularly distribute dividends. Corporate investors will be better off, but any benefit for domestic household investors will be offset by an additional 6 ppts tax on dividend income under the personal income tax. For the personal income tax, the reform plan is to more than double the basic allowance to €500 per month, bringing it to about 45 percent of the average wage in Estonia. At the same time, the allowance will become income dependent, phasing out with rising incomes. These changes to the personal income tax are likely to cost over 1 percent of GDP. There are also plans to introduce an excise on sugared beverages, a motor vehicle registration levy, a yet-to-be- specified small tax on the financial sector, additional excises on alcohol, etc. Funds of 0.1 percent of GDP for sectoral tax cuts to improve competitiveness have also been set aside. Expenditure policy. Investment equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP will be added to previous plans each year during 2018–20, with some projects already specified. Funds of about 0.4 percent are reserved for yet to be specified measures, including improving social benefits. Additional support for local governments and local transport will cost another 0.1 percent of GDP each. Fiscal framework. Estonia’s current fiscal rule mandates public finances to be at least in structural balance every year. Unforeseen deficits need to be compensated with subsequent surpluses, while unforeseen surpluses are not allowed to be credited against subsequent deficits. The new government intends to remove this asymmetry, subject to a ceiling of 0.5 percent of GDP on structural deficits. Financing deficits by issuing bonds in financial markets is also under consideration, which Estonia has eschewed for over a decade. Page 21 These plans imply a considerable fiscal impulse of almost 1 percent of GDP in 2018 and a structural deficit of about 0.2 percent of GDP. On current projections, there is no need for such a large stimulus in 2018 because economic slack is located in sectors where it would not be reached. The stimulus associated with the reform of the personal income tax should be reduced or at least spread out over several years by gradual implementation, while preserving its welcome redistributive properties. Instead, fiscal space should be reserved for measures that strengthen the supply side of the economy without much affecting domestic demand. The following package should be considered: (i) a one percentage point cut in social security contributions; (ii) a 50 percent increase in ALMP spending; (iii) a tripling of outlays for the innovation voucher program; and (iv) a doubling of the Company Development Program. It would cost about 0.6 percent of GDP, which could be accommodated by redesigning the personal income tax reform to make it less costly. More generally, Estonia’s successful fiscal institutions should be preserved. They have served the country well, underwriting one of the strongest public finances in Europe, keeping the tax system simple, low-rate, and predictable, and securing high public investment. There is substantial fiscal space and more of it could be accessed through the welcome envisaged modification of the fiscal rule, while still preserving a high degree of fiscal prudence. But it will be important to ensure that fiscal space is put to good use, i.e. that it strengthens the economy’s supply side and that existing spending programs are efficient. Views of the Authorities The government underscored its commitment to fiscal policies in support of broadly- shared growth, but the Bank of Estonia also saw risks of counterproductive fiscal stimulus and weakening fiscal discipline. There was agreement that fiscal policy should help promote productivity growth and investment. Corporate income tax reform and better conditions for smaller firms and startups are important in this regard. Making the personal income tax more progressive while preserving the standard flat rate of 20 percent takes precedence over social security contribution cuts. The Ministry of Finance saw the associated demand stimulus as an additional boon, but the Bank of Estonia expressed concern about untimely fiscal stimulus, further fueling already high wage and consumption growth. In addition, the envisaged modification of the fiscal rule could lead to persistent fiscal deficits given the practical difficulties of estimating structural fiscal deficits in real time, thereby risking to undermine fiscal discipline.