The fiscal stance in 2014 and medium-term path remain appropriate. With a projected headline deficit of 0.4 percent of GDP and an estimated structural surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP, the fiscal stance in 2014 is largely unchanged from 2013. The budget will maintain Estonia’s strong public finances and keep Estonia well within the limits set by its commitments under EU agreements. Over the medium-term, the fiscal stance will further reduce public debt and restore the net financial asset position of the government (see DSA, Figures 7 and 8). Estonia enacted a new State Budget Law in March 2014 that implements provisions of the EU Fiscal Compact. The structural surplus target embodied in the new budget Law could help to address the previous pro-cyclical patterns on fiscal policy. Specifically, the requirement for a structural surplus can help to prevent increases in expenditure during good times that cannot be sustained over the longer-term. While adherence to the structural surplus target would not require counter-cyclical spending during downturns, it provides scope to allow automatic stabilizers to operate fully. The government’s plans to keep the structural surplus well above the medium-term objective for the Fiscal Compact. This could keep the government’s balance sheet strong and provide a margin to accommodate negative fiscal surprises or disagreements as to whether the target is met based on alternative estimates of the structural balance. Care must be taken to ensure that the margin relative to the target does not provide a channel through which to reintroduce pro- Page 12 cyclicality. Legislation was approved in late March 2014 to create an new, independent fiscal council in line with the Fiscal Compact. Authorities’ views The authorities were more cautious than staff on allowing automatic stabilizers to work fully in downturns. While they accepted the argument for countercyclical fiscal policy, they felt that this needed to be weighed against the desirability of increasing fiscal reserves in an economy with a declining and aging population that has been exposed to large shocks in the past. They also consider fiscal stimulus rather inefficient because much of it leaks out of the country due to the high import share in the economy. On the fiscal council, the authorities believe that the formation of new independent institution will further bolster Estonia’s resilience and credibility on fiscal policy.