In October 2015, Ethiopia's authorities launched the second five-year Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II), setting medium-term economic and social policy priorities (Annex IV). Ethiopia has had an impressive track record of growth and poverty reduction in recent years, with GDP growth averaging 10.1 percent in 2010/11–2014/15, about 8 percent GDP per capita growth. Poverty has declined markedly and inequality, with a Gini index of 30 percent, is low by international and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) standards. However, income per capita is still low at US$590, only slightly over one-third of the SSA average. The key GTP II goal is for Ethiopia to become a lower middle-income country by 2025, through average annual real growth of 11 percent in 2015/16– 2019/20 (Table 1). While the public sector will continue playing an important role, the GTP II places a key emphasis on private sector development and FDI, particularly in building an export-oriented manufacturing sector. As in past national plans, growth targets are underpinned by envisaged rapid structural transformation and investments in energy generation, transportation, and infrastructure to boost productivity and competitiveness. II Targets for 2019/20 Investment Savings Exports Imports Real GDP Agriculture Industry Manufacturing Annual growth rate (in percent) As a share of GDP Performance in 2014/15 and GTP Actual performance in GTP II Targets for The Ethiopian economy coped well with a difficult 2015/16 year, when the country faced two adverse exogenous shocks. Overall economic growth is estimated at 6.5 percent, placing Ethiopia once again among the world’s fast-growing economies. This strong growth performance represents, however, a slowdown relative to last year due to the impact of the “El Niño”-related drought and a drastically weaker global environment, epitomized by the near 12 percent fall in the U.S. dollar value of world merchandise trade in 2015. Figure 1. Ethiopia: Real GDP Growth and Contribution by Sector (Percent) Agriculture Industry Services Real GDP growth Drought Sources: Ethiopian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Historical GDP data published by the IMF are those issued by Ethiopia’s Central Statistical Agency. Staff notes that GDP measurement continues to be affected by source data issues as identified by STA TA that are still not resolved (see paragraph 30). The fiscal year runs from July to June. Page 10 Targeted policies, buoyant industrial and service sectors, and increased agriculture resilience, helped to maintain growth momentum (Figure 1). Official data including the Central Statistical Agency (CSA) crop production survey estimate an increase in grain production by 2.9 percent in 2015/16 (versus 7.5 percent in 2014/15), while other sources had pointed to a less favorable outcome. While the drought spared most export crops and mainly affected low-productivity regions, the social costs were large. Timely government interventions and food aid, coupled with improved agricultural practices, technology, and rural infrastructure, appear to have limited the economic impact of the drought relative to earlier drought episodes, including by helping to increase production in less-affected areas. Indirect indicators point to strong growth in industry (particularly construction and manufacturing) and services (notably trade, freight and passenger transportation, telecoms, tourism and hospitality, and financial intermediation). Figure 2. Ethiopia: Trade and Current Account Balances (Percent of GDP) The current account gap remained wide, owing to a weak external environment and imports of drought-related food, inputs, and capital goods – despite lower fuel import costs. The current account deficit is estimated (as of July 2016) at about US$7.4 billion (10.7 percent of GDP, Figure 2), broadly unchanged in U.S. dollars from last year. Export revenue stagnated as significant merchandise export volume growth (7.7 percent) was offset by sharp declines in Ethiopia’s export prices (16 percent for coffee, 33 percent for oil seeds, and 6 percent for gold). Import savings from lower fuel prices were more than offset by drought-related food, inputs and capital goods imports. Remittances posted strong growth (28 percent), as did FDI (44½ percent). The foreign reserve cushion, at 1.9 months of imports at end-June 2016 (unchanged from previous year), remains thin. Trade Balance (goods and services) Current Account Balance Sources: Ethiopian authorities and IMF staff calculations. Inflationary pressure was contained by imports and cross-regional redistribution of domestic market purchases of foodstuffs—supported by a restrictive monetary policy stance (Figure 3). From an 11.9 percent peak in September 2015, headline inflation receded to 7.5 percent by June 2016, and 6 percent in July—in line with the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) inflation objective, driven by food price moderation. Base money grew broadly in line with the NBE target of 16 percent, despite a recent increase in net credit to the government, and the growth of credit to the non-government sectors moderated since December 2015. The NBE acquired a US$1 billion external liability by end-2015, which eased foreign exchange availability, financed increasing food and other imports, and temporarily boosted reserves. Financial intermediation has continued to A FAO report in February 2016 estimated crop losses at 14 percent. The US Department of Agriculture publication “Ethiopia: Grain and Feed Annual” of March 2016 estimated overall losses in major grain crops at 20 percent. As indicated in footnote 1, later in this report, and in the Informational Annex, deficiencies in source data persist which affect the overall estimation of national accounts. Page 11 advance at a fast clip with a 25 percent annual growth of bank deposits, supported by a 19 percent increase in bank branches (in the 12 months to December 2015). Figure 3. Ethiopia: Inflation and Credit Inflation (CPI, annual percentage change) Overall Food Nonfood Credit to the Economy (12-month growth rates) Public Enterprises Central Government Private Sector Total g t c O c D b F g t t c O c D b F Sources: Ethiopian authorities and IMF staff calculations. The fiscal stance was appropriately supportive, aiming at minimizing the economic and social impact of the drought. Tax revenue collection of the federal government is expected to be broadly in line with the annual budget plan, benefiting from good execution of direct and import taxes, while falling short in domestic VAT collection. On the spending side, the supplementary budget approved in December 2015 contained appropriations for food security, agriculture, and investments—funded by Oil Stabilization Fund surpluses (reflecting a limited pass-through of lower fuel import costs into domestic prices). The general government deficit is estimated at 3 percent of GDP. The total borrowing requirement of the non-financial public sector represented about 5 percent of GDP, a significant decline relative to recent years (Figure 4). Policy implementation was consistent with outstanding Fund advice in some areas, but less so in others. Notably, the GTP II incorporates a focus on competitiveness, private sector development and FDI. The new Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) legal and regulatory framework reform and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) financing schemes will support private sector participation. The newly established Ministry of Public Enterprises’ mandate for improved governance, and tax system reforms will strengthen public sector efficiency. Fiscal and monetary policies remained consistent with macroeconomic stability. However, Fund recommendations on interest rates, exchange rate, and financial sector policies are yet to gain momentum, including: (i) allowing for flexible determination of the interest rates, (ii) improving market functioning and price setting mechanism for the exchange rate and increase exchange rate flexibility, and (iii) phasing out the requirement that private banks invest in NBE bonds a 27 percent of their credit (to finance the Development Bank, DBE). Follow up on technical assistance (TA) recommendations to improve data quality and coverage has been mixed. Page 12 The growth performance slowed down in 2015/16, as Ethiopia faced severe drought conditions... Real GDP Growth (Annual percent change) Ethiopia Low-Income Countries Sub-Saharan Africa Imports of capital goods remained high…. Capital Goods Imports US$, millions (LHS) Shares to total imports (RHS) …reflecting a large savings-investment gap. Private and Public Financial Balances (Percent of GDP) Figure 4. Ethiopia: Recent Economic Developments …which resulted in larger imports of cereal. Cereal Imports Volume, in 1000 tons (LHS) Value, shares to total imports (RHS) …maintain a wide current account deficit…. Current Account and Foreign Exchange Reserves Current Account (US Dollars, LHS) Foreign Reserves (months of imports of the following year; RHS) Est. EMBI spreads have moved along with peers. EMBI Spread (Basis points) Ethiopia Kenya Tanzania Public savings Public investment Private savings Private investment Sources: Ethiopian authorities; IMF staff estimate; World Economic Outlook; and Bloomberg. Page 13 Figure 4. Ethiopia: Recent Economic Developments (concluded) Inflation has receded to a single digit, in line with NBE inflation objective…. …partly on account of appropriate monetary policy…. Food and Non-Food Inflation, YOY Bread and Cereals Vegetables Other food Clothing Housing, Water, Electricity, Gas Other non-food Overall Inflation Contribution to Base Money Growth (Year-on-year, percent) Net foreign assets Net domestic credits Other items net (transactions) Base m oney g t c O c D b F Most of the credit is channeled to the authorities’ priority sectors (industry, foreign trade, agriculture, as well as housing and construction)……. Tax revenue collection continues to remain below the ambitious GTP’s targets. … with public enterprises receiving the largest portion of credit.. Credit to the Economy (Millions of Birr) Central Government Public Enterprises Private Sector t Non-Financial Public Sector financing requirements have slowed down compared with the last year. Non-Financial Public Sector Financing (Percent of GDP) External Debt Domestic Debt Sources: Ethiopian authorities; IMF staff estimate; World Economic Outlook; and Bloomberg. Page 14