The budgetary policy stance has been broadly appropriate, in response to the drought- related needs; however, curbing the external deficit will require tighter policies going forward. The relatively expansionary fiscal policy stance in recent months was appropriate to mitigate the transitory agricultural supply shock, associated adverse hysteresis effects, and spillovers to the rest of the economy; and to minimize social costs. However, fiscal expenditure restraint in the implementation of the 2016/17 budget, including under-execution of nonessential lines, and subsequent years should take priority as supply improves, aiming at curbing the public borrowing requirement. The de facto fiscal anchor is the budget deficit, which the authorities target at about 3 percent of GDP over the medium term. However, reducing external imbalances and shifting savings and financing resources to private sector development would be aided by a gradual reduction of the fiscal deficit from its current level by about ½ percentage point of GDP per year over the medium term, underpinned by revenue expansion. Decisive tax reforms are needed to support the ambitious GTP II targets for revenue mobilization. The recently passed income tax law simplifies procedures, updates tax brackets, and improves the tax appeals process. Also, the newly introduced invoice-based taxation of imports is an important step in modernizing customs procedures and trade facilitation. However, achieving the GTP II objective of over 17 percent tax-to-GDP ratio by 2019/20 necessitates additional tax policy reforms, including the introduction of a property tax and review of existing tax expenditures and incentives. Property taxes have low distortive effects and, if allocated to sub-national levels of government, would reduce intergovernmental transfers. Annual review of tax expenditures would allow phasing out those Page 18 that are no longer cost-effective, while reducing tax complexity and the accumulation of tax loopholes. Regarding tax administration, measures need to focus on improving taxpayer coverage and enforcement, including by updating and maintaining the taxpayer register; using risk-based compliance monitoring; and improving IT systems, data quality, and their use. Prioritizing public investment, while protecting pro-poor outlays, would enhance fiscal sustainability and efficiency. Given limited resources, public expenditure policy should focus on critical infrastructure and priority areas. Ongoing reforms of the PPPs legal framework provide an opportunity to improve public sector efficiency and private sector development, while attracting foreign resources. The envisaged new PPP framework, however, should be based on cost-benefit analysis and minimize fiscal risk. Comprehensive and upgraded fiscal reporting would support macroeconomic management and accountability. Upgrading government accounting to 2001 Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) standards is an urgent task. Policymaking as well as public understanding of policies would benefit from more comprehensive fiscal reporting covering budgetary institutions jointly with extra-budgetary accounts (such as the Oil Stabilization Fund, Privatization Fund, Industrial Development Fund, Road Fund, and use of Eurobond proceeds). Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff on the need to accelerate revenue mobilization. They stressed that the adopted tax and administration reforms were an important step in this direction. Introduction of property taxes in the immediate future is not envisaged. They also agreed on reforms to enhance the PPP legal framework, which are under preparation including the creation of a unit to monitor potential fiscal risks. On expenditure policy, the authorities view it as correctly focusing on priority areas, with 2/3 of spending continuing to have a strong pro-poor focus.