Despite sustained growth, the bottleneck of the Ethiopian economy remains its large savings-investment gap and associated external borrowing requirement. The current account deficit of the last two years, at about 7½ billion dollars and over 10 percent of GDP, is not sustainable. In the short term, macroeconomic policies should be geared towards reducing the external current account deficit and its attendant risks. To this end, the authorities’ objective of rapidly rising exports is the first best option. However, at the same time, imports and large-scale public investment projects with substantial external borrowing requirements need to be paced according to the actual export performance. Specifically, public sector imports need to be curbed in the short term aiming at reducing demand for external credit. This would allow building up the foreign reserve buffer and avoid volatility in foreign exchange availability. Reaching the authorities’ ambitious five-year GTP II growth objectives and sustained investment rates of almost 40 percent of GDP without aggravating external imbalances will require mobilizing domestic resources and raising domestic savings, particularly in the public sector—the main user of external borrowing. In the medium- and long-term horizon, mobilizing and attracting domestic and foreign private sector resources, as envisaged in the GTP II, will require challenging reforms. After strong public sector-led growth under the GTP I, the authorities’ objectives for the current phase of Ethiopia’s economic development call for manufacturing expansion accompanied by rapid improvements in competitiveness, economic diversification, and the investment and business climate. This, in turn, requires fostering market competition within an increasing number of economic areas, including financial, credit, and investment markets; and expanding the allocation of resources to the private sector, such as credit and foreign exchange. It also requires increasing the efficiency and transparency of the public sector, including the tax system, public financial management processes, and public enterprise governance and financial management. Important steps in this direction, guided by the GTP II, are already in train—but will need to be scaled up and sustained. Page 16 Box 1. Ethiopia: Investing for Development Public capital Private capital ETH Median Private to Public Capital Ratio Marginal Product of Capital by Ownership The marginal product of public capital in Ethiopia is above most peers, but the increasing relative scarcity of private capital calls for private sector development. Based on staff panel estimations of Cobb-Douglas production functions using data from IMF and WEO databases, and the Penn World Table, the marginal product of public capital (0.42) in Ethiopia is significantly larger than the median of LICs (0.18)—consistent with a relatively good Public Investment Management Index (Dabla-Norris et al., 2012). Large public investments during more than a decade, however, have made private capital comparatively scarce, raising its marginal product and supporting the GTP II new focus on eliciting private investment and FDI. Model-based estimates point to large growth effects of infrastructure investment. A version of the open-economy Debt, Investment, and Growth (DIG) model developed by Buffie et al. (2012), has been calibrated to the Ethiopian economy. The model simulates the public investment under the GTP II and ascertain the approximate size and time profile of their effects on growth, current account, private investment and debt. An alternative and more cautious investment path could result in more sustainable outcomes—less crowding out of private investment and consumption and lower current account deficit and public debt—with long- term gains in growth and consumption preserved. Decelerating public investment could help Ethiopia to cope with the short-term challenges associated to external imbalances and GTP II financing requirements. The model also highlights the importance of efficiency in public investment implementation and the risks of surges in the cost of external financing. References Private to public capital (Ethiopia) Private to public capital (Median LICs) Dabla-Norris, Era, et al., “Investing in public investment: an index of public investment efficiency.” Journal of Economic Growth. Buffie, Edward, et al., “Public Investment, Growth, and Debt Sustainability: Putting Together the Pieces.” IMF WP 12/144. Page 17 Box 1. Ethiopia: Investing for Development (concluded)