Outlook . Overall economic growth is projected to remain strong (in the upper single digits) in the coming years, but may fall short of the government’s ambitious targets. Constraints on domestic and external financing for large-scale public investment; an uncertain external environment with anemic recovery of Ethiopia’s main trading partners; and a lack of supportive policies for private sector development are among the downside risks to the outlook. Inflation is projected to remain in the single digits, but given the stickiness in non-food prices it is expected to remain in upper range of the NBE’s objective. The current account deficit as a percentage of GDP is expected to improve, conditional on the government’s efforts toward diversification of the export base and boosting productivity of export-oriented industries bearing fruit. Risks . Despite a generally positive outlook, Ethiopia is subject to risks. These include: (i) constraints on the financing of a large public sector investment program; (ii) sustained decline in commodities prices and the re-emergence of foreign exchange shortages; (iii) slower recovery in advanced economies and growth slowdown in the major emerging market countries; and (iv) weather-related shocks, particularly a drought in the Horn of Africa (Table 1). Page 10 Figure 5. Ethiopia: Recent Economic Developments Growth remains robust and significantly above the average for SSA, LICs and EAC… …driven by agriculture and services. Real GDP Growth (Annual Percent Change) Sub-Sahara Africa Emerging Market and Developing Economies Ethiopia EAC Inflation returned to single digit, but non-food prices remain stubbornly in double digit territory. Consumer Price Index (Annual percentage change) CPI - general CPI - food CPI - nonfood y D b F S v N D b F S v N y Contraction in OIN mitigated the growth in net domestic assets. Contribution to Base Money Growth (Year-on-year, percent) Net foreign asset (after valuation adjustment) Net domestic credits Other items net (transactions) Base money b F y S v N D b F y S v N D b F y S v N D b F Real GDP growth and Contribution by Sector (Percent) Agriculture Industry Services Real GDP growth Despite declining inflation, real interest rates for T-bills remain negative. Real Interest Rates for T-bills Excess reserves in the banking system declined. Required and Excess Reserves of the Banking Sector Required Reserves (LHS) Excess Reserves (LHS) Excess/Shortfall in Reserves as Percent of Deposits (RHS) Sources: IMF staff estimates and World Development Indicators. Page 11 Figure 5. Ethiopia: Recent Economic Developments (concluded) General government stance has been cautious, but the overall public sector continues to be expansionary… …with tax collection performance lagging behind the peers. Domestic Financing of the Public Sector (Percent of GDP) Domestic financing Public enterprises Tax Revenue, 2013 (Percent of GDP) Ethiopia Kenya Tanzania Mauritius Uganda Rwanda … constraining adequate accumulation of reserves. Gross Official Reserves (in months of next year imports) 3-month medium-term target …competitiveness gains from earlier exchange rate devaluation have dissipated. Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (Index, 2005=100) Real effective exchange rate Oct-08, 159.709 Aug-10, 110.399 Oct-10, 93.174 Nominal effective exchange rate The exports performance remains weak… Exports and Imports of Goods and Services (Percent of GDP) Exports Imports Current Account Deficit The premium on the parallel market declined comparing with the previous year … Exchange Rates (Birr per US$) Parallel market rate Official rate Step adjustments to the crawl July 2009: 9.0% January 2010: 4.8% September 2010: 16.7% Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 12 Source of Risks Table 1. Ethiopia: Risk Assessment Matrix Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Policy Response High High Advanced economies: Lingering recovery process, with lower-than-anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation due to a failure to fully address legacies of the financial crisis, leading to global stagnation. Emerging markets (EMs): Maturing of the cycle, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth. Medium Growth slowdown in China: Continued buildup and eventual unwinding of excess capacity, subsequently resulting in a sharp growth slowdown and large financial and fiscal losses (medium-term). Medium Sustained decline in commodity prices triggered by deceleration of global demand and leading to prolonged foreign exchange shortages. External Risks The impact of such a shock would include less demand for commodities; as a result commodity prices would decline and reduce export earnings. Restrain fiscal policy, while shielding low-income and vulnerable households. A prolonged slower growth in EMs would lead to commodity price decline with a negative impact on Ethiopian exports. It would result in severe shortfalls of financing (especially from China), and a decline in remittances and FDIs. The financing of the GTP would be jeopardized with significantly slower growth. FDI from China, which has been rising rapidly across sectors, could decrease, slowing development of newly emerging export sectors, like textile and leather manufacturing. Major infrastructure investments, particularly in power, telecom, rails and roads, may not be fully financed, delaying the implementation of the GTP and slowing down the growth. It would lead to export revenue shortfall, which in turn would negatively affect the import of goods, e.g., fertilizers, petroleum products and capital goods. The latter, required for continuing investment-led development strategy may negatively impact sustaining high and long-term economic growth. Rapid devaluation, leading to higher inflation and larger fiscal deficit. Restrain fiscal policy while shielding low-income and vulnerable households, in particular appropriate scaling down public enterprises borrowings and public investment. Prioritize and pace the large- scale investment. Undertake the structural reforms aimed at: (i) improvements in productivity of export- oriented industries, (ii) diversification of export base, (iii) reforming functioning of foreign exchange market and buildup of foreign reserves to 3 months of import cover, and (iv) removing binding constraints on business operations. Page 13 Table 1. Ethiopia: Risk Assessment Matrix (concluded) Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Policy Response Lack of sufficient financing for GTP. High Domestic Risks Slow-down of economic growth. The return of drought to the Horn of Africa. Medium Higher food prices, leading to an increase in inflation and lower growth. Appropriate pacing of public enterprises investment and better prioritization of infrastructure investment. Shielding poor households and tight monetary policy, minimizing second round effects. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of Fund staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. POLICY DISCUSSIONS Ethiopia has achieved considerable success in implementing its development strategy, but sustaining it is increasingly challenging . Recent macroeconomic stability, with robust economic growth and single digit inflation, is not fully entrenched in the presence of negative real interest rates, an overvalued exchange rate, and low reserve coverage. Growth has also fluctuated in the context of global and domestic shocks and the country remains vulnerable to terms of trade shocks. Export diversification and competitiveness lag behind those of other African countries. Achieving high growth rates set out in the GTP requires continued investments and resource mobilization . The GTP envisages a significant part of investment to be undertaken by public enterprises with average annual borrowing over the five year period of some 15 percent of GDP, of which some two-thirds is to be borrowed externally. With binding external financing constraints, critical investments need to be financed increasingly from domestic sources, implying a need to mobilize substantial domestic savings. The current level of domestic savings is insufficient to finance the high public investment . The relatively low GDP per capita means that the scope for substantial mobilization of domestic savings in the short run is limited. At the same time, the government’s policy of keeping the real interest rates negative is not conducive to saving and distorts financial intermediation. Experience in the first three years of the GTP suggests that large scale public investment financed domestically squeezes the availability of credit for the rest of the economy. Thus, an adjustment in policies to establish better balance between the public and private sectors is warranted. There is also Page 14 a risk that the investment levels envisaged under the development strategy may run up against the absorptive capacity of the economy. Box 2. Ethiopia: The Macroeconomic Implications of Scaling up Infrastructure and Energy Investments Staff discussed with the authorities the macroeconomic effects of scaling up public investment using a variant of the open-economy Debt, Investment, and Growth (DIG) model developed by Buffie et al (2012). The benchmark DIG model features domestic production of traded and non-traded goods, public investment in infrastructure, alternative financing mechanisms (external concessional, external commercial, and domestic), and fiscal rules that target debt sustainability. The customized model for Ethiopia also incorporates: (i) a state-owned energy sector that exports electricity to neighboring countries and sells to firms and households at controlled, low prices; (ii) a state-owned banking sector that fixes interest rates and lends a large fraction of deposits to the public sector. The model and the investment program were calibrated to capture the key characteristics of Ethiopia’s GTP . The calibration assumes high rates of return to infrastructure (20 percent) and energy (30 percent) as well as large efficiency gains from construction of the Renaissance Dam. Consistent with the big-push investment program envisioned by the GTP, the simulations postulate very rapid increases in energy investment and more gradual increases in other infrastructure investment. The stock of infrastructure capital doubles in the long run, while the path for energy investment and the efficiency gains from the Renaissance Dam increase total energy supply four-fold (300 percent) at the 10-year horizon. The gap between investment outlays and concessional loans was covered by a combination of fiscal adjustment and either additional borrowing from the domestic banking system or additional external commercial borrowing. The simulations reveal that, despite positive long-run growth effects, transition challenges and trade- offs accompany the different financing strategies. Reliance on domestic bank borrowing requires substantial fiscal adjustment to prevent macroeconomic instability—transfers need to decrease by more than 5 percent of GDP within two years (blue line Figure 6). The surge in public investment also crowds out private investment and triggers a sharp increase in inflation in the short run. By contrast, external commercial borrowing relaxes the national budget constraint. The extra resources allow public investment to increase without cuts in recurrent expenditure, temporary crowding-out of private investment, and a sharp increase in inflation (red lines with dots). These gains have to be balanced against the risks associated with significant increases in the ratios of non-concessional debt and total external debt to GDP. The tradeoffs in other scenarios involving gradual increases in energy prices and slower scaling up of public investment were also analyzed. Prepared by Felipe Zana from the IMF’s Research Department based on a general equilibrium model to analyze the growth effects and tradeoffs in financing the scaling up of various public investments, as discussed in the accompanying Selected Issues paper. The macroeconomic effects of the large-scale public investments, including on growth, depend on the structural conditions of the economy. The baseline calibration of key parameters, such as the rates of return on infrastructure and energy, and the efficiency of public investment are favorable and yield positive medium-to long-run macroeconomic effects. Under less favorable calibration, reflecting weaker structural conditions, the positive effects could be significantly diminished. Page 15 Figure 6. Ethiopia: The Macroeconomic Implications of Scaling up Infrastructure and Energy GDP (% deviation from steady state) Public Sector Share of Bank Credit (%) Investments Private Investment (% deviation from steady state) Total External Public Debt (% of GDP) Transfer Change (% of GDP) Inflation (%) External Commercial Borrowing Bank Borrowing Staff’s baseline projections assume the continuation of current policies (Table 2) .These include constraints on private banking operations, directed lending with artificially low real interest rates, and allocation of foreign exchange to government’s priority sectors. Without policy adjustment, sustained high growth sought by the authorities over the long-term may not be achievable. Scaled-up public investment financed by domestic borrowing risks generating inflationary and further crowding out the private sector. In absence of policy correction, the staff estimates growth tapering in the medium-term to the 7.5–8.5 percent range, below that targeted by the authorities. Policy discussions focused on sustaining high economic growth while preserving macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability . Key recommendations include (i) rationalizing and prioritizing public sector investment, especially for state-owned enterprises; (ii) real and external sector reforms to support structural transformation; (iii) strengthening financial sector policies to promote inclusiveness and market development, bringing real interest rates to positive levels, and ensuring more flexible exchange rates and higher exchange reserves; and (iv) improving the business environment and expanding the private sector’s role in the economy. The implementation of these recommendations would facilitate financial development that should enable less distortionary financing of the GTP that is consistent with debt sustainability. Page 16 Staff’s alternative scenario, which assumes implementation of the corrective policies mentioned above, yields stronger growth, while safeguarding macroeconomic stability and reducing vulnerabilities (Table 6) . Under this scenario, the growth rate is projected to rise to 10.5 percent by 2018/19, inflation is targeted to decline to 6 percent by 2015/16, and current account deficit is estimated to narrow to 2.2 percent of GDP. Positive real interest rates will help to mobilize deposits, more flexible and better adjusted exchange rate will improve the competitiveness of exports, and private sector’s access to credit from the banking system will increase.