Growth is expected to rebound to 7.5 percent in 2016/17, as the weather-dependent agriculture normalizes, and remain at this level over the medium term, supported by strong GTP II growth-oriented reforms. Inflation is projected to hover around 8 percent through the medium term, buttressed by more stable commodity prices and an appropriate monetary policy stance. Exports of goods and services should pick up substantially in the medium term from the current low base, reflecting the coming online of key infrastructure projects close to completion (in electricity generation and export logistics) and pay-offs from domestic investment and greenfield FDI. Import growth will remain moderate in 2016/17 as emergency food imports are phased out, but is likely to be strong thereafter, as waning public import-intensive investment is replaced by private sector imports. Thus, the current account deficit is projected to remain high and decline only gradually in the medium term. Against a generally positive outlook, the high current account deficit and a potential export underperformance (should adverse global conditions prove protracted) are the key downside risks (Box 1). Additional external demand weakness and upturns in global risk aversion could hinder the current account improvement and financing, and hence output and debt sustainability. However, the risk of disorderly external stress episodes is mitigated by the high proportion of official bilateral and multilateral external debt (much of it concessional), a closed financial account, and the use of the borrowed funds for export-enhancing investment projects with expected high returns—increasing repayment capacity. On this basis, and assuming no further borrowing beyond existing plans, the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) currently assesses the risk of debt distress at moderate, but the extended large breach of the debt to export ratio is of increasing concern. Over the medium-term, financing constraints on private sector development, weak export growth, slow implementation of revenue mobilization reforms, potential deterioration of bank assets quality in the wake of rapid credit growth and higher pace in acquisition of external liabilities are the main risks. Ethiopia remains vulnerable to climate change and droughts. Authorities’ views The authorities estimated growth in 2015/16 and medium-term output and export growth potential higher than staff. The authorities emphasized rising export volumes, completion of key infrastructure projects, notably in energy generation and transportation, and measures to elicit export-oriented FDI, including commitments by international businesses to locate in the new industrial zones. In their view, these factors argued for two-digit medium-term growth potential, supported by export revenue growth of 32 percent in 2016/17 and about 17 percent subsequently, and continued strong remittances and FDI. Nonetheless, while seeing less downside risks than staff, the authorities concurred on the need to reduce the external deficit; take measures to ensure debt sustainability, consistent with the DSA moderate rating; and, should external revenue disappoint, adopt import-dampening policies. Page 15