Monetary policy stance has been consistent with keeping inflation in single digits . Base money growth in 2013/14 was in line with the NBE’s inflation objective, helped by limited recourse to the NBE for financing the budget. Staff stressed that, with inflation hovering toward the upper end of the authorities’ target and the persistently high non-food inflation exacerbating the vulnerability to food price shocks as well as the potential expansionary effect of private banks’ redemption of CDs issued to them by NBE last year to offset the reduction in reserve requirements, monetary policy stance would need to be cautious and consistent with further consolidating the gains on inflation and supporting high economic growth. The authorities indicated that monetary policy will remain anchored on base money and in line with nominal GDP growth at 18 percent in Staff argued that conditions were ripe for developing market-based instruments of indirect monetary control . A key requirement for the effective use of such instruments of liquidity control would be nominal interest rate flexibility. Since the prevailing interest rates on treasury bills are unlikely to be attractive, there is a need to gradually raise interest rates to activate the treasury bills market. This should reduce the reliance on direct measures for liquidity management, improve the monetary transmission mechanism, and establish a benchmark yield-curve, allowing for the pricing of other financial instruments. It will also help to create pre-conditions for the use of treasury bills as collateral for interbank transactions and improve functioning of liquidity facilities at the NBE that are important for better liquidity management at commercial banks. The NBE bill purchase requirement continues to severely constrain private commercial bank operations . The measure, introduced in 2011, requires commercial banks to purchase NBE bills equivalent to 27 percent of the new loan disbursements. It was intended to fund the Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) to provide project financing in priority areas at preferential interest rates, but it has only been partially effective in this regard given that a significant proportion of such funding has been invested by DBE in treasury bills. In the presence of the reserve requirement, the liquidity requirement, and an additional requirement for banks to hold 40 percent of their loans in short-term credits, this measure remains a major distortion in financial intermediation and should be phased out. Owing to long lead time for project appraisal and approval at DBE and prudential limits on single borrowers. Page 20 Consistency between monetary and exchange rate policies is important to ensure orderly conditions in credit and foreign exchange markets . This requires regular presence of the NBE to achieve its exchange rate objective, but the NBE’s limited liquidity instruments and reserve cushion make this difficult. Insufficient adjustment in the pricing of credit and foreign exchange means that excess credit or foreign exchange demand is not adequately addressed. Staff stressed that better market functioning and price setting mechanisms for the exchange rate, along with greater interest rate and exchange rate flexibility are needed, not only to clear the foreign exchange market, but also to promote the competitiveness of the traded goods sector. The NBE’s objective to increase its foreign exchange reserve by US$300 million to US$3.0 billion (about 1.9 months of imports) by the end of 2014/15 and further to the equivalent of 3 months of imports over the medium run is a step in right direction that could be facilitated by improvement in the functioning of the foreign exchange market. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the staff on the importance of a cautious monetary stance and the need to develop monetary policy instruments and the money market . They stressed their commitment to the base money target, consistent with broader macroeconomic objectives and other monetary targets. They indicated that the flexible pricing of government securities would be dependent on sustaining low inflation, and mentioned their plans to establish a designated unit within the NBE to coordinate efforts on establishing an active secondary market for government securities. They disagreed with the staff that the 27 percent of NBE bills purchase requirement was a distortion and explained that it was intended to mobilize excess liquidity in private banks to finance industrial projects. They considered the measure successful and only constrained by prudential limits, and reiterated that it will remain in place in the foreseeable future. The authorities also explained that DBE is working toward reducing time needed for project assessment and approval, which was another reason for its purchases of T-bills as part of its liquidity management.