A more flexible monetary policy framework would facilitate policy implementation. The NBE uses reserve money, foreign exchange sales, and other direct monetary policy instruments with a view to keeping inflation near 8 percent. The NBE is considering revamping the primary market and introducing a secondary market for government securities—and eventually, possibly for other instruments—to develop interbank market operations. These initiatives and an increased role of indirect monetary policy instruments could substantially benefit policy implementation and liquidity management. They could encourage commercial banks to manage more actively their liquidity positions (through market transactions, rather than via direct access to the NBE’s liquidity facilities), and enhance price discovery mechanisms and risk allocation. The authorities are making commendable progress in mobilizing domestic savings through rapid expansion of financial access and inclusion (Table 2). Deposit mobilization and bank branch expansion are deepening financial intermediation and funding growth-promoting credit. The authorities’ private sector development objectives would be aided by rebalancing the public sector credit demand towards the private sector to avoid its crowding out. Also, development of market-based Page 19 incentives for mobilization and allocation of savings will require positive real interest rates—facilitated by the NBE’s progress in achieving lower inflation. Efficiency and growth gains will eventually exceed the increased public sector borrowing costs. In the short term, however, higher interest rates will need to be accompanied by fiscal and public sector measures to accommodate the associated higher financing costs. The current means of financing the Development Bank (DBE)—now through banks mandatory purchases of NBE bonds—should be replaced by less distortive mechanisms, including through the budget. Table 2. Ethiopia: Financial Inclusion and Deepening Commercial bank branches Deposits at commercial banks Credit from commercial banks to non-government Share of firms using banks to finance working capital Share of firms using banks to finance investment Share of population with an account at a financial institution (age 15+) Sources: World Bank; Ethiopian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Data for 2015 or the latest available. Averages for low income countries. Ethiopia LICs (annual growth rates) (as percent of total) A sound financial sector is critical for the mobilization and efficient allocation of savings. Aggregate capital and profitability ratios of commercial banks do not indicate emerging vulnerabilities; and the system-wide NPL ratio remains low, below the statutory benchmark of 5 percent—although the lack of underlying detailed bank data preclude the assessment of individual bank vulnerabilities. There have occurred sporadic liquidity shortages, and the aggregate liquidity ratio is now close to the statutory minimum of 15 percent. While the rapid pace of financial deepening is welcome, strengthening the supervisory and regulatory environment is necessary to ensure that lending standards do not deteriorate. Risks related to credit exposures and their concentration should be assessed through regular stress-testing of commercial banks’ balance sheets. Although not a deposit-taking institution, the ongoing supervisory attention to high NPL ratios in the DBE is warranted—since it could affect confidence or become a fiscal liability. Strengthening the AML/CFT framework, in line with the Financial Action Task Force standard, will also contribute to the soundness of the financial sector. Page 20 Authorities’ views The authorities concurred in many areas, explaining that they plan to start secondary market operations in the near future. Selected NBE and government bonds are to become tradeable during FY2016–17 in a secondary market—which will facilitate liquidity management—while real interest rates are likely to increase moderately. The authorities are considering alternative modalities for financing the DBE while strengthening its private sector financing role. While the NBE is carefully monitoring DBE’s NPL ratios, the authorities pointed out that NBE’s regulation requires the DBE to maintain provisions of 100 percent for NPLs. Figure 5. Ethiopia: Doing Business Indicators Ranking (Out of 189 countries)