Despite recent improvements in financial markets and economic prospects, the obstacles to strong, sustained growth remain substantial. Insufficient aggregate demand is weighing on real activity and pulling down inflation across the euro area, as corporates, households and banks all attempt to repair their balance sheets. Despite the reduced drag from fiscal policy, contracting credit and high borrowing costs are constraining investment in countries with large output gaps, large debt burdens, and high Impaired balance sheets continue to inhibit monetary transmission and the flow of credit, particularly to SMEs. Weakness in banks’ balance sheets and uncertainty about their quality are contributing to fragmentation, constraining the ability and willingness of banks to support credit and investment. Corporate and household debt overhangs in some countries are further reinforcing fragmentation along national borders. Remaining structural gaps in capital, labor, and product markets present hurdles to financing investment, deploying resources from non-tradable to tradable sectors, adjusting relative prices, raising productivity, and creating jobs. Against this backdrop, the outlook is for a modest recovery and subdued inflation (Table 1). Growth is projected at a little over 1 percent this year and 1½ percent next year. This is predicated on a further pick-up in domestic demand, owing to limited fiscal drag, better lending conditions, and resilient external demand. In the medium run, the euro area economy is expected to expand at a moderate pace (1½ percent), reflecting the many constraints to growth bequeathed by the crisis. Thus, the output gap is not expected to close until 2019. Inflation is expected to remain below the ECB’s primary price objective for a protracted period. Persistent output gaps, weak credit conditions, and an impaired monetary transmission mechanism—especially in stressed economies—will combine to contain prices. Annual inflation in the euro area is forecast at 0.7 percent this year, before picking up to 1.2 percent in 2015. The current account surplus of about 2¼ percent of GDP is forecast to persist, with the pick-up in domestic economic activity balanced by sustained external demand from major trading partners (e.g., the US and China). Risks are still tilted to the downside (Table 2). With limited policy space in the near term, further negative shocks—either domestic or external —could sour financial market sentiment, halt the recovery, and push the economy into lower inflation and even deflation (see Risk Assessment Matrix). Bond market stresses could re-emerge if the AQR or stress tests uncovered unexpectedly large capital shortfalls in the absence of a common fiscal backstop. External risks could stem from a Page 9 slowdown in emerging market growth, escalation of geopolitical conflict, and an abrupt exit from unconventional monetary policies in the United States (see Spillover Report). Over the medium term, there is a high risk of stagnation, which could stem from persistently depressed domestic demand due to deleveraging, insufficient policy action, and stalled structural reforms. More positively, improved confidence could raise growth above forecast levels. For example, greater political and policy certainty could boost investment sentiment and create a virtuous cycle. A protracted stagnation could have significant spillovers on neighboring European countries through trade and financial channels . Staff analysis suggests a 1 percentage point slowdown in the euro area could reduce growth in emerging European countries by an estimated ½-¾ percentage points. Low inflation is already affecting countries in the region, especially those that peg their currencies to the euro, with core inflation in some of these countries in negative territory. In this context, further unconventional monetary easing in the euro area would generate positive spillovers for trade partners by supporting domestic growth and inflation, outweighing potentially adverse effects on balance sheets (due to possible currency depreciation).