RECOVERY To strengthen the recovery, policy efforts should focus on three priority areas: (1) support demand (to reduce spare capacity and combat low inflation/deflation risks); (2) repair balance sheets and completing the banking union (to tackle fragmentation, revive credit supply, and ensure financial stability); and (3) advance structural reforms (to boost investment, employment, productivity, and foster rebalancing). Such policies would help mitigate risks to the recovery and reduce spillovers from low growth and low inflation to the rest of the world (see Spillover Report). Providing more demand support to tackle low inflation and strengthen the recovery Further monetary policy easing would counteract the dangers posed by an extended period of low inflation. Several considerations point in the same direction: Damage from “lowflation”: By keeping real interest rates and real debt burdens elevated, very low inflation stifles demand. Given significant downward nominal rigidities in debtor economies and low inflation in creditor economies, it also makes difficult the adjustment in relative prices and real wages that must occur for sustainable growth to take hold. Deflation risk: Negative external shocks and/or further euro appreciation could easily push inflation into negative territory. Undershooting target : A persistent failure to meet the inflation target could undermine central bank credibility and de-anchor inflation expectations. Staff analysis suggests that even a small Page 10 and temporary decline in inflation expectations could have sizeable output effects (see Spillover Report). Expectations: Past deflationary episodes illustrate that long-term expectations tend to adjust too little and too late to provide a useful signal for monetary policy (Figure 6). In this context, the recent downward movement in short- and medium-rum inflation expectations could be worrisome. Shrinking balance sheet : The contraction of its balance sheet (in the context of LTRO repayments) has made it increasingly difficult for the ECB to credibly communicate that monetary conditions will be kept sufficiently accommodative, particularly when conventional policy space is almost exhausted. This put s upward pressure on the euro, pulling inflation down further. Most recently, the ECB announced a wide range of actions Fully in line with past staff recommendations, these measures will help tackle low inflation and address fragmentation. Collectively, they should lead to a substantial expansion of liquidity. reductions in policy interest rates (by 10 basis points for each the MRO and deposit rates, taking the latter to negative territory, and by 35 basis points for the MLF) will provide a credible signal of the ECB’s accommodative stance, and will limit the level and volatility of money market rates. The broad application of the negative deposit rate will ensure that banks do not arbitrage their deposit holdings across other facilities. targeted credit easing (TLTROs ) will support term funding and ensure credit provision. The substantial tenor and successive operations of the TLTROs are likely to attract a wide range of banks, thereby helping to address both fragmentation and low inflation. While the initial TLTRO allocation may offset some of the repayment of the previous 3-year LTRO coming due, the new TLTRO offers significant incentives for banks to use the facility. Nevertheless, the ECB has only indirect control over the expansion of its balance sheet, as take up depends on banks’ demand. extension of fixed rate full allotment will strengthen the ECB’s forward guidance and ensure the continued availability of liquidity. See the staff report for the 2013 Article IV consultation with member countries. Page 11 suspension of sterilization of the SMP holdings is warranted given low inflation and new measures to boost liquidity.It will help ease money market pressures by freeing up around €165 billion (current SMP holdings). extension of existing collateral eligibility will enhance access to liquidity facilities for stressed banks. The preparatory work related to outright purchases of ABS is being intensified. If and when implemented, direct ABS purchases would circumvent the banking system, helping to address fragmentation and providing the ECB direct control over the expansion of its balance sheet. However, the ABS market is small, limiting its effectiveness to address low inflation. Page 12 Also reassuring is that if inflation remains too low, the ECB has expressed willingness to do more. In staff’s view, this should involve a substantial balance sheet expansion, including through asset purchases. The deepest potential market for asset purchases—and therefore likely the most effective in significantly expanding the ECB’s balance sheet—is the sovereign bond market Buying sovereign assets, in proportion to ECB capital key, would reduce government bond yields, induce higher equity and corporate bond values, and ultimately raise demand and inflation expectations across the euro area. Such purchases can work even in a bank-centric system. Higher asset prices caused by ECB purchases would strengthen bank balance sheets and hence their capacity to lend, while stronger corporate balance sheets (from higher equity and bond values) would increase banks’ willingness to lend to them. Private asset purchases may be preferable on many counts, but the volume of eligible securities appears small and yields on assets like covered bonds have already compressed sharply. Buying private assets would also entail very uneven help across the area and favor the banks that hold more marketable assets. Nonetheless, the ECB could allocate a portion of its interventions to these markets. A mix of purchases from highly rated private bond markets (including NFCs and securitized assets) would complement interventions in sovereign markets, directly transmitting lower interest rates to the real economy through the credit channel. large-scale, non-targeted LTRO on a long-term, fixed-rate basis could also deliver a sizeable expansion of the ECB balance sheet and send a credible signal of the ECB’s accommodative stance. Its impact would be especially powerful if the establishment of the SSM facilitates the cross-border flow of liquidity within and between banks. By signaling the ECB’s commitment to its price stability objective, the above measures would likely have an important impact through expectations. They may also counter appreciation pressure on the euro, pushing up flagging inflation. The broadly neutral (area-wide) fiscal stance this year strikes a balance at the current juncture (Table 3 and Figure 7). On the one hand, persistently high debt ratios continue to cast a shadow over the medium term, and risks to fiscal forecasts remain significant. On the other hand, the still-large output gap would argue for fiscal support. Against this background, the fiscal response has to remain flexible. Large negative growth surprises should not trigger additional consolidation efforts. Moreover, if deflation risks materialize and monetary policy options are depleted, the escape clauses in the fiscal framework may need to be used to respond in these circumstances. While significant progress has been made to strengthen the fiscal governance framework in recent years, critical gaps remain . Successive reforms of the SGP have had many positive elements, including stronger economic underpinnings for the rules; a tighter link between fiscal targets and the debt objective; better enforcement; and greater flexibility and specificity. Nonetheless, these reforms have made the system increasingly complicated, creating risks of overlap and inconsistency between rules, as well as difficulties of public communication (Box 2). Staff advised examining the complexity of the framework over the medium term, and looking into the possibility of reducing the number of rules (e.g., by consolidating the preventive and corrective arms of the SGP and possibly focusing on some measure of the structural balance as the single Page 13 operational target). Another area is to enhance the credibility of the rules and foster compliance (e.g., by introducing administrative sanctions, accelerating procedures in predefined cases, and continuing to strengthen national fiscal frameworks). Box 2. The Stability and Growth Pact—Design and Implementation Issues The implementation of the fiscal governance framework has revealed gaps in the design of rules and enforcement mechanisms: The rules of the system have become exceedingly complex. Successive legislative changes have added new constraints and procedures, creating possible inconsistencies and redundancies. Individual rules have also become more sophisticated, in particular those specified in cyclically-adjusted terms. The structural budget balance is undermined by large measurement errors . The structural balance indicator is now at the center of the fiscal surveillance system both in the preventive and the corrective arms. However, its calculation relies on output gap estimates, which are generally underestimated in real time, making the structural balance prone to significant downward revisions (on the order of 0.5 percent of potential GDP per year). The SGP may reduce incentives to foster long-term growth . Two issues feature prominently in current discussions. The first is that the SGP may limit the space to finance structural reforms that entail sizeable short- term budgetary costs. Although the 2005 reform explicitly recognized that these costs should be accommodated, the present framework has so far only been applied to some types of pension reforms. Going beyond pension reforms is proving contentious. A second question is whether the MTO and, to a lesser extent, the 3 percent deficit cap, discourages public investment by limiting the capacity to borrow to fund projects that increase long-term growth potential. Enforcement mechanisms may need to be strengthened further Sanctions and corrective actions are mild compared to existing federations. In addition, the unique EU governance structure undermines the incentives for strict implementation (the Council has the final word on monitoring decisions, while the EC only makes recommendations), although recent changes to voting procedures may have partially mitigated this problem. Finally, supranational controls are not sufficient to ensure fiscal discipline at the national level, as credible enforcement has also to take place at the level where fiscal sovereignty is exerted. Prepared by Luc Eyraud (FAD) and Tao Wu (EUR). Page 14 Mending balance sheets and completing the banking union to reduce fragmentation and revive credit The ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment of bank balance sheets is well underway, with results expected to be announced in October 2014. Importantly, the asset quality review (AQR) establishes consistent definitions of capital and NPLs across national jurisdictions, and incorporates independent third party involvement in valuing bank assets, thereby ensuring cross-comparability of asset quality and providing transparency to the market. In general, the exercise is proceeding well (Figure 8). Capital hurdle rates are appropriately set higher than the regulatory minimum under Basel III: an 8 percent Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio is required under the baseline and 5.5 percent under the stress scenario. However, the treatment of sovereign risk might be perceived as too lenient by markets. Staff recommended development of an effective and clear communications strategy for the test results—particularly in light of some national discretion over the treatment of sovereign holdings, the lack of an adverse scenario incorporating a complete assessment of deflation risks, and the heterogeneity in stress test parameters across national and EU-wide variants. Staff welcomed independent third-party involvement in the AQR, but urged that efforts be made to ensure uniformity in the level of such involvement across countries. Banks falling below the required capital ratios will be expected to remedy the shortfall speedily. Banks falling below the AQR requirement will have 6 months to fill the gap, while banks falling below the stress test requirement in the adverse scenario will have 9 months. Moreover, banks will be asked to present a formal plan describing their recapitalization strategy to Sovereign holdings in the trading book and available-for-sale (AfS) portfolios are to be marked to market. National supervisors may allow the use of prudential filters for unrealized losses in sovereign AfS holdings, while hold-to- maturity (HtM) holdings will only be subject to changes in risk weights arising from banks’ internal models (and remain zero-rated under the standardized approach). Page 15 supervisors—for their approval—within two weeks of the results being announced. Staff welcomed the simplicity and clarity of this approach, but raised two issues: Timetable : Staff supported the ambitious recapitalization timetable. As noted earlier, many banks have been raising capital well in advance of the publication of the AQR and stress test results. This reduces the chances that they will need to raise capital after the exercise. However, if capital needs are high and the market environment unfavorable, it is reassuring that the framework has some flexibility to respond to such circumstances. But the authorities should continue to encourage banks potentially in need of capital to act pro-actively, taking advantage of current favorable market conditions. Bail-ins : If a bank proves unable to raise its minimum capital ratio to the desired level, the conversion of subordinated debt to capital must be applied before recourse to public support under EU state aid rules. Staff urged careful consideration of financial stability concerns when applying any capital conversion or bail-in provisions: if necessary, the systemic risk exception or proportionality principle should be invoked to mitigate risks. The credibility of the exercise would be markedly enhanced by a common fiscal backstop, which would help sever sovereign-bank links. In particular, direct recapitalization of banks from the ESM should be an option in case private capital is insufficient. There has been recent political progress in making operational ESM direct recap. But the timetable remains uncertain and the proposed threshold to access the mechanism is very high: direct recap must be preceded by bail-ins of at least 8 percent of eligible bank liabilities (in line with the BRRD); and the country’s fiscal position must rule out the possibility of indirect recapitalization (via the sovereign) from the ESM. There has been substantial progress toward a banking union along three dimensions: bank regulation, supervision, and resolution. However, the design will not fully sever bank-sovereign links in the foreseeable future, possibly delaying financial reintegration. Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM): The SSM is on-track to become fully operational in November 2014. The transition to a single supervisor should increase the fungibility of liquidity within cross-border banking groups in the euro area, thereby reducing financial fragmentation. Joint supervisory teams are being created to oversee individual banks, with staff drawn mainly from national central banks and regulatory authorities, but also the ECB. Staff stressed the need to guard against implementation risks, including the treatment of home- host supervisory coordination and—for banks with relevant activities outside the euro area—the Page 16 importance of reciprocal macro-prudential policies through supervisory colleges, as discussed in the 2013 FSAP. Single Resolution Mechanism and Fund (SRM/SRF): Compared with earlier plans, the final agreement specifies a more streamlined decision-making process with faster mutualization. However, the SRM decision-making procedure remains cumbersome, the SRF transition period too long (8 years), and its financial capacity limited given the concentration and size of large financial institutions. This raises questions about the ability of the framework to deliver least- cost, effective, and timely resolution in a systemic banking crisis. The possibility of a credit line with the ESM will help, but such concerns could be more directly mitigated by making direct bank recapitalization via the ESM less stringent. Backstop: There remains a need for a common fiscal backstop that could be deployed quickly in the event of a systemic crisis, when industry-based funds and purely national deposit insurance schemes may be insufficient. By supporting confidence in the banking sector, the availability of such a backstop could reduce the likelihood it would be used. Moreover, potential support measures for systemically relevant non-bank activities, such as insurance and central counterparties may need to be considered. Macro-prudential authority will be shared between the SSM and national competent authorities (NCAs). While the SSM will take over primary supervision of the largest banks from the NCAs, the ECB and the national central banks in the SSM area, via the Financial Stability Committee (FSC), will assess any system-wide vulnerabilities and the scope for macro-prudential policies. Staff urged the ECB to continue joint discussions with national authorities and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) on macro-prudential coordination under the new dispensation (as highlighted in last year’s FSAP recommendations), especially with respect to EU banking activities outside the euro area and policy measures related to non-banking sectors. Staff also encouraged effective cooperation with national authorities on anti-money laundering (AML) frameworks. Working out the corporate debt overhang will play an important role in repairing bank balance sheets and supporting investment. Although many countries have taken steps to reform their insolvency regimes, continued progress is needed on harmonizing and strengthening national insolvency frameworks, encompassing terminology, definitions and processes. Measures should also be taken to: (1) facilitate out-of-court settlements; (2) reduce impediments to more efficient debt restructuring (e.g. incentives for creditor coordination in debt restructuring, and schemes to provide priority financing for restructured entities); (3) standardize debt restructuring contracts for SMEs; (4) strengthen liquidation procedures to enable rapid exit of non-viable firms; and (5) introduce guidance on tax incentives and debt resolution procedures in line with international best practice. Page 17 Advancing structural reforms to boost growth and address imbalances Structural reforms can play an important role in reviving investment, employment, and productivity, as well as resolving intra-euro area imbalances. To this end, national reforms to improve labor market functioning and increase competition in product and service sectors need to progress further (Table 4 summarizes staff’s country-specific recommendations and priorities). These would be helped by reform efforts at the euro area level to implement the Services Directive, negotiate free trade agreements, and further integrate energy markets to mitigate possible disruptions in global commodity markets due to geopolitical events. Specifically, an energy strategy aimed at increasing interconnections of national networks could help ensure security of gas and electricity supply by pooling and allocating energy reserves across countries more efficiently. In addition, some reforms, such as capital market development, youth unemployment, and rebalancing have both national and area-wide dimensions. Improving SMEs’ access to finance is crucial to investment and growth. SMEs account for around 80 percent of employment and 70 percent of value added in Italy, Spain, and Portugal. SMEs applying for loans are experiencing difficulties in obtaining credit from banks, particularly in Spain and Italy, where about a fifth of SMEs were credit rationed during the last 6 months, either because their applications were rejected or offers were prohibitively expensive. Developing diversified funding markets would help ensure lending to viable smaller firms and enhance financial system resilience (Box 3). In particular, SME securitization could draw upon a large existing pool of assets and reduce the high reliance on bank-intermediated funding, while helping firms to rebalance their financial structure towards longer maturities and attracting new investors. Securitization would boost bank liquidity, free up regulatory capital, and allow banks to lend again. SME securitization could also improve the transmission of monetary policy, facilitate cross-border investment, and boost the growth of other funding markets. Staff recommended policy actions in the following areas: Regulatory frameworks: Capital regulations should appropriately differentiate between high-and low-quality SME-backed securities. Most securitization transactions in Europe showed remarkable resilience during the financial crisis. This was largely due to conservative loan origination standards; high equity participation and servicing being retained by the originator, together with issuer due diligence; and adequate post-issuance monitoring. Reducing the capital intensity of safer structures would encourage the supply of simpler (less capital intensive) transactions, with greater transparency of the underlying SME loans. This could also involve a more even capital treatment for different institutional investors (banks, insurance companies, and asset managers) and the use of SME loans as collateral in refinancing operations. Harmonization of reporting requirements would not only broaden the investor base but create scope for developing securitization instruments that pool SME loans on an EU-wide basis. Public sector support : The official sector should be a catalyst by creating institutional demand when markets are insufficiently developed. Area-wide and national initiatives—such as the joint Page 18 EC–EIB SME initiative, the EIB-EIF securitization program, or plans by several national central banks to support the bundling of SME-backed loans for ECB refinancing—move in the right direction, but should be broadened to have a significant impact. Box 3. Capital Market Development: SME Financing in the Euro Area The corporate sector in Europe is highly dependent on bank-based financing, with only the largest firms able to directly access capital markets. Developing diversified funding for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), including through securitization, could help overcome the adverse effects of financial fragmentation and support cross- border investment. But SME securitization faces several challenges. Unfavorable economic terms (e.g., the high cost of issuance, a lack of uniform reporting standards, and cumbersome insolvency regimes) and adverse cyclical factors (e.g., cheap alternative funding sources for banks and rising SME loan default rates in stressed economies) reduce the incentives for issuance. In fact, most recent transactions have been arranged for funding purposes and do not offer any regulatory capital relief for issuing banks. In 2013, more than half of all issuances were “retained”—well in excess of the 5 percent “skin in the game” regulatory requirement under CRD2— for use as collateral for short-term funding from Eurosystem liquidity facilities (“securitization to repo”). Moreover, pending regulatory changes—Basel III for banks and Solvency II for insurance companies—have weakened the institutional investor base by adversely affecting the capital intensity of holding highly- rated securitization transactions and their eligibility for liquidity purposes. Current initiatives to improve the economics of SME securitization are too small and too narrowly focused to have a broad impact. A joint EC-EIB SME lending program using EU structural funds will be operational by end-2014, and will complement the existing funding schemes for SMEs provided by the EIB/EIF. Both efforts provide greater official support to mostly bank-sponsored SME lending, but fall short of standardized mechanisms to entice non-banking funding sources and schemes that would allow direct capital market access. In April 2014, the EC issued recommendations on a new approach to business failure and insolvency, aimed at addressing some of the structural impediments to SME financing. Reforms in the following areas would facilitate development of the SME securitization market: The regulatory regime should appropriately differentiate between high- and low-quality securitization transactions. Reducing the capital intensity of safer structures to reflect the resilience of European asset securitization markets during the financial crisis would encourage the supply of transactions that fund real economic activity. This could involve a revised capital treatment for transactions that meet higher standards of loan portfolio disclosure and performance monitoring. Official sector involvement could help incubate market-based solutions for risk transfer. The EIB/EIF could initially act as guarantors or strategic investors (risk sharing) while guarding against long-term distortionary effects by making any risk-sharing time-bound. In this regard, a targeted change to the ECB collateral framework could provide incentives for creating a viable structure for the entire transaction rather than only that part of it placed with the ECB (possibly in combination with an ECB liquidity facility and the option for outright asset purchases of SME transactions to establish a floor to market prices). Structural improvements could further facilitate market development. National insolvency frameworks should continue to be strengthened, with a view to cleaning up banks’ balance sheets and boosting the quality and transparency of collateral. Greater harmonization of SME lending standards and credit registries across countries would facilitate the establishment of a truly single market. Also, forms of non-bank intermediated securitization (such as trade receivables) and equity finance should be explored in areas where structural impediments to asset securitization are too high and cannot be overcome in the near term. Prepared by Ali Al-Eyd and Andy Jobst. The European securitization market is relatively small and has contracted by more than one-third since the start of the financial crisis to €1.4 trillion (roughly a quarter of the size of the U.S. market). European Commission, 2014. Commission Recommendation of 12 March 2014 on a New Approach to Business Failure and Insolvency (2014/135/EU). See also European Commission, 2013, Finance for Growth, Report of the High-Level Expert group on SME and Infrastructure Financing In May 2014, the ECB and the Bank of England published a comprehensive review of existing obstacles to a better functioning of the securitization market in the European Union, which includes some arguments that are also reflected in these recommendations. Page 19 The crisis has left a legacy of unacceptably high unemployment, especially in stressed economies. For instance, euro area countries hit hardest by the crisis have had unprecedented increases in youth unemployment rates, ranging from 25 percent in Ireland to over 40 percent in Spain on average during 2007–13. Large and persistent youth and adult unemployment rates lower potential output due to skill attrition and depreciated human capital. Youth unemployment also leads to a lower probability of future employment and lower wages, and erodes social cohesion and institutions. A comprehensive and country-specific approach will be necessary for addressing high Staff analysis suggests that youth unemployment in the euro area has been especially sensitive to cyclical conditions (Box 4). Nonetheless, structural factors also make a difference: a larger tax wedge, higher minimum wage (relative to median wage), and lower spending on active labor market policies (ALMPs), especially on training, are associated with higher unemployment. Overall, a broad, comprehensive strategy to tackle youth unemployment is needed, which involves both measures to boost growth and remove country-specific structural impediments. The latter could include properly designed, cost-effective ALMPs, together with measures to lower hiring costs (by reducing the tax wedge and better aligning minimum wages to average labor costs) and improve skill levels (by providing work-related training). Further policy efforts in both creditor and debtor economies are necessary to prevent intra-euro area imbalances from re-emerging as the recovery takes hold . In addition to supportive macroeconomic policies, product and labor market reforms are crucial to rebalance the euro area. Higher infrastructure investment in the creditor countries could improve disposable incomes in these economies and lead to higher external demand, thereby reducing excessive surpluses including vis-à-vis the rest of the world. Further improvements in competitiveness are particularly important for stressed economies, which need to lower costs, shift resources to tradable sectors, and reduce external debt. Staff analysis shows that in a “good” rebalancing scenario—with higher public investment in creditor countries and more structural reform progress across the euro area—would improve current account balances in debtor economies, while reducing the surpluses of creditor economies. The growth dividends under this scenario could be substantial, ranging from a ½ to ¾ percentage point rise in growth annually over a five year horizon (Box 5). Page 20 Box 4. Youth Unemployment in the Euro Area: Okun’s Law and Beyond The business cycle is the most important driver of unemployment in the euro area. It explains up to 70 percent of changes in the youth (age 15–24) unemployment rates in stressed euro area countries. Youth unemployment rates are more than twice as sensitive to the business cycle as adult (age 25-64) rates, regardless of how the business cycle is measured (output growth or output gap). This may be because relatively more youth are employed in the cyclically sensitive industries (e.g. construction) as well as the concentration of employment in SMEs which have been severely affected by the crisis. Therefore, sustained growth is key to reducing youth unemployment, especially in stressed countries. For example, an additional percentage point of annual growth could lower the unemployment rate from 0.8 percentage points in Greece and Portugal to 1.9 percentage points per year in Spain. /1 Shaded bars and dots indicate results and are not Structural features of the labor market have significant effects on the size of unemployment. significant. A one percentage point increase in hiring costs (tax wedge, ratio of minimum to median wages) raises youth unemployment rates by 0.2 to 1.2 percentage points. A higher benefit replacement rate increases youth unemployment rates by up to 1.3 percentage points. An increase of 1000 euros in ALMP spending per unemployed person can lower youth unemployment rates by up to 0.3 percentage points. Skill levels also play a role, especially for long-term unemployment, while collective bargaining (e.g., union density), labor market duality (e.g., protection of regular workers) have more mixed effects, consistent with the literature. These estimates are robust to different empirical specifications. TWEDGE – Tax wedge, MIN2MED – the ratio of minimum to median wages, GRR – gross replacement rate, ALMP – total spending on active labor market policies per unemployed. Structural characteristics also affect the responsiveness of unemployment to the business cycle For example, in stressed economies such as Greece and Spain, a higher tax wedge makes unemployment rates more pro-cyclical. These results are subject to important caveats. Given data limitations, the estimations assume that structural factors have the same effect across countries. Moreover, the variables do not capture every relevant detail of the labor market structure, e.g. eligibility requirements for unemployment benefits differ across countries, and the tax wedge may vary across income levels in a given country, and in progressivity across countries. Prepared by Angana Banerji, Huidan Lin and Sergejs Saksonovs. See companion SIP for other variables considered and methodological details. RR Effects of Labor Market Features on Youth Unemployment Rates, median and range, percentage points Single structural variable in the model Multiple structural variables in the model Okun's law coefficients /1 Youth Unemployment Rate Adult Unemployment Rate Page 21 Box 5. External Rebalancing in the Euro Area: Developments and Policies The euro area has shifted into strong surplus since the crisis. However, country-level developments underlying this shift have been highly asymmetric, with debtor economies (such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain) seeing large improvements in their current accounts (sometimes into surplus), while creditor economies (like Germany and the Netherlands) have maintained their surpluses. At the sectoral level, the change in current accounts has been largely driven by falling private investment, mostly from the corporate sector. Statistical analysis indicates that euro area external imbalances can be traced to deviations in both saving and investment from model-based estimates. Creditor economies with large surpluses (such as Germany) have seen persistent under-investment and over-saving in recent years, compared to what would be predicted by a model incorporating fundamentals (see text figure). On the other hand, the analysis also points to persistent and substantial over- investment by some debtor economies prior to the crisis (such as Spain). The magnitude of over-investment in debtor economies has fallen since the crisis, but there is a risk that this reflects, at least in part, the large output gaps that remain in these economies and will unwind as they recover. Scenario analysis suggests that gains from further structural reforms and public investments by creditor economies would narrow external imbalances and boost output compared to the baseline. Simulations from the IMF’s EUROMOD general equilibrium model indicate that higher public investment in creditor economies and more structural reform progress across the euro area would improve current accounts in debtor economies, while reducing the surpluses of creditor economies. This would help reduce excessively high net external liabilities in some debtor economies (such as Greece) and temper the net external assets of some creditor economies (such as the Netherlands). More importantly, potential growth and productivity would improve across the board, with growth dividends ranging from ½–¾ percentage points of real GDP over the medium term. This would be accompanied by faster closing of the output gaps and higher inflation (helping aid relative price adjustment). The External Stability Report’s assessment suggests that the euro area as a whole exhibits an external position and real exchange rate that are broadly consistent with fundamentals. The 2013 real exchange rate gap is estimated to be somewhere between -5 and 0 percent, while the current account gap is estimated to be between -½ and 1 percent of GDP. However, this masks imbalances in constituent member economies, with some showing real exchange rate overvaluation (such as Spain) and others undervaluation (such as Germany). There is a need for continuing structural reforms in product and labor markets in both creditor and debtor economies to help rectify these imbalances. Moreover, in a few creditor economies, there is some scope to use fiscal space to boost public investment. Prepared by John Bluedorn, Shengzu Wang, and Tao Wu. GermanyOther EA CreditorEA Debt., ProgramItaly and SpainOther EA DebtorSum Source: IMF World Economic Outlook database and IMF staff calculations.Note: Italy and Spain do differ significantly in the magnitude of their net foreignliabilities. See Table 1 of the External Rebalancing Selected Issues Paper.(percent of GDP) Regional Composition of the Euro Area Current Account Current Account Saving Investment HouseholdsCorporatesGovernment Source: Eurostat database and IMF staff calculations. (percent of GDP) Composition Changes from 2007 to 2012 Under-investment Over-savings EBA Assessment Under-inv plus Over-sav Estimated Current Account Imbalance for Germany (percent of GDP) Source: IMF staff calculations. Page 22 THE AUTHORITIES’ VIEWS The authorities broadly agreed with the assessment of economic developments in the euro area and the downside risks to growth. They noted that the recovery, despite showing signs of being sustained, was still too weak to make a significant impact on high unemployment and debt levels. They acknowledged strong headwinds to growth from persistently weak credit conditions, financial fragmentation, and private sector deleveraging. The ECB’s recent package of policy measures demonstrates its resolve to raise inflation towards the price stability objective and counter financial fragmentation. The authorities agreed with staff that low inflation makes adjustment difficult and emphasized that a prolonged undershooting of the inflation objective is not acceptable to the Governing Council of the ECB. The ECB considered this package sufficient to address low inflation and support greater bank lending . But they are ready to respond swiftly if inflation remains unacceptably subdued including, potentially, asset purchases to expand the ECB’s balance sheet. Despite their limited size, private asset purchases could address fragmentation by injecting liquidity and supporting credit. Quantitative easing (QE)—mainly through sovereign but also private asset purchases—is an option, particularly if external risks materialize and the inflation outlook worsens. Nevertheless, it should be acknowledged that QE is no panacea, and is subject—just like any other measure—to some limitations. Despite some uncertainty about standard transmission mechanisms in an environment of already very low sovereign yields, the expectations channel is expected to play a significant role in transmitting an ECB balance sheet expansion into higher inflation. The EC agreed that the broadly neutral fiscal stance at the euro area level is helping sustain the recovery, but cautioned against the risk of policy complacency. Member states’ 2014 consolidation plans are now based on more realistic macroeconomic assumptions, perhaps reflecting the role of the new fiscal councils. The composition has also improved with less reliance on capital spending cuts. But the EC argued that a premature relaxation of SGP targets to tackle weak aggregate demand would undermine the credibility of the recently-reformed framework. Nonetheless, if inflation remained subdued after the monetary policy arsenal had been exhausted, the escape clauses of fiscal rules could be activated. On fiscal governance, the authorities acknowledged that some revisions to the framework were necessary but emphasized legal and political constraints to introducing radical changes . They noted that the complexity of the existing framework owed much to prior attempts to make the framework more flexible (and less pro-cyclical) in the face of large shocks. The EC also saw benefits in creating more incentives to foster long-term growth and fill the investment gap but warned that modifying the rules to accommodate structural reforms and higher public investment would create loopholes and make procedures even more complex. They also cautioned against an overly pessimistic view of existing enforcement mechanisms, pointing to the track record of several member countries successfully exiting the EDP. Page 23 The authorities were optimistic that the ongoing AQR and associated stress tests would be successfully completed. This will provide a major boost to confidence in the banking sector and facilitate balance sheet repair. The authorities pointed out that since the middle of 2013 there has already been a large improvement in European banks’ capital positions. Total capital has risen almost € 90 billion, nearly 4 percent, since May 2013. Coordination between the ECB and national competent authorities (NCAs) is so far proceeding smoothly, and independent third party involvement in asset valuations has been an integral part of the process. Clear and prompt recapitalization plans would be required of banks found to fall short of AQR or stress test hurdle rates. Recent improvements in the funding environment for banks should be conducive to banks’ ability to fulfill the ambitious timetable for recapitalization. The timetable is expected to be strictly followed, in order to preserve the credibility of the exercise. That said, the authorities agreed with staff that banks may be granted some flexibility in extraordinary circumstances. They also concurred that financial stability concerns would be appropriately taken into account in all decisions. Major progress has been made on the banking union. The authorities noted that the transition to a single supervisor is likely to facilitate cross-border liquidity provision within the euro area, which could help reduce financial fragmentation. The SSM is making institutional preparations—including hiring staff—to ensure that it will be ready to assume supervisory responsibilities in November. The authorities highlighted that recent agreements had made SRM decision making procedures less cumbersome—improving the prospects for quick resolution in a crisis—and the SRF transition period made shorter. Apart from a quicker overall mutualization of national compartments, they pointed to the front-loaded nature of the timetable, with 40 percent of the SRF funds being mutualized by the end of the first year of operation, and 60 percent by the end of the second year. They also noted that passage of the BRRD, which will become fully operational in 2016, has established tiered depositor preferences and a bail-in tool for creditors. Moreover, the Directive on Deposit Guarantee Schemes harmonizes the coverage and speed of payout of national deposit guarantee schemes across the EU. On a common fiscal backstop for the AQR and more generally for bank resolution, the authorities pointed to recent progress in enabling direct bank recapitalization from the ESM. They agreed with staff that the threshold envisaged for direct recap is very high, but argued that this was broadly appropriate in light of the desire to minimize the chances that public aid would be deployed. The principle that creditors rather than taxpayers should be liable for payments in case of bank failures or capital shortfalls is firmly entrenched in the resolution framework. The authorities agreed that the ongoing rebalancing is incomplete. Wages are adjusting and current account positions are improving in the debtor countries. But these developments are occurring against a backdrop of still-large output gaps and could be partially reversed as economic activity recovers. Further efforts in these countries should focus on microeconomic reforms to improve competitiveness. Meanwhile, there are limited signs of symmetric adjustment in surplus countries. The authorities agreed that higher infrastructure investment in these countries should contribute towards reducing intra-euro area imbalances. Page 24 On structural reforms, the authorities agreed with staff that action was needed on both the national and regional levels. The “Youth Guarantee Scheme” will provide EU structural funds to support country-specific programs, subject to an assessment by the EC. It will be targeted at countries where youth unemployment exceeds 25 percent. Progress was also being made on fostering a single market for energy, with wholesale prices for gas and electricity converging across countries. The most pressing challenges were to inter-connect national electricity grids, and harmonize country-specific climate change measures to achieve the common target for renewable by 2020. Negotiations continue on a free trade agreement with the US, and with other countries, although greater political uncertainty could slow the momentum. The authorities welcomed staff’s emphasis on capital market development. They viewed this area as an integral part of the drive toward a Single Market. In this context, they supported proposals for facilitating greater SME access to finance. Widening the existing EIB-EIF program for SME securitization and exploring synergies with the EC-EIB SME Initiative would foster greater capital market integration. The authorities saw merit in pursuing a number of proposals: differentiated capital intensity of high- and low-quality securitization transactions; more equitable regulatory treatment of securitized and non-securitized SME loans; harmonization of loan reporting requirements, credit scoring, and credit registry information; and non-bank intermediated forms of structured finance, such as cash flow (receivables) securitization. The authorities generally agreed with staff’s risk assessment. Surges in global financial market volatility due to revised expectations of US exit from UMP could complicate the ECB’s own polices to increase inflation expectations and support demand, if the ECB forward guidance proved less effective under such scenario. A protracted slowdown in emerging markets (EMs) could weigh on growth prospects through the trade channel, although such a channel is unlikely to be strong and there could be a potential offset from capital flow substitution from EMs to euro area periphery countries. An escalation of geopolitical tensions could have adverse—and uneven—consequences for several euro area countries, but the authorities observed that it was very difficult to attach meaningful probabilities to this event. They also noted that such risks seemed to have diminished recently. They agreed that internal risks arising from stagnation or a de-anchoring of long term inflation expectations remained germane. However, the authorities argued that some of these risks were interlinked, and the impact would be high only if they were all to be realized at the same time. Moreover, the probability of such scenarios materializing was reduced by the endogenous policy response that signs of stagnation would call forth, in particular as regards balance sheet repair. They attached a higher likelihood to the danger of reform fatigue setting in, especially in light of a more euro-skeptic configuration in the new European Parliament. STAFF APPRAISAL The euro area’s economy has now expanded for four consecutive quarters, with varying strength across countries. Financial market sentiment is buoyant, sovereign spreads have narrowed to pre-crisis levels and bank funding costs have declined sharply. These improvements have been grounded in vigorous policy actions. The ECB has provided demand support through Page 25 conventional monetary policy—including the recent rate cut and negative deposit rates—while the fiscal drag in 2014 has diminished. Rapid progress has been made with establishing a banking union, with the ECB ready to assume supervisory authority in November, soon after the results of the ongoing AQR are announced. But the recovery is neither robust nor sufficiently strong. Investment remains well below pre-crisis levels, constrained, at least in part by the continuing contraction of bank credit. Credit conditions in periphery countries are particularly weak, with many SMEs—a major source of output and employment—being rationed. Unemployment, especially youth unemployment, remains unacceptably high, and the private debt burden remains elevated in many countries. Therefore, greater growth momentum is required to substantially repair the damage from the crisis. Inflation has been too low for too long. This stifles demand by keeping real interest rates and real debt burdens too high, while making the unfinished task of rebalancing more difficult. A protracted period of inflation below the central bank’s target could de-anchor expectations and undermine monetary policy credibility. And a negative external shock could tip the economy into deflation. Concerted policy efforts are needed to strengthen the recovery. ECB actions have provided welcome demand support. Successful execution of the AQR and a common fiscal backstop are needed to facilitate balance sheet repair and sever bank-sovereign feedback links. And structural reforms are needed to tackle high unemployment and facilitate intra-euro area rebalancing. The ECB’s recent policy package signals its determination to address low, below-target inflation and fulfill its mandate . Collectively, the wide range of measures should lead to a substantial expansion of liquidity. The provision of targeted term funding for banks should encourage credit to SMEs, especially in stressed economies. But if low inflation and fragmentation are not reversed, a substantial expansion of the ECB’s balance sheet may be necessary to complement the recent package . This could be achieved through a large program of asset purchases—primarily sovereign assets for reasons of market depth—or a new non-targeted LTRO on a long-term, fixed-rate basis. Both asset purchases and a large-scale LTRO involve balance sheet risk for the ECB, strengthening the pre-commitment to accommodative policy, and thereby influencing inflation expectations. The overall broadly neutral fiscal stance of the euro area in 2014 strikes an appropriate balance between demand support and debt sustainability considerations. Negative growth surprises should not trigger additional consolidation efforts. Successful completion of the AQR will facilitate bank balance sheet repair. The ambitious timetable for recapitalization of banks should be feasible given markedly improved market conditions, but some flexibility might be necessary if several banks need to raise capital at the same time. Creditor bail-ins for systemically important banks, if necessary, would need to be Page 26 applied with due consideration given to financial stability concerns. Efforts are also needed to reduce the corporate debt overhang, by strengthening national insolvency frameworks and facilitating debt restructurings. There has been rapid progress towards a more complete banking union. The transition to a single supervisor—the SSM—should facilitate cross-border liquidity provision, thereby reducing fragmentation. SRM decision-making procedures have been simplified, and the timetable for mutualization of the SRF has been shortened. Work needs to continue on establishing a common fiscal backstop to effectively sever sovereign-bank links. While the proposal for ESM direct recap is a step in the right direction, as currently envisaged the thresholds for such support are too high. Capital market development should be encouraged to provide an alternative to bank lending. Developing capital market financing alternatives, like greater securitization for corporate funding, would help ensure lending to viable smaller firms, enhance the resilience of the financial system, and improve monetary transmission. To bolster securitization markets, regulatory risk weights for high quality (simple and transparent) liquid asset-backed securities should be reduced. This would free up capital for further lending. More structural reforms are necessary to tackle high unemployment, burnish competitiveness, and facilitate rebalancing. A comprehensive strategy to tackle youth unemployment would involve both measures to boost growth and remove country-specific structural impediments. The latter could include cost-effective ALMPs, measures to lower the opportunity cost of employment, and better-targeted training programs. Higher infrastructure investment in the creditor countries would help reduce excessive surpluses. Meanwhile, competitiveness-enhancing reforms to product and labor markets in debtor countries would aid further rebalancing, by boosting export growth as the recovery takes hold and import compression unwinds. Efforts should continue to implement the Services Directive, make progress with free trade agreements, and more closely integrate energy platforms and policies. Over the medium term, ideas to simplify and strengthen the fiscal governance framework should be explored. Consideration should be given to a more parsimonious framework with a single objective and an economically sound operational lever. The credibility of the rules would be enhanced by much stronger enforcement mechanisms. Boosting the ability of the center to fund public infrastructure projects—such as cross-border investments in transportation, communications and energy networks—would help lay the foundations for sustained growth, while keeping countries within the bounds of the fiscal framework. Staff proposes that the next Article VI consultations on euro area policies follow the standard 12-month cycle. Page 27 Table 1. Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2011–19 Projections 1/201120122013201420152016201720182019Demand and Supply Real GDP 1.6-0.7-0.41.11.51.71.61.61.6 Private consumption 0.3-1.3-0.70.61.11.31.41.41.4 Public consumption -0.1-0.60.10.30.30.40.50.60.7 Gross fixed investment 1.6-4.0-2.91.62.72.82.72.72.6 Final domestic demand 0.5-1.7-0.90.71.21.41.51.51.5 Stockbuilding 2/ 0.3-0.50.00.10.00.00.00.00.0 Domestic Demand0.7-2.2-1.00.81.21.41.41.51.5 Foreign balance 2/0.91.50.50.30.30.20.20.20.2 Exports 3/ 6.52.51.43.94.54.94.94.94.8 Imports 3/ 4.5-0.90.43.44.14.74.94.94.9Resource Utilization Potential GDP 0.60.40.60.81.01.11.21.21.3 Output gap-0.8-1.8-2.8-2.5-2.0-1.4-1.0-0.6-0.3 Employment 0.3-0.6-0.80.30.70.90.80.80.8 Unemployment rate 4/ 10.111.312.011.711.410.810.39.89.4Prices GDP deflator 1.21.31.51.11.41.41.51.51.6 Consumer prices2.72.51.30.71.21.31.51.51.6Public Finance 5/ General government balance-4.1-3.7-3.0-2.7-2.1-1.5-1.1-0.7-0.4 General government structural balance -3.7-2.3-1.3-1.2-0.9-0.6-0.5-0.3-0.1 General government gross debt88.292.995.295.994.993.291.289.086.3External Sector 5/, 7/ Current account balance 0.11.32.22.32.52.52.42.42.4Interest Rates 4/, 6/EURIBOR 3-month offered rate1.40.20.30.3……………10-year government benchmark bond yield4.32.33.32.6……………Exchange Rates 6/ U.S. dollar per euro1.391.301.371.37…………… Nominal effective rate (2000=100)104.299.8108.5108.6…………… Real effective rate (2000=100) 6/95.090.296.195.3…………… Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook, Global Data Source, DataStream, and Eurostat 1/ Projections are based on aggregation of WEO projections submitted by IMF country teams. 2/ Contribution to growth. 3/ Includes intra-euro area trade. 4/ In percent. 5/ In percent of GDP. 6/ Latest monthly available data for 2014. 7/ Projections are based on member countries' current account aggregations excluding intra-euro flows and corrected for aggregation discrepancy over the projection period. Page 28 Sources of Risk Protracted period of slower growth in advanced economies Reform fatigue at national and euro area levels Protracted period of slower growth in emerging economies Growth slowdown in China Bond market stress from a reassessment in sovereign risk Surges in global financial market volatility A sharp increase in geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia/Ukraine Sustained decline in commodity prices Likelihood of Risk (high, medium, or low) Expected Impact of Risk (high, medium, low) Table 2. Risk Assessment Matrix Lower-than-anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation due to a failure to fully address legacies of the financial crisis, leading to secular stagnation Maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth Continued buildup and eventual unwinding of financial excess capacity eventually, resulting in a sharp growth slowdown and large financial and fiscal losses (medium term) Low Stalled or incomplete delivery of bank reforms and policy commitments (national and euro- area wide) due to reform fatigue, political and social pressures Unanticipated outcomes from asset quality review and stress tests, absent common fiscal backstop Geopolitical tensions Revised market expectations on UMP exit/emerging market fundamentals Significant disruptions in global financial, trade and commodity markets Deceleration of global demand Coming on-stream of excess capacity (medium-term) Deanchoring of inflation expectations Debt-deflation dynamics (complicates public debt sustainability, balance sheet repair, rebalancing) Low investment and high unemployment lead to increased output gaps Lower growth potential Slower growth (primarily export-led so far), higher output gaps, lower growth potential Undermine market confidence in euro area growth prospects, increase in sovereign spreads Financial stress could re-emerge Bank-sovereign-real economy links could re- intensify via worsening financial fragmentation and credit transmission, loss of market confidence (sovereign refinancing risks could reemerge) Procyclical fiscal policies may become unavoidable Negative shocks to growth, worsening an already weak growth outlook Tightening of financial conditions Uncertainty could hamper growth Further decline in inflation due to a decline in inflation expectations Policy Recommendations Use monetary policy and ECB balance sheet expansion to support demand Repair bank, corporate, and household balance sheets to improve credit, support domestic demand On the supply side, implement structural policies to spur investment, productivity and competitiveness, and advance rebalancing Undertake sound implementation of asset quality review and stress tests with clear plan for recapitalization Proper communication about process and results Complete banking union, in particular single resolution mechanism and a common safety net and fiscal backstop Maintain appropriate pace of fiscal consolidation and debt reduction Ease monetary policy to support demand Keep national and euro area-wide reforms on track to preserve market confidence, reduce uncertainty Establish sufficient common backstops to help bank reform, break sovereign-bank links Revisiting euro area’s energy strategy may become necessary Tackle further declines in persistently low inflation (see above) The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of the staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). P C S Page 29 P C S Table 3. A Scorecard Approach to the Near-Term Fiscal Stance from April 2014 WEO Debt sustainability Credibility Change in CAPBOutputUnemp- Real GDPInflationOverallIndependent stockflowstock flow(CDS) CyclicalSustain-Weighted average 3/Govt.WEO Staff Report gaploymentgrowthMon. policy?OverallGG debtMT primaryIIPCurrentOverallconditionsability(Cyc,Sus)(Cyc,Sus)planproj.advice%%%%Spacegap 2/account4/4/=(25,75)=(50,50)Y/N% GDP% GDP% GDP% GDPbpts% GDP% GDP% GDPLast 6201420142014201420142013Latest2014months2014 5/20142014Germany-0.15.21.71.4 N753.2487.335.81.82.81.82.02.3-0.2-0.2-0.56/France-2.411.01.01.0 N96-0.1-21-1.780.73.82.03.83.42.90.87/0.50.4Italy-3.512.40.60.7 N1351.4-301.1271.63.81.53.83.22.7-0.1-0.10.3Spain-3.125.50.90.31.3N99-1.1-980.8286.44.41.34.43.62.80.60.60.6Netherlands-4.77.30.80.8 N751.75310.147.52.21.82.22.12.00.10.20.2 Euro area YLimited961.4-132.4…3.02.03.02.82.6...0.1… Memo UK-1.76.92.91.9 YLimited92-1.1-1-2.739.143.03.63.53.40.60.60.58/ US-3.36.42.81.4 YLimited106-0.1-27-2.237.342.83.63.43.3…0.49/… Thresholds 4/ Strong tightenAbove 3Under 3Above 3Above 45Above 90Below -3Below -50Below -5Above 10055555Above 255 Modest tighten1 to 33 - 52-33 - 4460-90- 1- to -3-20 to -50-2 to -580-100444440.5-244 Neutral+/-15-71-21 - 3350-60+/-1+/- 20+/- 240-8033333+/- 0.533 Modest stimulus-1 to -37-10-1 to 10.5- 1240-501 to 320 to 502 to 520-4022222-0.5 to -222 Strong stimulusBelow -3Above 10Below -1Below 0.51Below 40Above 3Above 50Above 5Below 2011111Below - 211 1/Includes large scale purchase of government securities, and credit easing measures.2/Primary gap defined as P-P*. P is the structural primary balance as % GDP in 2013. P* is the debt stabilizing primary balance in the medium term defined as (r-g)*d, where r is a weighted average(by average maturity) of the 2013 effective interest rate and the average 10-year yield over the last 6 months minus 2%, g is av. potential growth in 2016-2018 and d is the debt ratio in 2013.3/Weighted average of subcategories (red = 5, yellow = 4, grey = 3, light green = 2, dark green =1). Monetary policy space modifies the weight on the cycle: i.e., if full monetary policy space, fiscal policy is determined bysustainability concerns. If zero monetary space, then fiscal policy determined by the weighted average of cyclical and sustainability factors. The weight for cyclal conditions are reduced by: "Limited" = 25% adjustment,"significant" = 50%, "substantial" = 75%, "full" = 100%.4/The values for each variable are colored depending on their signal for the fiscal stance based on the thresholds.5/Staff estimated structural headline adjustment from Authorities' budget plans submitted to EC under the Six Pack, as percent of potential GDP, slightly different from change in CAPB. 6/Staff advice for Germany is to consider an additional deficit of -0.5 percent of GDP, with the caveat that spending should be tilted towards public investment.7/France Stability Program 2014-15, April 2014. 8/U.K. Fiscal year, and public sector.9/Fiscal Monitor April 2014, IMF. External sustainabilityIf yes: 1 - Cyclical Conditions2 - Monetary Policy Space3 - Sustainability Conditions4 - Fiscal Stance Page 30 Germany Reform priorities Increase labor force participation and facilitate immigration of qualified workers Increase productivity and competition, in particular in the services sector Clarify future energy policy with respect to pricing and infrastructure Table 4. Structural Reform Plans and Progress in Selected Countries EURO AREA POLICIE Recent progress Staff recommendations Progress in extending the provision of A framework (legal, tax, financial) that child care. encourages larger investor base. The contribution rate for statutory Lower tax wedge, in particular for the low pension insurance was reduced and the personal basic tax-free allowance for income tax and the monthly pay threshold for mini-jobs were increased in 2013. skilled and women. Further facilitation of immigration by creating new pathways for immigration of medium skilled workers in addition to supporting immigration of the high skilled. A law to facilitate recognition of Review the family policy to improve its qualifications obtained abroad came to force in 2012. The EU blue card facilitates immigration of skilled workers. Additional allocation to research and development in the 2012–2014 budgets. efficiency. Adjustments in the minimum wage should be tied to the recommendations of a council with independent expert representation. Accelerate the integration of pan- European transportation and energy networks and increase competition in network industries. Increased competition in services sector. Additional unemployment benefit reforms could aim for more degressivity and stricter activation measures. Open up distribution, some transportation services, and professional services to competition. Strengthen competition authority to review anti-competitive practices more effectively. Regulatory simplification. Simplify employment protection legislation and labor code and reduce judicial uncertainty Remove obstacles to labor mobility (unification of pension schemes, tax and cost distortions to selling a house etc.) France Improve functioning Approval of measures to accelerate of labor markets to re-absorb the unemployed, with a focus on youth Increase competition in service sectors with high economic impact. Pursue a business- friendly environment for enterprises. Increase labor mobility by reducing constraints on geographic and professional mobility. pension reform implementation in 2011. Additional pension reforms (2013) expected to close the deficit of the private sector pension system regime by 2020 and increase the effective retirement age. The government has subsidized firms’. permanent hiring of young workers (a €4000 subsidy for the first three years). The government has committed EUR 30 billion of labor tax cuts over 2013–16. The reform of training (Dec. 2013) is a positive step towards better skills matching and labor mobility. The latest reform of unemployment insurance (March 2014) does not change the benefit structure. Implementation of the Services Directive has strengthened competition, but some sectors remain protected. Italy Improve the New mandatory mediation scheme, Promote the use of out-of-court efficiency of civil justice. Reduce costs in regulated network sectors. Improve competition in product markets and services. Address very high unemployment (all age groups) and ineffective active labor market policies. measures to deal with backlog of pending cases and speed up case processing (2013). Packages on wage bargaining decentralization and labor contracts agreed in 2011 but implementation has stalled. Measures to support youth employment announced in July 2013 (tax breaks for employers hiring under-30s on permanent contracts, increase in training, apprentice and internship schemes). Fornero labor market reform (April 2012), reduced cost of individual dismissals. Liberalization of gas sector; establishment of transport authority. mediation, comprehensive review of court fees; strengthen court organization and management, fully open up the legal profession. Remove structural bottlenecks that push up average production cost. Enhance competition in supply and distribution of electricity. Improve coordination and efficiency of ALMPs and employment services at the local level to support the youth guarantee program starting in 2014. Shift to more flexible, single contracts for new workers that gradually increase job protection with seniority to lower the hiring cost and support apprenticeships. Decentralize wage setting. Link unemployment support to employability: redesign wage- supplementation scheme to turn it into universal support system conditional on job search and training. Faster implementation of plans to open up professional services and privatization of local services. Page 31 Table 4. Structural Reform Plans and Progress in Selected Countries (Concluded) Spain Improve labor The labor reform reduced severance Build on the 2012 labor reform law already market functioning; reduce high unemployment among the youth and unskilled. Address low revenue collection especially from indirect taxes. Raise TFP growth to improve productivity. Improve competitiveness (excessive regulatory burden of trading and protected professions). Greece Improve labor market flexibility. Foster competition in service and product markets Improve the business environment. payments and eased the use of fair dismissals, and facilitated firm-level agreements (February 2012). Reduction of the replacement rate for unemployment insurance and hiring subsidies in July 2012. In February 2013, the government announced a strategy for youth employment and entrepreneurship. Approved Market Unity law (2013). enacted, and seek to reduce duality and ensure wage flexibility. Strengthen active labor market policies and training; reduce the labor cost (including tax cost) of unskilled employment. Adopt a comprehensive tax reform that boosts jobs and growth, while increasing revenue. Fully implement the programs for Market Unity and the draft law on liberalization of professional services. Major labor market reforms were undertaken since 2010, including reduction of the severance pay; promotion of firm-level bargaining; lowering the tax wedge by 5 percentage points. Legislation was adopted liberalizing restricted professions, transportation services and energy. Legislation to improve the business environment including reduction of regulatory barriers to competition in 4 key sectors—retail trade, construction materials, tourism, food processing— with OECD assistance. Bring rules on collective dismissals and industrial action in line with the EU best practice. Continue opening up regulated professions. Continue to reduce regulatory barriers to competition in 4 additional sectors (possibly with OECD assistance). Lower the administrative burden. Continue overhauling the licensing system while reducing, in the short-term, the costs for establishing new businesses under the existing system. Simplify custom procedures in line with EU practices, and finalize the electronic submission system for trade declarations in 2014. Ireland Address high long- Increased staffing for employment Further improve engagement with the term unemployment. Increase efficiency services in 2013, tendered for private provision of these services. long-term unemployed. Implement reforms of further education and competitiveness of the overall economy. Identified priorities to improve further education and training to meet labor market needs. Completed sale of Bord Gais Energy for €1.125 billion. Portugal Improve the Implemented "organized functioning of the labor market. Enhance competition and tackle rents in the product markets. decentralization" on collective agreements and introduced representation threshold for extension of sectoral agreements. Severance payment was reduced. New Labor Code, effective as of August 1, 2012, aligned the accumulation rate of severance payments for existing contracts with those of new hires. Authorities are investigating options to reduce upward pressures on electricity prices, including by addressing rents. They have recently announced the introduction of an energy levy to claw back part of the rents. Source: IMF country teams and training. Introduce charging for water usage. Finalize the reform of legal services to improve transparency of legal costs and regulation of the sector. Implement further state assets disposals through an orderly process. Need to follow up on plans to further ease EPL, foster more effective wage bargaining (including by encouraging firm-level agreements and reducing survival periods), and strengthen activation policies. Maintain energy levy and apply proceeds toward reducing upward pressures on electricity prices. Implement measures to reduce electricity system costs. Complete ongoing negotiations with port concessionaires with a view to passing on labor cost reductions generated by the new Ports Work Law to end-users. Page 32 Figure 1. Euro Area: High Frequency Indicators Sources:Haver Analytics and Eurostat. Unemployment rate (percent) Employment (right scale, thousands) Labor Market Exports Imports CA balance (12-month rolling sum; right scale) Importsand Exports 140May-08May-09May-10May-11May-12May-13May-14 Business confidence (ESI, long-term average=100) Household confidence (balance of opinions, right scale) ConfidenceIndicators Food Non-food including fuel RetailTrade: Volume (SA, 2010=100) IP: Industry excl. construction IP: construction Industrial Productionand Retail Sales (SA,2006=100) Manufacturing Services PMI (SA; 50+=expansion) Activityhas been gradually picking up......with net exportsremaining the most important driver of growth. Persistently high unemployment continues to present a significant challange. Businessconfidence has improved... but firms are still cautious about their investment plans... ...and households about their consumtion expenditures. Page 33 Figure 2. Financial Market Developments Page 34 Figure 3. Euro Area Inflation Developments Inflation has been declining since 2013, driven partly by energy prices and appreciation of the euro... …but underlying inflation-excluding commodity, administered prices, and VAT effects- is also trending down and fluctuate at or below 1 percent. Negative inflation is not broad-based across product groups, but low inflation is. Labor costs have moderated gradually in 2013. The impact from the structural reforms is still limited, estimated at around 0.1pps. Country Belgium Gas and electricity. Limiting indexations to Reforms international oil prices; increased competition (2013). Telecommunications. A new telecommunications law improving pricing and good customer service (2012). Estimated price impact - Estimated impact from gas and electricity reforms is about 0.6 pps and from telecommunication reforms is about 0.1 pps in France Telecommunications. Increased competition (2011- 2012). - Estimated annual impact is about 0.3 pps in Italy Gas. Introduction of a futures market started trading; liberalization of the storage; progress towards building a trans-Adriatic pipeline; Greece Minimum wage cut. Effective in the second half of 2012, the minimum wage is lowered by 22 percent (by 32 percent for youth), and frozen for the next three years. Sources: Haver Analytics; Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. - Gas price declined by 4.2 percent in 2013. - Restaurant and canteens prices: the estimated impact is about 1/4 pps. Services Energy Non-energy industrial goods Unproc. food Processed food Euro Area Headline HICP at constant tax rates Core HICP excluding administered prices Euro Area v b y v b Less than 1 percent Less than 0 Euro Area: Total Weight of Items with Negative/Low Inflation (Percent, share of total; 3-month moving average) Hourly Labor Costs Unit Labor Costs Compensation per Employee Indicator of Negotiated Wages Labor Costs (Year-on-year percent change) Page 35 Figure 4. Debt Overhang in the Euro Area Figure 5. Debt Overhang in the Euro Area Sources: ECB, OECD, IMF IFS andstaff calculations. 1/ For the Netherlands, first observation is 2005. Corporate debt includes intercompany loans which can differ significantly across countries. 2/ France and EA are 2012 data. 3/ Long term average since 1999 but varies with data availability. 4/ First observation for Netherlands is 2005. Country data are not consolidated, EA is consolidated. IEPTESGRNLITFRDEEA Government Non-financial corporates Households Indebtedness in the Euro Area 1/ (percent of GDP) PTIEESGRITFRDENDEA Net International Investment Position (Percent of GDP) ES FR IE NL PT IT GB US Household Debt (percent of GDP, long term average=100, peak at t=0, quarters) Household Debt (percent of GDP, long term average=100, peak at t=0, quarters) 3/ AUTBEL DEN EST FIN FRA DEU0HUNIREITAJPNNDL POL PRT SVR SLOESPSWE CHEGBR USA R² = 0.46 ( s ) PS balance sheet stress, 2007 Growth and Balance SheetStress Financial corporates Government Households Non financial corporates Financial Surplus in the Euro Area (Net lending/borrowing by sector, percent of GDP) Public and private sector debt increased rapidly in the last decade in the stressedcountries …. …and the external position worsened. Household deleveraging has begun but has some way to go… …while corporate leverage is high in countries where financing conditions are procyclical Private sector balance sheet stress is weighing on output… …as all sectors de -lever simultaneously BELFRANLDESPDEUPRTITA EA Corporate Leverage in the Euro Area 4/ (NFC debt/equity ratio, percent) Page 36 Figure 5. External Sector Developments Page 37 Figure 6. Japan’s Deflation Episode and Current Euro Area Developments Source: Consensus Forecasts; ECB; FSA, Bank of Japan, Ministry of Finance; Haver Analytics; National central banks; and WEO. 1/ At end-fiscal year (i.e. end-March of following year) except for FY2013 refers to half-year ending September 2012. Credit is based on calendar year. All banks but Shinkin banks included. 2/ JPN: leverage in 2002 (beginning of deleveraging) and in 2013. Debt at EA level is non-consolidated. 3/ The BoJ is indexed to 1990Q1=100, and the ECB is indexed to 2007Q4=100. Japan Japan actual inflation EA EA actual inflation 10-year Survey Based Inflation Expectations (Percent)2008 2013 Nonperforming loans to total gross loans Domestic bank loan growth Regulatory Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets (rhs) Japan: Banking Sector 1/ 300BELFRANDLEAESPDEUIRLJPNITAPRT Euro Area and Japan:NFC Debt/Equity Ratio 2/ Euro Area and Japan: Cumulative Fiscal Stimulus (Percent of potential GDP) Japan Euro Area 2008 2013 Japan and EA Policy Rates BOJ ECB Sep-08Sep-11 Jun-14 Mar-87Mar-93Mar-99Mar-05Mar-11 BoJ ECB The BoJ and the ECB Balance Sheets 3/ (Absolute value, start of crisis indexed to 100) Dec-04 Mar-14 Start of crisis Inthe euro area, policy rates were cut swiftly, but conventionalspace is nowexhausted. In Japan, the BOJ started a substantial balance sheet expansion once expectations de-anchored. he ECB’s balance sheet h as been shrinking. In Japan, investment recoveredonly after balance sheets were repaired. In the euro area, corporate leverage is lower, but incomplete and ongoing. In the euro area, theinitial fiscal stimulus was stronger, but there is less room going forward. In Japan, long-term inflation expectations declined only gradually. Inthe euro area, they have remained anchored sofar. In Japan, banking reforms started late; credit picked up a few years later. In the euro area, banking sector reforms started earlier, but NPLs remain high. Page 38 Figure 7. Fiscal Developments and Policies Figure XX. Fiscal Developments and Policies Sources: WEO and IMF staff calculations. GRCITA SVKDEU AUT EA17NLD PRT FRAESPBEL IRL Changein Structural Balance, 2014 (General government, percent of potential Changein Structural Balance, 2014 (General government, percent of potential EA DEU FRAITA ESP AUTBEL GINGRC IRLMLT NLDPRT SVK y = -0.0376x + 0.4496 R² = 0.0012 Change in Structural Balance Euro area: Procyclicality of Fiscal Policy, 2014 (Output gap and fiscal impulse changes from 2013) EADEUFRA ITA ESPAUTBELFINGRC IRL MLTNLDPRTSVKSLV y = 0.2946x + 1.1323 R² = 0.051300.5 w s Change in structural balance, 2013 Euro area: Growth and Fiscal Consolidation, EA DEU FRA ITA ESP Changes in Public Debt-to-GDP ratios ( Percentage of GDP, changes from 2013 October WEO) 2014 Apr. WEO 2013 Oct WEO 2013 Apr WEO Euro area: Public Debt-to-GDP ratio (Percent of GDP) Fiscal consolidation will slow down in 2014 ... ...with moderated adjustment envisaged in both core and periphery. The pro-cyclicality of fiscal policies has largely diminished ... ... and fiscal drag on growth is waning. ... while remaining elevated in many countries. However, public debt is still expected to peak in 2014 before declining slowly ... Change from Oct. 2013 WEO Oct. 2013 WEO Aprlil 2014 WEO Euro area: Pace of Fiscal Consolidation, (% change in GG structural balance, percent of potential GDP) Page 39 Figure 8. Euro Area: Banking Sector Developments Sources: Bloomberg LP; Dealogic; ECB, World Bank,World DevelopmentIndicators database,and IMF staff calculations.1/ Core economies = AUT, BEL, DEU, FRA, NLD;stressed economies = ESP, GRC, IRL, ITA, and PRT. 2/ Core economies = BEL, DEU, FRA, and NLD;stressed economies = ESP, IRL, ITA, and PRT. Tier 1 Capital Ratio and Loan-to- Deposit Ratio (LtD) 1/ (Percent) Capital (core EA) Capital (stressed EA) LtD (core EA), RHS LtD (stressed EA), RHS NFC Debt/Earning (2008=100) Credit Growth (pp, RHS) Banking Sector Performance and Corporate Deleveraging Jan-11Oct-11Jul-12Apr-13Jan-14 Stressed economies Core economies Interbank Lending Growth (Percent, y/y) Capitalratios have been risingand loan-to-deposit ratios falling across the euro area, but differences remain between the core and stressed economies.Credit supply is still contracting, and corporates have yet to begin deleveraging. Bank profitability has shown wide variability, improving in somecore economies and Ireland and Spain, while deteriorating elsewhere. Loanloss provisioning rates have picked up across the euro area recently, with stressed economies like Italy and Spain showing a marked rise.Non-performing loans have also risen across the euro area, but more in stressed economies, acting as a drag on profitability.NPLs, profitability, and counterparty risk concerns may be contributing to falling interbank lending , which is seen across the euro area. Change in Return on Bank Assets (June 2012 to June 2013, annual percentage points) Loan Loss Provisioning (LLP) (Percent of pre-provisioning income, weighted by assets) ITA&ESP Core economies France Germany Italy Portugal Spain Non-Performing Loans (2008=100) Page 40 Appendix. Statistical Issues European statistics are developed, produced, and disseminated within their respective spheres of competence by the European Statistical System (ESS) and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). The ESS, composed of Eurostat and the national statistical institutes (NSIs), and the ESCB, composed of the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs), operate under separate legal frameworks reflecting their respective governance structures and cooperate closely when designing their respective statistical programs. The European statistics produced by the two statistical systems are of sufficient coverage, quality, and timeliness for effective macroeconomic surveillance. This appendix provides an update on developments of statistical issues since the previous Article IV consultation of the euro area. Significant progress has been made in implementation of the new international statistical standards . The shifts to the new European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) and to the Sixth Edition of the IMF’s Balance of Payments International Investment Position Manual (BPM6) are well on track. Eurostat and ECB are working closely with all stakeholders on preparing the new data compilation and transmission, as well as methodological and statistical revisions. According to the current schedule, the new set of national accounts under ESA 2010 will be compiled and disseminated from September 2014, and the new euro area BOP statistics in line with the BPM6 will be published from Q4 2014. Monetary and financial statistics (e.g. interest rate, investment funds, financial vehicle corporations, securities issues) have also been adapted and new statistics will become available in 2015. These new changes are to bring remarkable benefits to economic surveillance and analysis. The new statistical standards would allow economics data for the euro area to be disseminated in a timely manner with broadened coverage. In particular, Broadened data coverage and shorter transmission periods. ESA 2010 comes with a modified transmission program to Eurostat from the member states, with extended coverage (e.g. of non-financial assets and pension schemes) and advancement of transmission deadlines. Under the new schedule, national account aggregates are now to be transmitted at t+60 days (rather than t+70 days). The quarterly non-financial accounts by sector intended for euro area aggregates will be transmitted by the euro area countries at t+85 days (instead of t+90 days). Flash quarterly GDP estimates at T+30 days . In parallel to the adoption of ESA 2010, a Task Force (TF) is established by the National Accounts Working Group to assess the feasibility to Prepared jointly by the European (EUR) and Statistics Department (STA) of the IMF in consultation with the Eurostat and ECB. Claudia H. Dziobek acted as the STA coordinator. The ESS is defined by Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No. 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on European statistics. The ESCB performs its statistical function on the basis of Article 5 of the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB. The transition to ESA 2010 is regulated by EU Regulation No. 549/2013 and the transition to BPM6 is regulated by EU Regulation No. 555/2012 and ECB Guideline ECB/2011/23, as amended. Changes to monetary and financial statistics are regulated by the ECB.” Page 41 produce a flash estimate of the euro area and European Union quarterly GDP at T+30 days The TF started its work in June 2013 and intends to finalize the work by the end of 2015. Provided that the compilation of reliable T+30 days estimates is deemed to be feasible by the TF, a first T+30 flash estimate for the euro area and EU quarterly GDP could be published for Q1 2016. More detailed analysis and presentation of pension schemes . A compulsory supplementary table on pension entitlements will be required from 2017 to show the liabilities of all pension schemes, including those of government, whether they are unfunded or funded. This will improve comparability across countries and quantify the accrued-to-date pension entitlements of private households. Under ESA 2010, unfunded pension obligations of general government will not be reported in the core financial accounts and will not impact the Maastricht debt. Improved statistics and coverage of balance of payments data under BPM6. The ECB’s data reporting requirements on external statistics under the BPM6 are more detailed, particularly as regard the instrument detail within the various functional categories of financial transactions. The first dissemination of BPM6 data will also be accompanied by comprehensive back-data, whose length will depend on national data availability and quality. In addition, a more detailed geographical breakdown of the euro area international investment position will be available on a quarterly basis, instead of the current annual frequency. The implementation of the new international statistical standards, combined with improved national data collections, will result in revisions to the economic statistics. Revisions of historical GDP components are expected to raise GDP estimates for most EU members, partially due to the capitalization of research and development (R&D) expenditure and military weapons. The methodological revisions will for most countries coincide with regular benchmark revisions in which new data sources and methods will be introduced. While the exact impact on GDP levels varies across countries and they are not available until the data compilation is fully completed, the average impact of methodological changes (leaving aside statistical changes) on nominal EU GDP is expected to be an increase of 2.4 percent. In addition, the inclusion of part of illegal activities is likely to raise GDP estimates for some countries. Overall, as these re-categorized expenditures are relatively stable as share of GDP over time, most of methodological revisions are expected to affect GDP levels backwards with a limited impact on growth profile. There are remarkable improvements in government finance statistics to enhance economic and fiscal governance . The Enhanced Economic Governance Package (so called “Six Pack”) adopted in 2011 required adoption of measures for the collection and dissemination of monthly and quarterly fiscal data based on public accounts, and data on contingent liabilities for all Page 42 general government subsectors. Eurostat established a Task Force on the implications of the Directive under the “Six Pack” on the collection and dissemination of fiscal data. Important progress has been achieved up to date. Enhanced fiscal data reporting . By the end of 2013, countries brought into force the provisions necessary to comply with these requirements. Since February 2014, monthly fiscal data for central and state government and social security funds are publicly accessible for almost all countries on their national websites. A complete set of the general government accounts (including also local government) is available on a quarterly basis since end June Planned publication of general government contingent liabilities. In parallel to the new ESA transmission program, national publication of annual data on contingent liabilities and other indicators with potential impact on fiscal deficit and/or debt will start from October 2014. Eurostat will collect and disseminate new comparable sets of data regarding contingent liabilities and potential obligations of general government, such as the amounts of guarantees, the debt of public corporations, nonperforming loans, and potential obligations under Public Private Partnerships. Important steps are taken at the European level to support the ECB’s role as a single supervisor and monetary policy . In October 2013 a new EU regulation conferred to the ECB the sole responsibility for supervision of large banks in the euro area and in those EU member states that voluntarily adhere to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Expanded data collection and collaboration. The ECB will collect supervisory data for the banking groups based on the harmonized Implementing Technical Standards (ITS) of the European Banking Authority, which has six parts: financial reporting, consolidated reporting, asset encumbrance, large exposures, liquidity ratios, and leverage ratios. Additional ad hoc datasets, including but not limited to those required for stress-testing purposes, may also be requested. Data is also to be transmitted directly from national supervisory authorities when the national central bank is not the supervisory authority. Financial sector surveillance supporting SSM and monetary policy Since 2013 balance sheets of 246 monetary financial institutions (MFIs) are transmitted to the ECB on a monthly basis. This supports the analysis of deposit and lending decisions of the financial sector, and provides insights into the sources of bank funding. Quarterly data on the activities of non- bank financial institutions, including investment funds other than money market funds and including hedge funds, financial vehicles engaged in securitization and insurance companies and pension funds, are now collected by the ECB, complementing existing data relating to See Council Directive 2011/85/EU on requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States. The monthly fiscal data are cash based in the majority of countries, but the link with the accrual ESA 95 accounts is explained in the explanatory notes and a reconciliation table. See EU regulation No. 1024/2013. Page 43 money market funds. Analytical results based on these data are regularly transmitted to the ECB decision-making bodies to support monetary policy. Securities holdings statistics. A new dataset on securities holdings statistics is being collected by the ECB since end 2013 on the basis of the ECB Regulation concerning statistics on holdings of securities. The new data contains security-by-security information on holdings of individual securities by institutional sectors. Additionally, a second module comprises security-by-security information on the holdings by each of the largest euro area banking groups (i.e. also including the securities held by their subsidiaries and branches, both inside and outside the euro area) identified as important for the stability and functioning of the financial system in the euro area and in each euro area country. The survey on the access to finance of SMEs in the euro area (SAFE). ECB conducted the tenth semiannual survey on SME financing conditions, which provides evidence mainly on changes in the financial situation, financing needs, and access to financing from October 2013 to March 2014. The survey results suggest that financing conditions for SMEs continue to differ significantly across euro area countries and are in general more difficult than those of larger companies. Increasing quantitative coverage are to be expected in future surveys on firm characteristics including investment, export intensity, employees, and lending conditions such as interest rates, payment delays, and sources of financing. Moreover, from 2014, a larger version of the survey which is conducted every second year together with the Commission will become annual. Further improvements in data reporting The ECB and the IMF Statistics Department are finalizing the migration of the balance sheet data for depository corporations to the IMF’s Standardized Report Forms (SRFs) for monetary statistics. Work continues on mapping data for Other Financial Corporations. Ongoing efforts aim to enhance the statistics for the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (MIP). The ESS and the ESCB cooperate closely to assure the quality of MIP relevant statistics. In July 2013 the Commission submitted a draft proposal for a regulation on the provision and quality of statistics for the MIP to the European Parliament. The aim of this proposal is to develop a robust quality monitoring procedure in order to ensure the highest quality of the MIP relevant data. The proposal is currently under discussion at working party meetings of the Council. The total euro area sample size was 7,520 firms, of which 6,969 (93 percent) had fewer than 250 employees. Page 44 Press Release No. 14/341 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 14, 2014 International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 20431 USA IMF Executive Board Concludes 2014 Article IV Consultation on Euro Area Policies On July 9, 2014, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with the Euro Area. The euro area recovery is taking hold. Real output has expanded for four consecutive quarters, and financial market sentiment has improved markedly. Complementary policy actions have supported demand, boosted investor confidence, and eased financial conditions. At the national level, governments have made further progress repairing sovereign and bank balance sheets and implementing structure reforms to restore competitiveness. At the area- wide level, the ECB has taken a wider range of measures to support demand and address fragmentation. Progress on building a banking union continues, with the ECB set to assume supervisory responsibilities in November 2014, following the planned completion of the Comprehensive Assessment of systemically important banks. Additional steps—such as agreements on a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), backed by Single Resolution Fund (SRF), the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), and the deposit insurance harmonization directive—demonstrate collective commitment to EMU. But the recovery is neither robust nor sufficiently strong. Weak aggregate demand is weighing on real activity and pulling down inflation across the euro area, as corporates, households and banks continue to repair their balance sheets. Financial markets are still fragmented, with contracting credit and high borrowing costs constraining investment in countries with large output gaps, large debt burdens, and high unemployment. In this context, euro area GDP is expected to grow by just over 1 percent this year, before expanding by 1.5 percent in 2015. Headline inflation is expected to remain below the ECB’s primary price objective for a protracted period, underscoring the risks from low inflation. And there are remaining structural gaps in capital, labor, and product markets, presenting hurdles to financing investment, intra-euro area rebalancing, and raising productivity. Risks to growth are still tilted to the downside. With limited policy space in the near term, Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. Page 45 further negative shocks—either domestic or external—could undermine financial market sentiment, halt the recovery, and push the economy into lower inflation and even deflation. A common fiscal backstop would strengthen the credibility of the asset quality review (AQR) and stress tests. The recovery is also subject to external risks, including a slowdown in emerging market growth, escalation of geopolitical conflict, and an abrupt exit from unconventional monetary policies in the United States. Over the medium term, there is a risk of stagnation, which could result from persistently depressed domestic demand due to deleveraging, insufficient policy action, and stalled structural reforms. More positively, improved confidence could raise growth above forecast levels. Executive Board Assessment Executive Directors welcomed the strong policy actions taken at the euro area and national levels to prop up demand and ease financial conditions, which have improved market sentiment and recovery prospects. Directors emphasized that sustained, higher growth is needed to reduce unemployment and debt burdens in the euro area while also generating positive spillovers to the rest of the world. This requires concerted efforts that focus on additional demand support, completion of bank balance sheet repair and of a banking union, and further advancement of structural reforms. Directors underscored the importance of continued collective commitment to completing the architecture of the Economic and Monetary Union. Directors welcomed the exceptional measures recently taken by the European Central Bank (ECB) to address low inflation and strengthen demand, as well as its intention to use further unconventional instruments if necessary. They agreed that if inflation remains too low, consideration could be given to a large-scale asset purchase program, primarily of sovereign assets. Directors noted that the signaling of the ECB’s commitment to its price objective would eventually raise inflation expectations across the euro area. Directors acknowledged that the neutral area-wide fiscal stance is broadly appropriate, balancing growth with debt sustainability considerations. They stressed, however, that national fiscal policies should be carefully calibrated to support growth where space permits, making use of the flexibility under the fiscal framework and avoiding further consolidation in the event of large negative growth surprises, while adhering to the medium-term objective of reducing public debt-to-GDP ratios. Directors also recommended using the escape clauses in the fiscal framework if deflation risks materialize and monetary policy options are depleted. They saw scope for streamlining the governance framework over the medium term with a view to improving its clarity and compliance. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. Page 46 Directors underlined the urgency of repairing bank balance sheets and reducing financial fragmentation. While supporting the broad strategy and the ambitious timetable for bank recapitalization, they saw merit in maintaining some flexibility to take account of market conditions and financial stability concerns. They also considered that a common fiscal backstop would decisively sever bank-sovereign links and enhance the credibility of the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment of bank balance sheets. Directors were encouraged by the substantial progress toward a banking union, and looked forward to further advancement at the national level to facilitate corporate debt resolution, including by strengthening insolvency and debt restructuring frameworks. Directors stressed the need to step up structural reforms with a view to promoting employment, competitiveness, and intra-euro area rebalancing. Priority areas include: (i) diversifying funding markets through securitization, especially to credit-constrained smaller firms; (ii) removing country-specific structural impediments to tackle high youth unemployment; and (iii) higher public investment in creditor countries and continued competitiveness-enhancing reforms in debtor countries. Directors also encouraged steps to improve labor market functioning and increase competition in product and services sectors, which would support efforts at the euro area level to implement the Services Directive, negotiate free trade agreements, and further integrate energy markets. Page 47 Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2011-2016 (Percent change) Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2011-2016(Percent change) Projections 1/201120122013201420152016Demand and Supply Real GDP 1.6-0.7-0.41.11.51.7 Private consumption 0.3-1.3-0.70.61.11.3 Public consumption -0.1-0.60.10.30.30.4 Gross fixed investment 1.6-4.0-2.91.62.72.8 Final domestic demand 0.5-1.7-0.90.71.21.4 Stockbuilding 2/ 0.3-0.50.00.10.00.0 Domestic Demand0.7-2.2-1.00.81.21.4 Foreign balance 2/0.91.50.50.30.30.2 Exports 3/ 6.52.51.43.94.54.9 Imports 3/ 4.5-0.90.43.44.14.7 Resource Utilization Potential GDP 0.60.40.60.81.01.1 Output gap-0.8-1.8-2.8-2.5-2.0-1.4 Employment 0.3-0.6-0.80.30.70.9 Unemployment rate 4/ 10.111.312.011.711.410.8Prices GDP deflator 1.21.31.51.11.41.4 Consumer prices2.72.51.30.71.21.3Public Finance 5/ General government balance-4.1-3.7-3.0-2.7-2.1-1.5 General government structural balance -3.7-2.3-1.3-1.2-0.9-0.6 General government gross debt88.292.995.295.994.993.2External Sector 5/, 7/ Current account balance 0.11.32.22.32.52.5Interest Rates 4/, 6/EURIBOR 3-month offered rate1.40.20.30.3……10-year government benchmark bond yield4.32.33.32.6…… Exchange Rates 6/ U.S. dollar per euro1.391.301.371.37…… Nominal effective rate (2000=100)104.299.8108.5108.6…… Real effective rate (2000=100) 6/95.090.296.195.3…… Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook, Global Data Source, DataStream, and Eurostat. 1/ Projections are based on aggregation of WEO projections submitted by IMF country teams. 2/ Contribution to growth. 3/ Includes intra-euro area trade. 4/ In percent. 5/ In percent of GDP. 6/ Latest monthly available data for 2014. 7/ Projections are based on member countries' current account aggregations excluding intra-euro flows and corrected for aggregation discrepancy over the projection period. Page 48 Statement by Menno Snel, Executive Director, on the Euro Area July 9, 2014 In my capacity as President of EURIMF, I submit this Buff statement on the Article IV consultation with the euro area. It reflects the common view of the Member States of the euro area and the relevant European Union institutions in their respective fields of competence. The authorities of the euro-area Member States and EU institutions are grateful for open and fruitful consultations with staff and for their constructive policy advice. The authorities are generally in broad agreement with staff findings and recommendations. Policy actions over the past year have laid the foundations for recovery and boosted investor confidence. However, policy action is still needed to strengthen the recovery by supporting domestic sources of growth, pursuing differentiated, growth friendly fiscal consolidation, addressing financial fragmentation and facilitating the balance sheet repair in the private sector as well as advancing structural reforms. The authorities are making continued efforts to ensure deeper structural reforms throughout the euro area in order to boost potential growth, to create jobs and to ensure that the intra euro area rebalancing observed in recent years will continue. The analysis undertaken within the economic surveillance framework under the European Semester leads to country specific policy advice on fiscal and structural policies. The authorities reiterate their commitment to take all necessary actions to strengthen the recovery in the euro area and ensure medium-term growth and sustainability of public debt. Economic outlook and risks The authorities broadly share staff's view on economic prospects. Despite recent improvements, the ongoing economic recovery remains moderate and is expected to gain momentum only slowly in 2014-15, while job creation is still lagging behind. In the first quarter, real GDP increased by 0.2% (quarter-on-quarter), following an expansion by 0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2013. After four quarters of economic expansion, the real economy has not yet fully recovered from the impact of the European sovereign-debt crisis. Despite significant improvements in financial market sentiment, in the first half of 2014, credit dynamics remain weak, which can only partially be attributed to the usual lagged response of credit during a cyclical upturn. For instance, bank lending to the euro-area private sector continued to decline over the last couple of months, at an annual rate of -1.4% in May (adjusted for sales and securitisation). Lending volumes to the non-financial corporate sector continued to be weaker with -2.5% annual growth in May (adjusted for sales and securitisation), with market fragmentation still persisting, while the annual growth rate of loans to households remained slightly positive, mainly supported by lending for house purchases. Heterogeneity in lending volumes and interest rates across euro-area countries has slightly receded but remains high. Financial fragmentation has reduced but is still hampering the transmission of financial conditions to productive activity in some countries. Page 49 Looking ahead, the economic recovery is expected to continue, gradually gaining momentum and broadening across countries, as domestic demand strengthens in the course of this year. This includes fixed investment, which, as staff also emphasises, has been hit hard since the beginning of the crisis in 2007-08. Fixed investment is expected to continue its expansion as financing conditions remain favourable (on average), uncertainty declines further and the recovery gains momentum. According to the Commission services' Spring 2014 forecast, real GDP should grow by 1.2% in 2014 and by 1.7% in 2015, with all domestic GDP components and net exports making positive contributions in both years. The mechanical impact of the weaker-than expected first quarter on the annual figure for 2014 should be small. This outlook is also broadly in line with staff's forecast, which appears to be marginally less optimistic for output growth but comprises an identical outlook for employment growth. The on-going balance-sheet repair in the private sector as well as the residual fragmentation of financial markets are the main factors constraining growth in 2014. The expected uptick in growth in 2015 reflects not only stronger global growth, but also higher growth of private consumption and gross fixed capital formation. Further progress with structural reforms, with the banking union and with the repair of banks' balance sheets is expected to support the strengthening of domestic demand and thus the recovery. In both years, the moderate pace of expansion implies that unemployment rates should fall only slowly from current levels. The staff’s assessment highlights that risks to the growth outlook remain tilted to the downside with downside risks having recently increased on the external side. The authorities are less pessimistic than the staff's report regarding their potential impact on the euro area. On the domestic side, one of the main risks to growth remains the stalling or only partial implementation of structural, fiscal and institutional reforms at the Member States and the EU level. Supporting domestic demand and strengthening the recovery The authorities underline that the Fund's concern of a protracted period of slow growth and even stagnation is not a central scenario. Monetary policy and the outlook for price stability The authorities broadly share staff's view on euro area inflation dynamics and outlook. At present, inflation is very low at 0.5% both in May and, according to the flash estimate, also in June 2014. Looking ahead, inflation is expected to remain at low levels over the coming months, before increasing only gradually during 2015 and 2016. Inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be firmly anchored in line with the ECB’s aim to maintain inflation rates at levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Both upside and downside risks to the outlook for price developments remain limited and broadly balanced over the medium term. The ECB is strongly determined to keep inflation expectations solidly anchored over the medium term. Over the past year, the ECB forcefully responded to the risks to price stability, which at the current juncture are associated with the risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation. To address those risks, the ECB has lowered its key ECB interest rates in November and announced a comprehensive monetary policy package in early June. All these measures provide additional monetary policy accommodation and support lending to the real economy. Taken together, these measures should contribute to a return of inflation to levels closer to Page 50 Specifically, the ECB measures of early June included a cut in the key ECB interest rates, including, for the first time, a negative rate on the deposit facility now standing at -0.10%. Moreover, the ECB has announced to conduct longer-term refinancing operations targeted to support bank lending to the non-financial private sector and it is intensifying its preparatory work related to outright purchases in the ABS market. To maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation and to contain volatility in money markets all refinancing operations will be conducted as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment at least until end 2016, and the weekly operations sterilising the liquidity injected under the SMP have been suspended. The ECB has also announced to maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation. The key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period of time in view of the current outlook for inflation. If necessary, the ECB stands ready to use further unconventional instruments within its mandate to address further risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. At the same time, the combination of monetary policy measures decided last month has already led to a measurable easing of the monetary policy stance and is likely to provide impetus to an expansion of loans to the real economy which in turn will support and reinforce the on-going economic recovery. Fiscal policy On the fiscal policy side, the authorities broadly agree with the Fund's assessment that the current fiscal stance for the euro area is appropriate and believe that, if needed, the possibilities offered by the EU's existing fiscal framework to balance fiscal discipline with the need to support growth should be used. Given the persistently high debt and unemployment levels and the low nominal GDP growth, as well as the challenges of an ageing society and of supporting job-creation, particularly for the young, fiscal consolidation must continue in a growth-friendly and differentiated manner. Structural reforms that enhance growth and improve fiscal sustainability should be given particular attention, including through an appropriate assessment of fiscal measures and structural reforms, while making best use of the flexibility that is built into the existing Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) rules. On the fiscal governance framework, the authorities believe that the Fund should take into account the legal requirements of the Treaty, when assessing possible changes to the current governance framework. Substantial progress has been achieved in improving the SGP, and in improving the methodology to interpret fiscal effort and the structural indicators. In addition, the composition of fiscal consolidation is important to ensure a growth-friendly fiscal