The euro area recovery is taking hold (Figure 1). Real activity has expanded for four consecutive quarters. An incipient revival in domestic demand, owing partly to reduced fiscal drag, is adding to the impetus from net exports. Financial market sentiment has improved dramatically (Figure 2) Sovereign and corporate yields have fallen markedly, benefiting from increasing foreign demand. This has narrowed sovereign spreads between stressed and core economies, and supported corporate bond issuance and equity markets across the region. Bank funding costs have also declined, helping banks to raise capital and deleverage their balance sheets. Strong policy actions have boosted investor confidence and laid the foundations for recovery. At the national level, governments have made further progress repairing sovereign and bank balance sheets and implementing structural reforms to restore competitiveness. At the area- wide level, the ECB has taken a wide range of measures to support demand and address fragmentation. The Comprehensive Assessment of systemically important banks is on track to be completed in October 2014 before the ECB assumes supervisory responsibilities in November 2014. Further progress on building a banking union—such as the agreements on a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), backed by a Single Resolution Fund (SRF), the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), and the deposit insurance harmonization directive—has demonstrated the collective commitment to EMU. European elections may pose risks to the single market (particularly the free flow of labor) and test the credibility of the nascent fiscal governance framework. With the economic recovery taking hold and financial markets rallying, additional progress on reforms may be prone to reform fatigue—both at the national and euro area level. But the appetite for further integration has diminished. The euro-skeptic outcome of the Page 6 And lingering damage from the crisis has manifested itself in several ways. Real activity and investment in the euro area have yet to reach pre-crisis levels . In the first quarter of 2014, euro area growth was weaker than expected and unevenly distributed across countries. Investment continues to be constrained by limited access to credit in stressed countries (Box 1). Financial markets are still fragmented . Private borrowing costs remain too high in stressed economies. The flow of credit to the private sector in stressed economies is contracting at a faster rate than for the euro area as a whole, with SMEs in particular subject to credit rationing. Moreover, cross-border banking flows continue to shrink, suggesting that liquidity provision is becoming splintered along national lines. Inflation remains worryingly low. Both headline and underlying inflation rates are fluctuating below 1 percent—away from the ECB’s price stability objective of close to (but below) 2 percent for headline inflation (Figure 3). They remain low even in the core. Energy and food price developments, euro appreciation, and structural reforms have contributed to disinflationary pressures but cannot fully explain them. The still-sizeable output gap continues to pull down inflation. Although long-term inflation expectations remain anchored, short- and medium-term expectations have been drifting down. Unemployment and debt are still stubbornly high . The average unemployment rate for the euro area remains at 12 percent, although it is much higher in economies under stress. Youth unemployment is even more elevated, averaging 24 percent across the region, but with unprecedented highs in stressed economies (e.g., over 50 percent in Greece). Private and public debt levels remain elevated in many countries (Figure 4). For the euro area as a whole, the external position is assessed to be broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals and desired policies (Figure 5). But this masks the asymmetry of past adjustments and some continued imbalances, viz . an undervaluation in some creditor economies and overvaluation in most debtor economies (see 2014 External Sector Report). In debtor countries, relative price adjustments have been proceeding gradually. While these efforts have contributed to a rebound in exports, slumping internal demand has accounted for much of the reduction in current account deficits in these economies. This has not been matched by stronger demand and lower external surpluses in the core. Hence, the current account surplus of the euro Page 7 area as a whole has grown further, putting upward pressure on the euro. Staff analysis indicates that further adjustments in relative prices are still needed for some countries to regain competitiveness. Such adjustments will be increasingly difficult to achieve, given nominal rigidities in these countries and low inflation in trading partners. A fall in the surpluses of creditor countries would allow debtor country surpluses to increase further without pressure for euro appreciation. In addition, although the euro is broadly in equilibrium in real terms, a weaker nominal exchange rate (and higher inflation) would help support the recovery by improving cyclical conditions. Box 1. Investment in the Euro Area: Why has it been Weak? Investment has been hit hard since the onset of the crisis. It remains below its pre-crisis level, particularly in stressed countries and it has been weaker than in most previous recessions and financial crises Staff analysis shows that output changes can explain broad trends in investment in the euro area and selected individual countries. But, in most cases and with the exception of Spain, a model controlling for output changes only does not fully account for the decline in real non-residential private investment after the European sovereign debt crisis. The elevated cost of capital, greater financial constraints, high corporate leverage, and uncertainty have also weighed on investment across the euro area. The relative importance of different factors varies across countries. The real cost of capital is important in explaining investment in many cases. In addition, financial constraints (from the EC consumer and business survey) have limited investment, particularly in stressed countries. High corporate sector leverage and uncertainty are additional impediments to investment in Italy, Spain, and to a lesser extent in Portugal and France. Output changes and country specific impediments explain the weak investment performance well. While output dynamics play a dominant role in determining investment, the real cost of capital, credit rationing (proxied by a financial constraints variable), high corporate indebtedness, and uncertainty are additional factors pulling down investment across the euro area, particularly after the European sovereign debt crisis. For example, while investment in cumulative terms (since 2010Q2) has been below the levels that would have been predicted by controlling only for output changes (about 3 to 6 percent of GDP), once the other factors are controlled for the “missing” investment declines to about ½ to 2 percent of GDP. Investment is expected to pick up as the recovery strengthens and uncertainty declines . However, a sustained recovery in investment will require dealing with the corporate debt overhang and financial fragmentation. Corporate debt-to-equity remains elevated in some stressed countries, and the deleveraging process is still at an early stage. At the same time, borrowing costs need to be substantially lower particularly for smaller firms. Prepared by Bergljot Barkbu, Pelin Berkmen, Pavel Lukyantsau, Sergejs Saksonovs, and Hanni Schoelermann. The real cost of capital is calculated as a weighted average of financing costs of bank loans, corporate bonds, and equities, adjusted for inflation and depreciation. In stressed economies it is currently higher than its historical average, while for Germany it is lower. See the accompanying Selected Issues Paper for further details. Page 8