Background. Improving the investment climate is key in achieving private sector-led growth in the FSM. Currently, FSM’s overall investment climate is ranked among the worst in the Pacific (145 th among 189 economies in the world). Structural issues, including in the area of land ownership, combined with the remoteness of the country, are key bottlenecks for private sector development. Private sector is largely dependent on the public sector, and is not an engine of growth as of now. Land tenure issue. In the FSM, most properties are held as family trusts and land use rights are passed down from generation to generation within the extended family. This makes it difficult for potential investors to secure a long-term land lease. Use of land as collateral is also difficult due to family ownership of the land, which is compounded by uncertain boundaries and titles. While complex in nature and closely related to the local traditions, the authorities should redouble efforts at land reform, including by expediting the land survey and registration. Tourism. FSM’s tourism income (7 percent of GDP in 2013) lags behind several of its peers in the Pacific. The recent grant-financed extension of the runway at Pohnpei Airport could open the way for expanding tourism. The authorities are making efforts to establish direct air connections to destinations in Asia, including by signing open sky agreements and arranging chartered flights. Nonetheless, the issue of land ownership will be a crucial factor in developing tourism, including the availability of land for new hotel investment. Also, attention needs to be paid to safeguard the cultural heritage and pristine nature of the country, key to achieving national consensus for the promotion of tourism. Others. The “2023 Action Plan” reconfirms the challenges pointed out by the World Bank Group’s Doing Business Report persist, including the time required in resolving a commercial dispute before local courts (5.3 years on average) and the elevated cost for creditors in recovering debt from insolvent debtors (average recovery rate is 3.3 cents on the dollar). Review of applications for inward foreign direct investment should be expedited. Tourism Income, 2013 Source: Fund staff estimates. . 1/ Highest rank = 1; lowest rank = 189.Small Pacific island countries (mean)Other small states (mean) Page 10 Authorities’ Views. The authorities broadly agreed with the assessment by staff that a more robust private sector is indispensable for the future of the FSM, and emphasized that a number of policy actions are included in the “2023 Action Plan”. They also explained that they plan to receive TA from the World Bank Group to review all investment and other relevant laws in the FSM to identify areas of discrepancies. To facilitate foreign direct investment, the authorities are considering establishing an Investment Promotion Agency at the national level to act as a one-stop-shop.