Context. The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) is a microstate in the Pacific with one of the most dispersed population in the world. It is highly dependent on external aid, mainly from the United States. The FSM has a loosely federated structure, with four states each having its own executive and legislative bodies. This makes decision making at the national level difficult – a number of reform agendas are experiencing protracted delays. Growth and social indicators. private sector has yet to become the engine of growth for the economy, and caters largely to the needs of the public sector. FSM’s average annual growth rate between FY2005 and 2013 was close to zero and is worse than other countries in the Pacific (Figures 1 and 2). The FSM is endowed with bountiful natural resources and has a strong tradition of caring and sharing through the extended family. While there are no data to track hunger in the FSM, the fact that a relatively small proportion of the population (11 percent) live below the national food poverty line suggests that extreme poverty and poverty- caused hunger are not widespread , while the disappointing growth has had some negative impact on the progress of Millennium Development Goals. Long-term fiscal challenge. The FSM faces a long-term fiscal challenge as US grants provided under the Compact of Free Association (Compact grants) will expire in FY2023. Compact grants disbursed in FY2013 for current and capital spending amounted to about 25 percent of GDP accounting for more than 40 percent of the general government revenue. The authorities have recently produced the “2023 Action Plan” with the view to addressing the long-term fiscal challenge while accelerating the economic growth (Box 1). At this juncture, most of the policy actions included in the Action Plan, including the tax reform package that will play a critical role in enhancing the fiscal revenue, remain to be endorsed by the legislatures. The fiscal year runs from October to September (for example, FY2015 covers October 2014 to September 2015). Average annual growth rate in the Pacific during the same period was about 2 percent. Millennium Development Goals and the Federated States of Micronesia Status Report 2010, FSM Office of Statistics, Budget, and Economic Management, Overseas Development Assistance, and Compact Management. If contributions to the CTF are included, the ratio is more than 30 percent of GDP. Geographical Dispersion: Average Sea Distance Between Two Inhabitants of the Same Country (In kilometers) Micronesia: Millenium Development Goals (MDGs) Progress Source: 2013 Pacific Regional MDG Tracking Report, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. MixedOff trackMDG 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Halve between 1990 and 2015 the proportion of people whose income is less than $1 per day. MDG 2. Achieve universal primary educationMDG 3. Promote gender equality and empowerment Eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education. MDG 4. Reduce child (under 5) mortality by two thirds Integrate principles of sustainable development into country policies. MDG 5. Improve maternal health Reduce maternal mortality by three quarters. MDG 6. Reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria and TBOff trackMDG 7. Ensure environmental sustainabilityOn trackOn trackMixedMixed Page 5 Trust funds. A portion of the Compact grants have been disbursed into the Compact Trust Fund (CTF), jointly managed by the US and the FSM, with the view that returns from the trust fund would be sufficient to enable Micronesia to become fiscally sustainable after FY2023. The FSM has also established its own trust fund (FSM Trust Fund). However, at current pace of accumulation, returns from these funds are expected to fall short of the expired Compact grants in FY2023 – hence the need to step up fiscal consolidation and growth-enhancing structural reforms.