Recent developments. Fiscal revenue excluding foreign grants increased in FY2014 by 10 percent of GDP, on account mostly of higher fishing license fees (4 percent of GDP) and a tax windfall from a company’s sale of shares launched on a foreign stock exchange (7 percent of GDP). Against this backdrop, the national government transferred $30 million (10 percent of GDP) to the trust funds out of the surplus realized in FY2014 and plans to allocate more funds for infrastructure in FY2015. State governments have started fiscal consolidation efforts under their respective Long- Term Fiscal Frameworks (LTFF), which envisages a contraction of current expenditures by 2 percent per year on average in real terms. Taking all these into account, staff estimates that the overall fiscal surplus will decline to 3 percent of GDP in FY2015 from 10 percent in FY2014. Typhoon Maysak traversed the Chuuk and Yap states between March 29 and April 1, 2015. While assessments of the damages are still on-going, 4 fatalities resulting from the storm have been confirmed and about 30,000 people are affected in the states of Chuuk and Yap. In light of disaster assistance agreements between the FSM and the U.S. under the Compact of Free Association, the U.S. Agency for International Development (Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance) is providing humanitarian assistance to Micronesia (humanitarian assistance provided so far amounts to $2.3 million). United Nations and other countries, including Marshall Islands, Australia, China, and Japan, are also providing emergency assistance. Page 7 Medium-term fiscal framework. The authorities should formulate a medium- to long-term fiscal framework that covers both the national and state governments, with a view to achieving budgetary self-reliance in the post-2023 period. To this end, an inclusive process underpinned by extensive consultations with stakeholders across the country will be critically important – this will help ensure that the fiscal strategy can be implemented with the required legislative measures over a medium term. The framework should adopt the outstanding value of the trust funds (Compact Trust Fund and FSM Trust Fund) in percent of GDP as the fiscal anchor. Target value of the trust funds asset (see Box 2). The trust funds value should reach 340 percent of GDP in FY2023 through a combination of increased revenue efforts and expenditure reforms. At this level, the trust funds will be able to generate sufficient returns to make up for the expiration of the Compact grants in FY2024. Even after adjusting the annual draw downs with the inflation rate, trust funds value will remain around 300 percent of GDP in FY2034. Tax reform and tax administration. long-debated tax reform package should be implemented over a period of 4 years starting from FY2016, generating additional tax revenue of 4 percent of GDP when fully implemented (1 percent of GDP per year). Micronesia’s tax revenue is low (12–13 percent of GDP), while the average in the Pacific is close to 20 percent of GDP. The mission welcomes the recent establishment of the Unified Revenue Authority (URA) by the national and 2 state governments (Chuuk and Kosrae). The URA should be extended to cover the remaining two states (Pohnpei and Yap) while further enhancing tax compliance, in particular of large tax payers. At the request of the authorities, PFTAC has recently started to provide TA in this area. Income Tax International Trade Taxes Others Tax Revenue, 2013 (In percent of GDP)Source: Fund staff estimates. Introduce a new Net Profit Tax (at a rate of 25 percent) 1/2. Business tax 1/ Major corporations are already subject to a corporate income tax. Main elements of the tax reform package Abolish import duties and state sales taxes1. Indirect taxIntroduce a new VAT (at a rate of 10 percent) Abolish the Gross Revenue Tax (at a rate of 3 percent)4. Tax administration Source: FSM authorities Reduce the Gross Wage and Salary Tax (6 percent for the first $11,000; 10 percent of amounts over $11,000) by introducing a $5,000 tax free threshold.3. Payroll taxEstablish a Unified Revenue Authority (URA)URA acts as an agent on behalf of the national and state governments Page 8 Expenditure reform. Staff welcomes the recent start of fiscal consolidation efforts at the state level under the LTFF. However, more needs to be done to achieve the targeted value of the trust funds (340 percent of GDP) in FY2023. This will require additional fiscal consolidation of 1 percent of GDP and the LTFF should be extended to the national government as well. Fiscal consolidation should be accompanied by improvement in the quality of public spending, so as to safeguard priority spending in the social sector and infrastructure investment with high development impact. Micronesia’s overall wage expenditure, at 22 percent of GDP, is among the highest in the Pacific. Better coordination between the national and state governments could result in savings by minimizing redundancies of functions between the two levels of governments. While qualifications required for private and public sector may not be fully comparable, public sector wage should continuously be reviewed . The national government is undertaking a public administration reform project, which includes the review of staff number, pay structure and staff grading. The state governments are reviewing their expenditure including the wage bill under the LTFFs. PFTAC is providing TA to strengthen Public Financial Management and improve the quality of spending with limited resources. Transfer of fiscal surplus to the trust funds. Staff welcomes the recent transfer of $30 million to the FSM Trust Fund, thus saving the fiscal surplus resulting from the tax windfall from a company’s sale of shares launched on a foreign stock exchange and the increase in the fishing license fee revenue in FY2014. Going forward, fiscal surpluses should continue to be transferred in full to the trust funds. The trust funds should continue to be managed prudently to ensure that funds are appropriately managed for the post-2023 period. Externally-funded infrastructure projects. The unused balance of already allocated Compact grants for infrastructure projects reached almost US$ 140 million (about 40 percent of GDP) at the end of FY2014. Authorities should work closely with all the stakeholders to address the issue, including by updating the infrastructure development plan of 2004 with TA from the ADB in order to prioritize projects in light of their development effectiveness and implementation capacity of each state . Improving the planning and management of the projects, in particular through better coordination between the national government and state governments, would also be important. Authorities’ Views. The authorities broadly agreed with the staff view of the overall strategy. The authorities emphasized that achieving national consensus across the four states and the national government for both the expenditure and revenue reforms will be critically important. Average wage of the public sector is twice the level of the private sector. Updating the infrastructure development plan of 2004 is also a requirement by the donor, along with other measures to ensure proper management of projects. Wage expenditure Other current expenditureSources: Country authorities;and Fund staff estimates. Government Current Expenditures, 2014 Average of Pacific Island Countries Page 9 They noted that the “2023 Action Plan” calls for the implementation of a number of policy actions, including the tax reform package which should be implemented by FY2018 by both the national and state governments. The authorities noted that the national government has recently developed a Public Financial Management Roadmap to achieve improved transparency in accounting for public funds and increased availability of information on annual budgets and financial statements.