Background. Risks to external stability are limited, as current account deficits have mostly been financed by non-debt creating foreign capital grants for infrastructure projects. While the trade and service balance had a large deficit, it was partially offset by official transfers and fishing license fees. Compact-related grants will continue to provide a stable source of funding until FY2023. However, under the baseline scenario that does not envisage major policy actions, the authorities will have to take on concessional external loans from FY2024 onwards in order to safeguard priority developent spending, leading to the breach of some debt indicators (see DSA Annex). Impact of lower oil price. The FSM is a net importer of petroleum products, thus benefitting from a recent decline in energy prices. Micronesia’s net import of petroleum products have been increasing over the past two decades, rising from 4 percent of GDP in FY1995 to 12 percent in FY2013. This has partly reflected the increase in oil prices while changes in the way of life of Micronesians have led to a gradual shift to use of modern forms of energy. A decline in oil prices is expected to have positive impact as the FSM is a net oil importer – a 10 percent decline in the imported price of petroleum products is estimated to improve the current account balance by around 1 percent of GDP . To reduce its reliance on imported petroleum products, the FSM has started to work with development partners to invest in renewable energy, in particular in outlying islands where the cost of electricity generation tends to be elevated. Real exchange rate. Micronesia’s real exchange rate has been evolving in line with its neighboring countries in the Pacific, and is driven by changes in the price of imported food and fuel. The real effective rate appreciated by 5 percent between 2010 and 2013, before stabilizing in 2014 (Figure 2), but does not seem to have had much impact on Micronesia’s export that is heavily concentrated on tuna fish (see Box 3 on the fisheries sector). Fish export increased from 7 percent of Kazuaki Washimi, April 2015, “Small States of the Pacific – Impact of Lower Oil Prices”, IMF Asia and Pacific Small States Monitor. Exports of Fish (% of GDP) Price of Tuna (US$ per ton) [RHS]1/ Four-quarter moving average. Sources: Country authorities; Globe Fish, Ministry of Trade of Thailand; and Fund staff estimates. Micronesia: Fish Exports and Prices 1/ Crude Oil Price (US$) [RHS] 1/ Net Oil Imports (% of GDP) Sources: FSM authorities; and Bloomberg.1/ Simple average of Brent, Dubai, and WTI. Micronesia: Net Oil Imports and International Prices Page 12 GDP in FY2010 to 9 percent of GDP in FY2013, reflecting the increase in the international price of tuna. Authorities’ view. The authorities broadly shared the view that lower oil prices would have some positive impact on the economy. They also noted that utilities companies have already started to lower the electricity tariff to pass on the lower price of imported diesel. The authorities mentioned that the use of the U.S. dollar as the domestic currency remains appropriate for the FSM given its limited administrative capacity for independent monetary and exchange rate policies.