Background. The difficult business environment, in particular, complexities in securing a land lease and using land as collateral, has resulted in the scarcity of bankable projects. At the same time, the number of deposit accounts with commercial banks per 1,000 adults reached 565 in 2013 increasing by more than 30 percent since 2004. Reflecting the lack of bankable projects, the loan-to- deposit ratio of commercial banks is very low at 24 percent in FY2014 and the majority of deposits are invested overseas in safe financial assets (Table 4). Credit unions. While commercial banks are well-capitalized and have sufficient liquidity and subject to the supervision of the Banking Board, credit unions, while small in their size, are not subject to any prudential oversight. Staff welcomes on-going initiative by the authorities to enact a new Credit Union Act that will place credit unions under the supervision of the Banking Board, with TA provided by PFTAC and the Legal Department of the Fund. Authorities’ views: The authorities emphasized that they have been working closely with PFTAC and the Legal Department of the Fund to prepare a Credit Union Act that will expand the There are two commercial banks in the FSM: one local bank and a U.S. bank. The two banks are covered by the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The average in the Pacific in 2013 was about 800 accounts per 1,000 adults, though data was not available for 3 countries (Marshalls, Tuvalu and Vanuatu). As deposits are mostly short term, so are the foreign assets. This helps reduce the market risk of the banks. PalauSamoaFijiTongaFSMPNGSolomon Isl.Kiribati Deposit accounts with commercial banks, 2013 (Per 1,000 adults)Sources: IMF, Financial Access Survey Average Getting Electricity Dealing with Construction PermitsGetting CreditTrading Across BordersPaying Taxes Resolving Insolvency Starting a BusinessEnforcing ContractsProtecting Minority InvestorsRegistering Property Micronesia: Ease of Doing Business, 2015 Doing Business 2015 .1/ Highest rank = 1; lowest rank = 189. . 1/ Highest rank = 1; lowest rank = 189.Small Pacific island countries (mean)Other small states (mean) . 1/ Highest rank = 1; lowest rank = 189.Small Pacific island countries (mean)Other small states (mean) Page 11 supervisory mandate of the Banking Board over credit unions. They also noted the need to achieve a national consensus in order to have the new law approved by the legislature. On the business environment, the authorities reiterated the importance of implementing the policy actions included in the “2023 Action Plan”, in particular, those related to regulatory and land reforms.