The external balance has improved in 2015, owing to low global commodity prices and strong foreign inflows. The trade balance narrowed in 2015 given weaker-than-expected import growth, due to low global commodity prices. Exceptionally strong earnings from tourism and remittances have also contributed to the improvement of the current account balance from a deficit of 10 percent of GDP in 2013 to an estimated deficit of 5.6 percent of GDP in 2015. While the tourism earnings and visitor arrivals are expected to continue to grow strongly due to an increased connectivity to Asia, the current account deficit is expected to widen somewhat going forward with growing imports. Reserve coverage remains stable at about 5 months of imports using standard reserve metric. While the real effective exchange rate has depreciated slightly in 2015, it remains somewhat above the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals. In September 2015, the REER declined slightly by 0.2 percent from a year ago. Reflecting its peg to a currency basket, the Fiji dollar appreciated against the Australian and New Zealand dollar but depreciated significantly Imports have been substantially revised downwards due to improved data collection by the authorities. Since April 1975, the exchange rate of the Fiji dollar has been linked to a basket of currencies of Fiji’s five major trading partners: the U.S., Australian, and New Zealand dollars; the Euro; and the Japanese yen. The weights used in the basket, based mainly on the value of trade and tourist transactions are reviewed annually. Page 16 against the US dollar. According to the Fund’s exchange rate assessment models, estimates of the deviation of the real effective exchange rate from its equilibrium level point to an average overvaluation of about 8 percent, with a range that encompasses a small undervaluation of 3 percent to an overvaluation of 15 percent (see Box 3 for further details). The current favorable environment provides a good opportunity to lay the foundation for a more flexible exchange rate regime. Periodic reviews and adjustments as needed of the level of the basket peg would avoid protracted deviations from fundamentals and the need for large adjustments. As noted in previous consultations, allowing greater flexibility from a position of strength (particularly strong economic growth and robust foreign exchange inflows) would facilitate the eventual transition to a more flexible regime while helping cushion the blow from external shocks. Relaxation of capital account restrictions should continue towards fully meeting Article VIII requirements. A gradual liberalization of capital controls and exchange rate restrictions will encourage foreign investment as it will improve investors’ perception (particularly of the ease of remittance of profits and funds and the elimination of tax certification requirements). Given the prospect of robust reserve coverage over the medium term, the challenges associated with liberalizing exchange restrictions should diminish and the measures would have a minimal impact on the balance of payments. Moreover, recent efforts to strengthen the current AML/CFT regime, including the role of the Financial Intelligence Unit in assisting the National AML Council, are welcome and should continue. Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that the current exchange rate regime has served the country well and has contributed to macroeconomic stability . They noted that reserves are at a comfortable level and that foreign exchange inflows have continued to surprise on the upside. While they noted that more flexibility could be desirable over the longer term as the economy develops, they are closely monitoring the foreign exchange market and see no need for adjustments in the near term. The authorities also argued that exchange restrictions should be gradually liberalized, but this should happen in tandem with broader economic development . They underscored that those restrictions have helped insulate Fiji from volatility in international financial markets, while at the same time they have not adversely affected the country’s overall openness to international investors.