While CPI inflation has been subdued, low interest rates and excess liquidity in the banking system have fueled credit growth and house prices. Inflation pressures have remained subdued partly due to low global fuel prices as well as a significant share of administered prices in the CPI (Appendix IV). In contrast, house prices have risen rapidly and the credit cycle has remained strong, and combined with low interest rates, has further propelled the house price momentum. Despite the relatively weak monetary transmission mechanism, there is some econometric evidence that low interest rates have fueled credit growth and contributed to the run-up in house prices (Appendix V). Given strong economic momentum and rapid credit growth, a removal of monetary accommodation is warranted . The RBF should start by mopping up excess liquidity (with open market operations or raising reserve requirements) and then gradually raising the policy rate. Growth has been above trend for the past three years, and as a result, the output gap is estimated to be positive. With the real policy interest rate in negative territory, a tightening of the monetary policy stance is needed to ensure that the credit cycle is sustainable and does not accentuate the economic cycle, increasing the economic volatility and the likelihood of a boom-bust cycle (Appendix V). The removal of monetary support will also be important as broader efforts to deregulate administered prices take place, especially as the transitory factors holding inflation down (such as the low level of oil and other commodity prices) wane. Strong credit growth also calls for intensified financial sector supervision and the implementation of macroprudential policies . While banks have capital ratios above regulatory House price data are somewhat incomplete and covers mostly the capital Suva. The rapid increases in house prices in recent years were partly driven by scarcity of freehold land and a surge in purchases by foreigners before measures to restrict foreign purchases were taken by the authorities. Nonetheless, loan growth in the real estate and housing segments has remained strong, pointing to strong domestic demand as well. Page 13 requirements and low levels of non-performing loans (NPLs), the RBF should actively monitor their exposures to interest rate and credit risks, including by regularly conducting stress tests. This is important given that NPLs are a lagging indicator (particularly when credit growth is robust) and asset quality has not been tested given the strong economic momentum. The RBF should also actively monitor and supervise the lending activities of non-bank financial institutions as a step toward enlarging the regulatory perimeter, given that closer supervision of banks may create incentives for regulatory arbitrage and growth in the non-bank financial sector. The RBF should also consider imposing loan-to-value restrictions for real estate loans to help tame the steep credit growth in the real estate segment and rapid increases in house prices. Measures to address the fast growth in automobile and unsecured personal loans should also be considered. Efforts to promote financial inclusion, particularly access to banking services, are welcome. Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that monetary policy should continue to support growth . While they agreed that interest rates are low, they see the liquidity situation stabilizing in the near term and noted that lending rates have already started to increase. They also argued that while they are monitoring credit growth closely, it is too early to tighten monetary policy as there is still pent up demand for credit. In response to the staff’s recommendation of enhanced financial sector supervision, the RBF noted that they have been proactively conducting onsite supervisions They also noted that they have access to more data following the implementation of the macro-prudential survey to assess lending conditions and creditworthiness. The RBF underscored that they would consider the use of macro-prudential tools such as loan-to-value ratios for real estate , particularly if the run-up in house prices continue, but that changes in policy and regulations would remain data dependent. The authorities have also added that measures to restrict foreign purchases of land and real estate have helped somewhat cool the momentum in house prices.