Fiscal policy has played an important role in supporting demand and raising potential growth with a focus on infrastructure spending . The government contributed to recent strong growth by boosting public demand and improving the business environment. Public spending increased from 27.6 percent of GDP in 2013 to an estimated 31.4 percent in 2015 mainly due to larger public investment, but also on account of greater health and education spending as well as increases in public sector wages. For instance, the government introduced free primary and secondary education program and loan schemes for tertiary education. Both are expected to improve Fiji’s growth potential (see Appendix III) by enhancing human and physical capital, in addition to supporting near-term demand. Although sales of the government’s assets, which were supposed to finance the expenditure increase, has been behind the schedule, the government has managed to maintain capital spending while containing current expenditure in 2015. Public investment is expected to further increase in 2016, financed through additional asset sales. Page 14 The approved 2016 budget remains accommodative . It targets a deficit of 4.4 percent of GDP, and includes tax reform measures and continued high public investment. The VAT rate has been cut from 15 percent to 9 percent, but exemptions on certain goods (food and medicine) will be removed to broaden the tax base and improve revenue buoyancy. Along with other smaller changes to the tax system, the services tax has been increased from 5 to 10 percent, which should cover nearly 40 percent of the loss of VAT revenue. The budget incorporates capital projects which have been delayed in 2015, with a prospective deterioration in the fiscal balance of about 1 percent of GDP in 2016. Fiscal consolidation is needed to build buffers and reduce policy pro-cyclicality The envisaged deficit reduction this year has been postponed (resulting in an increase in the deficit by 1 percent of GDP), in part because of slower implementation of capital projects in 2015 which resulted in a smaller-than-expected deficit. Staff, however, urged the authorities to tighten fiscal policy in order to lower the risk of overheating and create fiscal buffers. Implementation of the envisaged fiscal adjustment over the medium term is critical, while taking into account the need to support investment to address infrastructure bottlenecks and raise productivity and potential growth. Greater efforts should also be made to secure privatization receipts. Containing current spending and maintaining robust revenue growth should remain an important part of the strategy of sustaining high public investment and bolstering fiscal sustainability . While revenue buoyancy and spending restraint have been maintained, the government rightly intends to further contain wage growth (after a rapid increase in recent years) as well as rationalize other current spending. On the revenue front, the authorities’ efforts to implement many of the recommendations of the TADAT (tax administration and diagnostic tool) and the measures to increase the efficiency of the tax system are welcome. Ongoing efforts to improve rates of filing compliance and taxpayer registry have been important to maintain tax buoyancy. The elimination of VAT exemptions, effective in January 2016, will also contribute to broadening the tax base and reducing administration and compliance costs. In this connection, both tax incentives and tax expenditures should be reviewed and gradually phased out in a predictable fashion, especially in areas where job creation has fallen short of expectations or costs are estimated to be too high. Public debt remains sustainable, with an important roll-over risk eliminated While the debt to GDP ratio has been on a steady decline reflecting favorable growth and debt dynamics, maintaining the envisaged medium-term fiscal consolidation path will contribute to reducing public debt from around 50 percent of GDP to about 40 percent by 2020. This would create policy space and fiscal buffers to deal with contingent liabilities and shocks, especially natural disasters. External debt is relatively low at 21 percent of GDP and is expected to decline modestly to about 19 percent of GDP. The external debt profile has also improved with the pre-payment of the global bond that is due in March 2016 and the issuance of a new bond at much lower rate. Pension reform has restored sustainability, but more needs to be done to increase investment opportunities and diversify risks . The pension system, which is managed by the Fiji National Provident Fund (FNPF), is fully funded and financially viable, thanks to a comprehensive reform implemented in 2012, which among other things, raised the contribution rate (initially to 15 percent from 8 percent) and restricted contributors’ withdrawals from their retirement accounts. Page 15 The FNPF remains heavily exposed to government debt, but has also been diversifying its portfolio and gradually increasing its exposure to external investments to improve risk-adjusted returns. Authorities’ Views The authorities have emphasized that a prudent approach to fiscal policy remains their priority and that it will continue to guide the formulation of their fiscal policies . In particular, they noted that the goal of a declining debt to GDP ratio is consistent with the budget. The tax reforms enacted will be largely revenue neutral and should help improve compliance, which is consistent with their goal of improving efficiency and equity of revenue collection. They noted that the shift in capital spending to 2016 will lead to a temporary increase in the fiscal deficit in 2016, but that this will not compromise macroeconomic stability or the medium-term orientation of fiscal policy. They agreed with the mission on the need for fiscal adjustment over the medium term— starting in 2017—to deliver on the goals of lowering the public debt and bolstering the credibility of the fiscal framework. The authorities also argued for the need to continue to look into tax policies to enhance the business climate while at the same time improving compliance, which will help maintain revenue buoyancy . They also noted that while tax incentives for investment will remain a part of their policy package, they will continue to review incentive regimes to ensure that ineffective incentives are gradually phased out, although this could take time. The authorities also noted that the FNPF will continue to pursue a diversified strategy to enhance investment returns, including through gradual increases in its overseas investments, with due consideration for Fiji’s foreign reserve coverage.