Fiscal policy has been prudent and well focused in recent years, but the expansionary 2014 budget is a departure from these trends. The overall deficit in the 2014 budget is estimated at 7.8 percent of GDP, of which about 6 percentage points are expected to be financed from the proceeds of privatization and the remaining 1.9 percent from debt financing. The Budget continues the focus on improving infrastructure and expands health and education spending. On the other hand, it also increases civil service wages significantly, albeit after several years of wage freezes. More importantly, the budget relies heavily on prospects of large-scale government asset sales to finance the expansion in recurrent expenditures, risking funding shortfall possibly in the current year and in the years ahead. Given the likely large shortfall in privatization receipts, the authorities are striving to meet the 2014 financing gap by proactively developing contingency plans. The planned large- scale privatization sales seem unlikely to be realized in 2014, judging from the progress made so far in the complex and long process of privatizing state-owned companies and properties. The current strong consumption and import growth are likely to increase tax and duties revenue above the Page 10 planned level, and partially offset the asset sale shortfall. The ambitious capital spending budget may encounter capacity constraints, resulting in under spending. Nevertheless, keeping the debt financing of the 2014 budget to below 1.9 percent will require broad-based and deep expenditure restraint, including on the budgeted 20 percent increase in the civil service wage bill. To the extent that deficit targets are threatened, the authorities should continue to rein in expenditure, including delaying filling civil service vacancies. From a cyclical point of view, fiscal restraint in 2014 would be helpful in limiting overheating concerns, including pressure on reserves due to strong import growth, in the context of above potential growth. The challenge intensifies as the authorities prepare the 2015 budget. While the increase in recurrent expenditure in the 2014 budget elevates baseline expenditures in 2015, the temporary revenue boost from above-potential growth in 2014 is likely to dissipate in 2015. Against this backdrop, it will be challenging for the 2015 budget to meet the authorities’ medium-term deficit plan which envisages a further reduction in the deficit to 1.5 percent of GDP for the year. In view of elevated expenditure levels and dissipation of the temporary revenue boost, it is unlikely that the authorities’ deficit and debt targets can be met without increases in current revenues. Base-broadening measures should be the first in line, as the abundant use of income-tax holidays and tax incentives have narrowed the direct tax revenue base and added complexity to the tax system. As the general environment for investment and political stability improve, the need for these ad hoc tax incentives diminish. Using the broad mandate for continued economic reform, the authorities should proceed to curtail these ad hoc tax subsidies significantly, and only well-targeted and temporary incentives should be provided after rigorous cost-benefit analysis. Likewise, ad hoc fees, administrative charges and fines, as well as irregular treatment of deductibles, have worsened the business environment, and should also be drastically curtailed. Fiscal policy should continue to balance the need to strengthen the fiscal position against the need for public investment spending. To address severe infrastructure backlogs, which constrains the economy's supply capacity and affects public safety, capital spending has increased in recent budgets. This has alleviated some of the most urgent needs. However, the infrastructure improvement needs for the next ten years remain significant and requires continued focus on improving infrastructure in the budget, including maintenance. The authorities are encouraged to coordinate development projects closely with donors including the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. Public debt has declined since 2010 and is broadly sustainable. The debt sustainability analysis indicates that public debt is sustainable, but points to some caution on external financing. Fiji’s external debt remains low from a regional perspective, but it has increased sharply recently, largely reflecting the US$250 million sovereign bond issued in 2011, and increased reliance on bilateral loans from nontraditional sources for infrastructure financing. State-owned enterprise (SOE) reform is progressing well and the authorities continue to pursue divestment and corporatization of the SOEs. On a consolidated basis, SOEs produced a net profit. Among the larger, the Fiji Sugar Corporation and Fiji Electricity Authority were profitable in 2013, while other SOEs such as the Page 11 Housing Authority still require subsidies. Contingent liabilities have also declined in recent years through the SOE and FNPF reform. Debt management strategies should be geared to preserving policy options. The US- dollar denominated sovereign bond issued in 2011 matures in early 2016. To maintain policy buffers and reduce the risk of being forced to roll over the bond in a volatile international financial market, debt management needs to be prudent, including maintaining sufficient balances in the sinking fund to retire the bond if necessary. With the planned re-engagement of traditional development partners following the recent elections, the authorities are urged to consider the use of concessional financing to lower the cost of funding. Authorities’ Views The authorities are confident that the debt financing gap of the 2014 budget deficit will not be breached, similar to the recent past where the actual deficit outcomes have been lower than budgeted. On the revenue side, the authorities agreed that the recent revenue performance may not be sustained, particularly on the VAT side. The authorities view some tax incentives as necessary to continue to attract foreign investment, but they intend to review the tax incentive regime in due course. On debt management, the authorities remain committed to preserve policy options.