The historic September 2014 general elections marked Fiji’s return to democracy. Voter participation was high at 84 percent and FijiFirst—the party of Prime Minister Bainimarama— received nearly 60 percent of the popular vote, securing a two-third majority in Parliament. Parliament has supported reforms and government policies more generally, helping lay the foundations of the ongoing strong economic performance. Moreover, relations with traditional development partners have normalized, further enhancing economic sentiment and access to concessional financing. Political and macroeconomic stability have underpinned rising confidence in the economy. Business confidence picked up in the lead-up to the elections and has remained strong, contributing to a gradual pick up in private domestic investment. Tourist arrivals reached new peaks in 2014, and are on track for another strong performance in 2015. Despite some moderation, the credit cycle has remained strong, reflecting pent up demand, improved optimism, and accommodative monetary policy settings. In May 2015, Standard and Poor’s raised Fiji’s credit rating from B to B+, further boosting confidence in the economy. The authorities have accelerated reforms in recent years—including improved infrastructure, civil service, pension system, and the restructuring of the sugar industry. Long-standing structural challenges remain. For three decades prior to 2013, growth was sluggish, averaging 2–2.5 percent per annum, owing to recurring political turmoil, external shocks, and slow progress in structural reforms. The transition to the higher growth path has reduced slack in the economy, but unemployment and poverty remain relatively high, particularly in rural areas. The main policy challenge is to accelerate reforms to sustain the growth momentum in an inclusive manner, while at the same time consolidating the fiscal position and normalizing monetary policy to build policy buffers against shocks and avoid the risk of overheating.