Fiji’s growth momentum has been exceptionally strong in recent years . The economy entered its third year of above 4 percent annual growth in 2015, with GDP projected to expand by 4.3 percent, following growth of 5.3 percent in 2014. Growth has been broad-based and several sectors (for example, transportation, financial intermediation, retail) have benefited from strong foreign exchange inflows (from both tourism and remittances) and a continuation of the credit cycle upswing. Tourist arrivals reached new peaks in 2014 and, despite significant exchange rate appreciation relative to New Zealand and Australia, arrivals from both countries continued to grow – while at the same time Fiji has also been expanding into Asian markets. The sugar industry, which has been restructured, performed relatively well in 2014 and is estimated to have done so again in Official unemployment data was last reported at 9 percent (2012, ILO), and poverty at 35 percent (2008, World Bank). Page 9 2015. Retail and commerce also continued to improve, benefiting from remittances. Strong economic performance, favorable market conditions, and the credit rating upgrade (to B+ by S&P) contributed to Fiji’s successful issuance of a new global bond to refinance part of a maturing bond. Despite robust domestic demand, inflation has remained low Inflation increased modestly in 2015, but remains low at 1.8 percent (November) due to lower oil prices, wide ranging administered prices, and the appreciation of the exchange rate against major trading partners. The strong growth momentum has diminished slack in the economy, but following several years of lackluster growth, demand-induced inflationary pressures remain relatively muted. Moreover, price pressures from domestic demand have been alleviated by higher imports (Table 4), with imports benefitting from exchange rate appreciation against the Australian and New Zealand dollars (countries which represented 25 percent of imports in 2014). Finally, the introduction of fee-free primary and secondary education in early 2014 also helped to contain price pressures. While reserve coverage has declined somewhat, it remains adequate. International reserves remain adequate but fell modestly to about 5.1 months of imports in 2015, reflecting strong import growth. Fiji’s merchandise underlying trade deficit (after excluding aircraft purchases in 2013) widened in 2014 with the growth of imports (15 percent) exceeding that of exports (7 percent). However, the balance of payments remained in surplus in 2014 on account of strong growth in tourism (5 percent) and remittances (13 percent), as well as robust FDI. Preliminary data for 2015 suggests that the trade deficit is estimated to have narrowed, owing in large part to lower global oil and food prices and a pickup in export growth. Meanwhile, the real effective exchange rate, after appreciating by about 1.5 percent in 2014, was broadly stable in 2015. Notwithstanding some moderation in 2015, credit growth has remained strong, reflecting in part accommodative monetary conditions Interest rates (both lending and deposit) are low, as the RBF has kept its policy rate at 0.5 percent since November 2011. Low real interest rates and the strong demand momentum have helped fuel a sustained period of rapid credit growth, particularly in certain segments such as automobiles and real estate. The latter has contributed to rapidly rising house prices, further propelling credit growth. Although commercial bank lending has moderated to 12.8 percent (provisional as of October 2015), it is still high after adjusting for inflation. Liquidity conditions have remained comfortable, aided by strong foreign exchange inflows and the accommodative monetary stance. Reflecting the strong growth in recent years, commercial banks remain profitable and financial stability indicators are generally sound. The capital adequacy ratio declined marginally, reaching 14.7 percent at end-September 2014, well above the minimum prudential requirement of 12 percent, while Tier-1 capital ratios dropped to 11.3 percent, while remaining at strong levels. Interest margins have also remained broadly stable as have non-interest expenses (relative to gross income), while the return on assets has declined only modestly last year. The NPL ratio has been on The level of adequate reserves is estimated at 4-4.5 months of imports, based on the standard IMF metric which is a function of the weighted average of short term external debt, longer term debt arising from portfolio investment and other investment liabilities, broad money, and exports of goods and services. Page 10 a declining trend since 2012, reflecting the strong upswing in the credit cycle. Banks’ balance sheets are liquid: the liquid asset ratio has remained comfortable at 17.6 percent, albeit lower compared to Fiscal policy has remained accommodative. The fiscal deficits in 2014 and 2015 are estimated at 4.3 and 3.2 percent of GDP, respectively, considerably larger than in previous years. The authorities financed part of the spending increase (especially on roads and other capital projects) with receipts from privatization, although these fell short of original targets. Following the 2014 budget, civil servant wages were raised by an average of 20 percent, although the pay hike does not cover all civil servants, and follows several years of wage freezes. For 2015, key budget targets are estimated to have been met (for example, VAT revenues) and there is some over performance in tax revenues (partly due to stronger-than-expected growth), though the slower execution of capital projects contributed to a smaller-than-projected deficit in 2015. Privatization continued to fall short of targets. Receipts from the sale of assets are estimated to have reached F$80–100 million, well short of the F$507 million (6 percent of GDP) planned for 2015. Similarly to last year, delays in the sale of the Fijian Electricity Authority, which accounts for about half (F$250m) of the initially-envisaged privatization program, reflect uncertainty about electricity tariff policies. Other SOEs including the port (F$80m) and airport operator (F$125m) were only partially privatized. Given shortfalls the authorities have relied on sales of domestic bonds and loans from banks and the FNPF to finance the budget. Fiji has successfully issued a US$200 million 5-year bond to refinance part of the US$250 million (6 percent of GDP) global bond that will fall due in March 2016. The remainder of the maturing bond will be paid using accumulated savings (US$43 million from the government’s sinking fund), and a residual of US$7 million remains outstanding until they mature in March 2016. The coupon rate of the new bond (6.6 percent) is about 240 basis points lower than that of the maturing bond, in line with government estimates and reflecting favorable market conditions as well as S&P’s upgrade of Fiji’s credit rating (to B+) in May 2015.