International reserves coverage has recently declined owing to strong import growth and sluggish exports. Fiji’s narrow export base and susceptibility to shocks would suggest the need for a relatively higher reserves target in the range of 4 to 5 months of retained imports. Under current projections, the reserves level would be in the lower end of the range at end-2014. The competitive boost from the April 2009 devaluation has been largely eroded by creeping real exchange rate appreciation, driven by partner-country inflation differentials. The Fund’s standard exchange rate assessment approaches indicate that the real exchange rate remains moderately higher (in the range of 2-14 percent) than the level consistent with medium- term macroeconomic fundamentals (see Box 3), although the estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty. A more flexible exchange rate would help absorb shocks and protect the reserve position. Although the level of international reserves is currently adequate, a more flexible exchange rate, through periodic reviews and adjustments as needed, would help prevent creeping overvaluation and avoid the disruptive large devaluations experienced in the past and safeguard balance of payments sustainability. The current environment provides a good opportunity to lay the foundation for a more flexible exchange rate, including by considering a crawling peg system which can ensure that the exchange rate remains fair valued over the medium term. Exchange restrictions arising from the tax certification requirements and from the limits on large payments should be made compatible with the IMF’s Article VIII. A number of Page 12 exchange restrictions are subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a). These exchange restrictions arise from tax certification requirements on the transfer abroad of profits and dividends and on the proceeds of airline ticket sales, and on the making of external debt and maintenance payments, and from limits on large payments. These exchange restrictions should be made compatible with requirements under Article VIII. While the restrictions arising from the tax certification requirements are designed to promote tax compliance, exchange restrictions are not the appropriate means to this end as they weaken the business climate and dampen foreign investment. In addition, to promote the integrity of the financial sector, and in advance of the upcoming AML/CFT assessment scheduled for next year, the authorities are urged to further strengthen the AML/CFT regime. Authorities’ Views The authorities view the current level of the exchange rate as generally in line with economic fundamentals. The authorities agreed that more exchange rate flexibility is desirable in the medium- term, but the timing of this will depend on alignment with the appropriate monetary and fiscal policy framework as well as when macroeconomic circumstances warrant such a move. They also highlighted the role of different currencies in the Fijian currency basket, and the challenges in making assessments of competitiveness when basket currencies move in different directions. On exchange restrictions, the authorities remain committed to working with staff to make the restrictions more compatible with the Fund’s Article VIII.