Progress towards elections had led to increased confidence in the economy. Growth in 2013 is estimated to have accelerated to 4.6 percent. The latest available consumption and investment indicators suggest continued strength in 2014, with economic growth projected at 3.8 percent. Growth is projected to moderate towards 2.5 percent in 2015, in line with estimated potential, as the growth rates in 2013-14 were temporarily boosted by a sharp rise in credit growth. The one-off increase in disposable income from recent tax cuts would likely be used for debt service. Headline inflation remains subdued. Headline inflation is currently low (0.7 percent) as imported commodity and food prices have remained stable. However, this low inflation includes a one-off contribution of the introduction of free primary and secondary education. The authorities Pacific island countries have become more exposed to the region’s business cycles. See Sheridan, Tumbarello, and Wu (2012), “Global and Regional Spillovers to Pacific Island Countries”, IMF Working Paper 12/154. The Multinational Observers Group found the elections credible and on track to broadly represent the will of the Fijian voters. On the other hand, leaders of 6 other parties issued a joint statement disputing freeness and fairness of the elections. Page 6 continue to maintain price controls on a large part of the CPI basket —basic food items, hardware and construction materials, pharmaceuticals, and petroleum products—that may cause the measured CPI to understate the inflationary pressures. Looking ahead, inflation is expected to remain within the Reserve Bank of Fiji’s (RBF) comfort range around 3 percent on continued benign movements of food and commodities prices. Monetary policy rates remain near the zero-lower bound and lending growth is accelerating. The RBF lowered its policy rate to 0.5 percent in October 2011 and monetary policy has been on hold since then. The lower policy rate and persistent excess liquidity in the banking system have slowly been transmitted to lower lending rates. In response to lower rates and improved confidence, net domestic credit increased by 16.5 percent in the first half of 2014, driven by loans to households, wholesale and retail, building and construction, hotel and restaurants, and real estate sectors. The financial sector prudential indicators continue to show strength. The banking sector has been dominated by foreign-owned commercial banks but two new entrants (one domestic) in the past two years have increased competition. Overall, the banks remain highly liquid, with liquid assets-to-total assets at 18 percent. Despite some pressures on margins reflecting increased competition, the banks remain highly profitable with a return on equity of 25.6 percent. The capital adequacy ratio stood at 13.7 percent at end-2013, above the minimum prudential requirement of 12 percent, and the NPL ratio declined to 2 percent. The fiscal deficit was smaller than expected in 2013, but the 2014 budget was expansionary. The overall deficit for 2013 is estimated at 0.5 percent of GDP, well below the budgeted level of 2.8 percent. Slower expenditure disbursement (including initial delays in road projects due to the unexpected need for new equipment) as well as buoyant VAT collections contributed to the lower deficit. As a result, the government debt-to-GDP ratio declined to 51 percent of GDP, down from 56 percent in 2010. In the 2014 budget, the authorities have provided for a large increase in expenditures with the bulk of the increased spending financed from privatization receipts. Under the national convention which treats privatization receipts as revenue, the budget deficit is projected at 1.9 percent of GDP, however, under the Fund’s convention, the budgeted deficit is much larger at 7.8 percent of GDP. Large parts of the planned privatization financing will not materialize in 2014, and the authorities have developed and implemented expenditure and revenue contingency plans aimed at containing the deficit. Based on developments in the first half of 2014, the deficit financing target is on track to be met, as the authorities have exercised significant expenditure restraint, combined with revenue over performance. It is estimated that nearly half the CPI basket is under some form of price control. The Commerce Commission adjusts the prices in response to international price developments (often with a few months lag). Lifting the price controls would shorten the transmission of international prices to the CPI. The national convention in Fiji relies on older Government Financial Statistics (GFS) standards and treats asset sales as revenue, whereas the new GFS since 2001 treats asset sales as financing. Page 7 International reserves have recently declined owing to strong import growth, but remain above four months of imports . The goods export-to-GDP ratio has declined in recent years, partly reflecting the real exchange rate appreciation since 2009, while the import-to-GDP ratio has increased. At the same time, robust remittances and tourism spending have moderated the current account deficit, which combined with sizeable foreign direct investment, have allowed the buildup of an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves. Fiji’s merchandise trade deficit widened in 2013 as imports grew by 20 percent (including aircraft purchase by Fiji Airways) while exports contracted by 3 percent, partly reflecting disruptions in tourism due to the floods in the first quarter and sluggish gold exports. Strong remittances (10 percent increase) and tourism spending (1 percent increase) provided offsetting inflows. Fiji’s net international investment position stood at -81 percent of GDP in 2013, up from -78 percent in 2012, with the bulk of liabilities stemming from foreign direct investment. There are both domestic and external risks to the outlook (see RAM in Box 2). Downside domestic risks are focused on a slowing of the reform momentum, including sustaining capital investment. There is also a risk that the planned large-scale privatizations may not materialize, jeopardizing the authorities’ medium-term debt and deficit targets without offsetting expenditure and revenue measures. On the upside, smooth transition to reform-oriented democratic government could result in stronger confidence in the economy, overheating, and upward pressure on inflation. On the external risks, Australia and New Zealand, the two most important tourism markets for Fiji, could be adversely affected by lower commodity demand from China and elsewhere. Normalization of U.S. monetary policy could raise interest rates globally and result in higher bond market volatility, at a time when Fiji’s sovereign bond matures in 2016. Moreover, increased frequency of natural disasters, possibly related to climate change, and the susceptibility to commodity price shocks call for stronger macroeconomic buffers. In the event that risks to the Fijian economy materialize, allowing the automatic stabilizers to operate would be the first line of defense. If the downturn persists, there is scope for limited fiscal stimulus. Monetary policy will be of limited effectiveness given that policy rates are near the zero-lower bound and the transmission mechanism is weak. To limit the risk of having to refinance Fiji’s sovereign bond in unfavorable market conditions, the authorities should maintain sufficient balances in the sinking fund. On the upside, to take advantage of the benefits of increased foreign direct investment after the successful democratic transition, it is urgent to accelerate the implementation of structural reforms to alleviate supply side constraints and boost the absorptive capacity in the economy so as to avoid bidding up asset prices and wages of skilled workers in short supply. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with the macroeconomic outlook and risks. The authorities view the strong pickup in growth reaching 4.6 percent in 2013 as broad based, driven both by increased investment and consumption, and supported by accommodative macroeconomic policies. Remittances have increased as a result of increased demand from the UN for Fiji peacekeepers, supporting consumption. They view the 3.8 percent growth forecast in 2014 as conservative. Growth Page 8 will slow in 2015 as the effects of tax cuts and lending growth moderate. While inflation is currently low, a rise in commodity prices, increase in wage demands and a growing economy may put upward pressure on inflation. Sustaining investment levels at around 25 percent of GDP will be a macroeconomic challenge. On the external front, the rapid increase in imports can put stress on the balance of payments in the post-election environment.