The accommodative monetary policy has stimulated economic activity over the past two years. After a long lag, the low policy rate in place since 2011 has led to a reduction in nominal lending rates, which combined with increased disposable income, competition in the banking sector and rising confidence in the economy, have contributed to strong credit growth over the past two years. Both the household and corporate sectors have now rapidly taken advantage of recent tax cuts and growth in disposable income to increase leverage, contributing to the strong increase in real estate prices and buoyant import growth. The economy is now estimated to be growing faster than its potential of around 2½ percent. While inflation is currently low, the limited supply capacity of the economy could lead to rapid price increases in some sectors in light of a growing output gap. The RBF should now tighten policy in a gradual and measured manner to moderate credit growth. The RBF is carefully monitoring the rapid credit growth and has intensified its surveillance through targeted onsite bank examinations. Despite intensified surveillance, credit growth accelerated in the first half of 2014. While initially welcomed as a long-awaited departure from stagnant credit growth, it has reached a stage where moderation is needed. Large parts of loans carry variable rates, making borrowers subject to risk of interest rate hike. To moderate credit growth, the RBF should enhance its supervision (including moral suasion) as a targeted first step. Banks should conduct scenario analysis as to how a sizable increase in its variable lending rate would affect its clients' financial viability, especially for real estate and personal lending. In this context, more data on household and corporate leverage need to be collected. The RBF could also consider targeted macro prudential measures in sectors where credit growth is deemed excessive, such as stamp duties and higher risk weights. While macro prudential measures would address the effects of excess liquidity, and to the extent that such measures alone may be insufficient to limit credit growth, the RBF should mop up excess liquidity through open market operations and raising the reserve requirement. The RBF should also consider gradually raising the policy rate as a preemptive move to moderate demand pressure on the economy. The financial sector remains highly profitable . The banking sector is well capitalized and most banks report low NPLs. Despite some pressure on interest margins reflecting increased Page 9 competition, the banks remain highly profitable and liquid. However, with the rapid rise in credit growth and a likely moderation of the economy, along with a general increase in global interest rate levels, there is a risk that non-performing loans could increase in the period ahead. It is imperative that banks address such risk through stress testing and scenario analysis, an area where further progress is needed to complement the authorities' good progress on the 2006 FSAP recommendations (see Annex 3). The Fiji National Provident Fund (FNPF) continues to play a key role in the financial sector and the economy more broadly. Recent reforms have commendably strengthened the actuarial soundness of the Fund. The reforms have also improved the board governance of the Fund through the "fit and proper” criteria. The FNPF has taken equity stakes in a wide range of sectors, and it is also a potential bidder in sales of government assets. In this context, it is important that FNPF not be pressured to accept below-market returns on such investments in order to provide funding for budget spending. Against this background, the continued focus on governance and commercial criteria in the FNPF investment decision-making process is of paramount importance, especially given FNPF’s past record of poor investment decisions and governance issues. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly shared staff’s outlook on the monetary and financial sectors. The RBF has maintained an accommodative monetary policy stance since 2011, resulting in high system liquidity and record low interest rates. Furthermore, tax rates have been reduced, resulting in higher disposable income, which has fuelled credit growth in the banking sector. Liquidity in the system has recently been reduced through the decline in foreign reserves and the RBF has communicated a monetary tightening bias, including raising the policy rate to stem rapid credit growth. The RBF is closely monitoring credit growth and has stepped up supervision with onsite examinations.