The near-term outlook is favorable . Growth for 2015 is estimated at 4.3 percent, propelled by strong tourism earnings and remittances, robust credit growth, low oil prices, as well as high public investment. The momentum is expected to moderate this year, with GDP projected to expand by 3.7 percent supported in part by accommodative policies. Inflation is projected to remain stable in 2016, and low oil and food prices will continue to keep inflationary pressures at bay. The current account deficit is projected to widen slightly to 6.1 percent of GDP reflecting a pickup in non-oil import growth, with reserve coverage projected to remain at 5 months of imports. The medium-term outlook is also favorable, but Fiji needs to address infrastructure gaps and improve the business climate . Growth is expected to remain strong at around 3– As the authorities’ convention treats privatization receipts as revenues, the deficit by the authorities’ definition is somewhat smaller at 4.1 and 2.1 percent of GDP in 2014 and 2015, respectively. In real terms, taking into account cumulative CPI inflation in the last 5 years, the increase was about 4 percent. Page 11 4 percent over the medium term (Appendix III), partly driven by robust public and private investment, as well as buoyant tourism and remittances inflows, despite a gradual tightening in macro policies. Strong FDI inflows are also expected in the medium-term, due to regained political stability and positive investment sentiment, albeit with downside risks from external conditions as discussed below. The current account deficit is expected to decline gradually, stabilizing at around 5 percent of GDP and public debt is also projected to decline in relation to GDP (to about 40 percent in 2020), owing to fiscal consolidation and strong GDP growth. Inflation is expected to remain low and stable, in line with developments in main trading partners and global commodity prices. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside and are largely related to external developments, including Fiji’s exposure to natural disasters, but prolonged accommodative policies have increased the risk of macroeconomic imbalances. Over the medium-term, risks to reform implementation are also relevant (see RAM, Box 1). A sharper-than-envisaged growth slowdown in China would hit Fiji directly as tourism revenue, FDI, and exports would be impacted. Slower growth in China would also have indirect effects, as it would adversely affect Australia and New Zealand economies, which would in turn hit Fiji’s tourism revenues as well as remittances. While Fiji is relatively insulated from global financial markets, higher global borrowing costs and financial volatility could result in higher market volatility and interest rates, denting FDI and other foreign exchange inflows into Fiji. Prolonged policy accommodation could lead to macroeconomic imbalances (such as rising current account deficits and financial sector vulnerabilities) associated with continued low interest rates and fiscal expansion. In addition, further delays in asset sales could affect the financing of the planned infrastructure spending, adversely impacting growth potential. Sustaining strong growth will also depend on timely and effective implementation of reforms to further bolster the business climate, boosting private investment and fostering private sector development more broadly. Private sector development could also slow if capacity constraints and supply bottlenecks (e.g., labor skills mismatch) are not eased and the provision of infrastructure by the public sector falls short of envisaged levels. Fiji, like other small states in the Pacific, is highly exposed to natural disasters, including cyclones and flooding, which could severely affect macroeconomic performance and the livelihood of Fijians. Building fiscal buffers will increase Fiji’s resilience to natural disasters and weather-related shocks. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the staff’s macroeconomic outlook, but consider risks to be more balanced than in the staff’s assessment While they expect the economic momentum to moderate slightly more than in the staff’s baseline, they noted that private investment should provide a bigger impetus going forward, especially as business expectations remain strong. In their view, credit growth has been the result of strong economic growth and has not been a key autonomous driver of the current momentum. Page 12 The authorities see risks as broadly balanced: while they recognized the risk factors outlined by the staff, they pointed to the positive sentiment, increased domestic private sector investment, and upside for more foreign direct investment. They also pointed that there is an upside risk to tourism inflows as connectivity continues to improve with the addition of direct flights to Singapore. The budget announcement was also noted as an additional factor that will further bolster business sentiment.