Reviving growth remains Finland’s preeminent challenge. Annual labor productivity growth dropped from about 2½ percent during 2000-07 to negative territory during 2007-14, mainly reflecting a sharp reduction in TFP growth in manufacturing following the decline of Nokia and the paper industry (Figure 6). Coupled with ill-timed wage increases in 2008-10, this has led to a surge in Finland’s unit labor costs (ULC), which rose 5-15 percent more than in peer countries over the post-crisis period. Meanwhile, declining labor participation, population ageing, and high unemployment have resulted in slower workforce growth, further adding to the growth challenge. Substantial cuts in R&D spending by both the private and public sectors (down by over 10 percent in real terms since 2007), also weaken growth opportunities. These factors combined have reduced potential growth to less than half its pre-crisis average. The reduced growth potential also highlights pre-existing constraints on economic activity, including relatively strict regulation in retail trade and selected network sectors (e.g., gas, rail and postal services), which exceeds the average in peer countries and best practices, thereby constraining private sector dynamics and productivity growth. Structural reforms are needed in three mutually reinforcing areas. First, labor market reforms are needed to raise labor supply, facilitate labor mobility (in particular between economic sectors), and boost labor demand through better aligning wages with productivity. Second, public Product Market Regulation, 2013 (Index, 0-6, higher=more restrictive regulation) Finland European OECD Frontier European OECD MedianSources: OECD and Fund staff calculations. Note: Frontier is average of best 3 European OECD countries. OECD avg. DNK SWE DEU GBR FIN Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D (Constant PPP USD Indexed, 2001=100) Sources: OECD and Fund staff calculations. Page 15 sector reforms should improve public sector efficiency and help contain aging-related spending pressures, especially in health and social services. Third, product market reforms should promote competition and help boost productivity. The new Competitiveness Pact could achieve several key labor market reforms. The pact, which was agreed in June 2016 and covers over 90 percent of Finnish workers, includes (i) a wage freeze for 2017, (ii) an unremunerated increase in annual hours worked of 24 hours, (iii) a temporary 30 percent cut in holiday bonuses for public sector employees during 2017-19, and (iv) a 2 percentage point shift of social security contributions from employers to employees over 2017-19. In addition, the pact calls for modifications to the highly-centralized wage bargaining process aimed at increasing firm-level flexibility and better aligning wages with productivity. In return, starting in 2017 the government will provide income tax cuts that will more than offset the impact of the shift in social security contributions on workers’ disposable income in the short run. Other new measures should help labor market activation, participation, and mobility. The government has decided to shorten the maximum duration of unemployment benefits from 500 to 400 days starting in 2017, and additional activation measures are being considered. Separately, study grants for higher education are being tightened to help reduce overly long study duration, thus getting younger people into the labor market sooner. New financial incentives for developers to promote housing construction in key urban areas and measures to improve the allocation of subsidized housing should facilitate labor mobility across regions. Progress is also being made on the plans to reform health and social services. Draft bills on the first phase of the health, social services, and local government reforms have been circulated to key stakeholders for consultation and a final proposal should go to Parliament by end 2016 (Box 2). Details of the second phase are still being developed and are expected next spring. Box 2. Reforming Health and Social Services In June 2016, the government presented draft bills on reforms of health and social services which aim to contain long-run aging-related fiscal pressures by improving the efficiency of health and social services, including by exploiting economies of scale. The main elements of the reforms are as follows:  Provision of services. Starting in 2019, all public health and social services delivery will be shifted from the more than 300 municipalities that are currently providing such services to 18 newly established administrative areas. The latter will be responsible for integrating the services such that public and private sector services work more closely together, while meeting certain centrally-set quality criteria.  Financing arrangement. The reform also entails a fiscally neutral shift in taxation from local governments to the central government, which will make transfers to administrative regions to pay for health and social services. Correspondingly, local government tax rates and transfers they receive from the central government will be lowered so that the overall taxation level will not increase. The modalities of the transfer of expenses and revenues under the new financial model and related equalization elements across regions are under preparation and will be finalized by 2020. An envisaged second phase of the reform will aim to expand service options by allowing people to choose between public, private, and nonprofit providers, but modalities are still being worked out. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 16 The progress with reform implementation is encouraging, but results should be closely monitored. In particular, the government should follow up closely on the implementation of the Competitiveness Pact to ensure that the envisaged increase in firm-level flexibility in wage formation materializes. If the current agreement is not successful at better aligning wages with productivity at the firm level, other approaches should be considered, including legislative changes to the wage bargaining process. The legal, organizational, and fiscal changes required by the reform of health and social services provision will be complicated to implement and key elements of the new system still need to be developed. Clear and timely communication with stakeholders will be critical and implementation results need to be carefully examined to identify any problems early on and ensure the reforms generate the intended improvements in public sector productivity. Reform efforts also need to be broadened in other priority areas. Staff analysis suggests that deregulation in selected network sectors could strengthen competition and yield substantial productivity gains, including through downstream effects on the broader economy. There is ample scope for deregulation, particularly in the retail sector—which is subject to relatively tight zoning and planning restrictions—and in government dominated sectors such as rail and postal services, where effective barriers to entry restrict competition. In this context, staff welcomes the recent work to update the transportation code as well as the renewed privatization efforts initiated by the government. Also, cross-country experience suggests that well-targeted R&D spending could foster innovation and higher productivity growth. Recent cuts in public R&D spending should therefore be reversed and ways to incentivize private sector R&D—such as through well-designed R&D tax credits—should be explored further. Additional measures to facilitate labor mobility should also be pursued. Strengthening active labor market programs (ALMPs) would help workers retrain and move between industries. Further efforts to increase affordable housing in urban areas, such as streamlining planning and development processes, would support labor mobility between regions. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that structural reforms are critical to reviving growth. They believed that the government program addressed the main issues, but the challenge now is in implementation. In this regard, they underscored the importance of the agreement on the Competitiveness Pact, which will reduce relative labor costs, lower taxes, and help Finland’s exports regain competitiveness. They agreed that more firm-level flexibility in wage bargaining was also critical and pointed to a recent decision by the construction workers’ union to lower the minimum wage for new entrants as a possible early sign of increasing flexibility in the system. The authorities emphasized, however, they are ready to take further measures if needed. On product markets, the authorities agreed there is scope for further deregulation. They pointed to several new initiatives currently under consideration, including relaxing store-size limits and opening the passenger rail market to competition. See Selected Issues Chapter “Product Market Reform, R&D Spending, and Firm-Level Productivity in Finland.” Page 17