Fiscal consolidation is needed to ensure long-run sustainability and respect SGP rules. The long-run fiscal sustainability gap is sizable (estimated at around 5 percent of GDP) and is primarily due to projected aging related spending pressures. Partly due to such pressures, public expenditure has already increased 12 percentage points of GDP since 2007, suggesting a need to Page 16 begin addressing the sustainability gap now. Also, after breaching of the SGP’s deficit criterion in 2014, fiscal consolidation is needed to ensure the deficit is brought back below the 3 percent threshold next year and that the public debt-to-GDP ratio is on a downward path by 2020 (see Appendix I). To address these issues, the new government is planning fiscal adjustment of nearly 2 percent of GDP over 2016–19. While this consolidation generates only a small improvement in the structural fiscal balance, it prevents a further deterioration of the structural balance (e.g., from rising aging related spending) that would have occurred without the measures. The consolidation path is slightly frontloaded, with more than three fifths of the consolidation occurring in the first two years. The proposed 2016 budget envisages consolidation measures worth about 0.6 percent of GDP. Overall Fiscal Balance Projections April forecast September forecast SGP deficit criterion Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. Note: April forecast is before consolidation measures were announced. September forecast reflects consolidation plans. Public Debt Ratio Projections April forecast September forecast SGP debt criterion Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. However, in the short term the consolidation poses a risk to the recovery. Staff’s projections include the estimated growth impact of consolidation. Assuming a fiscal multiplier of 0.6—the estimated average over the cycle—the consolidation in 2016 is expected to reduce growth by about 0.3 percentage points relative to the April 2015 WEO projection. However, there is significant uncertainty around multiplier estimates and the growth impact of the consolidation could be larger. The impact on growth will also depend on the composition of fiscal adjustment. The authorities’ consolidation plan is heavily weighted towards spending cuts. Spending reductions are more than ¾ of the planned consolidation measures over 2016–19. Education, foreign aid, and social benefits are targeted for some of the most substantial cuts, though how some of these savings will be achieved remains to be determined. Despite high and rising unemployment, spending on ALMP will be reduced, while plans to reform unemployment benefits, generating savings of 0.1 percent of GDP per year, will be delayed to 2017. Public investment in new projects, such as the City Rail Loop in Helsinki, will be reduced, though these cuts will be partially offset by increased maintenance of existing infrastructure (see below). Local governments will be responsible for about 20 percent of the savings. This will be achieved in part by the central government reducing their responsibilities and allowing them greater flexibility in the delivery of services. In addition, a General Government Fiscal Plan has been Page 17 introduced that sets out medium-term spending and deficit limits on both the central and local governments. However, municipalities have substantial fiscal autonomy under the constitution, and it is unclear if spending limits at the municipal level can be fully enforced. On the revenue side, the net impact of envisaged tax policy measures will be small. The budget proposal includes a hike in unemployment insurance (UI) taxes to generate 0.1 percent of GDP per year in 2016–17. Other revenue raising measures for 2016–19 include phasing out the tax deductibility of mortgage interest and excise tax increases. These measures will be largely offset, however, by lower income, capital, and corporate taxes, including an earned income tax credit increase worth about 0.2 percent of GDP. A “growth package” is planned to mitigate the adverse impact of consolidation. Similar to a comparable package that was introduced in 2014, the growth package consists of one-off investments in infrastructure maintenance (0.3 percent of 2016 GDP) and other key projects, including investments in innovation and digitization of government services. In total, the growth package is worth about 0.7 percent of GDP, with about 0.15 percent of GDP spent in 2016 and 0.3 percent of GDP spent 2017 and 2018 each. Financing for the package comes from a combination of asset sales, increased dividends from public enterprises, and cuts to new infrastructure projects (the latter reduce the net impact of the package’s infrastructure component by about half). Staff supported measures to curb long-term spending pressures, but suggested that the pace of consolidation could be smoothed to reduce growth risks. For instance, there would seem to be some scope for a more even consolidation path within the constraints posed by the SGP. Moreover, frontloading some of the spending from the currently backloaded growth package would also help reduce the effective fiscal consolidation and ameliorate the growth impact. In particular, it should be feasible to bring forward some of the planned infrastructure maintenance spending. Additionally, if growth is weaker than expected, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate and fiscal costs from a significant surge in refugees should be accommodated. The composition of consolidation should also be made as growth friendly as possible. In the government’s current plan most of the measures on the revenue side shift the tax composition away from direct (income) taxes towards indirect (consumption) taxes. This should be beneficial for growth in the medium- to long-run. However, the planned increase in the UI contribution tax—which is driven by the rules governing the UI fund—increases labor costs at a time when labor demand is already weak. It would be better to delay this tax increase until unemployment is closer to normal levels. On the expenditure side, spending on ALMP should be increased rather than cut, to help reduce high unemployment. Also, planned cuts to productive public investment and R&D should be avoided, as they are most damaging to growth. Staff’s analysis suggests that for a given amount of consolidation, shifting cuts from public investment and targeted transfers to public consumption and untargeted transfers could reduce the negative short- run effects on output by about one third. See third chapter of Selected Issues Paper. Page 18 In the longer-run, structural reforms are essential to contain aging related spending pressures and ensure fiscal sustainability. The pension reforms that will be legislated this year are projected to reduce the fiscal sustainability gap Contribution to Closing the Fiscal Sustainability Gap by around 1 percentage point of GDP. Taking into (Shares of each element in closing 5 percent of GDP gap) account the government’s nearly 2 percent of GDP consolidation effort, this suggests that closing the remaining 2 percentage points of the gap will depend on the impact of various planned structural reforms. In particular, reforms to improve the cost efficiency of health and social services, including by consolidating services provision at the regional level, will be critical to containing aging related spending pressures. Pension reforms Fiscal consolidation Other reforms (e.g., of healthcare and social services) Authorities’ Views Sources: National authorities and Fund staff calculations. The authorities acknowledged that consolidation posed risks to growth, but felt it was important to have sufficient buffers to ensure compliance with the SGP. They argued that savings needed to be locked-in early to make sure the public debt-to-GDP ratio is on a downward path by 2020. They indicated that the timing of the growth package spending will partly depend on the availability of financing from planned sources and saw limited scope for frontloading of investments. The authorities believed that the negative growth impact from cuts to public investment and R&D in Finland would not be as high as the literature suggests, as the country’s infrastructure levels and R&D spending were near the frontier. The authorities agreed that reforms to improve public sector productivity, especially in health and social services, were critical, but noted that the careful design and implementation of such reforms would take time.