Nokia's Market Capitalization (Billions of euros, quarterly average) The economy’s return to growth will likely be slow. The outlook is for growth of 0.4 percent in 2015 and 0.9 percent in 2016 (down from April 2015 WEO projections of 0.8 and 1.4 percent, respectively). Despite modest nominal wage increases, growth in 2015 is partly driven by a projected pick-up in private consumption. Consumption growth is supported by lower inflation, which boosts households’ real purchasing power, and one-off mortgage amortization holidays offered by major banks (worth about 0.3 percent of GDP in total), which increased discretionary income in the first half of 2015. Private investment is expected to start contributing positively to growth in 2016, partly driven by sizable investments in new technology in the paper industry. The recovery will also be supported by the bottoming out of Nokia’s decline and the revival of its network equipment business (Nokia announced it will buy Alcatel-Lucent, giving it economies of scale that should improve its competitive position). Absent further structural reforms, however, medium-term growth will remain much slower than before the crisis, rising to only 1.6 percent in 2020. By then the output gap (-3.2 percent of potential GDP in 2015) will still be slightly negative. Unemployment is forecast to rise to 9.5 percent in 2015–16 and begin gradually declining in 2017. Headline inflation is projected to pick-up again in 2016 to 1.3 percent as the effects of falling commodity prices abate. While a protracted bout of deflation is therefore unlikely, in the short run low inflation could hamper relative price adjustments and contribute to households’ debt burdens. 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Sources: Bloomberg and Fund staff calculations. Spillovers from weaker-than-expected external demand, a financial shock, and the growth impact of fiscal tightening are the main sources of risk (Table 6). Slower growth in key export partners, including Russia, the rest of the Nordic region, or the euro area, would be a drag on export growth and likely retard the recovery. Spillovers from a financial shock, whether originating in the region (e.g., severe housing market decline in one of the other Nordics) or elsewhere in the euro area (e.g., deeper and more protracted turbulence related to Greece), could be channeled through Swedish or Danish banks. Such a shock could cause a tightening of financial conditions in Finland, with a potentially significant impact on investment, consumption, and the housing market. Domestically, the main risk is that the procyclical fiscal consolidation would weaken the recovery more than has been accounted for in the baseline (e.g., if fiscal multipliers are higher than expected). Page 12 Recent migrant inflows—while thus far small compared to the most affected European countries— could be positive for labor force growth, but will have short-run fiscal costs. Authorities’ Views The authorities saw weaker external demand or financial shocks as the main risks. They agreed with staff that such shocks had the potential to impair the fragile recovery. They noted, however, that the drop in exports to Russia last year was sharper than expected and that, given the scale of the realized decline, any further weakening should have a smaller impact. The authorities acknowledged that fiscal consolidation will have a negative impact on growth. However, they thought the likelihood of this being large was low, arguing that most of the conditions that could increase fiscal multipliers are not significant for Finland. In particular, they noted fiscal multipliers in small open economies are typically small and that the share of liquidity constrained consumers is smaller in Finland than in most other euro area countries. Also, interest rates at the zero lower bound are unlikely to affect multipliers in Finland since, as a small member of a monetary union, monetary policy does not respond to fiscal policy changes in Finland even in normal times.