Fiscal policy needs to strike a balance between ensuring long-term sustainability and protecting the recovery. While Finland had a very strong fiscal position up to 2007, having one of the fastest aging populations in the world has contributed to a 12 percentage point of GDP increase in public spending since then. Aging-related fiscal pressures also contribute to a sizable long-run fiscal sustainability gap—defined as the adjustment needed to stabilize the debt ratio over the long term—estimated at about 5 percent of GDP in 2015. To address the pressures and comply with European rules, in 2015 the government initiated a slightly frontloaded multi-year consolidation plan worth 2 percentage points of GDP during 2016-19. While the plan appropriately addressed long-term sustainability needs, in the short term the substantial adjustment posed a risk to the budding recovery. To mitigate some of the risk the authorities introduced a growth package of one- off infrastructure and technology investments worth 0.7 percent of GDP and financed through asset sales—though the package is back-loaded with most of the spending planned in 2017 and 2018 (0.3 percent of GDP in each year). Meanwhile, the allocation of public spending leaves room for improvement as generous unemployment benefits with a long duration reduce incentives to work while extensive tax breaks for energy-intensive industries support incumbent firms instead of spurring innovation and productivity growth. The near-term pace of fiscal consolidation has been eased in return for labor market reforms. Updates to the authorities’ fiscal plan, released in April and in the draft 2017 budget, feature similar targets for the total adjustment (2 percent of GDP) and the 2019 deficit (-1.5 percent of GDP) as the original plan. However, the fiscal overperformance in 2015 allowed for the pace of consolidation to be slowed in 2016 and for the fiscal stance to be slightly expansionary in 2017. The easing measures include the new income tax cuts to support the Competitiveness Pact (0.2 percent of GDP per year, starting in 2017) and related reductions in social security contributions (0.4 percent of GDP in 2017, but diminishing thereafter), as well as unanticipated refugee-related outlays (0.1 percent of GDP per year during 2016-20). Some additional expenditure cuts are also planned—including holiday bonus cuts for civil servants in 2017–19 and longer working hours agreed to as part of the Competitiveness Pact (0.1 percent of GDP per year). Altogether, the new measures should bring the deficit broadly back to the originally projected deficit path from 2018. The short-term easing of the pace of consolidation is appropriate and should help support the recovery. The more accommodative fiscal stance in 2016–17—which does not jeopardize medium-term adjustment goals—is welcome and in line with staff’s 2015 Article IV recommendations. To further support the economy in the short term, the authorities should also GG GG + dg Page 18 consider a faster implementation of the remaining spending under the growth package . The growth- friendliness of fiscal consolidation could also be improved by reallocating resources toward R&D spending, well-designed ALMPs, and productive public investment, and away from poorly-targeted transfers and tax expenditures. If growth disappoints, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully, while revenue windfalls should be used to reduce borrowing needs. To close the long-run sustainability gap, effective implementation of the structural reform agenda remains critical. An earlier-agreed pension reform that becomes effective in 2017 is expected to close about 1 percentage point of the gap. With the 2017–19 consolidation plan accounting for an additional 2 percentage point reduction, the successful implementation of other structural reforms—most notably the reform of health and social services—will be key to closing the remaining 2 percentage points and ensuring that public finances are robust to aging-related spending pressures that will continue to build rapidly over the next decade and a half. Advancing these reforms should therefore be a top priority from a fiscal perspective as well. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that the short-run easing of the pace of consolidation in return for reforms was a good policy bargain. They underscored that the government is committed to its consolidation program and will make the necessary adjustment to achieve long-term fiscal sustainability. The Competitiveness Pact and unemployment benefits reform would help boost the labor supply and growth and would thus contribute to long-run fiscal sustainability. The authorities also emphasized that the health and social services reform is one of the most significant reforms in Finnish history and will improve public sector productivity and curb expenditure growth. On ALMPs and R&D spending, they considered that the efficient use of current appropriations was more important than shifting resources back towards these areas. They were also hesitant to bring forward spending under the growth package as they thought it might risk breaching SGP limits.