Finland's strong recovery from the global crisis was short-lived After rapid growth in 2010–11, GDP declined by 1 percent in 2012 and by an estimated 1.4 percent in 2013 (Table 1). Unemployment is elevated, at more than 8 percent as more people went without work for longer, and the output gap is sizable, estimated at around 3 percent of potential GDP. Moderating, but still positive, wage growth and higher indirect taxes explain why inflation (2.2 percent in 2013) remained above the euro area average (Figure 2). GDP Developments (Index: 2007Q4=100) Source: Fund staff calculations. NOR SWE DNK ESP GBR NLD DEU FIN ITA Behind the slowdown is a combination of cyclical and structural factors . The effects from weak domestic and external demand in the wake of the crisis have been exacerbated by the decline in the information and communications technology (ICT) industry and the continuing fall in global demand for traditional exports such as paper and pulp (Figure 1). Longer-term structural factors are also playing a role, including a rapidly aging workforce and declining total factor productivity (TFP) growth. At the same time, the persistently weak growth outlook has affected the confidence of investors, with private sector investment falling from over 20 percent of GDP in 2007 to under 16 percent in 2013. Highly leveraged households (mostly in the form of mounting real estate credit) are contributing little to overall consumption growth. Twin Deficits The fiscal deficit has widened and current account surpluses have given way to deficits Increased social spending and the weaker economy have raised the general government deficit to an estimated 2.4 percent of GDP in 2013 (Table 4). At the same time, the debt-to-GDP ratio is approaching the 60 percent benchmark in 2014 (under the pre-ESA2010 GDP accounting standard). Along with the reduced importance of the ICT sector, the current account surpluses of the late 1990s and early 2000s have disappeared (Table 2). The real effective exchange rate (REER), though somewhat on the strong side, is broadly in line with fundamentals (see Box 1). Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. Fiscal Balance Current Account Goods Balance Services Balance The slowdown has come despite unusually favorable financial conditions, increasing risks to banks. The banking sector, dominated by large Nordic institutions, has been operating in a low interest rate environment, partially linked to Finland’s appeal as a “safe haven.” This has weighed on banks’ margins and increased their exposure to riskier borrowers, especially through housing- Page 6 Credit Institutions' Interest Rate Margins in the Euro Area and Finland Average discrepancy EA average IR to NFCs EA average IR to household FIN average IR to NFCs FIN average IR to households related loans. Overall credit has declined with the weak economy, but household debt has continued to grow, reaching 118 percent of disposable income in 2013, more than double the level in the late 1990s (Figure 4). Standard metrics suggest that real house prices are 8.5 percent above fundamentals. Structural issues are playing a significant role in the slowdown . In addition to the weakening of traditional industries, falling export shares also reflect a loss in competitiveness linked to high pre- crisis wage growth at a time when labor productivity was deteriorating (Figure 2). The slowdown in productivity predominantly stems from weaker TFP growth caused, in large part, by the fading importance of the ICT sector and the associated decline in patent and innovation activity. As a result of this and an aging workforce, potential output growth is estimated to have declined from about 3 percent on average in 1997–2007 to less than ½ percent in 2013. Sources: European Central Bank and Fund staff calculations. Notes: The average discrepancy is a simple average of the difference in margins in the euro area (EA) and Finland for long-term loans to non-financial corporations and households. 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Policymakers have begun to address these challenges. The government is pursuing an ambitious reform agenda to improve the public finances and strengthen conditions for economic growth, with some measures already in train. Also, long-needed progress is being made towards putting in place a macroprudential policy framework in line with the evolving framework at the European Union (EU) and euro area levels.