Growth is expected to remain sluggish over the medium term. GDP growth is expected to rise to 0.9 percent in 2016 and 1.1 percent in 2017, before gradually increasing further to around 1½ percent in the outer years of the forecast— a markedly lower growth rate than before the crisis. Private consumption and investment are expected to be the main drivers of medium- term growth, even as consumption will be weighed down in the short run by slower real wage growth reflecting higher inflation and the Competitiveness Pact. Potential growth will only rebound slowly as investment rises and TFP growth begins to recover from the decline of key high-productivity industries. Credit growth should pick up in line with rising nominal GDP growth. Unemployment is expected to decline slowly to 9.1 percent this year and to 8.9 percent in 2017. Inflation should gradually rise as the economy recovers and the effects of oil and food price declines abate, rising to 0.4 percent in 2016, 1.2 percent in 2017, and reaching 2 percent by 2020. The current account is forecast to remain in deficit as gradually strengthening export growth—with the drop in exports to Russia bottoming out—is offset by rising imports and the unwinding of the terms of trade shock from falling oil prices. The outlook is subject to significant downside risks (Table 7). Weaker-than-expected global growth, in particular slower growth in advanced Europe, could further slow the recovery given Finland’s tight integration with European and world markets. Also, protracted uncertainty surrounding post-Brexit arrangements could weigh heavier on confidence and investment than currently envisaged. Meanwhile, a financial or economic shock in any of the other Nordics—e.g., a correction in housing markets—could spill over to Finland through the interconnected regional banking system and close trade links. Domestically, fiscal and structural policy efforts could weaken the recovery in the near term, even if their longer run effects should be positive. Page 14 Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly shared the staff’s assessment of the outlook and risks. They generally noted the same external and domestic risks identified by staff and underscored that the ability of the Finnish economy to adjust to new shocks remained limited. On Brexit, the authorities noted that the impact could be less large than originally feared. They also pointed out that, with the UK accounting for only about five percent of Finnish merchandise exports, the impact would be largely indirect—via the EU and the global economy.