Following a deep recession, growth has turned tepidly positive again. After declining by 3 percent over 2012–14, GDP grew at 0.2 percent in 2015 driven by stronger private consumption and a rebound in private investment (Figure 1 and Table 1). Consumption was supported by lower inflation—which boosted real wages—and temporary mortgage amortization holidays while the upswing in investment reflected catch-up spending on machinery and equipment, especially in the manufacturing sector. Net exports remained a drag on growth as stronger domestic demand translated into higher real import growth, while real exports stagnated reflecting weak global demand, a further drop in exports to Russia, and a loss of competitiveness since the crisis. Recent data suggest that GDP growth continued to improve in the first half of 2016 (0.8 percent higher than 2015H1), driven by a further strengthening of domestic demand. But the recession has left a large output gap (-3 percent of potential GDP) and high unemployment, which peaked at 9.3 percent in 2015. Headline inflation has slowed sharply, from 2.2 percent in 2013 to -0.2 percent in 2015, largely due to falling oil and food prices (core inflation remains close to one percent). After a surge in asylum seekers last year, the flow of new refugees has returned to normal levels. The recovery is aided by a dissipating drag from the structural shocks that hit Finland in recent years. The sharp decline in key export industries (Nokia and paper) since 2007 seems to now have largely bottomed out. Exports have stabilized and in particular the paper industry is investing in new products and technology, resulting in an increase in investment worth ¼ percent of GDP in 2015. However, these high-productivity industries will continue to account for a much smaller share of employment and value added than in the past, implying slower productivity growth than before the crisis. Rapidly declining labor force growth due to population aging remains an additional structural drag on potential growth. Page 10 Improving terms of trade have helped to reduce the current account deficit. Though in real terms net exports have detracted from growth, falling import prices, especially oil prices, contributed to the nominal trade balance shifting into surplus in 2015, shrinking the current account deficit (Table 2 and Figure 2). The net international investment position, however, has continued to deteriorate (Table 3). After being undervalued before the crisis, the real effective exchange rate now appears broadly in line with fundamentals (Annex I). The fiscal deficit was brought back under the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) limit, but fiscal space remains limited. The general government balance has been in deficit since 2009 reflecting the protracted downturn and increases in spending related to aging (Figure 3, Tables 4 and 5). In 2014 the deficit breached the SGP’s 3 percent of GDP threshold but Finland escaped the = Contribution to Difference Public Investment Social Benefits Wages Consumption Non-tax Revenue Tax Revenue (incl. SSC) Capital Transfers, etc. Difference between Actual and Forecast 2015 Deficit (Percent of 2015 GDP) Sources: Ministry of Finance and Fund staff calculations. Current account Trade balance Income balance Current Account (Percent of GDP)Sources: IMF WEO and Fund staff calculations. Fiscal Deficit and Debt (Percent of GDP) Sources: IMF WEO and Fund staff calculations. Debt (rhs) SGP 60% criterion SGP 3% criterion Deficit Page 11 Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) as the European Commission (EC) judged the excess to be small, temporary, and exceptional. In 2015, the deficit narrowed to -2.8 percent of GDP—a positive surprise as the original 2015 budget had forecast a -3.4 percent of GDP deficit. The better than expected outcome was driven by revenue overperformance and lower than budgeted spending, especially on public consumption. Public debt nearly doubled over the past decade and reached 63.6 percent of GDP in 2015, breaching the SGP threshold and making the government’s financial position more vulnerable to shocks (Annex II). The growth in indebtedness along with the mounting pressures from aging related spending and the need to adhere to the SGP constrain fiscal space. Financial cycle measures and debt levels provide a mixed picture. The credit-to-GDP gap has been declining since 2009 and was at a moderate level in early 2016. Credit growth picked up slightly in 2015, but remains much lower than before the crisis. Meanwhile, a sectoral financial balance sheet analysis finds that debts of nonfinancial corporations and households have risen markedly in the post-crisis period, making them more vulnerable to potential shocks (Box 1 and Figure 4). The increase in household debt, however, has not been associated with rapid growth in house prices and the latter do not appear significantly overvalued. Despite the weak economy and low credit demand, the banks remain broadly sound. The 2016 FSAP found that banks have remained profitable in a low interest rate environment by reducing cost-to-income ratios and increasing income from trading and insurance. Banks are also well capitalized compared to peer countries, with a risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio (CAR) at 23.1 percent in 2015, up from 17.3 percent in 2014 (Figure 5 and Table 6). This said, their simple leverage ratio (capital to total assets) of 5.6 percent is low compared to peers. Banks’ health and the low level of nonperforming loans (1.6 percent of gross loans in 2015) suggest that the marked slowdown in credit growth since 2011 mostly reflects weaker credit demand associated with the weak economy and increased indebtedness. J X Risk-weighted Capital Adequacy Ratio (Percent of risk-weighted assets, 2015Q4 or latest) Sources: FIN-FSA, IMF FSI database, and Fund staff calculations. J LL X KK Leverage Ratio (Percent of total assets, 2015Q4 or latest)Sources: FIN-FSA, IMF FSI database, and Fund staff calculations. Page 12 Box 1. Sectoral Balance Sheet Analysis Vulnerabilities stemming from indebtedness and cross-border exposures have risen since the crisis. An analysis of sectoral balance sheets shows that, in an environment of slow growth and low interest rates the total indebtedness of the economy has increased by nearly 100 percent of GDP since 2007 to around 360 percent of GDP in 2015. Similarly, total foreign liabilities have increased by around 90 percent of GDP over this period, though the economy’s external net financial position has improved as foreign assets grew by 115 percent of GDP. Debts of nonfinancial corporations (NFCs) have increased nearly 20 percentage points of GDP since Correspondingly, the share of debt in total liabilities has risen 10 percentage points to half of the total, increasing the financial fragility of NFCs’ balance sheets. Moreover, NFCs’ debt service costs will rise faster when interest rates begin to normalize. Also, they could find it harder to rollover the larger debt load in the event of a severe downturn, especially since one-third of the debt is foreign financed. Households’ indebtedness has also steadily increased since the crisis, though assets have risen too. Most of households’ liabilities are loans from banks—predominantly mortgage loans—which have increased by 16 percent of GDP since 2007. Household debt stood at more than 120 percent of disposable income in 2015. Meanwhile, households’ equity holdings, which constitute nearly half of their financial assets, expose their net financial position to significant fluctuations, such as the more than 20 percent of GDP decline they experienced during 2006-08. Households also have nonfinancial assets worth 212 percent of GDP in 2015, mainly in real estate, so a drop in house prices would damage their net worth. Most mortgages have variable interest rates but fixed monthly payments, which helps buffer households from interest rate shocks. The government’s financial position has weakened, driven by rising debt eroding fiscal space. The general government’s debt has risen by more than 30 percent of GDP since 2007, with debt held by foreign investors accounting for 25 percentage points of that. Higher debt levels increase the vulnerability to macroeconomic risks, where negative shocks to GDP growth or inflation or a rapid rise in interest rates could have a sizeable impact on the future trajectory of the debt ratio. The erosion of fiscal space also constrains the government’s capacity to respond to new shocks. Banks’ balance sheets swelled by over 100 percent of GDP since 2007 and cross-border exposures increased considerably. About one-quarter of this was due to Nordea shifting its derivatives book to Finland in 2010. The rise in foreign liabilities accounts for 80 percent of the increase in total liabilities. Overall, banks’ net financial position with the rest of the world deteriorated by more than 20 percent of GDP. At the same time, banks’ net financial position vis-à-vis domestic households improved, as increased foreign wholesale funding has been channeled into mortgage credit, increasing banks’ exposure to the housing market. Higher foreign-financed wholesale funding also increases banks’ exposure to liquidity funding risks. Nonbanks’ vulnerabilities remain limited though low interest rates have damped returns and motivated a shift to riskier assets. Lower interest rates have reduced returns on fixed income assets, prompting nonbanks (e.g., insurers, pension funds, and investment funds) to increase the share of equities in their portfolios. Half of nonbanks’ portfolios consist of foreign assets, which provides diversification benefits but also exposes them to spillovers from global financial market volatility. ____________________________________ See Selected Issues Chapter “A Sectoral Balance Sheet Analysis for Finland.” ll HH " " cc Page 13 Substantial reforms are underway to address Finland’s challenges. The government’s ambitious structural reform agenda published last year includes key reforms of the labor market and healthcare and social services, and work on implementation has begun. Agreement was reached between social partners on a Competitiveness Pact that will reduce labor costs (including via a wage freeze in 2017) and increase hours worked, and could introduce more firm-level flexibility into the wage bargaining system. Bills on the reform of healthcare and social services provision have been drafted and are being discussed with stakeholders. A fiscal consolidation plan is being implemented. Work is continuing on the improvement of the macroprudential policy and resolution frameworks.