Structural reforms are needed to facilitate resource reallocation between sectors, boost productivity, and raise labor supply growth. The precipitous decline of once rapidly growing high-productivity sectors has negatively impacted aggregate labor productivity and total factor productivity (TFP) growth, with the latter forecast to be only half its pre-crisis average over the medium-term. Reallocating resources from declining industries to growing ones is critical to restoring growth and raising TFP. Impediments to labor mobility—such as too little affordable housing in Helsinki and limited retraining opportunities—can hamper this reallocation. Also, the centralized wage setting system compresses the wage distribution. This constrains firms’ ability to adjust wages in line with firm-specific productivity developments and effectively causes a relatively high minimum wage that may make it more difficult for low-skilled workers to find jobs, reducing participation and raising structural unemployment. Coupled with generous unemployment benefits (500 days duration), wage compression may have also discouraged skill development that can facilitate inter-sectoral labor mobility. Meanwhile, labor force growth has fallen sharply as the impact See first chapter of Selected Issues Paper. Page 13 of population aging has been compounded by a decline in the participation rate of 25–54 year olds (by 4 percentage points since 2008) and a relatively low participation rate for 65–69 year olds (13 percent versus 25 percent OECD average). TFP Growth (Percent, annual average) Labor Force Growth (Percent, annual average) 2015-20 (proj.) 2015-20 (proj.) The new government’s structural reform program seeks to address several policy gaps. It aims to improve competitiveness and raise growth through both product and labor market reforms. Additionally, the authorities seek to improve public sector productivity and contain aging related fiscal pressures. Several of the most important labor market and public sector reforms will either need to be negotiated with social partners or will take several years to fully develop and implement. Structural Policy Gap: Finland vs. OECD Frontier (Index: 1=OECD frontier) Finland OECD Frontier EPL (regular) PISA score EPL (temporary) Retail trade market regulation Effective retirement age ALMP per unemployed UI replacement rate Flexibility of wage determination Tax wedge Sources: OECD and Fund staff calculations. Note: For each indicator, OECD Frontier is set equal to 1, while the worst OECD performer is set equal to zero. OECD Frontiers for the indicators included in the table are defined as follows: the Danish level is used for ALMP per unemployed, OECD average for UI replacement rate and tax wedge, the average level of the three best-performing OECD countries for effective retirement age, the Swedish level for product market regula in retail trade, the Korean level for PISA score, and the average levels of the three best-performing OECD countries in terms of unemployment ra plus the USA for the rest of the indicators. Labor market reforms focus on reducing unit labor costs and raising the labor supply. Pension reforms, agreed last year, aim to increase the average effective retirement age to 62.4 by 2025 (from 61 years currently). The reforms should slow the decline in labor supply growth and help address the long-run sustainability gap in public finances. Plans to tighten requirements on student aid should help reduce very long tertiary study duration and increase labor force participation by younger people. The government also seeks to reduce unit labor costs, including via a reduction of employers’ social security contributions and via unremunerated increases in working hours (the See second chapter of Selected Issues Paper. Page 14 Wage Dispersion (Ratio of gross earnings, decile 9/decile 1) OECD avg. H Sources: OECD and Fund staff calculations. V C Z F G B P P X G C C H F B W modalities of how the latter is to be achieved are subject of ongoing discussions with the social partners). The government has indicated its intention to increase the flexibility of the wage bargaining system at the firm-level and appointed an internal government expert to make specific proposals to achieve this. Reforms to unemployment benefits that would trim their generosity and duration are also planned, but will not be implemented before 2017. The reform program also aims to improve public sector productivity, especially in the provision of health and social services. Measures aimed at reducing bureaucratic requirements and increasing local governments’ flexibility in service delivery—easing the minimum staff-to- children ratio in day cares, for example—should increase productivity in the near-term. The planned reform of the provision of health and social services, however, will be a more complex, medium-term endeavor. This reform aims to shift responsibility for delivering health and social services from municipalities to regional bodies to streamline administration, reap economies of scale, and facilitate the dissemination of best practices. Measures are also planned to support private sector productivity growth and increase the availability of housing. A recent proposal to Parliament to liberalize shop opening hours should help increase competition and have an immediate positive effect on retail sector output and employment. Other initiatives aim to reduce various administrative and regulatory burdens on business, including streamlining permitting processes, but many details remain to be specified. Plans to improve financial incentives for collaboration on R&D between universities and firms could potentially have a beneficial impact on private sector productivity over the medium-term, though the planned cuts to public R&D spending overall are a concern. Separately, measures in the reform program to stimulate housing construction should help ease constraints on regional labor mobility. Planned measures include easing requirements for state-subsidized housing construction, reducing restrictions on land use, and streamlining aspects of the permitting and development process. Unemployment by Region (Percent, 2015Q1) North & Helsinki South Total West East The government’s reform program is promising, but needs to be further developed and implemented. Staff welcomed the reform intentions, but noted that the effects of key reforms, including of the wage bargaining system, unemployment insurance, and health and social services, would depend on their precise modalities and implementation. Thus, the authorities should quickly Page 15 flesh out the details of their reform agenda. The outcomes of reforms to increase the local governments’ flexibility in the delivery of services should be closely monitored to ensure they do not result in lower quality of services. The impact of the pension reform should also be assessed over time to ensure it is achieving its aims. The reform program could also be strengthened in some areas. With unemployment high and rising, active labor market programs (ALMP) should be expanded to increase retraining and skill development opportunities. Strengthening ALMPs can also help ensure that reforms that increase labor supply do not lead to higher structural unemployment. The government’s plan to cut ALMP funding therefore raises concern and should be reconsidered. Direct investment in affordable housing and related infrastructure in the main urban areas would also support labor mobility between regions. Similarly, overall public investment in R&D and innovation could be increased (and should at least be maintained at current levels), as evidence suggests such spending is associated with faster private sector TFP growth over the medium-term. There is also scope for further product market reforms, including reducing planning restrictions on real estate developments for retail locations that can limit market entry and economies of scale. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with staff on the structural challenges and were determined to move ahead with planned reforms. The authorities wanted to proceed quickly with reforms but cautioned that implementing too many measures simultaneously could create resistance and be counterproductive. In line with Finnish tradition, taking decisions based on broad consensus with social partners was the government’s strongly preferred option. The authorities were adamant, however, that they would take required measures even if consensus could not be secured. For example, after recent efforts to reach a “social contract” with employers and trade unions on a reduction of unit labor costs had failed, the authorities had introduced proposals to amend legislation governing collective agreements and bypass trade unions. The authorities fully agreed with staff on the need for more flexibility in collective wage setting, but believed that radical changes to the system could prove costly and disruptive. Hence, they are exploring options to increase firm-level flexibility in wage formation within the broad contours of the existing system, such as by adding opt-out clauses to collective agreements. The authorities considered the pension reform that comes into force in 2017 sufficient to put pension expenditure on a sustainable path. However, they assured staff they will monitor developments and reassess the need for further reforms at five-year intervals. On ALMP and R&D spending cuts, the authorities indicated that there was scope to cut less effective programs to help satisfy fiscal consolidation needs.