The recovery will be slow Growth is projected to improve modestly, driven largely by the expected improvement in euro area exports and gradually strengthening investment helped by still low interest rates and building confidence in the recovery. However, in light of the expected slowdown in Russia and the planned fiscal consolidation, the pick-up in growth will be moderate— about 0.3 percent in 2014 and 1.1 percent in 2015. As a result, unemployment will remain high and the output gap will shrink only gradually, with inflation decelerating to about 1.5 percent in 2015. A number of downside risks could further lower growth. Slower-than-expected exports linked to a cooling of global trade, rising geopolitical tensions, or a protracted period of slow European growth could easily derail the recovery. Domestically, high household debt could cause consumers to cut back if interest rates normalized more quickly than expected, for example because of changing global financial conditions. Rapid fiscal consolidation or a less growth-friendly budget composition could further weaken demand. Finally, a financial shock, such as a funding difficulty IMF, 2013, “ Nordic Regional Report, ” describes the underlying methodology. See Chapter III of the Selected Issues for further details See Chapter I of the Selected Issues for a discussion of potential output estimates under a variety of approaches, including the importance of smoothing parameter assumptions for the volatility of potential output growth Page 7 hitting the large Swedish or Danish banks operating in Finland, could impact financing conditions, with potentially significant consequences for investment and consumption, especially if amplified by a fall in house prices (see also Table 7 with the Risk Assessment Matrix). The Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed that the pace of recovery would be moderate and initially fragile. They recognized that the growth path would be very dependent on the external environment, especially the pace of recovery in Europe. Relatedly, the authorities acknowledged the risks to growth from developments in Eastern Europe, as Russia is an important export market and the source of all Finnish gas imports. However, they noted that the planned “growth package” (see below) should mitigate short-term risks while structural reforms should boost medium-term growth and facilitate adjustment, which could lead to export market diversification. Although household debt is still rising as a share of disposable income, the authorities did not think this represented a significant risk to financial stability in the near term. They also felt that the macroprudential policy tools provided in recent draft legislation would help them address future risks in this area.