The recovery faces a difficult take off. On the back of a weaker than expected first quarter, staff revised growth projections relative to the April WEO, to 0.7 percent in 2014 and 1.4 percent in 2015. The expected gradual recovery rests on stronger external and domestic private demand (from gains in real disposable income and gradual improvements in profit margins), and a lesser fiscal drag. Supply side measures are expected to gain in strength over the medium term. Following 2 years of net job destruction, the private sector should become a source of net job creation this year, but the unemployment rate should begin to come down measurably only in 2016. Inflation is expected to remain around 1 percent, rising only very gradually over the medium term. The inflation projection is predicated on moderate wage inflation related to the slack in the labor market and the need of enterprises to restore profit margins. However, there are non- negligible downside risks to the inflation outlook. While so far wage growth has declined very slowly in response to labor market slack, it could decelerate more rapidly in a context of continued slow output growth. In particular, downward pressures could develop as falling inflation feeds into wages through the indexation of the minimum wage. The 2014 budget was prepared on the basis of prudent macroeconomic assumptions, reflecting the moderating role of the fiscal council. The authorities project a deficit of 3.8 percent of GDP based on additional saving measures to be adopted this summer. Staff projects a deficit of 4.0 percent reflecting the downward revision to growth and lower tax buoyancy. Structural adjustment would be 0.4 percent of GDP, the bulk of it coming from expenditure containment. The authorities’ medium-term scenario envisages a somewhat stronger and faster response of the economy to supply side measures. The Stability Program, prepared prior to the release of the poor Q1 results, envisaged growth of 1 percent this year and 1.7 percent in 2015, rising to 2.25 percent by 2016. It also assumed higher price and wage inflation and a more rapid decline of the unemployment rate. The newly created fiscal council assessed the growth and employment projections to be realistic for 2014, possible but subject to the “realization of several positive assumptions” in 2015, and optimistic for 2016-17. Delivery of planned supply side and fiscal policies should help correct the external imbalance. In the staff’s baseline scenario, the current account deficit is projected to close over the medium-term in tandem with the fiscal deficit. This would bring the external position to a level consistent with fundamentals and desirable policy settings. This adjustment is to be facilitated by internal depreciation induced by the implementation of the authorities’ policy program of public expenditure containment and labor tax reductions, and by wage moderation. These policy actions are aligned with those recommended by staff to close the external gap. Risks around the baseline scenario remain substantial, reflecting uncertainty about the timing and strength of the cyclical turnaround and the impact of popular discontent on policy resolve. Slower global growth and financial market volatility are the main external risks (see Risk Page 16 Assessment Matrix). The main domestic risk is a stalled recovery of investment in the face of an uncertain outlook—some leading indicators remain below average. A negative spiral of low growth and falling inflation, and its effect on real interest rates, would have additional adverse effects on investment and the fiscal deficit. Lower-than-expected growth could also fuel popular discontent and could undermine fiscal resolve. However, the fiscal responsibility framework would likely kick in to limit backtracking on fiscal policy. Public debt is particularly sensitive to a lower growth scenario (DSA in Appendix II). On the upside, staff could be underestimating the rebound, given the well- known difficulties in projecting cyclical turnarounds. The main financial sector risks stem from the banks’ continued reliance on wholesale funding, even though the maturity of debt has been lengthened; medium-term risks relate to the ability of French banks to adapt to changes in the regulatory environment (see policy discussion). Legal risks associated with their global operations (e.g., investigations into market manipulation, compliance with international sanctions) could also weigh significantly on some banks, particularly if penalties were to curtail some of their international activities. The potential for outward spillovers from France appears to have abated since the crisis, particularly with respect to financial linkages . Recent research shows that, whereas credit and funding shocks to French banks could have induced banking failures in more than ten countries in 2008, as of 2012 significant outward spillovers would have been limited to Belgium, Italy, and Ireland, reflecting lower cross-border exposures. Other research shows that, under deteriorated liquidity conditions, cutbacks in interbank lending were the first line of defense of French banks, and that banks with higher capital ratios were able to maintain higher rates of lending to the foreign non-financial sector. By implication, the generalized improvement in capital ratios since the crisis should help limit outward spillovers to the real sector in the event of renewed liquidity stress. With respect to trade linkages, France continues to exercise strong demand effects especially on small neighboring countries. A recent study highlights the strong outward spillovers of business investment in particular, given its large import component. In all, with investment set to recover gradually, and with banks’ capital and liquidity positions strengthened and direct financial inter- linkages reduced, large adverse spillovers from France appear less likely. Kim and Mitra, ”Real and Financial Vulnerabilities from Crossborder Banking Linkages,” IMF Working Paper, forthcoming. Bussière, Camara, Castellani, Potier and Schmidt, 2014, “Shock Transmission Through International Banks – Evidence From France,” Banque de France Working Paper No. 485. Bussière, M., G. Callegari, F. Ghironi, G. Sestieri, and N. Yamano, 2013, “Estimating Trade Elasticities: Demand Composition and the Trade Collapse of 2008-2009,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 5(3). Page 17 France: Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Impact on France if Realized Surges in global financial market volatility (e.g., related to geopolitical tensions, revised market expectation, UMP exit) High Medium Market volatility and higher-than- expected increases in long-term rates. Inward spillovers from global financial market volatility have been limited in recent years, but could affect interest rates in the future. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies High Weak demand could take a toll on Impact from trade and investment links productive capacities. Risk of mitigated by automatic stabilizers in the short deflation in Europe has increased. run, but domestic growth would suffer eventually. Entrenchment of high structural unemployment and limited fiscal space would make it difficult to exit low growth trap. Risks to financial stability from incomplete regulatory reforms (medium term) Global risks from regulatory uncertainty offset in part by convergence to banking union in the euro area, which reduces the risk of French banks are vulnerable to a globally systemic closure in funding markets. Pressures to meet stricter leverage ratios on a short horizon could trigger further deleveraging and, Housing price correction fragmentation. in turn, erode profits. Low Housing prices supported by strong fundamentals but empirical estimates suggest 10-20 percent overvaluation. Limited impact on banks due to sound lending standards, but possibly larger impact from a concomitant shock to income and Weak implementation of fiscal and structural policy commitments. employment. Political resolve for reform may wane in the face of protracted low growth Reversal of commitments could undermine investment and growth, and aggravate the and popular discontent. external imbalance enough to trigger adverse market reactions. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 18