Growth potential fundamentally weaker than before crisis. Potential output growth has declined sharply, from an average of 2.2 percent in 1981–99, to 1.8 percent in 2000−08, to around 1.1 percent now (Box 1). While some of the decline may reflect lower total factor productivity (TFP) growth from information technology, crisis legacies and structural rigidities appear to have left their mark. Rising government spending has pushed up public debt. Labor market rigidities are hampering job creation, with unemployment projected to The Crédit d’Impôt pour la Compétitivité et l’Emploi ) is a corporate tax credit applying to six percent of the wage bill of employees earning up to 2½ times minimum wage. The Responsibility Pact ( Pacte de Responsabilité et de Solidarité ) reduces employer’s social security contributions for wages up to 3.5 times to the minimum wage. These reforms are estimated to raise real GDP growth by an average of ½ percent over the next five years (Table 7). Real GDP Hypothetical potential GDP (pre-crisis trend) Potential GDP Loss in Potential Output Since the Crisis (In index number, 1999 = 100) 8 pct. Page 12 remain high throughout the forecast period. Heavy regulation, barriers to competition in services, wage inertia, and a rising tax burden have squeezed profit margins, thereby inhibiting innovation, weakening competitiveness, and aggravating the impact of the prolonged pause of investment growth during the crisis. Looking ahead, potential output in 2020 is projected to be eight percent lower than on pre-crisis trends (chart). In short, France’s traditional growth model—with domestic demand supported by government spending, robust real wage dynamics, and a steady labor force growth—appears at risk. Significant downside risks over the medium term. While accommodative external conditions and robust domestic demand are projected to underpin growth under baseline assumptions, there is a risk that the recovery may eventually fizzle out, and that France may face a protracted period of sluggish growth, low inflation, and persistently high unemployment. Such a scenario would significantly affect public debt dynamics, which are particularly vulnerable to growth shocks (Debt Sustainability Analysis, Appendix III). Key risk factors include (Appendix IV): Less accommodative external environment. A protracted period of stagnation in advanced countries would have a significant impact on exports and may spill over into investment dynamics. A sustained increase in commodity prices could further dampen domestic demand. Insufficient reform progress. If political resolve for structural reform implementation were to wane, growth could suffer as structural rigidities would constrain both supply and demand. Financial volatility. A protracted period of financial volatility—e.g., from, reassessment of global risk, market uncertainty around unconventional monetary policies, or renewed bond market stress in the euro area—would likely have only limited direct impact on France. However, France’s banks remain vulnerable to a globally systemic closure in funding markets, given their reliance on wholesale funding. The low interest rate environment could lead to a gradual build- up of financial sector risks as a result of weakening profitability of banks and insurers or increased risk-taking in the search-for-yield. Spillovers. The above risks can in turn create outward spillovers. A protracted period of economic stagnation in France could have an adverse effect on euro area partners, both directly on aggregate demand and indirectly via confidence effects. Failure to deliver on fiscal consolidation and structural reform commitments could be seen as weakening the credibility of EU economic governance. Given their size and interconnectedness, French banks could create adverse effects if forced into further retrenchment from corporate lending and investment banking or from retail operations abroad (e.g., Italy, emerging Europe). The authorities noted that staff’s baseline projections are broadly in line with theirs. They concurred that the recovery was supported by favorable external developments, but also noted that recent reforms have likely played a role in building domestic confidence. They saw the balance of near-term risks as tilted to the upside. The authorities agreed that potential growth and employment creation are still weaker than before the crisis, but considered that their reform program will help in this respect. Page 13 Box 1. Potential Output in France Estimating potential output is particularly relevant at the current juncture. Potential output plays an important role in assessing fiscal effort and projecting future growth, inflation, unemployment, and debt dynamics. Following significant revisions in recent years, IMF staff has sought to improve the consistency and robustness of its estimates by using a multivariate filter approach that incorporates empirical relationships between actual and potential GDP, unemployment, and inflation. This filter has been applied to assess potential output in the global economy (2015 April WEO) and to estimate potential output separately for four large euro area countries (France, Germany, Italy, Spain). Potential growth has declined significantly since the early 2000s, driven initially by a sustained decline in TFP and thereafter by crisis legacies. The drop in TFP growth, mirrored in many other advanced countries, may be related to lower growth returns from ICT (Fernald 2014a, 2014b; April 2015 WEO), and, to a lesser extent, the switch from manufacturing to services (van Ark and others, 2007; Dabla-Norris, 2015, Molagoda and Perez, 2011). In France, this decline was initially partly offset by higher potential employment growth related to dynamic labor force growth. During the crisis years, potential growth collapsed to less than 1 percent, reflecting a prolonged slowdown in investment and a rise in structural unemployment. Looking ahead, France’s potential growth appears much weaker than before the crisis. Under current policies, including recent and planned reforms, potential growth should increase over the medium term, but average only about 1.2 percent over 2015–20, despite France’s comparatively dynamic demographics. The accumulation of labor and capital is likely to remain broadly stable in the near future, while TFP is projected to rebound somewhat, though not to the exceptional growth rates seen in the 1990s. The Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU) has risen to an estimated 9¼ percent, and is expected to decline only very slowly in the coming years. Budina N., H. Lin, E. Pérez Ruiz, J. Vandenbussche, and A. Weber, 2015, “Potential growth in France, Germany, Italy, and Spain: A reassessment,” Chapter IV, Selected Issues paper for Spain 2015 Article IV. Potential output is conventionally defined as the level of output—based on full utilization of available labor, capital and technological resources—that is consistent with stable inflation (Okun, 1962). The output gap is the difference between actual and potential GDP. A related concept is the NAIRU, which measures the rate of unemployment consistent with stable inflation. Inflation Output gap Unemployment gap Inflation and Economic Slack 1994–19992000–20082009–20142015–2020 ∆ Capital ∆ Trend employment ∆ Trend TFP Potential growth Potential Output Growth Page 14