Reforms have progressed in recent years but more efforts are needed to bring down debt and unemployment. Limiting spending growth through efficiency reforms would help rebuild fiscal buffers and eventually allow alleviating France’s high tax burden. Reforming unemployment insurance, strengthening training, and supporting creation of new enterprises would help support job creation. The health of the financial sector should be protected by adapting to a modest growth and low rate environment. The government has made significant policy progress. In an environment with modest medium-term growth prospects at home and in the euro area, France faces two central policy challenges: (i) to support a more rapid creation of new private sector jobs and (ii) to ensure the sustainability of public finances via more efficient government spending growth. The authorities have made progress on both fronts in recent years, notably through the reduction in taxes under the Pacte de Responsabilité et de Solidarité ( PRS ) and the Crédit d'Impôt pour la Compétitivité et l'Emploi ( CICE) and the competition-enhancing structural reforms under the Macron law. Building on earlier labor market reforms, the El Khomri law currently in parliament, would be another step forward, increasing the scope for company-level labor agreements and reducing judicial uncertainty around dismissals. As for budget policies, there has been progress on efforts to contain spending growth at all levels of government while easing taxes. These were necessary steps that, taken together, have created the conditions for improved economic performance. Further efforts will be needed to secure a durable reduction in debt and unemployment. First, despite the ongoing recovery, the public debt ratio is still rising and approaching triple digits, while structural fiscal adjustment is slowing to around zero. To rebuild fiscal buffers and place debt on a firm downward trajectory, it will be important to bring down the deficit further, and to do this based on deep reforms that make government spending much more efficient in order to safeguard important services and social protections, while eventually making room for alleviating the high tax burden. Second, with unemployment entrenched at a high level, recent tax cuts and labor reforms should be followed by other growth-friendly measures to improve the functioning of the labor market, while supporting growth opportunities for start-ups and SMEs and further deregulating regulated professions. Finally, it will be important to protect the health of the financial sector in an environment of modest growth and low margins.