Reform efforts. France has struggled to bring its fiscal deficit in line with the targets under the Stability and Growth Pact and accelerate structural reforms. The government has recently pushed ahead with a number of supply-side reform initiatives against some resistance in parliament. In April 2015, it presented a multi-year economic strategy in the Stability Program and National Reform Program, which centers on gradual fiscal adjustment and broad-based economic reforms. Notwithstanding political and economic setbacks, the government has vowed to continue its economic reform course. Late recovery. While the French economy showed some resilience during the crisis years, the recovery lagged behind other euro area economies, with only 0.2 percent growth in 2014 (Figures 1 and 2). Investment and net exports both declined in real terms while high levels of unemployment and inactivity remained a drag on consumer demand. Consumption and export growth began accelerating in late 2014 and early 2015, but corporate investment remained weak and residential construction depressed. Unemployment continued to climb, reaching 10.5 percent in April 2015. Delayed Recovery and Disinflation Sources: OECD, Haver Analytics, and IMF Staff calculations. Disinflation. Inflation slowed sharply in 2014 and early 2015 on flagging core inflation (0.6 percent year-on-year in April), energy deflation, and slower food price growth. Unused production capacities, high unemployment, and the pass through of lower import prices all restrained inflationary pressures. Weak competitiveness and external imbalances. France’s share in world export markets has declined substantially over the past decade (Figure 3), while robust domestic demand throughout the crisis has sustained import growth. The current account deficit declined modestly in 2014, but remained one to three percent of GDP weaker than its cyclically-adjusted norm, and the real exchange rate was five to ten percent overvalued according to staff estimates (Appendix V). Competitiveness has been impaired by a prolonged period during which real wage growth remained Core Energy Food, alcohol, tobacco Headline inflation Core inflation Consumer Prices (HICP) (In percent change, year-on-year; bars in contribution to total) -2.5-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.522.52000–072008–122013–14 Euro area excl. France GDP per Capita (In percent annualized growth over the period) Page 10 solid despite declining productivity growth. This has squeezed profit margins and reduced firms’ capacity to invest and innovate, with regulatory disincentives for SME growth and a rising tax burden adding to the competitiveness gap. While the recent euro depreciation and fall in oil prices are expected to narrow the current account deficit (Figure 4), some of the underlying causes of the external imbalance remain, in particular elevated unit labor costs and a sizeable fiscal deficit. Fiscal slippages. In early 2012, the authorities set out to bring the structural deficit to balance by 2016, with adjustment equally divided between revenue and expenditure measures. Tax increases were frontloaded and expenditure containment began in 2013. The structural deficit was reduced by about two percentage points of GDP in 2012–13. But the strategy ran into difficulties in 2014 when nominal spending containment efforts did not yield the envisaged savings in the context of low growth and inflation. As a result, fiscal consolidation fell short of the authorities’ target, with the headline deficit broadly unchanged at 4 percent of GDP and expenditure and debt ratios continuing to climb. Financial sector stable. The banking system’s capital and liquidity ratios have been strengthened, and the maturity structure of funding has been lengthened, although banks remain dependent on wholesale funding (Figure 5). The largest four banks have raised Core Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratios to above 10 percent (fully loaded Basel III basis) and all meet the 100 percent Liquidity Coverage Ratio. The NPL ratio has declined to 4 percent. The ECB’s 2014 Comprehensive Assessment did not result in any banks needing to raise additional capital. In the asset quality review, valuation adjustments to risk-weighted assets were less than 0.5 percent, the second lowest among euro area countries, and the stress test reduced the CET1 ratio by around 3 percentage points, less than for most other countries. However, leverage ratios remain comparatively low in some banks. Risks to private balance sheets appear limited, with corporate indebtedness at 66 percent of GDP, adjusted for intercompany loans, and household debt at 55 percent of GDP.