France’s economy is recovering. But unemployment remains stubbornly high and public debt is still rising. To address these challenges, the government has pushed forward an agenda of tax cuts, spending restraint, and supply-side reforms against significant political resistance. Gradual reform progress against political resistance. Since 2013, the government has advanced a number of supply-side reforms, including services liberalization and income, labor, and corporate tax cuts (Box 1). The fiscal consolidation strategy switched from tax increases to spending restraint. These reforms were implemented against significant political resistance and in the context of rising anti-establishment sentiment as evidenced by the results of the December 2015 regional elections. The El Khomri reform of the labor code, unveiled earlier this year, has faced even stronger opposition, and the government relied on a constitutional procedure to move a modified version of the law through the lower house of parliament, triggering a confidence vote. This was followed by union- led strikes and fuel blockades. The political climate and social dialogue appear increasingly tense as France approaches the May 2017 Presidential elections. Recovery underway, but job creation still limited. France’s economy grew 1.3 percent in 2015, the fastest pace in four years. While the strong first quarter this year partly reflected one-off factors, growth appears to be solidifying and catching up with the euro area average. The recovery has been driven primarily by private consumption, which picked up in early 2015 as households gained purchasing power from falling energy prices and flat consumer price inflation against steady moderate wage growth, while some benefited from mortgage refinancing at lower interest rates. Corporate investment has also picked up alongside the cyclical recovery, supported by improved profit margins, low borrowing costs, phased-in tax cuts, and temporary fiscal incentives for amortization. By contrast, net external demand has remained weak, in part reflecting slower growth in trading partners. Despite the recovery, private sector job creation has remained lackluster, with the unemployment rate hovering around 10 percent. Headline inflation has remained flat, and core inflation was only 0.6 percent in May 2016, below the euro area average, pointing to continued economic slack. Continued credit growth despite volatility. A bout of global financial volatility in the first quarter hit French banks’ equity prices but CDS spreads remained far below 2011/12 peaks. The impact on France’s banks was broadly similar to other euro area countries and stock prices have recovered since then. Despite the volatility, bank credit growth has remained positive—at around 4 percent in 2015 for both households and companies, well above the euro area—and larger firms have significantly stepped up bond market financing, supporting a pickup in investment by French companies both at home and abroad. Access to credit does not appear to be a major hurdle for France’s SMEs. il nnu Page 9 Growth is catching up to the euro area …. … as investment and credit growth are picking up. Figure 1. A Subdued Recovery Consumer prices have drifted back to near zero … …while the jobless rate remains near 10 percent. The current account deficit declined on improved terms of trade … …. but competitiveness is still a concern. Sources: France Authorities, IMF World Economic Outlook , Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Real GDP (Percent change, year-on-year) FranceEuro area(excl. France) K gd EE lli = Page 10 Lower headline deficit, but slower structural adjustment and rising debt. After a pause in 2014, the overall fiscal deficit fell by almost half a percentage point to 3.6 percent of GDP in 2015, overperforming the authorities’ projections (3.8 percent of GDP). Consolidation was supported by nominal containment measures, including the continued wage scale freeze and reduced central transfers to local governments, which in turn sharply curtailed investment spending for the second year in a row. However, policy measures explain less than a third of the improvement, with real primary spending continuing to grow faster than GDP. The main drivers of consolidation were the cyclical recovery and savings from lower interest rates, with the 10-year bond yield averaging 0.8 percent in 2015, supported by the ECB’s quantitative easing program. Public debt continued to rise, reaching 96.1 percent of GDP at end-2015. Some progress on competitiveness and external imbalances. France’s share in world export markets has declined substantially over the past decade, while resilient domestic demand has sustained import growth throughout the crisis. The current account deficit narrowed to less than ¼ percent of GDP in 2015, partly on account of improved terms of trade. This was ½ to 2½ percent of GDP lower than staff’s assessment of the cyclically-adjusted norm, with the real exchange rate 3 to 9 percent overvalued (Appendix IV). Competitiveness has been impaired by a prolonged period during which real wage growth remained solid despite declining productivity growth, combined with regulatory barriers and a high tax burden. A weaker euro and low oil prices, together with cuts in the labor tax wedge, have helped strengthen the external position somewhat but some of the underlying causes of the external imbalance remain, including elevated unit labor costs and a sizeable fiscal deficit.