The mission took place before the European Parliament elections, in which the far- right party registered large gains at the expense of the socialist and center right parties. These electoral results came in the wake of a similar rebuke at the local elections in April, following which the President nominated a new government, headed by PM Valls. Discussions with the authorities centered on the policy program of the new government, as described in the Stability Program and National Reform Program. European Parliament elections have no immediate implications for policies: the government can count on a comfortable socialist majority in parliament until Presidential and Parliamentary elections in 2017; and, in reaction to the electoral results, both the President and the PM vowed to stay the course. Nonetheless, the popular discontent voiced during these elections could make the reform and adjustment process more arduous. Through the crisis, the economy fared better than other large euro area economies, except Germany, but it is also behind others in the recovery cycle (Figures 1 and 2) Investment in particular remains depressed and the output gap widened to -2.2 percent in 2013, with unemployment stuck above 10 percent. Demand has been constrained by a weak external environment and the drag caused by structural fiscal adjustment of nearly 3 percent of GDP over three years (2011–13). Resilient wage growth helped sustain consumption; but, combined with faltering productivity growth, it also compressed profit margins. Falling profitability, in turn, appears to have amplified the contraction of investment in response to flagging demand. Long-standing structural and competitiveness problems have compounded these negative factors. Private consumption has been an important factor of resilience in the French economy. During the crisis, the private saving rate did not react as procyclically as in other economies (notably the United States and the United Kingdom), and consumption growth remained positive, except for a small dip in 2012—real consumption was 2.5 percent higher in 2013 than at the pre-crisis peak, and the household saving rate has been relatively stable around 15½ percent in the last decade. The stability of consumption, even as disposable incomes were squeezed by rising taxation, reflects extensive social safety nets and sustained real wage growth. The stability of private consumption also reflects weak exposure to asset price changes. The absence of observable wealth effects in consumption, which have amplified the recession in other advanced economies, owes to conservative financial holdings (mostly bank deposits and life insurance products which have built-in shock absorbers) and inability to monetize real estate wealth because of rigid lending standards—these are based on capacity to repay rather than collateral. Thus, in the absence of over-leveraging, the gradual correction of real estate prices which is underway—real prices are 9 percent below pre-crisis peak—has had no discernible impact on consumption. See Selected Issues: “The Drivers of Business Investment in France: Reasons for Recent Weakness.” Page 6 In the wake of disinflationary pressures that began in 2012, inflation has stabilized around 1 percent. The slowdown in inflation (from 2.3 percent in 2012Q2 to 0.9 percent in 2014Q1) originates from declining core, energy, and food inflation in about equal proportions (Figure 3). Core inflation bottomed out mid–2013 driven by the continued compression in profit margins, pass through of lower import prices into manufacturing products, and the significant drop of telecom prices following the entry of a fourth operator. As some of the temporary factors waned, core inflation has edged up to just over 1 percent. Monetary easing has been transmitted into domestic interest rates, but monetary conditions have tightened since 2012. Despite the low level of nominal lending rates, falling inflation expectations have led to an increase in real interest rates. Balance sheet restructuring by banks was achieved mostly by shedding non-core foreign activities while preserving the core lending business. Domestic credit growth has thus remained positive through much of the crisis, although in 2013 the only growth was in mortgage lending. Corporate and household debt levels have increased, but they remain moderate by international comparison (Figure 4). Though nominal interest rates have remained broadly stable, real interest rates have risen as inflation has come down. Notwithstanding the significant adjustment already achieved, the government deficit was still 4.2 percent of GDP in 2013 (2.8 percent in structural terms). The persistence of structural fiscal deficits stems from the fact that public expenditure has tended to outrun GDP growth over decades, including through the fiscal stimulus of 2009. The resulting accumulation of deficits since 1975, even in good times, has reduced fiscal space and limited the ability of governments to sustain demand as the economy slowed down in 2012-13 (Figure 5). Fiscal space is also constrained by contingent liabilities, which declined from 152 percent of GDP end 2012 to As the structural deficit in 2012-13 diverged significantly from the multi-year fiscal law of 2012, the fiscal council triggered the corrective mechanism in May 2014 (for details see Box 1 of the Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation, Country Report No. 13/251). In response, the government said it will take additional spending measures (0.2 percent of GDP) this summer; and it will likely send to Parliament, in the fall, a new multi-year fiscal law targeting structural balance in 2017 rather than in 2016 (consistent with the April 2014 stability program). Real interest rate differential 1/ Nominal interest rate differential Real interest rate (France) 1/Sources: Haver Analytics; Consensus Forecasts; and staff calculations. Nominal rates deflated using CPI consensus forecasts. France: Real Lending Rate and Differential Relative to Germany (In percent, for new business loans up to one year maturity) France loans less than 1 year France loans 1 to 5 years ECB policy rate France loans greater than 5 years France: Lending Rate for New Business Loans (In percent)Sources: Haver Analytics, IMF Staff calculations. Page 7 134 percent of GDP in 2013 (slightly more than half is related to pensions). Despite the increase in debt, government borrowing rates have stabilized at historically low levels (the 10-year yield has declined from 4.7 percent in June 2008 to less than 1.9 percent in May 2014). The fiscal policy strategy was to divide the adjustment equally between revenue and expenditure measures but to front-load the revenue measures because of their lower (expected) multiplier. The tax burden increased by 2.8 percent of GDP from 2007 to 2013. Fiscal adjustment shifted from tax increases to expenditure containment in 2013, but growth of spending was still 0.9 percent in real terms. The strategy has encountered a number of challenges, including a political backlash against taxation, falling tax buoyancy and inflation, expenditure slippages at the level of local governments, and rising social spending. In the event, the social insurance system which has contributed to the economy’s resilience has become more difficult to sustain financially and to reconcile with deficit reduction. Loss of competitiveness has weighed on growth. The competitiveness gap is evident from export market share and unit labor cost developments (Figure 6). The evidence based on price competitiveness is less clear, because narrowing profit margins have compensated for the loss of cost competitiveness. At the same time, EBA model estimates suggest that the 2013 current account was 1 to 3 percent of GDP below its cyclically-adjusted norm. Based on all of these considerations, staff considers that the real exchange rate in 2013 was 5-10 percent higher (i.e., overvalued) relative to medium term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Export performance appears weak even when correcting for the fact that France is less integrated in the Global Value Chains, which tend to gross up both imports and exports. Non-cost factors weighing on competitiveness are related to rigidities in the economy. The recent narrowing of the current account deficit—from 2.1 percent of GDP in 2012 to 1.3 percent in 2013—reflects to a greater extent weak domestic demand than a rebound of export growth. The net international investment position has deteriorated since the outset of the crisis to -20 percent of GDP. However, its size and trajectory do not raise sustainability concerns. Financial sector indicators show continued improvements, but banks remain exposed to wholesale funding risks. Banks have made significant progress in building capital and liquidity buffers, drawing from increased profitability and adjustments in their funding structure. These improvements have been reflected in rising price-to-book ratios (Figure 7). Despite a further reduction in the loan-to-deposit ratio (to 115.9 percent in 2013 for the six large banking groups), banks face gaps relative to future net stable funding ratio requirements. And, although the large groups have met the CRD-IV fully loaded minimum CET1 capital requirement, many peers have gone further. Deleveraging has continued, with total assets of the five large banking groups down 7.5 percent in 2013. Non-performing loans have risen to 4.5 percent in 2013 (Table 5), but continue to be well provisioned. See Selected Issues: “France in the Global Value Chains: Revisiting the Competitiveness Loss.” Page 8 Figure 1. Real Sector Developments, 2007–19 The French economy weathered the crisis relatively well compared to peers…. Composite leading indicators point to a lag in the recovery in France compared to other large economies …. ….supported by the resilience of private consumption ….which should be followed by steady medium-term growth, as investment recovers lost ground. Sources: OECD, Haver Analytics, and IMF Staff calculations. Comprises Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Spain. GDP Private consumption Business investment GDP, Consumption, and Investment Projections (In index number, 2008Q1 = 100) France United Kingdom EA18 Real GDP (In index number, 2008Q1 = 100) un un un France United States EA18 European big four G7 Composite Leading Indicator (In index number, long-term average = 100) Real disposable income Consumption Savings rate (in percent, right scale) Household Disposable Income, Consumption, and Savings (In percentage change, year-on-year) Page 9 Figure 2. Per Capita Income 1995–2013 Real GDP per capita in France has grown in line with the euro area average and remains below the pre-crisis peak. The growth of real per capita income in France prior to the crisis was driven essentially by labor productivity growth, with virtually no contribution from increase in the employment rate. This contrasts with the observed increases of the employment rates in peer countries. Income growth in France has been sustained by a highly productive labor force, while employment rates have remained lower than in other countries. Since the outset of the crisis, the loss of real per capita income in France reflects both rising dependency rates and falling employment rates, although to a lesser extent than in peer countries (with the exception of Germany). Sources: AMECO, Haver Analytics, and IMF Staff calculations. Converted into Euros using the average exchange rate for 1995-2013. Euro area Germany SpainFranceItaly Labor productivity (Y/L) Employment rate (L/WAP) Dependency rate (WAP/POP) Cross term GDP per capita (Y/POP) Growth of Real GDP per Capita, and Components, 2000-07 (In percent change, and percentage point contributions) Euro area Germany SpainFranceItaly Labor productivity (Y/L) Employment rate (L/WAP) Dependency rate (WAP/POP) Cross term GDP per capita (Y/POP) Growth of Real GDP per Capita, and Components, 2008-13 (In percent change, and percentage point contributions) EA18 United Kingdom 1/ Real GDP per Capita (In thousands of 2005 euros) EA18 United Kingdom 1/ Real GDP per Person Employed (In thousands of 2005 euros) Page 10 Figure 3. Inflation Developments, 2009–13 Inflation has fallen rapidly since 2012, and …. ….with waning temporary factors, inflation has stabilized around 1 percent. Longstanding labor market rigidities have rendered wages …and profit margins have been squeezed by real wage relatively unresponsive to unemployment conditions…. growth and the deterioration in the terms of trade Sources: INSEE, Haver Analytics, and IMF Staff calculations. Ratio of value added deflator to consumption deflator. Core Energy Food, alcohol, tobacco Headline inflation (HICP) Core inflation Headline and Core Consumer Prices (HICP) (In percent change, year-on-year; bars in contribution to total) Manufacturing Energy Health services Transport & com. services Food Other services Headline inflation Contributions to Headline Inflation by Items (In percent change, year-on-year; bars in contribution to total) Social contributions and other Terms of trade 1/ Real wages and productivity Profit margin variation Profit margin (right scale) Contributions to Profit Margins (In percent change, year-on-year; bars in contribution to total) ( ) Unemployment rate (in percent) The Phillips Curve (1999Q1-2013Q3) Page 11 Figure 4. Debt and Financing Conditions for Non-Financial Private Sector Household and corporate debts are moderate relative to peers. In the past year, positive credit growth has been driven by mortgage lending…. …even as credit standards for mortgages were tightened. Bank loans remain central to enterprise debt financing … …. even though the share of market financing has been growing in recent years. Sources: ECB, Haver Analytics, and IMF Staff calculations. The difference between consolidated and non-consolidated NFC debt in these countries was a maximum of 21 percent of GDP in 2012 for France; no consolidated data exist for the UK. Loans Securities Unquoted shares and other equity Quoted shares Financial Liabilities of NFCs (In percent of the total stock) Loans Securities Quoted shares Unquoted shares and other equity Financing Flows to NFCs (In billions of euros) 80100Jan-04Jan-06Jan-08Jan-10Jan-12Jan-14 Corporate criteria Criteria for house purchase Criteria for consumer credit Lending Standards (In percent balance of responses) TighteningLoosening 05101520Jan-04Jan-06Jan-08Jan-10Jan-12Jan-14 Corporate loans Consumer credit Housing loans Corporate and Household Loans (In year-on-year percent change) United Kingdom Netherlands Sweden Household Debt (In percent of disposable income) United Kingdom Netherlands Sweden Non-Consolidated Debt of Non-Financial Corps. (In percent of GDP) Page 12 Figure 5. France: Fiscal Developments and Adjustment Scenario Spending has outpaced GDP… ... making it difficult to close the structural deficit even in good times,…. The result has been a steady erosion of fiscal buffers. … despite a ratcheting up of taxes. Sources: French Authorities, INSEE, and IMF Staff calculations. Real Primary Expenditure and Real GDP (In index number, 1980=100) Real primary expenditure Real GDP Structural deficit and output gap (In percent of potential GDP) Structural deficit Output gap Fiscal ratios (In percent of GDP) Revenue-to-GDP Tax-to-GDP Expenditure-to-GDP Baseline Growth shock (DSA) Debt-to-GDP Ratio (In percent of GDP) Page 13 Figure 6. External Developments, 2000–13 The steady deterioration in the current account…. More recently, external competitiveness has been undermined by losses in cost competitiveness relative to some peers… ….is mirrored by weak export performance ….which exporters have offset by squeezing profit margins so as to preserve price competitiveness. Sources: European Commission, IMF WEO Statistics, IMF BOP Statistics, Haver Analytics, and IMF Staff calculations. Compensation in current Euros divided by apparent labor productivity measured in 2005 Euros. Adjusted by imputing the CICE tax credit (0.9 percent of GDP) to lower labor costs. Income balance Net exports of goods Current transfers balance Net exports of services Current account balance France: Current Account by Components (In percent of GDP) Germany Selected Euro Area Countries -Unit Labor Costs (Compensation per employee over apparent labor productivity) HICP based CICE adjusted, ULC based 2/ ULC based France: Real Effective Exchange Rates (In index number, 2000 = 100) li li un x K li f il T li x Z K gd Share in Exports of Goods and Services, 1997-2013 (In percent change) Page 14 System capital and liquidity ratios have improved … … and markets have responded positively. Figure 7. Banking Sector Developments In the French systemically important banks, capital ratios meet fully-loaded Basel III requirements; leverage ratios are in the low range, reflecting relatively low risk-weights. Stable financing sources have increased, but wholesale funding remains large. Market conditions have been favorable. Sources: Banque De France, ACPR, SNL Financial, Bloomberg, and IMF Staff calculations. T W Liquid Assets to Total Assets Capital and Liquidity, 2007-2013 (In percent) French bank average Other banks Price to Book Ratio of European G-SIBs (In percent) il K f mm GG AA SS il Risk-weighted Assets to Total Assets, 2013Q4 (In percent; French G-SIBs in red) il K GG il mm f Basel III Common Equity Tier 1 ratio IFRS Tier 1 Leverage Ratio Capital and Leverage, 2013Q4 (In percent, French G-SIBs in red) May-12Nov-12May-13Nov-13May-14 France Bank 5-Year Credit Default Swap Spreads (CDS spreads in basis points) Interbank and market financing, MLT, > 3 mo. Interbank and market financing, short term, < 3 mo. Deposits and long term financing Financing Structure of the Largest 5 Banking Groups (In percent of total liabilities) Page 15