With a recovery finally underway, attention is shifting to the structural rigidities that weigh on medium-term prospects. The present accommodative macroeconomic environment provides an opportunity to push ahead with the more difficult policies and reforms to address France’s more fundamental economic problems. Rising government spending, which had supported aggregate demand before and during the crisis, has pushed up public debt and the tax burden, and makes fiscal adjustment a difficult balancing act. The persistence of high structural unemployment risks creating longer-term social problems while also limiting France’s potential growth. A range of long-standing structural bottlenecks, including overregulation and barriers to competition, are hampering innovation, investment, and productivity growth. The authorities have embarked on a range of welcome reforms, though further efforts are needed to lay the foundations for sustainable growth (Box 2). The 2015 National Reform Program and Stability Program set out a broad strategy to raise economic growth, reduce unemployment, and gradually consolidate the fiscal position via spending containment. Following the substantial cuts in the labor tax wedge under the Responsibility Pact and , the government is pushing ahead with additional reform initiatives. The law—now at a final stage of parliamentary approval following use of a special constitutional procedure to overcome political resistance—contains supply-side reforms to liberalize parts of the economy while also advancing some labor reforms. The draft Rebsamen law, expected to be adopted by year end, is intended to improve the social dialogue and ease labor-related regulations that hamper SME growth. While significant, these efforts are likely not enough to lift potential growth closer to pre-crisis levels and ensure that fiscal objectives are achieved with adequate margins. To this end, staff focused its recommendations on the need to underpin fiscal consolidation through deep spending reform, push ahead with broad-based reforms to foster employment creation, while maintaining the recent momentum on product market reforms.