Barriers to competition in services and extensive regulation remain important obstacles to growth (Selected Issues Chapter III). Productivity growth in services has been slow in recent years. As in other European countries, this partly reflects crisis legacies, but also barriers to competition, which limit the development of startups and weaken incentives to innovate and improve quality (Figure 8). This raises the cost of services and filters into the rest of the economy— staff has estimated that a 1 percent productivity gain in regulated services could raise GDP by 0.8 percent after two years. Extensive regulatory requirements on businesses, especially above certain employee thresholds, further limit incentives for investment. Together with a heavy tax burden and labor market rigidities, these factors are a significant drag on France’s competitiveness and growth potential. The recent momentum on product market reform should be maintained. The law contains a number of supply-side reforms, including steps to liberalize opening hours, enhance competition in regulated legal professions, reduce rents received by toll road operators, and open up intercity bus transport. It also expands the competencies of the Competition Authority, notably regarding some barriers to entry affecting retail and regulated legal professions. These reforms complement the ongoing simplification of administrative burden process, with support from the Business Simplification Council. Staff welcomed these steps, while underscoring the significant remaining potential for productivity gains from enhanced competition in services and reduction of red tape (see some specific recommendations in Box 2). More could be done to alleviate structural rigidities in the housing market. Residential construction has fallen by 14 percent, and real house prices by 11 percent, since the peak in 2007. While this decline is partly cyclical, a succession of laws introducing regulatory and tax changes may also have contributed. Another long-standing factor affecting the market is the extensive system of housing subsidies, which include rental cash assistance (received by 44 percent of tenants), subsidized mortgage rates for households, and fiscal breaks for providers (including of social The OECD has estimated that structural reforms undertaken since 2012 (including labor tax cuts and the Macron law) would jointly raise GDP growth by 0.3 percent per year. See reference in Selected Issues Chapter III. Page 20 housing), together amounting to 1.9 percent of GDP in 2013. While these were aimed at making housing more affordable, studies have found that rental assistance may contribute to rising rents. Staff recommended reviewing the functioning of the housing market, with a view to alleviating constraints on the supply of affordable housing and improving the targeting of benefits. The authorities were confident that ongoing product market reforms will foster competition and growth. The government recently announced measures to support employment creation in SMEs, including by alleviating administrative and tax requirements, and labor constraints. They also highlighted the recent introduction of temporarily more favorable amortization rules, which should provide a near-term boost to investment. There are plans to reform qualification requirements that act as barriers to entry into certain professions. The authorities also reiterated the importance of seed money from the state to foster innovation and steer the economy toward sectors with growth potential. On housing, they considered that recent measures to increase supply—such as simplifying regulations and increasing availability of land, including in areas with especially high demand—are starting to bear fruit. They also noted that certain rental assistance benefits are under scrutiny as part of efforts to contain expenditure.