High unemployment is becoming entrenched in a segmented labor market. Sluggish demand during the crisis years, coupled with labor market and wage rigidities, has pushed unemployment to 10.5 percent as of April 2015, from 7.5 percent in 2008 (Figure 7). Despite a relatively robust labor force growth, net job creation has stagnated since 2008. Employment rates remain relatively low, and inactivity rates of the young are now among the highest in Europe. The labor market remains segmented, with 55 percent of young workers below 25 on a fixed-term contract and an unemployment rate among unskilled workers almost three times that of skilled workers. The protracted period of high and rising unemployment has almost doubled the number of long-term unemployed since the onset of the crisis. This is contributing to a rise in structural unemployment, with the NAIRU currently estimated at 9¼ percent. Building on recent efforts, broad-based reforms are needed to return to pre-crisis rates of job creation (Selected Issues Chapter II). With a steadily rising labor force and moderate medium-term growth prospects, removing barriers to employment growth will be critical to reversing the rise in structural unemployment. Important steps have been taken in recent years, in particular through: the reduction of the tax wedge under the Responsibility Pact and CICE tax credit; the 2013 agreements to enhance social partners’ flexibility at the enterprise level and ease collective dismissals; the planned reform of the prud’hommes system under the Macron law to reduce judicial uncertainties on individual dismissals; and the draft Rebsamen law would streamline the mandatory discussions between social partners in SMEs. However, given remaining labor market rigidities, the unemployment rate is likely to decline only slowly, and there is a risk that recent labor tax cuts feed Long-term unemployment (right scale) Unemployment rate Unemployment (In percent; right scale in millions of persons)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF Staff calculations.Note: Long-term unemployment is defined as 1 year or more. Page 18 into wages as unemployment declines. Achieving a faster and deeper reduction in unemployment would require a broad-based reform approach that rests on four pillars: Enterprise-level agreements. The ability of enterprises to adjust hours and wages to changing economic circumstances remains very constrained. Recent reforms were aimed at introducing more flexibility for enterprises in economic difficulties through “job preservation agreements”. These agreements have been rarely used, however, in part because of restrictive conditions. Staff recommended enhancing the flexibility of social partners to agree on hours and wages in all enterprises. Minimum wage . While intended to ensure a basic living wage, France’s minimum wage level is one of the highest in the euro area, hampering the employability of the young and of the low- skilled. Moreover, annual minimum wage increases, partially indexed to the average real wage in the economy, set a floor for pay settlements downstream, thus creating a feedback loop that contributes to wage rigidity. To better balance its social role against unemployment effects, staff recommended limiting minimum wage increases to inflation for as long as unemployment remains high. Benefits. France’s benefits system is comparatively generous. Staff recommended harmonizing and strengthening job search incentives of unemployment and social welfare benefit recipients, including through gradual reductions in benefits if reasonable job offers are refused. In addition, job search incentives could be strengthened for unemployment benefits by lengthening the period of work that is required for eligibility, and by introducing degressivity of benefits. Education and training. Each year, 140,000 young people leave the education system without completing school. Spending on professional training amounts to about 1.4 percent of GDP, but primarily benefits skilled workers and those in large companies. Staff emphasized the need for better targeting resources on quality training for the young, the low-skilled, and unemployed. Views of the authorities. Reducing unemployment remains the government’s central objective, with structural reform efforts increasingly focusing on the labor market. The authorities estimate that the Responsibility Pact and CICE will create around half a million jobs. The authorities noted that the Macron law would also facilitate the use of job preservation agreements, and that they have set up a working group to recommend further steps for increasing company-level flexibility. Regarding the minimum wage, they emphasized its social role while noting that recent reductions in the tax wedge have already lowered the effective cost of labor at lower salary ranges. A number of studies point to the need for a multi-pronged strategy, with varying assessments of the importance of individual labor market reforms. Staff estimates that each of the four main reform areas discussed here would reduce the NAIRU by at least ½ percentage point in the long term. A comprehensive package, including further tax wedge cuts once fiscal space allows, could yield a four percentage point reduction of the long-term NAIRU, and raise potential output by five percentage points cumulatively by 2030. Firm-level labor agreements must improve upon industry-level agreements and labor code. Extension procedures achieve a wide coverage of industry agreements, notwithstanding limited union density. Page 19 Regarding benefits, an ongoing review of the unemployment insurance system will inform future reforms to be negotiated by social partners; the employment agency is exploring ways to enforce job search requirements; and the draft law would merge the two supplementary income support programs for the working poor. On professional training, the authorities highlighted that the recent introduction of portable training will encourage labor mobility. The government is also exploring options for promoting apprenticeships and better targeting training resources. In early June, the government announced additional measures to promote employment, particularly in SMEs, including by increasing the number of allowed renewals for fixed-term contracts, easing threshold effects for small firms, subsidizing micro enterprises recruiting their first employee, and extending the trial period of apprenticeships.