Much of France’s high unemployment is structural, presenting a major social and economic challenge. Unemployment appears less responsive to the business cycle, see Selected Issues Paper (SIP) Chapter I, A. The unemployment rate has hovered around 10 percent for four years. Despite steady public sector hiring, employment rates in France have stagnated, underperforming peer countries, as job creation lagged behind previous recoveries. In April 2016, the number of unemployed reached 3.5 million, and those out of a job for more than one year numbered almost 2.5 million, more than double the pre-crisis level. The unemployment rate is projected to decline only very slowly, converging with the NAIRU (to around 8½ percent) over the medium term. The poor labor market performance reflects deep-rooted structural rigidities, not just a weak recovery. Several factors seem to have made France’s labor market less adaptable to an evolving global economy—centralized labor agreements for over 700 branches; long and uncertain judicial procedures around dismissals; relatively easy access to unemployment and welfare benefits; a relatively high minimum wage; and a sizeable labor tax wedge. Moreover, real wages and unit labor costs have grown steadily since 2000, including during the crisis years, contributing to a labor cost competitiveness gap. Together with barriers to private sector growth, this has made it difficult for job creation to match the dynamically growing labor force. The adverse effects cut across the population but are particularly pronounced for the young, the low-skilled, and immigrants. Page 19 Figure 3. Lack of Dynamism in the Labor Market Slow job creation, despite public hiring, has kept unemployment high. Much of France’s unemployment is structural. The employment rate has failed to pick up…. …and remains very low for a number of groups… …partly reflecting easily accessible benefits… …and above-average minimum wages. Sources: Europ’Info, 2012: “L’assurance chômage en Europe,”—Edition N°9, July 2012; France authorities, EuroStat, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Private Public Unemployment rate (right scale) France: Cumulative Change in Employment (In thousands of persons; right scale in percent) z oo France Germany Italy Spain United Kingdom United States Employment per Working Age Population (In percent, ages 15-64) K K Minimum Wages, 2014 (Ratio of minimum to median wage) Page 20 Reducing unemployment has been the authorities’ long-standing goal—and important steps have been taken in recent years. The labor tax wedge has been reduced significantly for low wage earners through the PRS and CICE , helping reduce unit labor costs The Rebsamen law has streamlined regulations for social dialogue in small and mid-sized companies and strengthened activity incentive schemes for lower wage earners. The Macron law has taken a step toward reforming the labor arbitration system ( prud’hommes ). A new hiring subsidy for lower wage earners in small firms and a new training program for the unemployed were introduced earlier this year. Building on these reforms as well as the earlier labor law in 2013, the El Khomri law would increase the scope for company-level labor agreements and further reduce judicial uncertainty around dismissals—these measures should encourage more hiring on open-ended contracts and improve labor market dynamics as the recovery gathers pace. Important barriers to job creation remain, however (see SIP Chapter I, B). Certain aspects of the unemployment and welfare benefits systems may contribute to inactivity traps, with relatively easy qualification for benefits and weak job search incentives. Moreover, the education and training system has not kept up with a changing labor market, creating an increasing mismatch between the existing skills of the jobless and those sought by employers. Bringing down the high level of structural unemployment and raising the stagnant employment rate will be critical both for growth and social objectives. With a view to supporting a job-rich recovery, staff recommends a set of specific reforms that should raise France’s medium-term employment and growth potential while improving opportunities for vulnerable groups without creating a drag on short-term demand: Reforming unemployment insurance rules to strengthen work incentives, including by (i) lengthening the minimum contribution period to qualify for unemployment insurance from the current four months; (ii) unifying the maximum unemployment benefit period to two years; (iii) changing the formula for calculating unemployment benefits to balance the treatment of part-time work and alternating short-term work contracts; and (iv) introducing “degressivity” of unemployment benefits. Enhancing job search support for unemployment and welfare benefit recipients, while tightening rules for accepting suitable job offers and strengthening enforcement of rules. Changing the minimum wage formula to limit indexation to inflation while unemployment is high. The OECD estimated the combined impact of labor and other tax cuts and structural reforms under the Macron law would raise real GDP growth by 0.3 percent per year through 2020. A person becomes eligible for benefits after working for just 4 months, and reaches eligibility for the maximum of 24 months of benefits after working for 2 years (with a the maximum is 36 months for persons over 50). While on benefits, the unemployed can reject the first “suitable” job offer, and can reject any offer with a wage of less than 85– 100 percent of the previous wage. The French system also features Europe’s highest cap for benefits, at about €7,000 per month. Moreover, an analysis by the Conseil d’Analyse Economique (September 2015) shows that there is an increasing number of workers who alternate between ultra-short term contracts and short-term unemployment within a month, receiving a total income close to the full monthly wage based on the current unemployment benefit formula. Job search requirements are often weakly enforced, including for welfare recipients. Page 21 Further improving education and professional training to better match the skills of the young and unemployed to the needs of the labor market. Product market reforms remain an important complement to fostering job creation and growth. The Macron law has liberalized legal professions and intercity bus transport, and opened the way for extending retail trade opening hours, while the Rebsamen law increased certain employee thresholds including for mandatory social dialogue, lifting the administrative burden on SMEs. Building on these reforms, there is still ample scope to boost potential growth and job creation, both in the short and medium term, by reducing red tape and enhancing competition: Easing regulations for start-ups and the self-employed, enhancing data transparency, and streamlining qualification requirements for regulated professions, as envisaged in the “ Sapin II ” law on economic transparency. Reducing barriers to competition for regulated professions other than in the legal area, and further liberalizing retail trade (including by reviewing zoning restrictions). Enhancing the efficiency of the “Business Simplification” process aimed at cutting red tape, with additional monitoring from a new unit in the Ministry of Economy. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly agreed that a large share of unemployment is structural. They stressed their strong commitment to combat unemployment, noting that the El Khomri law builds on a series of reforms and fiscal measures that were all aimed at improving the functioning of the labor market. The law would be the first step in redrafting the labor code in order to increase the scope for collective bargaining. It would reduce the fragmentation of the labor market by enhancing incentives for hiring on open-ended contracts. It would also give more flexibility to firms while providing security to workers. They agreed that in order to bring down unemployment decisively, continued efforts are needed to strengthen education and professional training (such as through the recent presidential initiative to create a new training program for the unemployed), reform the unemployment insurance system, and further encourage the creation of new enterprises, growth, and development (as is the intent of the Sapin II law on economic transparency). Page 22