Solid short-term recovery ahead. We project real GDP growth at 1.2 percent in 2015 and 1.5 percent in 2016, supported by improved consumer confidence and a highly accommodative external environment. Sharply lower oil prices will underpin households’ consumption while a depreciated euro and the euro area recovery should lift export growth. Very low interest rates on account of Quantitative Easing (QE) are projected to filter gradually into higher investment (Appendix I quantifies these shocks). Credit growth is expected to pick up alongside rising demand. France CLI France growth (right scale) Composite Leading Indicator (Amplitude adjusted index; right scale in y-o-y growth) Page 11 Yet headwinds remain. Unemployment is still high and rising, notwithstanding recent cuts in the labor tax wedge under the and Responsibility Pact. Residential construction remains depressed, and fiscal consolidation, while slower, will continue to dampen near-term growth. Inflation to pick up this year . Lower energy prices and slowing wage growth (including a below average increase in the minimum wage) are projected to reduce annual average inflation to 0.1 percent in 2015, and core inflation to 0.5 percent. Inflation is set to accelerate this year, and rise to 1.0 percent in 2016 as the output gap starts to narrow, the impact of the oil price decline on headline inflation wanes, and the price effects from euro depreciation and QE are felt more fully. Output gap to narrow gradually. The more accommodative macroeconomic policy mix on account of QE, a depreciated euro, and slower fiscal consolidation is projected to support aggregate demand over the coming years. Together with recent and planned structural reforms, this more favorable environment should improve economic confidence and filter into a solid rebound in corporate investment, a stabilization and eventual recovery of the housing sector, and further strengthening of private consumption. Export growth is expected to be more dynamic alongside rising global demand and the recovery in the euro area. Under baseline assumptions, this should allow for a gradual narrowing of the output gap and a return of inflation to more normal rates. Short-term risks evenly balanced. Growth may turn out stronger than projected in the short term, in particular if QE and improved confidence in the euro area were to filter more quickly into investment and export gains. However, the recovery could be adversely affected by potential confidence losses (e.g., in the event of adverse geopolitical or Greece-related developments), a rebound in energy prices, or a surge in financial volatility.