A subdued medium-term outlook implies that unemployment and public debt will remain elevated for some time to come. France remains exposed to global financial stress, a protracted period of low growth in the euro area, and confidence losses from regional or domestic political developments. Solidifying recovery, with some uncertainty and downside risks. We project real GDP to grow by 1.5 percent this year. The latest data point to continued strong consumer spending, suggesting that consumer confidence continues to improve despite recent terrorist attacks and the still poor labor market. There are also clear signs that investment is picking up and that the slump in residential construction may be bottoming out. The slowdown in structural fiscal adjustment, while problematic for fiscal sustainability (see below), removes another headwind to growth. Conversely, net external demand remains weak, reflecting in part slow growth in trading partners, including in the euro area. Among the areas of uncertainty are the potential effects of strikes and blockades, the upcoming Presidential elections, and a number of regional risks (see below). Page 11 Inflation outlook still subdued. Despite higher energy prices, headline inflation is projected to remain just marginally above zero in 2016, reflecting continued economic slack and flat import prices. As the recovery firms up, wage growth accelerates, and energy prices rise, inflation is expected to increase to around 1 percent in 2017, still well below the rate consistent with medium- term inflation objectives for the euro area. Modest medium-term growth prospects. Over past decades, growth has been supported by rising government spending, robust wage dynamics and productivity growth, and a steady expansion of the labor force. But the crisis has taken a toll and past drivers of aggregate demand are fading. Alongside a subdued euro area recovery, France’s growth trajectory has flattened, with the level of output around 8 percent below the (hypothetical) pre-crisis trend line by 2021. Potential output growth—projected to rise gradually from around 1 percent in 2015 to 1½ percent by 2021— is held back by slowing productivity as in other advanced economies, but also by structural rigidities as discussed in last year’s consultation. Apart from regulations in the services sector and the high tax burden, a key obstacle to growth remains the labor market, where structural unemployment is projected to remain high in the absence of additional reforms. On the demand side, growth is projected to be supported mainly by robust private consumption and accelerating investment as the recovery gains pace and confidence solidifies along with stronger growth in the euro area. This should prompt some catching up with respect to long-postponed durables consumption and machinery and equipment purchases. The subdued growth and inflation outlook implies that unemployment and public debt will remain elevated for some time to come. Risks. There are a number of important downside risks that could have significant adverse effects on growth, financial stability, fiscal sustainability, and unemployment (see also the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA, Appendix II) and the Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM, Appendix III)): J J J J J = Real GDP Hypothetical potential GDP (pre-crisis trend) Potential GDP Loss in Potential Output Since the Crisis (In index number, 1999 = 100) 8 pct. Sources: French Authorities and IMF Staff calculations. Page 12 Global financial stress and severe downturn. An investment demand shock in the euro area caused by weaker confidence and financial stress, combined with a near-term global slowdown, could reduce French output by 3 percent cumulatively in real terms relative to baseline, and raise unemployment by about 1½ percentage points by 2021 (Appendix I). Global financial stress would transmit to France’s real economy via export demand, confidence effects, and through the impact on France’s banks, which (as some other euro area banks) remain exposed to such shocks in part due to modest profitability, elevated leverage, and still above average reliance on wholesale funding (see financial section below). Based on historical data and assuming no changes in the business model, this could imply a substantial loss in profitability for the globally systemic banks, according to staff’s analysis (see paragraph 26). Protracted stagnation in the euro area. A prolonged demand shock from lower investment intentions and higher risk premia—reflecting low growth expectations, financial fragmentation, and balance sheet concerns—could push the euro area into a low growth, low inflation equilibrium, reducing potential output while leaving the output gap open and further eroding the profitability of the banks. In this scenario, real output in France could drop in cumulative terms by 1¾ percent by 2021 relative to baseline, and unemployment could rise by over ½ percentage points. This could squeeze banks’ profitability and their ability to lend to the real economy (see paragraph 26). Confidence losses due to domestic or regional politics. Domestically, the possibility of an extended period of strike actions, social unrest, or a strengthening of populist forces in the run up to the 2017 Presidential elections could hurt investor and consumer confidence, hinder fiscal and structural reform efforts, and create a more euro-skeptical environment. At the regional level, there are a number of risks that could contribute to the above downside scenarios. The British referendum on EU membership could trigger financial volatility—France’s direct banking system exposure to the UK is estimated at about 10 percent of GDP—and an extended period of political uncertainty, possibly compounded by other regional challenges such as refugees, Ukraine, Greece, and terrorism. Potential spillovers. The above risks can create outward spillovers. A protracted period of economic stagnation or domestic political tensions in France could have an adverse effect on the euro area, both directly on aggregate demand and indirectly via confidence effects. Failure to deliver on fiscal consolidation and structural reform commitments could be seen as weakening the credibility of EU economic governance. Given their size and interconnectedness, French banks could create adverse effects if global financial stress forced them into further retrenchment from retail operations abroad (e.g., Italy, emerging Europe), trade and project finance, and correspondent banking activities (though de-risking is less relevant for global French banks than for some global peers). Page 13