The continued drawdown of fiscal buffers increases the risks to fiscal sustainability and the adequate financing of needed investment (Figure 3) While there was a slowdown in the execution of the 2015 budget (only 62 percent of budgeted capital spending was executed by September), non-oil revenue was lower than in 2014 and the government repaid large domestic arrears and temporary external arrears. Financing pressures likely persisted in the last quarter considering the expected acceleration in spending. Taking into account these developments and the 2015 amended budget, the staff projects a fiscal deficit on a commitment basis of 3½ percent and on a cash basis of 9 percent of non-oil GDP (including large reimbursements of VAT-related and other arrears). Figure 3. Gabon: Fiscal Indicators The government has significantly reduced capital spending… ..in the context of falling oil revenues... ..but the overall balance has turned negative.. …and external debt has increased. The authorities project end-2015 domestic arrears at CFAF 162 billion. 60201020112012201320142015 Proj. Capital and Current Expenditures , 2010-15(percent of non oil GDP) Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure 60201020112012201320142015 Proj. Oil and Non Oil Revenues, 2010-15(percent of non oil GDP) Oil Revenues Non Oil Revenues -30-25-20-15-10-505201020112012201320142015 Proj. Budget Balances, 2010-15 Overal Balance (% of GDP) Non oil Balance (% of Non Oil GDP) 15202530201020112012201320142015 Proj. External Debt, 2010-15 (percent of GDP) External Public Debt Page 14 Staff welcomes the authorities’ aim to continue fiscal consolidation, as outlined in the 2016 budget draft and in the Medium Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF), but has substantial reservations on the underlying assumptions. While the assumed US$42 per barrel of Gabonese oil was conservative when the budget was prepared, the acceleration of the decline in international oil prices suggests there is a need to amend the budget accordingly. Furthermore, the 2016 initial budget optimistically assumes a 20 percent increase in non-oil revenues relative to the authorities’ 2015 projection. It also proposes a small 3.5 percent increase in current spending, which will be politically difficult in an election environment and crowds out much-needed productive public investment by including two stadia to host the 2017 African Cup of Nations, which account for 15 percent of total capital spending. The 2016–18 MTFF proposes spending paths that imply a freeze in current spending in nominal terms and a reduction in capital spending by 8 percent between 2015 and 2018. Under these assumptions the government expects that the overall fiscal deficit would gradually decline and reach a small surplus in 2018. The staff baseline scenario proposes a more substantial adjustment to preserve fiscal sustainability. Staff proposes that the non-oil revenue base be widened over time with the elimination of overly generous tax exemptions; wages and salaries would grow at 2 percent per year in nominal terms throughout the period; and other main current spending items and capital spending grow in nominal terms but at a rate significantly below non-oil GDP growth (Figure 4). Under those assumptions, a debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows Gabon’s projected debt level peaking at 50.1 percent of GDP in 2016, and decline slowly from 2019. That said, shocks considered in the DSA could lead to much higher debt-to-GDP ratios, and a growth shock could propel debt significantly above the CEMAC ceiling (70 percent of GDP) by 2021. Given the large proportion of US dollar-denominated debt, exchange rate fluctuations constitute a significant risk to Gabon’s external debt sustainability Since the CFA franc is pegged to the euro, fiscal policy is the main policy mechanism to adjust to the terms-of-trade shock. Note that only 55 percent of planned improvements to the main road corridors have been finalized. About half of Gabon’s public debt is denominated in US dollars, with Eurobonds accounting for most of it. The authorities continue to rely on the US dollar-denominated Eurobonds considering them their only feasible alternative to obtain large amounts of new budget financing. Page 15 Figure 4. Gabon: Medium Term Outlook, 2015–21 ...as oil production and prices remain weak.... ...and forcing an adjustment in public spending... With growing non-oil exports and increasing oil prices,the current account deficit will narrow. Non-oil growth is expected to gradually recover... ...limiting government revenues... ...so as to progressively reduce the fiscal deficit. Real Oil and Non-oil GDP Growth, 2015-21 (percent) Growth contribution, Real Non-Oil GDP Growth contribution, Real Oil GDP Oil Production Volume and Oil Price Oil production volume (millions of barrels; LHS) National oil prices (thousands CFAF/barrel; RHS) Oil and Non Oil Revenues, 2015-21(percent of non oil GDP) Oil Revenues Non Oil Revenues Capital and Current Expenditures ,2015-21(percent of non oil GDP) Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure Budget Balances, 2015-21 Overal Balance (% of GDP) Non oil Balance (% of Non Oil GDP) Current Account , Imports and Exports of Goods and Services, 2015-21 Current Account (Percent of GDP) -left axis Exports of Goods and Services (billions of CFA; RHS) Imports of Goods and Services (billions of CFA; RHS) Page 16 The outsized and still growing wage bill is a major threat to fiscal sustainability. wage bill grew by 70 percent between 2010 and 2015 (an 11 percent average growth rate per year), mainly due to a 30 percent increase in the number of public servants, the conversion of temporary workers to permanent status, and the introduction of an ill-designed performance incentive system in 2014 that was later converted into base pay in 2015. After this period of very high growth, in 2015 the wage bill accounted for 34 percent of total government spending and was equivalent to 38 percent of total revenue. As seen in Figure 5, by 2015 the wage bill was equivalent to 9 percent of GDP and to 60 percent of non-oil revenue; and the growth rates of these ratios in recent years have been high in the subregion. Figure 5. SSA Oil Producers' Wage Bill (2007–15) Source: IMF Staff estimates Staff commends the authorities for the implementation of major reforms to public financial management. The main axis of these reforms is the implementation of the budgétisation par objectifs de programme (BOP), which aims to better align the budget process with public policy objectives, gauge performance, and increase decentralization and accountability. As part of the BOP, the authorities have aligned budget execution and public spending principles with CEMAC directives, significantly computerized the expenditure chain, started decentralizing budgetary execution, and adopted a single account at the BEAC, among other important measures. Adjusting to the unfavorable oil price outlook while ensuring the financing of the government’s diversification plan requires a wide range of strong measures. The authorities need to: Foster non-oil revenues by widening the tax base, mainly by reducing tax exemptions and improving tax administration. In a fiscally-challenging environment, it is hard to justify the recent elimination of taxes and fees for over 171 products as part of the so-called “policies against high living costs”, and the prohibition of importation of vehicles over three years old, which represent a revenue loss of 0.7 percent of GDP in 2015. A review of these policies is urgently needed, especially in the context of rapidly rising real public wages. More generally, staff recommends a thorough review and reform of the tax policy regime. Wage bill as percentage of GDP Congo, Republic of Cameroon Equatorial Guinea Chad Angola Wage bill as percentage of Non-Oil Revenue Congo, Republic of Cameroon Equatorial Guinea Chad Angola Page 17 Prepare a revised budget for 2016, given the worsening growth and oil price outlook, to pre- empt unfavorable public debt dynamics and avoid the accumulation of arrears. Further enhance tax administration, drawing on extensive IMF and AFRITAC technical assistance by implementing measures such as formalizing the collaboration between tax and customs directorates, moving the collection of customs revenues from the Treasury to the customs department, modernizing customs drawback system, and adopting a risk-based approach to VAT reimbursements. There is also a critical need to curb inefficient and/or poorly targeted current spending, while protecting social spending. Most importantly, the public wage bill needs to grow below inflation in the medium term. With public investment considerably lower than in recent years, private sector participation for infrastructure construction should be encouraged by accelerating development of an appropriate Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework. Key projects under the PSGE should be reviewed and reprioritized while minimizing projects with limited long-term economic payoff such as sports infrastructure. Staff recommends anchoring medium-term fiscal policy by targeting a steady reduction in the debt to non-oil GDP ratio through a progressive strengthening of the nonoil primary deficit, which would allow the authorities to rebuild fiscal buffers. Throughout the adjustment, and financing permitting, annual reductions in the non-oil primary deficit should not exceed 2 percent of non-oil GDP so as to limit the negative fiscal impulse. The implementation of the BOP should continue, taking into account recent recommendations by IMF technical assistance, emphasizing measures to improve treasury management and to avoid further accumulation of arrears, especially external arrears. Authorities’ views Amidst a worsened economic outlook, the authorities underlined that they are firmly committed to implementing measures in line with staff recommendations. To this end, as a major sign of their commitment, they eliminated petrol and diesel subsidies on February 1, 2016, and introduced an automatic fuel-pricing mechanism. Now their major concern is the need to reduce the outsized wage bill. In addition to recently undertaken measures (incentives for early retirement, recruitment freezes, and the elimination of an inefficient incentive system), a major civil service reform is being designed with assistance from the World Bank. Potential measures could include improvements in human resource management such as merit-based recruitments and promotions. The government also aims to continue reducing tax exemptions, although it noted that not all tax incentives—especially those enshrined in law—can be easily eliminated. The authorities are studying Most studies show that investment in major international sporting events has relatively limited long-term economic returns (see a complete review of this issue in “Is it Worth it?” Finance and Development, March 2010). Page 18 the possibility of partly reversing the recent restriction on second-hand vehicle imports, and the World Bank is assisting them on the rationalization of the tax exemption regime. In view of continued declines in the oil price, the authorities indicated that they would limit expenditure in line with cash flow constraints, and prepare a revised 2016 budget with a lower oil price assumption. The authorities welcomed staff’s recommended public financial management reforms, and reiterated their commitment to proceed with BOP reforms. B. Addressing the Financial Sector’s Vulnerability to Macroeconomic