Fiscal framework and policies Despite historically high oil prices, in recent years the fiscal stance has substantially deteriorated as a result of a massive scaling up of public investment. The accelerated Page 12 implementation of the PSGE led to a large increase in government expenditures from 38 percent of non-oil GDP in 2009 to 46.5 percent in 2013 (see Figure 5). The non-oil primary deficit consequently increased from 11.7 to 19.6 percent of non-oil GDP between 2009 and 2013. The massive boost in public spending, in the context of gradually declining oil revenues, has been partly financed by a large increase in public debt from 16.5 percent of GDP in 2011 to 27.6 percent in 2013, statutory advances at the maximum permissible level and a rapid draw-down of deposits at the central bank in 2014, a significant accumulation of domestic payments and VAT arrears, and even some accumulation of external arrears. The authorities recognized the tight fiscal situation, appropriately rectified their 2014 budget in order to scale down their investment program, and are finalizing a conservative 2015 budget assuming much lower oil revenues. The revised budget approved by parliament in July 2014 sharply cut down capital spending with respect to the initial budget by an amount equivalent to percent of 2014 non-oil GDP. Preliminary estimates indicate that the adjustment in 2014 resulted in an overall surplus of 4½ percent of non-oil GDP on a commitment basis that allowed the government to pay about CFAF 435 billion in arrears. The authorities also recently implemented measures to speed up the reimbursement of the VAT. The most recent version of the 2015 budget to be sent to parliament conservatively assumes the price of Brent oil at US$45 per barrel, cuts down spending on goods and services with respect to 2014, substantially reduces oil subsidies, reschedules repayment of domestic arrears , and freezes the level of public investment. To protect capital spending, the government intends to issue a eurobond in 2015. The staff report baseline scenario (see Tables 1-5 and Figure 7) incorporates the expenditures proposed in the latest 2015 budget, reduces by half the size of the eurobond issuance, and projects oil revenues based on a price of US$51 per barrel as per January 20, 2015 WEO assumptions. For 2016 onwards, the projections are based on staff’s understanding of the authorities’ planned medium-term policies, and present an adjustment scenario aimed at controlling public debt levels and ensuring repayment of arrears, mainly by containing the wage bill growth and considerably reducing oil subsidies. In assessing the quality of the scaling up of public investment it is worth noting that a considerable part of it was extra- budgetary and another significant amount was allocated to developing the infrastructure needed to host the African Cup of Nations in 2012. Non-accumulation of government arrears (domestic or external) is a CEMAC convergence criterion. Oil revenue performance was better than originally projected in part due to settlement of arrears and fines of over CFAF 190 billion. The authorities are negotiating the repayment of arrears over the next three years. They are committed to remain current on VAT reimbursements. The initial 2015 budget planned the issuance of a US$1 billion eurobond, but the authorities may revise down this amount in view of the tightening financing terms in international markets for Gabon (see Figure 3) and other oil producers. Page 13 Figure 5. Gabon Fiscal Indicators The PSGE translated into a major increase in public investment... …in the context of falling oil revenues... Capital and Current Expenditures , 2009-14 (percent of non oil GDP) 2014 Prel. Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure ...eroding fiscal balances... Budget Balances, 2009-14 2014 Prel. Overal Balance (% of GDP) Non oil Balance (% of Non Oil GDP) Sources: IMF and Gabonese Authorities. Oil and Non Oil Revenues, 2009-14 (percent of non oil GDP) 2014 Prel. Oil Revenues Non Oil Revenues ...and increasing the external debt. Government and External Debt, 2009-14 (percent of GDP) 2014 Prel. External Public Debt The substantial and continued decline in oil revenues will complicate the sustainable implementation of the PSGE, absent additional fiscal consolidation. With oil prices forecast at half of their 2014 level and with Gabonese production continuing its declining trend, considerable fiscal adjustment is required. As seen in Figure 4, without adjustment the fiscal position would deteriorate sharply and debt levels would considerably surpass the government’s own ceiling of 35 percent of GDP. Plans to finance the 2015 and 2016 deficit through international borrowing amidst a potential increase in global interest rates could be further complicated by negative prospects in the oil sector and the perception of a weakening fiscal situation. In fact, the spread of Gabon’s 2013 eurobond has climbed about 200 basis points between end-November 2014 and mid-January 2015 (see Figure 6), and the regional bond market may also tighten as many oil exporters in the region are also seeking additional financing. The implementation of the PSGE itself could be endangered without the fiscal resources needed for many of its public and public-private investments. At the same time, even if projects under Page 14 the PSGE reach production stage in the medium run, generous tax concessions will significantly limit their potential contribution of net fiscal revenues anytime soon. Figure 6. Gabon 2013 Eurobond Interest Yield and Spread with 10 Year US Bond (percent) Eurobond conventional yield (LHS) Spread with US 10 year bond (RHS) In this context, ensuring the fiscal sustainability of the PSGE requires revenue and Source: Bloomberg. spending measures upfront. The non-oil revenue tax base should be expanded, notably by reducing overly generous tax exemptions. On the spending side, the government should strictly contain growth in current expenditures, especially of the wage bill, and seize the opportunity provided by low oil prices to phase out the substantial and poorly targeted fuel subsidies (Appendix III), while protecting well- targeted spending on key social areas. The government should avoid any increase in spending beyond its current projections in the run-up to the 2016 elections. Staff’s macroeconomic framework assumes the full implementation of these measures, and shows how capital spending can be gradually increased to finance the PSGE while accumulating currently low government deposits to protect the economy against exogenous shocks and without permanently violating the government’s debt ceiling. The government should further strengthen the legal environment to promote PPPs in order to help finance much-needed infrastructure, making sure the necessary safeguards are in place so as to avoid putting excessive risk on the government. Finally, staff recommends anchoring medium-term fiscal policy based Even if new oil explorations bear fruit, they will not reach production stage until the next decade. The proposed framework actually assumes that, given tighter financing conditions for oil exporters in the oil market, the authorities issue a US$500 million eurobond in 2015, not the previously planned US$1 billion. For 2016, the assumption is that Gabon will issue a US$250 million eurobond. Throughout the projection period, Gabon would be in compliance of CEMAC’s convergence criteria, including the non- accumulation of government arrears criterion, which was violated in recent years. Page 15 on a nonoil primary deficit of less than 10 percent of GDP and an overall surplus of at least 2 percent of GDP, which would allow the authorities to progressively rebuild fiscal buffers. Under the proposed staff scenario, public debt approaches the government’s ceiling only temporarily and gradually declines afterwards, but shocks could considerably worsen the debt situation (see Debt Sustainability Analysis) . Debt is expected to continue its rapid upward trend in 2015 and 2016 slightly exceeding the 35 percent of GDP ceiling in 2016, and gradually decline afterwards as the government further controls spending. External debt is also projected to increase up to 2016 and gradually decline afterwards. Lack of fiscal adjustment, GDP growth below projections, and/or shocks to government revenues would significantly accelerate public debt accumulation to bring it considerably above the government’s ceiling. External debt could substantially rise if the non-interest rate current account deteriorates and the real exchange rate depreciates. The destabilizing impact of the shock scenarios highlights the urgent need to accumulate fiscal buffers. Authorities’ views Given the tight fiscal situation and the collapse of oil prices, the authorities recognized the need for further adjustment. In their view, the oil price shock has underscored the need to accelerate structural reforms to boost non-oil growth While emphasizing the need to keep public debt below its conservative ceiling by limiting growth in current spending, they stressed the need to adequately finance their diversification strategy. In order to do so, the authorities agreed on the need to eliminate discretionary tax exemptions and progressively phase out fuel subsidies, while more forcefully controlling current expenditures after 2016. At the same time, they underscored the need to protect capital spending by shifting away resources from current spending, notably on goods and services. The authorities emphasized that they are also strengthening the PPP regulatory framework, as well as redoubling its tax collection effort. Revenue measures also include greater emphasis on risk-based audits and enhanced customs controls including the use of scanners, which will be facilitated by the survey of tax expenditure already undertaken by the authorities. To improve the credibility of the tax system, the authorities are committed to ensuring that they are current on VAT refunds. Public finance management issues Ensuring the fiscal sustainability of PSGE requires continued efforts to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of government spending. A recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment on Gabon found many deficiencies in its PFM system including: (i) low credibility of the budget due to frequent upward revisions and inadequate monitoring of arrears; (ii) weak accounting and financial reporting; (iii) insufficient monitoring and external audit, and lack of parliamentary review; (iv) weak internal controls; and (v) low transparency of budgetary transactions and of transfers to local authorities. On the positive side, the PEFA praised the fact that the annual budget is prepared in a participatory process and within a medium-term framework. The shock scenarios considered in the DSA could result from, for example, a decline in oil prices below WEO projections or a limited growth pay-off of the PSGE. Page 16 Figure 7. Gabon Medium Term Outlook, 2014–2020 Non-oil growth will remain the growth engine... Real Oil and Non-oil GDP Growth, 2014-20 (percent) Growth contribution, Real Non-Oil GDP Growth contribution, Real Oil GDP ...limiting government revenues... Oil and Non Oil Revenues, 2014-20 (percent of non oil GDP) Oil Revenues Non Oil Revenues ...so as to bring the fiscal balance back to surplus. Budget Balances, 2014-20 Overal Balance (% of GDP) Non oil Balance (% of Non Oil GDP) Sources: IMF and Gabonese Authorities. ...as oil production and prices remain weak... Oil Production Volume and Oil Price Oil production volume (millions of barrels) - left axis National oil prices (thousands CFA/BBL.) - right axis ...and forcing an adjustment in public spending... Capital and Current Expenditures ,2014-20 (percent of non oil GDP) Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure Declining oil exports will continue to weaken the current account. Current Account , Imports and Exports of Goods and Services, 2014-20 Current Account (Percent of GDP) - left axis Exports of Goods and Services (billions of CFA) -right axis Imports of Goods and Services (billions of CFA) -right axis Page 17 Overall, the PEFA concluded that the PFM system remains outdated and relatively ineffective. There are gaps between budget transactions and accounting, delays in the expenditure chain, inadequate financial information systems, a chasm between payroll and personnel files, and weak ex-post internal controls. There is need to improve the quality of spending, especially for investment (“investing in investment”) by enhancing the selection, execution and monitoring (Figure 8), as well as to curtail high extra-budgetary spending, which potentially leads to the accumulation of arrears, and to strengthen anti-corruption safeguards. These improvements should be facilitated by more manageable levels of investment. Figure 8. Public Investment Management Index, 2011 Public investment management lags significantly behind emerging countries... SSA Oil exporting Emerging Countries* Based on Dabla-Norris, E. et al. ” Investing in Public Investment: An Index of Public Investment Efficiency” IMF Working Paper, 2011 (WP/11/37) *Includes emerging countries for which this index is available, namely: South Africa, Brazil, Colombia, Thailand, Peru, Turkey, Philippines, Pakistan, Indonesia, and Egypt. ...including all those of a similar income per capita. Appraisal Selection Implementation Evaluation South Africa Brazil Turkey Based on Dabla-Norris, E. et al. ” Investing in Public Investment: An Index of Public Investment Efficiency” IMF Working Paper, 2011 (WP/11/37) An action plan should be developed to tackle weaknesses identified in the PEFA. The authorities should aim to: (i) improve the completeness of the transactions recorded in the state budget by fully integrating revenue and expenditure operations currently performed in cash on the accounts of the treasury; (ii) enhance financial supervision of public institutions; (iii) modernize the accounting functions to produce more reliable accounts within a reasonable time; and (iv) strengthen collaboration between revenue collection units (at the Ministry of the Economy) and spending units (at the Ministry of the Budget). Authorities’ views The authorities expressed their determination to strengthen the PFM system and welcomed IMF assistance in this area . They also highlighted recent PFM reforms, such as the recent establishment of a single treasury account, the unification of customs and tax statements, and the Page 18 ongoing process to introduce a "budgeting by program objective" (BOP, according to its initials in French), which should result in a budget implementation in program mode as of January 2015. The law governing the budget in BOP mode should be adopted by end-2014. The authorities underscored their determination to increase transparency of natural resource revenues. To this end, they have adopted an action plan to become EITI-compliant during 2015. Regarding investment quality, the authorities highlighted their adoption of a public procurement code, a requirement to finalize technical studies underpinning specific investment projects before monetary outlays are made, and a requirement to effect payments only after proof of performance. They also note that Bechtel Corporation, a large construction and engineering multinational company, contributes to the design and monitoring of the implementation of PSGE infrastructure projects.