Transformation The PSGE aims to achieve greater economic diversification while moving up on the exports value-added chain. With oil-related GDP accounting for about 35 percent of GDP and oil exports accounting for about 80 percent of goods exports in 2014, and against the background of falling oil prices and aging oil wells , the authorities recognize the need to develop non-oil sectors (mainly agro-industry, wood processing, industrial fishing, and service exports). Overall, the PSGE has an ambitious target of creating 325,000 new jobs by 2025. According to value chain analyses conducted by the World Bank for agriculture, forestry, and tourism, key hurdles to the expansion of the non-oil economy include high transportation and labor costs, low labor productivity, and lack of craftsmanship and technical know-how. To meet the PSGE’s objectives, the government has taken several actions. In 2010, the government banned the export of raw logs. A special economic zone (SEZ) has been established at Nkok (near Libreville) and a free-trade zone is being established in Port-Gentil. Both offer very generous incentives to firms exporting more than 75 percent of their production, including a 10-year corporate income tax holiday, total tariff exemption on imported capital equipment and parts, total exemption from the value-added tax (VAT) for the first 25 years, unlimited and tax-free profit repatriation, and flexible labor laws for seven years for the employment of foreign workers. Steps have also been taken to facilitate business, such as cutting in half to two weeks the average time needed to start a business in the SEZ of Nkok, and the granting of construction permits has been reduced from more than six months to ten days. Staff emphasized that considerable risks to its effective implementation remain, especially insufficient staff training and inadequate testing of new software, and recommended back-up options. Even if ongoing exploration in deep offshore bears fruit, production stage would be reached in the next decade and therefore oil production is expected to fall by 10 percent between 2013 and 2020. World Bank, 2014, Gabon—Export Diversification and Competitiveness Report, World Bank Policy Notes, Report No. ACS10571. World Bank (2014), op. cit Page 19 To support the economic takeoff, the PSGE seeks to improve public infrastructure, enhance the business climate, and strengthen human capital. Objectives for the modernization of public infrastructure include developing a nationwide fiber optic infrastructure, doubling the country’s energy capacity to 1,000 MW, and establishing a national network of 3,600 kilometers of paved roads and 3,000 kilometers of waterways by 2025. The target for business climate reforms is to make Gabon one of the top 10 performers in Africa in the ranking of the World Bank’s of Doing Business indicators by 2020 (Figure 9). Regarding human capital formation, the objective is to refocus the educational system toward technical training in the sectors targeted by the PSGE. Despite considerable progress in attracting investment and improving infrastructure (Appendix I), the government needs to focus on “horizontal” policies to ensure a positive impact of the PSGE on the Gabonese population. Key achievements under the PSGE include improvements in transport and energy infrastructure, and joint-ventures with foreign companies in strategic sectors, but much remains to be done. Indeed, foreign investors typically cite insufficient and unreliable electricity supply, limited supply of qualified labor, and security of contracts as key deterrents to investing in Gabon. Given high labor costs, the authorities have aimed to compensate for them by granting foreign investors tax exemptions and subsidized electricity. This may have the perverse effect of attracting industries that are capital-intensive, thereby leading to a limited increase in employment and government revenue. Staff underscored that cross-country evidence shows that to attract labor- intensive industries that do not require direct government assistance, priority should be given to “horizontal” reforms. These include notably reforms to improve the business climate, physical infrastructure, and the quality of technical education. Clear targets for social indicators should be defined and surveys should be conducted regularly to monitor progress This is particularly important given that Gabon has fallen short of meeting most Millennium Development Goals (Table 7). The real effective exchange rate is overvalued by 9 to 15 percent (Appendix II), following the large decline in oil prices . The recent collapse in oil prices significantly weakened the current account currently forecasted to fall from a surplus of 11 percent of GDP in 2014 to a deficit of about 4 percent in 2015. In the medium term, the current account deficit is projected to moderate somewhat on the back of higher processed wood and manganese exports. The deficit is expected to be financed with FDI inflows into strategic sectors and with external borrowing by the government, consistently with debt sustainability. To reinforce external stability, structural policies should be implemented to curtail factor costs considered high by regional standards. Key priorities are: (1) adopting a more prudent medium-term fiscal stance to sustain the implementation of programs and projects under the PSGE; and (2) accelerating the pace of structural reforms to boost human capital development and improve the business climate. In 2009, Gabon had about 1,060 km of paved roads. IMF, 2014, “Sustaining Long-Run Growth and Macroeconomic Stability in Low-Income Countries—the Roles of Structural Transformation and Diversification”. These include, wood processing, rubber, palm oil, manganese, and iron ore production. Page 20 Authorities’ views The authorities concurred on the need to improve infrastructure, boost human capital development, and accelerate business climate reforms to diversify the Gabonese economy. They further agreed that business climate reforms would be essential to the realization of public-private partnerships needed to support the PSGE, and noted the recent creation of a special agency to improve the business climate ( Agence Nationale de la Promotion des Investissements ) and efforts to improve technical education under the PSGE. They also noted ongoing discussions with local businesses to enhance their role in on-the-job training, and their intention to establish a specialized court for mediating industrial disputes in 2015. However, they argued that given high labor costs, the small size of the economy, and international competition, they had no choice but to offer incentives and affordable electricity for SEZs—which was possible in part due to newer lower-cost plants. Finally, the authorities deemed staff’s growth projections to be rather conservative.