The recent decline in oil prices is proving a stark reminder of Gabon’s oil dependence, underscoring the need to foster non-oil growth and employment. Econometric evidence presented in the 2015 CEMAC regional consultation staff report shows that shocks like the recent decline in oil prices could lead to negative non-oil GDP growth in Gabon, with effects from both fiscal pro-cyclicality and from direct linkages between the oil and non-oil economies. The current strong fiscal response of the authorities and increased non-oil production is expected to soften the impact during the current oil price slump. Still, the ongoing deceleration and vulnerable fiscal outlook highlights the importance of the authorities’ PSGE, which seeks better stewardship of natural resources, infrastructure and human resource development, and moving up along the value chain. The authorities have been able to attract foreign non-oil investment, but partly relying on costly schemes. As part of the PSGE, the government has appropriately allocated a portion of the oil windfall to strength the country’s transport and energy infrastructure. The authorities have Page 22 embarked on a major rehabilitation of the Trans-gabonais railway line with the support of the IFC. This should significantly remove bottlenecks for wood-related and mineral exports. Gabon has also partnered with Olam International in one of the largest agri-business investments currently underway in sub-Saharan Africa. The government has provided a land bank to Olam of 300,000 hectares, of which over one-sixth is already under oil palm and rubber cultivation. To date, Olam’s foreign direct investment in Gabon has totaled US$1.5 billion, including plantations and the development of the Special Economic Zone and port capacity. Further impetus is expected to come from the GRAINE program, a joint venture of Olam and the government to address food security and rural income issues in Gabon. These investments will increase both cash crop and subsistence farming, boosting real growth by one percentage point, although the tradeoff is government financing for related infrastructure and foregone revenue in the form of a long tax holiday. There is substantial room to implement more cost-efficient reforms to attract additional investment. The focus should be on improving the business climate, especially considering that Gabon’s standing in the World Bank’s Doing Business report and in other rankings is very low, below comparator countries (Figure 8 and 9), as well as undertaking additional horizontal structural reforms aimed at reducing factor costs. Figure 8. Gabon: Global Competitiveness Index Comparison, 2015–16 (Ranking; 140=last place Gabonaise des Réalisations Agricoles des Nationaux Engagés. InstitutionsInfrastructureMacroeconomic environmentHealth and primary educationHigher education and training Goods market efficiencyLabor market efficiencyFinancial market development Technological readiness Market sizeBusiness sophistication Innovation Emerging Countries Similar Income per Capita EmergingSources: World Economic Forum and IMF staff calculations. Page 23 Figure 9. Gabon: Business Environment and Governance Sources: Doing Business, 2016; World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), 2014, (average of control of corruption, government effectiveness, rule of law, regulatory quality, political stability and voice and accountability); Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU); and IMF staff calculations. UMIC= Upper-middle income country; SSA= Sub-Saharan Africa; WGI= Worldwide Governance Indicators. SSA oil exporters = Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Rep. of, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Nigeria. GabonEmerging Countries Similar Income per Capita Emerging SSA Oil Exporters E f g u ss Ease of Doing Business 2016(Percentile rank; 100= best) Starting a BusinessDealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity Registering PropertyGetting CreditProtecting Minority InvestorsPaying TaxesTrading Across Borders Enforcing Contracts Resolving Insolvency Change in Doing Business Indicators (Ranking; 189=last place) Voice and AccountabilityPolitical Stability and Absence of Violence/TerrorismGovernment EffectivenessRegulatory QualityRule of Law Control of Corruption Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI)(re-scaled, 0=worst, 5 best), 2014 estimate Emerging Countries Similar Income per Capita Emerging SSA Oil Exporters EM AGO UMICCMR TCDGNQ EM NGA SSA T w tt g v c Log GDP PPP per capita Government and GDP per Capita (log PPP) GABSimilar per Capita Income EmergingEmerging CountriesSSA Oil Exporters Change in Governance Indicator(Percentile Rank of 6 score average, 100= best) 60GabonEmerging CountriesSimilar per Capita Emerging SSA Oil Exporters EIU Democracy Index, 2014, score (0 lowest, 10 highest) WGI Political Stability 2014, rank Politicaland Democracy Stability Score T w m p li c l ili y Page 24 With the oil price shock weighing on private sector activity, PSGE growth and diversification objectives need to be protected and structural reforms accelerated. In the present tight budgetary context, the authorities should aim to maximize the return on limited resources. Investor tax incentives should be avoided, as these undermine revenue generation and are unlikely to trigger a self-sustaining process of economic diversification. Investment should be reprioritized to focus on transport and energy projects with potential growth spillovers. In the same vein, priority should be on horizontal structural reforms aimed at raising economic competitiveness and productivity, notably in the areas of education, infrastructure, and institutions. Even prior to adopting a road map for Phase 2 of the PSGE, business climate reform should be accelerated, notably improving labor market legislation , strengthening anti-corruption efforts and the AML/CFT framework, and cutting red tape, as recommended in an action plan developed with the IFC. Deeper regional integration in CEMAC and more trade openness of the region would facilitate economic diversification in Gabon. Gabon should take a lead role in taking the necessary regional reforms forward. Similarly, Gabon should review its investment program against projects already underway in neighboring countries to ensure that possible synergies at the regional level are fully exploited. The authorities concurred that in a tight budgetary environment the investment program should focus on projects with long-term spillovers. The completion of corridors connecting growth poles, the continued development of SEZs, and the setting up of an investment promotion agency would help improve the business climate and boost FDI and exports in the near term. The authorities place great store in agro-industrial projects to boost non-oil growth. They underscored the catalytic role they expect from the redevelopment of the Trans-gabonais railway line which would ease transportation bottlenecks faced by the mining and wood industries. They noted that sports infrastructure projects would generate immediate employment as well as foster local development. Nevertheless, the road map being prepared for the second phase of the PGSE would focus on social transformation, including administrative reform, employment training, and health infrastructure. Gabon fares better than the average of comparator countries (Figure 8) on the Global Competitiveness Index for labor market efficiency (68 of 140 countries), but several aspects need to be improved. While redundancy costs have been considerably reduced lately, there is a relatively high level of female participation, Gabon is relatively poor performer on some survey-based measures of labor market efficiency such as managerial proficiency (ranked 91) and on linking pay to productivity (ranked 114). Page 25