The financial sector in Gabon comprises mainly banks, and is highly concentrated . Three banks account for nearly 75 percent of total assets, and their activity is concentrated on large companies financing large-scale projects. Financial intermediation remains limited (lending to the private sector is 15 percent of GDP), and well below the average for its emerging-market peers. The nascent regional bond market, which has limited depth and short maturity profiles, can only meet a limited amount of domestic financing needs. There are nine microfinance institutions (MFIs) and eight insurance companies that operate in Gabon that have been increasingly instrumental in providing financial access to households and small- and medium-size enterprises (SMEs). Banking supervision is carried out by the regional authority COBAC. While recent progress has been made in reforming the regulatory framework, particularly in bank resolution, and licensing, the COBAC has also been facing serious capacity constraints, which hinder its efficiency. Additional efforts will be required to develop the regional bond market even to a level similar to that observed in the WAEMU. Financial access in Gabon is low due to several factors. While the share of population with bank accounts has increased, it is still below the sub-Saharan Africa and emerging market averages. Total credit provided to households constituted 3 percent of GDP in 2013. Given low financial deepening, SMEs face even lower access to finance than in Gabon’s peer groups. Banks cite the absence of credit bureaux and lack of company information and guarantees as underlying reasons for low credit supply and high lending rates (Figure 10). Low financial deepening and access as well as high banking sector liquidity also reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission. Nonetheless, the exchange rate peg has adequately anchored inflation expectations and inflation is quite low. Page 21 Figure 9. Gabon: Business Environment and Governance Ease of Doing Business 2015 (Percentile rank; 100= best) u b g d f E GAB Emerging Countries Similar Income per SSA Oil Exporters Capita Emerging Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) (re-scaled, 0=worst, 5 best), 2012 estimate Control of Corruption Rule of Law Regulatory Quality Voice and Accountability Political Stability Government Effectiveness Similar Income per Capita Emerging SSA Oil Exporters Change in Governance Indicator (Percentile Rank of 6 score average, 100= best) c v g b d w GAB Similar per Capita Income Emerging Emerging Countries SSA Oil Exporters Doing Business Indicators 2015 (Ranking; 189=last place) Starting a Business Resolving Insolvency Enforcing Contracts Paying Taxes Dealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity Registering Property Getting Credit Protecting Minority Investors GAB Similar Income per Capita Emerging SSA Oil Exporters Governance and GDP per Capita (log PPP) c v g b d w y l b l c l p m d w UMIC A GO Oil-Exp. G NQ N GA C MR C OG T CD Log GDP PPP per capita Political and Democracy Stability Score Oil Exporters Emerging Countries Similar per SSA Oil Exporters Capita Emerging EIU Democracy Index 2012, score (0 lowest, 10 highest) WGI Political Stability 2012, rank Sources: Doing Business, 2014; World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), 2012, (average of control of corruption, government effectiveness, rule of law, regulatory quality, political stability and voice and accountability); Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU); and IMS staff calculations. LIC=Low-income country; UMIC= Upper-middle income country; OIL=Oil producers; WGI= Worldwide Governance Indicators. SSA oil exporters = Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Rep. of, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Nigeria. Page 22 Although the overall banking sector in Gabon remains liquid, profitable, and generally well-capitalized, public banks are under financial stress. Overall financial soundness indicators show that the banks were sufficiently capitalized with slightly higher return on assets and equity in 2013 compared to 2012. The liquidity ratio has come down as a result of increasing credit to the economy, but remains high. The regulatory capital has been decreasing, but is above the legal requirement of 8 percent, while non-performing loans are low at 3.5 percent of total assets. Similarly, the ratio of provisions to non-performing loans decreased in 2013, although it is still at a comfortable level. Although banks are not very exposed to the government directly, the weakening government balance sheet will undoubtedly have a negative impact on the banking system through increasing NPLs. Apart from the weaker growth outlook, the main transmission channel is likely to be through the weakening financial situation of firms that rely on government contracts. Timely action is needed to address the weak financial situation of three distressed public banks. These banks’ total assets amount to 9 percent of the banking system’s total and 3 percent of GDP. The banks are facing structural problems leading to significant undercapitalization, and one of them has had serious governance issues. Faced with high overhead costs relative to their peers, these banks are unable to generate sufficient revenues from lending activities. Thus, they continue registering losses, but they have limited interbank relations with other banks. Staff commends the authorities’ on their acknowledgement of the severity of the situation and for initiating the process of assessing the financial needs to define an action plan. Staff recommends developing resolution options in consultation with the regional bank supervisor, COBAC, and subsequently taking timely action—which will likely have fiscal costs—to safeguard financial stability. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of the financial sector, and concurred with the need to improve financial access in the economy. They indicated that they intend to continue their efforts in setting-up a credit registry, which is expected to decrease barriers to finance. Regarding the three problem banks, the authorities informed staff that they have hired international advisors to assess the banks, and to define an action plan and a financing package. As for the MFIs, the authorities remain cautious of any macroprudential risks that may be induced by these institutions. More detailed assessment will be available after the completion of the ongoing regional FSAP exercise. Page 23 Figure 10. Financial Indicators Risks to Gabon's financial stability appear manageable… …but against the backdrop of low financial intermediation... Domestic Credit to Private Sector (percent of GDP) 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 EM average EM income peer group ...and low financial access… Account at a formal financial institution (% age 15+) …which can be attributed to a number of reasons. Reasons for Not Having an Account in Gabon (percent) Lack of trust in financial institutions Don't have enough money to use them Lack of documentation Too expensive Too far away EM average EM income peer group Microfinance institutions have been growing rapidly. Evolution of MFIs in Gabon However, they provide only a small portion of loans. Loans to Private Sector in 2013 l l m F C F loans deposits no. of clients (rhs) Sources: IMF (Financial Access Survey), World Development Indicators, Findex and Staff calculations. MFIs Banks Page 24 IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF DATA FOR DECISION-