Despite progress in implementing its transformation plan, Gabon is still oil-dependent and therefore highly vulnerable to the recent oil price shock. After a decade of lackluster economic growth, in 2010 the government embarked on the Plan Stratégique Gabon Emergent (PSGE), which aims to diversify its economy by 2025. In its first phase (2010–14), high oil revenues funded a scaling up of public investment that helped propel overall growth to nearly 6 percent on average, led by construction and services. While there are initial promising signs of diversification, structural transformation is a gradual process, and as of 2014 oil still accounted for roughly 40 percent of GDP, 45 percent of government revenues, and nearly 85 percent of exports. The low oil price outlook and secularly declining oil production will reduce available financing for the second phase of the PSGE (2016–20). As part of the oil-dependent CEMAC monetary union, Gabon’s success in adjusting to oil price shocks also hinges on the ability of other member countries to appropriately implement fiscal adjustments and their own diversification agenda. Economic activity has significantly decelerated in 2015. Statistical data through September 2015 indicate higher-than-expected oil production (thanks to the introduction of new wells and performance improvements), mining (manganese), and agriculture (due to a large, ongoing international agribusiness joint venture). However, the sharp fall in oil prices has prompted the government to slow capital spending, and oil companies to rein in operating and development expenditures. This reduced domestic demand led to significant contractions in large non-oil sectors, including construction, transportation, commerce, and services. At the same time, broad money and credit to the economy are contracting. Despite significant fiscal adjustment since the second half of 2014 and delays in the implementation of the capital spending, fiscal buffers are contracting rapidly. Since 2012, public debt has more than doubled from 20 to 43 percent of GDP (above the 35 percent indicative ceiling of the government), in part due to US$1.5 billion and US$500 million Eurobond issuances in December 2013 and June 2015, respectively. About two-thirds of the increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio since 2014 is due to the depreciation of the CFA franc and the decline in the oil GDP deflator. Moreover, between December 2014 and October 2015, government deposits at the BEAC (net of Eurobond receipts) declined by 57 percent, and gross international reserves by 30 percent. Foreign financing has become increasingly costly, as rating agencies have downgraded the sovereign debt of oil exporters, including Gabon, contributing to a significant increase in spreads in recent months (Figure 1). Presidential and parliamentary elections are expected in the second half of 2016. No official election dates have been announced, but the process of electoral list revision began in January 2016. Opposition parties boycotted the 2009 parliamentary elections, and the governing Parti Démocratique Gabonais won 113 of the 120 seats in the National Assembly. The run-up to the The 2014 Article IV staff report provides more information on the PSGE. Of the US$1.5 billion, US$610 million was issued for liability management operations. Page 10 elections is likely to be accompanied by heightened social and political tensions. As a result, some politically tough economic policy decisions may be delayed. Figure 1. Gabon: 2013 Eurobond Issuance (in percent) Source: Bloomberg.