Gabon’s external sustainability has deteriorated significantly due to the oil price shock. The current account balance is projected to drop sharply from a surplus of 8.3 percent of GDP in 2014 to a deficit of 1.9 percent in 2015, then slowly recover but remain negative over the medium term. The recovery is predicated on the development of non-oil exports, which are projected to increase by 64 percent between 2014 and 2020 (mainly manganese and processed wood). The current account balance prospects, however, are vulnerable to spillovers from China, where rebalancing has reduced demand for commodity imports. Official external reserves appear adequate, but downward pressure has intensified since the oil price shock. Although Gabon’s contribution to reserves at the BEAC is among the highest in the CEMAC region, the principle of reserves pooling implies that Gabon’s external sustainability hinges on the sustainability of the CEMAC region where overall reserves have declined even more dramatically (Figure 10). The BEAC recently adopted extraordinary measures to help countries cope with the oil price shock, through a 50-basis-point discount rate cut to 2.45 percent in July 2015 and a 52.4 percent increase in regional statutory advances in August 2015. By end-2015, all countries had substantially drawn down on their deposits at the BEAC, and, except Cameroon and Gabon, they exhausted their available advances. Figure 10. CEMAC and Gabon: BEAC Reserve Coverage (Months of prospective imports) Model-based approaches strongly suggest that the real effective exchange rate (REER) is overvalued by 3 to 16 percent. Despite the stability of Gabon’s REER, both the Bems and Carvalho (2009) and Araujo et al. (2013) methodologies point to an overvaluation of the exchange rate, ranging from about 3 to 16 percent (Annex I). The overall increase in statutory advance was granted through the restoration of the statutory advances ceiling to 20 percent of the previous fiscal year’s domestic revenue for each member state and a resetting of the reference year to 2014 from 2008. As of November 2015, Gabon had used up CFAF 340 billion out of CFAF 453 billion (ceiling). CEMAC Sources: BEAC and IMF staff estimations. Page 26 Given the significant real exchange rate overvaluation, staff recommended addressing competitiveness issues through: Fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to promote exports diversification. The implementation of reforms under the PSGE should be continued, with increased focus on projects with the highest socio-economic returns and on improving the business climate. More horizontal reforms that better adapt education and training to the needs of the economy should also be embraced. Successful lobbying by Gabon to promote more efficient regional integration, trade, and implementation of regional policies that would help reduce external vulnerabilities notably by: (i) increasing the level of international reserves through the full repatriation of reserves by member states and more ambitious fiscal consolidation policies across member states; (ii) continuing the removal of barriers to regional trade (simplifying customs procedures and restoring fully the common external tariff; implementing the rules of origin; and creating common merchandise standards). Advocating greater coordination between regional and national authorities in the areas of regional governance, business climate, taxation and public investment. This would ensure a greater efficiency in public investment, improve the attractiveness of the region to investors, and help relax pressures on the current account.