Housing prices in the most dynamic cities deserve close monitoring, but concerns about across-the-board excesses in the mortgage market look premature. In recent years, the upward price trend has been largely driven by fundamental factors such as demographic developments, rising incomes, ratcheting up construction costs, and lower mortgage rates. As households have taken advantage of record-low interest rates, mortgage credit growth has been trending up, but at a still relatively moderate pace and with largely unchanged credit standards. When measured in relation to rents or income, current average housing prices are broadly consistent with long-term averages, suggesting the upswing mainly reflects catching-up effects. There are, however, important regional differences. Apartment price inflation rates have recently reached double-digit in some of the largest cities and in some university towns where pockets of vulnerability (high loan-to-value and debt-service-to-income ratios) have recently emerged. Available data (e.g., transaction volumes, rates of return) for commercial real estate also indicate that the market is dynamic, but credit growth in this sector is still moderate and in line with that in the residential real estate sector. Housing price inflation also reflects a tepid response of housing supply to a swell in demand. Even before the refugee surge, net immigration turned out much higher than projected in the most optimistic migration scenario of the 2009 official demographic projections, expanding the demand for housing (Figure 8). Housing completions and residential building permits have rebounded from their 2009 trough, but the new residential construction has remained far below the amount required to balance the market according to various consultancies and the Federal Ministry for the Environment. Staff analysis indicates that the long-term housing supply price elasticity has nearly halved over the past four years, suggesting that, absent new policy action, balancing supply and demand in the housing market could take a long time and would involve further significant Land price to new apartment rent ratio New apartment price to new rent ratio Land price to disposable income per capita ratio New apartment price to disposable income per capita ratio Housing Market Valuation Indices (Index, 1991=100) Sources: Bulwiengesa, Destatis, and IMF staff calculations. Page 24 price increases in the short term. Furthermore, the mismatch between supply and demand appears to be concentrated in the affordable housing segment. To address supply constraints and increase the availability of affordable housing, the government has developed a comprehensive package of measures . This package includes the sale of publicly-owned land and properties below market price for affordable housing projects, more funds for social housing, and targeted tax incentives. It complements the near doubling in the budget for housing subsidies ( Wohngeld ) from the beginning of 2016, as well as policy measures taken earlier to accommodate refugees. The effectiveness of this package should be closely monitored, and the authorities should stand ready to recalibrate it if the desired effects on supply do not materialize. In addition, loosening height and zoning restrictions in areas under pressure and their vicinity seems to be needed. To further strengthen the housing supply response, lowering the effective real estate transfer tax rate on new construction would be helpful . The Länder have been free to set the real estate transaction tax rate since 2007. Since then, rates have increased from 3.5 percent in 2006 to up to 6.5 percent now. In addition, land may be taxed multiple times before new construction is completed, which creates distortions and increases the effective tax rate. The authorities could consider a VAT-like system for land transfer taxation in the case of new construction so as to avoid double taxation of land and make new construction more financially attractive. To further improve the efficiency of real estate taxation, they could also tax properties more heavily than transactions; in fact, an update of property value assessments is long overdue. Legislation to expand the macroprudential toolkit to address potential imbalances in the housing market and related data gaps is being prepared . Macroprudential policy instruments (countercyclical capital buffer, capital buffers for systemically important institutions, a systemic risk buffer, and phased-in liquidity coverage ratio requirement) have become operational on January 1, 2016. In June 2015, the Financial Stability Committee recommended additional macroprudential tools (loan-to-value caps, debt-service-to-income limits, debt-to-income ceilings and minimum amortization requirements) specifically targeted at the real estate sector, and the legislation is being drafted. However, the calibration and operationalization of these instruments requires granular and frequently updated loan-level data on household income and indebtedness, as well as data on banks’ individual exposures to mortgage risks, which are currently not available to supervisors, in part because of strict data protection laws. The new legislation would need to address these data gaps. See “The Price Responsiveness of German Residential Investment,” Selected Issues Paper. Page 25 The authorities concurred with staff that a housing bubble was not an immediate concern. Based on its internal valuation models, the Bundesbank’s did not see recent price increases or mortgage credit developments as alarming, but was closely monitoring the situation. Authorities agreed with the importance of broadening the macroprudential toolkit, but pointed that privacy concerns related to data access were complicating the legislative process. There was broad agreement that housing supply needed to catch up with demand. The authorities noted that their action plan in this regard was fulfilling one of the commitments made in the government coalition agreement. They also explained that some measures had already been enacted, and that the action plan’s success would hinge on continued cooperation across all levels of government as housing policy is very decentralized.