The economy is projected to slowly rebalance, with domestic demand supported by the tight labor market, accommodative monetary conditions, and, in 2016, a fiscal expansion. Declining medium- term growth prospects, however, continue to hold back domestic investment and push up savings, preventing faster rebalancing. Domestic demand is expected to keep underpinning the moderate growth momentum. A sizable fiscal expansion (see below), further ECB monetary stimulus since March, and lower energy prices should continue to offset the weakness in key advanced and emerging countries. Private consumption should remain dynamic as real disposable income, while residential investment should pick up further to respond to growing needs (see below). All in all, GDP is projected to grow by 1.7 percent this year and 1.5 percent next year, with a small positive output gap opening up. Continued large net immigration and the gradual absorption of the refugees into the labor market over the short-to-medium term will help meet growing labor demand, though the unemployment rate is likely to bottom out as refugees will face obstacles in finding employment. Headline inflation will rise as a result of the recent ECB policy actions as well as the small positive output gap, but will do so only gradually, and will reach two percent only over the medium-term. In light of the relative cyclical positions and rebalancing needs within the monetary union, inflation in Germany should remain above the euro area average over the medium-term. A foreseen fiscal expansion of 1 percent of GDP in 2016 comes at an opportune time, as, if it materializes, it will cushion the effect of slowing foreign demand, though revenues might again surprise on the upside. The expansion reflects higher planned social transfers, refugee-related spending, and, to a lesser extent, higher public investment and income tax relief. Altogether the structural balance is expected to fall to -¼ percent of GDP in 2016 and remain constant in 2017, slightly above the lower bounds imposed by the fiscal rules (Germany’s Medium Term Objective under the Stability and Growth Pact (MTO) and the national “debt brake”). However, over recent years, tax revenues have systematically overperformed forecasts due to better-than- expected labor market developments (though over the longer run there has been no systematic bias). Refugee-related spending should reach ½ percent of GDP per year in 2016 and 2017, although there is uncertainty around this estimate. At the federal level, despite a small deficit expected in 2016, the government should be able to fulfill its “no net new borrowing” political commitment by spending reserves accumulated in 2015. The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that fiscal risks should be manageable, with no severe adverse effects on public debt dynamics (Annex I). The projections are prepared by the Working Party for Tax Revenue Estimates, a body including representatives from the federal and regional governments, research institutes, and the Bundesbank. Decisions are made by consensus. Although methodologies differ, the macroeconomic scenario used by all members is the same. Thus, forecast errors in the macroeconomic assumptions would be reflected in all the estimates. Page 13 Germany: General Government Operations (percent of GDP) In 2015, the external position continued to be substantially stronger than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings . The cyclically-adjusted current account balance stood at 8.8 percent of GDP in 2015, 3–6 percentage points of GDP above the assessed norm of 2.5–5.5 of GDP (Annex II). The wide interval reflects the high sensitivity of the norm to uncertain demographic factors, including future immigration. The REER in 2015 is assessed as undervalued by 10–20 percent, up from 5–15 percent in 2014. In 2016, the oil and gas trade balance should narrow further as energy prices remain lower on average than in 2015, while the lagged effects of the past real effective exchange rate depreciation will counterbalance the slowdown in external demand. Continued strong wage growth and the fiscal expansion, on the other hand, should push up imports. Over the medium-term, the surplus is expected to slowly decline . The rebalancing process will unfold as the terms of trade windfall is spent, energy prices partially recover, the output gap becomes positive, and increasing unit labor costs relative to euro area trading partners realign price competitiveness. However, at 6.8 percent in 2021, the current account surplus is projected to remain outside the assessed norm, while the (NIIP) will continue to grow rapidly, reaching over 80 percent of GDP by 2021. Based on the EBA model estimation results, in 2015 if fiscal gaps in Germany and its trading partners were closed, Germany’s current account surplus would have been lower by some 1.5 percentage points of GDP. The remaining CA gap that is not explained by 20102011201220132014*2015 Net lending/borrowing forecast error Revenue forecast error (underestimation) Expenditure forecast error (overestimation) Over-performance: Actual Fiscal Balance less Stability Program Projections (Pecent of GDP) * Thechange in national accounts system from ESA1995 to ESA2010 does not have a relevant impact on the balance outturn (see 2015 Stability Program update). However, it does not allow a precise decomposition of the net-lending forecast error in 2014. Sources:Stability Program projections, Destastis, and IMF staff calculations. f Tax revenue forecast error Wages and salaries growth forecast error, right axis TaxRevenue Forecast Bias, 2011-2015 1/ 1/ Forecast errors are computed as the difference between the actual values and the forecast as of November of the previousyear (relevant for the budget formulation). Social security contributions are not included.Sources: Bundesbank, Federal Ministry of Finance,and IMF staff calculations. 20132014201520162017Proj.Proj.Net Lending/Borrowing-0.10.30.6-0.10.1Structural Balance0.10.70.7-0.3-0.3 of which , Structural Balance of the Central Government-0.10.60.3-0.1-0.2Change in structural balance0.30.60.0-1.00.0SGP Medium Term Objective (General Government)-0.5-0.5-0.5-0.5-0.5Debt Brake Floor (Central Government)-1.28-0.97-0.66-0.35-0.35Public gross debt (Maastricht definition)77.274.771.268.566.2Sources: Ministry of Finance, Bundesbank, Federal Statistical Office, and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 14 identified policy distortions likely reflects the short-term factors mentioned above (such as the unspent terms of trade windfall), as well as the limited nominal exchange rate adjustment because of the currency union. A range of policies could be considered that would strengthen the external rebalancing relative to the baseline scenario. The foreseen adjustment process is sluggish because medium-term growth prospects will keep a damper on domestic investment, while population aging combined with expectations of slow future income growth will continue to keep savings high. Structural reforms that increase future growth prospects could help reverse these factors and strengthen the rebalancing process. For instance, model simulations show that higher labor supply by female workers, better refugee integration, and pension reforms to prolong working lives will increase future output, enhancing incentives for corporate investment and reducing household savings already in the short-term, yielding a reduction in the current account surplus and positive (though small) demand spillovers to the rest of the euro area. These reforms are discussed in more detail in the next section. A medium-term fiscal position closer to the MTO, particularly to finance more public investment or other growth-enhancing fiscal policies would also be helpful (see paragraph 17 below). Risks to the baseline are to the downside. Given the considerable monetary and fiscal stimulus in the pipeline, upside risk could arise from a stronger-than-expected response of the economy. Inflation could also reach the ECB inflation target faster should wage pressures intensify, which would also accelerate the projected external rebalancing. On the downside, several external and internal risks, which are made particularly salient by the deep trade linkages between Germany and other euro area countries, the U.K., and China (Figure 7), could derail the growth momentum (see Annex III): Growing eurosceptic sentiment could lead some European countries to renegotiate the terms of their membership to the European Union, or exit the Union altogether. Most immediately, an See “Macroeconomic Effects of Policies to Expand the Labor Supply in Germany”, Selected Issues Paper. TFP Labor Capital Potential GDP Potential GDP Growth After 2020: The EC Ageing Report Scenario (Percent)Source: 2015 EC Ageing Report. Saving Investment Private Sector Saving and Investment Source:Destatis and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 exit by the U.K. (Brexit) following the referendum on June 23, 2016, would lead to protracted negotiations on successor arrangements. The related uncertainty may lead to periods of financial volatility, heightened uncertainty, and discourage investment. The U.K. is Germany’s third largest export destination, German banks’ consolidated exposures to the U.K. amount to 12 percent of GDP, and Germany’s largest bank has sizable London-based operations. A greater–than-expected slowdown in key advanced and emerging economies (in particular China) could spill over to commodity exporters further, roil global financial markets and reduce global growth. Germany might also act as a transmitter of such a shock to economies in its manufacturing supply chain, notably in Central and Eastern Europe. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions could lead to sharp asset price declines and a decompression of credit spreads. In Germany, such a scenario may give rise to financial turbulence and second round adverse spillovers because of a globally interconnected financial sector. The still incomplete new framework for bank recovery and resolution may complicate the policy response. Should a large downside risk materialize in Germany and across other advanced economies, a fiscal expansion would be warranted . Further monetary support from the ECB would also be in order in such a scenario. In Germany, if the output gap became significantly negative, invoking the escape clause under the fiscal rule would be appropriate. In the case of a moderate recession, the relatively large automatic stabilizers would help absorb adverse shocks. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s views on the outlook and the driving role of domestic demand at the current juncture. They highlighted the continued strength of the labor market, but agreed that core inflation had been less dynamic than anticipated. This was attributed mostly to the decline in oil and other commodity prices that led to a slowdown in core inflation via indirect channels, as well as the effect of lower non-energy import prices. In contrast, the pass-through of wages to prices was quite low. Looking forward they projected somewhat more dynamic core inflation developments than staff, but they saw slight downside risks to this projection. They also noted the weak response of inflation to measures of economic slack in the past, and did not expect nominal wage growth to increase significantly from current levels. They also broadly agreed with staff on risks, expressing particular concern about the erosion of confidence in the European project across the continent. As in the past, the authorities did not see the large current account surplus as a reflection of policy-related macroeconomic imbalances. They noted the need for high household See Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation, Box 1, for a quantitative scenario of an emerging market slowdown risk. On the German-Central European supply chain, see IMF Country Report No. 13/263. See FSSA for an analysis of financial sector outward and inward spillovers and the impact of higher interest rates on housing prices and the mortgage portfolio in the banking sector. Page 16 savings and fiscal discipline in light of long-run demographic developments. While the reasons behind high net savings by the non-financial corporate sector were less clear, especially since the long de-leveraging process following the stock market crash of the early 2000s should have been completed by now, they did not see this as the result of policy distortions but mainly pointed to the desire of German firms to take advantage of more attractive investment opportunities abroad. The Bundesbank saw the undervaluation of the REER as much smaller than staff (5–6 percent vis-à-vis 10–20 percent), the different assessments being due to different methodological and conceptual issues as well as observation periods. The large and growing NIIP was a concern to some counterparts, given past experience with poor financial investments abroad.