Competition-enhancing reforms in the services sector should be pursued more vigorously. Slow productivity growth in the services sector is holding back overall growth, and reforms to enhance competition in parts of the sector where it is lacking could trigger a shift toward greater efficiency and innovation. However, progress on this front has been slow as special interest groups appear well organized, and has mainly reflected pressure from the European Commission (EC). In the context of the EC-driven mutual evaluation on access to and practice of regulated professions, the federal and state governments reviewed the extent and nature of professional regulations, and submitted an action plan in January, which the EC has recently qualified as lacking ambition. In the area of professional services, the loosening of a few requirements are contemplated. Infringement procedures by the EC are ongoing regarding the minimum compulsory tariffs of architects and engineers, while an agreement has recently been found with tax advisors to make these tariffs indicative instead of compulsory. In the retail sector, the government recently gave its green light to a merger proposal between two supermarket chains that had received a negative opinion by the competition authority and the monopolies commission, prompting the chairman of the latter to resign. Incumbents’ dominant position in railways and postal services is still largely unchanged. A new version of the long-awaited Act to Strengthen Competition in the Railway Sector was approved by the federal cabinet in January 2016 but is facing a deluge of amendments in the parliamentary process. If passed, it would strengthen the powers of the regulator, and would enhance incentives to boost efficiency, while improving the conditions for the development of a single European railway market. Meanwhile, the market share of new entrants in the long-distance rail passenger market segment has remained below 1 percent. In the area of postal services, the competition authority accused the incumbent operator of abusing its dominant position, while the monopolies commission called last year for a reform of the legal and regulatory framework so as to address impediments to effective competition, to no avail. The authorities agreed that faster progress in reforming regulation in parts of the services sector would stimulate competition and growth . In the area of professional services, they saw scope to review conduct regulation, including price regulation, restrictions on inter- professional cooperation, exclusive rights, and shareholding restrictions. By contrast, they thought entry regulation to be truly instrumental in promoting consumer protection and quality and unlikely to have adverse economic effects. They saw the digitization of the economy as an opportunity to rethink and, if necessary, redesign rules and regulations in order to foster innovation and the transformation of existing markets, while transferring valuable protection standards into the digital For model simulations of the macroeconomic effects of services sector reforms in Germany and related spillovers, see “Germany: Selected Issues”, IMF Country Report 14/217, Chapter III. Page 23 economy. They argued that the proposed railway regulation would have a positive impact on the competition on the railway sector, and noted that the market share of the incumbent in regional passenger rail transport and rail freight transport continued to decline, and that the liberalization of long-distance bus services in 2013 had a strong stimulative effect on the long-distance passenger market. On the merger between the supermarket chains they explained that the Minister of Economic Affairs granted a ministerial authorization with conditions, since common “welfare considerations” prevailed over competition concerns in that particular case.