A recovery is under way, led by domestic demand. Real GDP has been rising since the second quarter of 2013, and for the year as a whole growth was 0.5 percent (Figure 1), versus a 0.8 percent contraction in the rest of the euro area. Growth in the first quarter of 2014 was particularly strong (0.8 percent q-o-q), but this partly reflected the mild weather. The recovery has been mainly led by domestic demand, except in Q4-2013, when private consumption unexpectedly contracted. Despite a strong labor market, wage pressures are modest. The labor force continued to expand on the back of strong immigration flows and increasing participation rates (Figure 2). Employment grew by 1 percent in 2013, as an additional 400,000 jobs were created mostly in the services sector. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate has stabilized at 5.1 percent, a post- reunification low, after having continuously declined since 2005. The newly created jobs, however, are mainly part-time, leading to a further decline in the average number of hours worked per employee. This suggests that there may be further slack in the labor market, as also reflected in the moderate wage pressures in 2013, with nominal hourly wages up 2.5 percent compared with 3.5 percent in 2012. Headline inflation is falling, while core inflation is stable but low. Headline inflation has been on a downtrend throughout 2013, falling from a peak of 1.9 percent in July to 0.6 percent in May 2014. The fall reflects a marked decline in food and energy prices, but also the effects of the strong euro on other import prices. Core inflation has been low, hovering around an average of 1.1 percent. Over the last year, German inflation has exceeded that in the rest of the euro area by 0.5 percentage points. Surveys indicate that German inflation expectations appear well anchored. Page 6 Figure 1. Germany: Growth, Rebalancing, and Risks Source: Baker,Bloom, and Davis (2012); Haver Analytics; IMF World Economic Outlook United Nations; and IMF staff calculations. GRC, ITA, IRL, PRT, ESP Rest of euro area Selected Economies: Real GDP (2008Q1=100) Foreign balance Domestic demand Germany: Demand Components of GDP Growth (Percentage points; contributions to quarterly growth) GDP Index Growth (year-over-year; RHS) Germany: Real GDP Dynamics (Index=100 at 2013Q1; growth in percent) The expansion of the German economyhas strengthened recently......and the continuingvigor of the labor market is remarkable. Domestic demand gained momentum in the first quarter of 2014......bolstering the projected uptrend, which beganearlier in 2013. Capacity utilization rates above historical averages and ... ...otherkey activity indicators bode well for growth going forward. GRC, ITA, IRL, PRT, ESP Rest of euro area Selected Economies: Employment (2008Q1=100) Capacity utilization (CU): Industry CU: Construction Germany: Indicators of Capacity Utilization (Percentage points; dotted lines denote averages) Manufacturing Services Germany: PMI Indices (Seasonally adjusted; index>50 indicates expansion) Page 7 Figure 2. Germany: Labor Market and Prices Source: Bundesbank, Eurostat, Federal Statistical Office,Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Total employment (LHS, million persons) Labor participation rate (RHS, percent) Employment and Labor Participation Unemployment rate (LHS, percent of labor force) Part-time work (RHS, percent of employment) Germany: Slack in Labor Market 6Mar-07Jul-08Nov-09Mar-11Jul-12Nov-13 Total economy Industry Services, private sector Services, public sector Negotiated Wages 6Mar-07Jul-08Nov-09Mar-11Jul-12Nov-13 CPI Negotiated hourly earnings Actual hourly earnings (national accounts) Negotiated Pay Rates and Actual Earnings Mar-07Jul-08Nov-09Mar-11Jul-12Nov-13 Real hourly wage Productivity (GDP per hour) Germany: Productivity and Real Wage Growth Jan-11Jul-11Jan-12Jul-12Jan-13Jul-13Jan-14 Core Energy Food, alchohol, & tobacco Inflation Contributions to Headline Inflation Labor market conditionsremain favorable.Theunemployment rate is near post-unificationlows but many new jobs were part time. Reflectingthe remaining slack in the labor market, wagegrowth slowed in 2013... ...but remained more robust in industry. Real wage growth has exceeded that of productivity over the last two years... ...whichhas helped keep core inflation stable. Page 8 The fiscal stance was contractionary in 2013, but is envisaged to become expansionary in 2014. The general government registered a surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP in 2013, once again stronger than planned (this time by 0.5 percent of GDP), resulting in a contractionary stance (0.7 percent of GDP)—an unwelcome development given the slack in the economy (Figure 3). The new coalition government’s fiscal plans envisage a mild expansionary stance in 2014 and 2015 (see paragraph 13 below). The debt-to-GDP ratio is on a firmly declining path (see Annex III, Debt Sustainability Analysis), and structural deficit targets for the federal government (expressed in the national debt brake rule) and the general government (Medium-Term Objective of the Fiscal Compact) have been achieved. All in all, following four years of robust fiscal performance, fiscal consolidation is on track. In 2013, the current account surplus reached a new high . The surplus for 2013 was of $274 billion (7½ percent of GDP)––virtually all in goods trade––and benefited from improved terms of trade (+1.3 percent) (Figure 4). The services balance and current transfers were both negative, while net investment income was positive and increased significantly over the last decade, reflecting the growing net investment position (see Chapter I, Selected Issues). Rising corporate savings contributed strongly to the increase in the surplus before the crisis, while low investment and fiscal consolidation were more important in recent years (Figure 5). The regional composition of the surplus has changed, with lower surpluses vis-à-vis the euro area periphery offset by larger ones vis- à-vis economies outside of Europe (most notably China). The German surplus vis-à-vis non-euro area countries accounts for two thirds of the euro area current account surplus of $303 billion. The German banking system is gradually gaining strength . Profitability is subdued because of structurally low net interest margins and pressure from protracted low interest rates, but it was supported last year by a favorable domestic and regional macro-financial environment (Figures 6 and 7). Improvements in capital adequacy continued and, pending the results of the ECB Comprehensive Assessment, banks should be ready to meet upcoming stricter regulatory requirements in a timely manner, though a few remain highly leveraged. Large banks keep restructuring their balance sheets—helped by the current market appetite for parts of their legacy portfolios—and are strengthening their capital position, though sizable litigation costs have been an impediment in some cases. Smaller banks, with a very traditional business model, kept growing at a slow pace while benefiting from a very low level of credit risk provisioning. While credit conditions remain favorable, credit growth has been lackluster, reflecting low demand in the context of large corporate profits and retained earnings. Further progress in implementing the 2011 FSAP Update recommendations has been achieved (see Annex II). Page 9 Figure 3. Fiscal Developments and Outlook Sources: FederalStatistical Office, Stability and Growth Program Projections, and IMF staff calculations and projections. Over-performance: Actual Fiscal Balance less Stability and Growth Program Projections Envisaged under January 2010 Stability and Growth Program Actual General Government Gross Debt Financial sector supoport in 2010 Overall balance Structural balance Medium-term objecitve for structural balance (Fiscal Compact) Germany: General Government Fiscal Outlook Overall balance Structural balance Debt brake rule floor (National) Germany: Central Government Fiscal Outlook Course for deficit reduction defined in 2010 March 2013 projections March 2014 projections (IMF staff projections reflecting new coalition plans) Central Government: Evolution of Plans (Structural balance using authorties' output gap, % of GDP) Social security Funds Municipalities Laender Federal government Fiscal Balances of Components of General Government Thanks to better-than-planned fiscal oucomes... The generalgovernment has already met its medium-term objective under the Fiscal Compact... ...and the central government structural balance already complies with the 2016 debt brake rule. Additionalspending in the new coalition agreement will reduce projected surpluses... ...andsocial security funds will temporarily run a deficit covering the costs of additional pension spending. ...publicdebt is lower than anticipated despite large financial sector support. Page 10 Figure 4. Germany: The Balance of Payments Source: Bundesbank, Haver Analytics, andIMF staff calculations. Income Services Current transfers Trade balance Current account balance Germany: Current Account Balance Over the Long Run Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain Rest of EU Rest of world Rest of euro area Germany: Current Account Balance by Region FDI (net) Portfolio investment (net) Other (net) Germany: Capital and Financial Account Bundesbank other investments Monetary financial institutions Enterprises and individuals General government Bundesbank reserve assets Total Germany: Net International Investment Position by Sector Net direct investment Net portfolio investment Net loans, currency, and deposits Net other investment Net official reserves Net IIP Germany: Net International Investment Position by Instrument (Billions of euros) In 2013, the current accout surplus reached a new historical peak of 7½ percent of GDP... ...netIIP continues to grow rapidly. While Target2 balances have declined... In 2013 the surplus financed large portfolio outflows. ...as the surplus vis-à-vis the euro area periphery has been offset by larger surpluses vis-à-vis the rest of the world. Page 11 Figure 5. A Retrospective on Current Account and Savings-Investment Balances Page 12 Figure 6. Recent Developments in the German Banking Sector Source: Bloomberg,IFS, SNL Financial, and IMF staff calculations. Deutsche Bank Commerzbank HVB LBBW DZBank German Banks 5-Year CDS Spreads (in pps) g f G P P ss Price to Book Ratio, May 30th, 2014 K K db Change in Total Assets during 2013 Core Tier 1 Ratio Largebanks' perceived riskiness has stabilized......but they trade at a discount to Europeanpeers. Their profitability remains depressed......becauseof a structurally low interest margin.Balancesheet downsizing......has helpedimprove capital adequacy ratios. Return on Average Assets, 2013 Net Interest Margin Page 13 Figure 7. German Credit Conditions Page 14 The energy reorientation policy is facing challenges, though it has boosted the production of renewable energy (Box 1) . Production of renewable energy (RE) has surged and accounts for 24 percent of total electricity production, in line with targets. However, the rapid expansion of RE generation has sharply raised surcharges (used to finance RE), making the electricity price one of the highest in Europe. Large, energy-intensive firms facing international competition receive subsidies in the form of reduced surcharges, but this results in a higher burden for other users and has raised concerns with the EU competition authority. At the same time, the profitability of conventional electricity producers is suffering while sizable conventional capacity needs to be preserved to complement RE generation. As nuclear energy is being phased out at an accelerated rate after the Fukushima accident, conventional generation is increasingly relying on the cheapest source, brown coal (lignite), which is causing a surge in CO emissions. Finally, as the switch to RE continues and nuclear capacity is phased out, industrial users in the South of the country may have trouble accessing RE capacity in the North as grid expansion plans face strong opposition by affected parties and are behind schedule. Page 15 Box 1 Energiewende The Energiewende (Energy turnaround) seeks to balance energy supply security, affordability, and environmental soundness. The strategy was first set out by the government in 2010 and then modified after the 2011 Fukushima disaster to allow for the full phase-out of nuclear power by 2022. It lays out ambitious national targets for 2020, going beyond EU requirements, including: reducing carbon emissions by 40 percent relative to their 1990 level, reducing primary energy consumption by 20 percent relative to 2008, and increasing the share of renewable energy (RE) in electricity consumption by 35 percent. Targets for 2050 are equally ambitious. The transformation of Germany’s energy system is making headway. In 2013, 24 percent of electricity came from RE, making it the second largest source of electricity after brown coal (lignite). Greenhouse emissions have been lowered by 25 percent in 2012 relative to 1990 levels. Adjusted for inventory and temperature effects, primary energy consumption also decreased by one percent compared to the previous year. The Energiewende continues to face challenges: Controlling costs. The rapid growth in RE has been mainly promoted through the provision of feed-in tariffs (FITs), which guarantee a sale price for RE (usually for 20 years). FITs, which were introduced already in 2000, are funded by a surcharge passed onto consumers. Despite past measures to contain costs, the RE surcharge has increased dramatically from 1.1 cents/kWh in 2008 to 6.24 cents/kWh in 2014, with German electricity prices amongst the highest in Europe. Energy-intensive internationally active firms in certain sectors are eligible for surcharge reductions (i.e., exemptions). The cost of the exemption is born by other users, i.e., households and SMEs. Facilitating grid expansion. The rising importance of RE supply requires substantial investment in the electrical grid to deliver electricity from suppliers to consumers, which are typically not close. This significant increase of RE generation capacity in the North has outpaced grid expansion, and the planned reduction in nuclear capacity in the more industrial South, along with a slow pace of network expansion (in part related to public opposition to such projects) have raised concerns about potential bottlenecks. Preserving conventional capacity. RE is by its nature intermittent, and sizable conventional capacity needs to be preserved to complement it. However, since RE has preferential access to the grid, conventional producers are finding it hard to remain profitable. Reducing CO emissions. Despite the successful effort to promote RE, CO emissions from Germany rose last year as conventional producers are increasingly relying on cheaper brown coal rather than nuclear power or natural gas. Page 16