Competition-enhancing reforms in the services sector are very slow to materialize Labor productivity growth in the services sector remains low, particularly in business services. Barriers to competition have been documented by the OECD and the Monopolies Commission in several large sub-sectors, and their removal would boost productivity and potential growth. Germany’s leadership in this area would also likely help catalyze reforms in other European Union members. In the area of the regulated professions, the European Commission (EC)-led transparency and mutual evaluation exercise— focused on access conditions—will be completed in January 2016 and no conclusions have been drawn yet. The government has initiated a review of the restrictions on equity investment in the field of selected professions (e.g., architects and engineering companies) and results are expected by the end of the year. Regarding price regulation, the EC initiated pilot proceedings against Germany last December, inter alia posing questions with respect to the scale of fees of some professions. It is yet unclear whether this procedure will lead to any significant change. In the area of rail transportation, a new draft of the regulation law is being discussed, which is a not- See “Services sector performance and product market regulation” Chapter IV, Selected Issues for the 2014 Article IV Consultation for greater detail. AgricultureIndustryConstructionTrade, transport, & accomodationInformation & communicationFinancial & insurance servicesReal estateBusiness servicesPublic services, education, & health Other services g nnu g w f g ss dd w Share of total gross value added, 2010Q1 Sectoral Labor Productivity Growth and Share of Total Gross Value Added (Percent)Sources: Federal Statistical Office and IMF staff calculations. Page 27 to-be-missed opportunity to enhance regulatory powers to limit discriminatory practices by the incumbent operator and thus promote greater competition in all business segments. On the energy front, progress is being made to tackle the challenges from the ambitious program of transition to renewable sources and nuclear phase-out, but several issues remain . The Renewable Energy Act was amended last year to help contain costs for retail electricity users, while the EC decided to allow the continuation of subsidies for large companies competing internationally at least until 2020. However, this controversial subsidy, which is paid for by higher electricity charges on other users, remains uncertain in the long run; also, key decisions are still pending on how to secure conventional back-up capacity as renewable capacity is expanded. A still unresolved issue is how grid expansion can be expedited amid strong opposition by affected parties in some regions. These challenges should be addressed rapidly to ensure that electricity costs, already among the highest in Europe, do not continue to climb, and to remove important elements of uncertainty in private sector investment decisions. The authorities were confident that the energy transition would be successfully managed and acknowledged that progress in the area of professional services was slow. On the energy agenda, they noted that, after many years of rapid growth, in 2015 the electricity price surcharge related to renewable sources had not increased—though this reflected in part statistical factors. They indicated that plans to auction off renewable subsidies would introduce more competition and help curb costs. In the services sector, they indicated that work to identify growth- enhancing product market competition policy measures was ongoing. More specifically, on regulated professions they agreed that there was scope for re-assessing the relevance of parts of the regulation, but noted that political support for these reforms was generally weak and that they required a case-by-case review to ensure that quality standards in the provision of services would not be compromised. Page 28