A moderate pace of growth is expected to continue. Given favorable domestic financial conditions, healthy corporate balance sheets, capacity utilization back to normal, lower uncertainty, and an anemic growth in the recent past, investment should be poised for a more enduring recovery. In particular, construction investment, buoyed by rising housing prices, is expected to keep contributing significantly to domestic demand, while private consumption growth should continue to benefit from the healthy labor market, high immigration, stronger wage growth, and healthy balance sheets, though low interest rates may lead to stepped up saving for retirement. As domestic demand growth becomes more broad-based, output should increase by 1.9 percent this year and 1.7 percent in the next, resulting in a slightly positive output gap. After a subdued pace this year, inflation is expected to pick up to 1.4 percent in 2015 as the commodity price downdraft fades and the output gap closes. Throughout the projection horizon, it is envisaged that the average rate of German inflation will exceed that in the rest of the euro area. The extent of the recovery in investment is an important risk factor for the baseline projection. As discussed in last year’s staff report, investment is highly sensitive to policy uncertainty, notably, over euro area–wide policies. Indexes of policy uncertainty have declined noticeably in the last year, and this should underpin a rebound in investment. In addition, capacity utilization in manufacturing and (especially) in construction is now above its historic average, also boding well for investment. Nonetheless, renewed policy uncertainty could weaken business investment and hurt growth. Conversely, stronger-than-envisioned investment growth could give rise to a stronger cyclical upturn. 201320142015Staff-0.6-0.30.1OECD-0.60.10.9European Commission-1.1-0.7-0.3 German Authorities-1.1-0.8-0.3 Germany: Output Gap Estimates (As a percentage of potential GDP) Page 17 The outlook is subject to a number of additional interrelated and potentially mutually reinforcing risks (see Risk Assessment Matrix): Given its trade openness (exports-to-GDP ratio over 50 percent; value-added goods exports- to-GDP over 30 percent), Germany is highly susceptible to global recovery prospects, which have recently been marked down. A deeper-than-expected slowdown in major trading partners—including large emerging markets—would dampen growth. For example, model- based simulations suggest that each 1 percentage point temporary decline in domestic demand in Emerging Asia would drag down German growth by about 0.1 percentage point; a more protracted slowdown could have more severe implications, in part owing to weaker confidence. A prolonged period of slower growth in the euro area, other advanced economies, or emerging markets presents a risk that is more medium-term in nature. If the output gap widened again, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully. In case of a significant slowdown and rapidly rising unemployment, proactive fiscal policies would be needed. Persistent stagnation in the euro area, especially if combined with low inflation, represents a risk to Germany because it may, inter alia, call into question debt sustainability in the periphery, undermining confidence, and triggering a re-emergence of regional financial stress. An escalation of geopolitical tensions over Ukraine-Russia would hit Germany. While direct trade ties and financial exposures are modest, risks could nonetheless be indirectly transmitted to Germany through disruptions affecting its Central European supply chain partners. In addition, Germany could experience safe haven inflows if tensions escalate. In a tail risk scenario in which tensions lead to disruptions in energy supply, Germany would be strongly affected because of its heavy dependence on Russian oil and, especially, gas (40 percent of total consumption). The authorities agreed with staff that the moderate expansion of the German economy should continue . They expressed confidence in a domestic demand-led upswing driven by private consumption and investment, amid tight labor market conditions and a virtually closed output gap underpinning solid wage growth. In particular, the authorities were more upbeat than staff about the strength of domestic demand, especially private investment in 2015. They noted that the structural decline in the unemployment rate had run its course and therefore expected wage growth to strengthen in 2014-15 and support consumption. At the same time, while the authorities concurred with staff that inflationary pressures would be muted this year, they underscored that prices were likely to accelerate owing to the expected positive output gap and the introduction of the minimum wage, with inflation reaching around 1.9 percent in 2016. They agreed that the current account surplus would decline gradually. The authorities saw the risks to the outlook as generally balanced. On the upside, they noted that the strength of the expansion may be underestimated, given the building momentum of domestic demand growth. On the downside, the authorities indicated that a worsening of the Page 18 geopolitical situation in Ukraine represents a serious tail risk. They acknowledged that while difficult to assess precisely, a materialization of such a risk would adversely affect Germany primarily through confidence effects, rather than via trade and financial channels. However, the authorities noted that the resilience of the German labor market and its safe haven status could help cushion blows to the economy. They saw a re-emergence of a euro area crisis less likely in the current conjuncture, but acknowledged that risks pertaining to key emerging markets were harder to appraise. They concurred that persistently low growth in advanced economies is a risk over the medium term which could seriously undermine confidence.