Interest rates in the euro area are expected to remain low for a long time. With euro area inflation projected to remain persistently subdued, the ECB is expected to keep its main policy rate at or near zero for a long period of time. In addition, the ECB is putting in place further unconventional easing measures in the form of targeted long-term refinancing operations maturing in September 2018. With monetary conditions already accommodative from a cyclical perspective, in the medium term, German inflation might rise above the ECB’s price stability objective as part of the needed rebalancing process within the euro area, though this is not envisaged under the baseline July 2014 World Economic Outlook (WEO) projections. Page 26 Low interest rates are contributing to an upturn in the housing cycle, but related macroeconomic effects are expected to be modest. After a prolonged period of weakness, housing prices have increased by 18 percent over the past five years (5 percent in 2013), but remain below their peak reached in the mid-1990’s in real terms. Relatively stronger price dynamics is observed in some segments (i.e., apartments in selected large cities), which are overvalued by up to 25 percent according to the Bundesbank (see Chapter V, Selected Issues). Recent housing market strength appears to reflect the lack of attractive alternative domestic investment options, stronger immigration flows, demand from foreign investors, and lags in the supply response. Because of the features of German housing finance (traditionally conservative loan-to-value ratios, absence of equity release products), the effects on consumption are likely to be close to nil or even slightly negative so that the main transmission channel to the economy is through residential investment, which has been robust. While there is no need to take action at the moment, the authorities should ready their macroprudential toolkit. Looking ahead, the monetary policy stance in the euro area may become too expansionary for Germany, given its relative position in the cycle. Hence, active use of macroprudential policies to contain related financial stability risks may become necessary down the road. Concerning current conditions in the housing market, with aggregate mortgage loan growth barely positive in real terms and lending standards unchanged, stepped-up monitoring is the right approach. Nevertheless, the currently available macroprudential policy toolkit is limited and should be enriched by adding at least loan-to-value and debt-service-to-income instruments (see Chapter VI, Selected Issues). Furthermore, the macroprudential framework could be made more operational in line with recent Financial Stability Board (FSB) peer review recommendations by clarifying the Financial Stability Committee’s scope of action and developing a comprehensive communication strategy. While low interest rates are helping the fiscal accounts, they are negatively affecting the household sector, given generally conservative investment portfolios. Households’ financial assets almost doubled since 1995 with an increasing share concentrated in age-related saving products (such as life insurance and pension plans) or held as currency and deposits—all of which Page 27 are earning low yields in the current enviroment. Households are not well positioned to gain from higher asset prices due to the low share of equities in their portfolios, low home ownership rate, and low indebtedness. A low interest rate environment is also a challenge for the banking sector. The pressure on interest margins exacerbates banks’ structurally weak profitability. A Bundesbank survey of banks’ internal forecasts suggests that the sector would be able to withstand persistently low interest rates, but would make relatively weaker institutions more vulnerable. Banks’ response to profit erosion, for example through possible shifts to riskier portfolios (including cross-border) should be carefully monitored to safeguard financial stability. While stable, the life insurance sector requires policy action. In Germany as elsewhere, life insurance companies typically have very strong liquidity positions but are exposed to long-term solvency risk. The German sector is vulnerable to a persistent low interest rate environment because of historically high guaranteed interest rates coupled with a high duration gap between assets and liabilities (see Chapter VII, Selected Issues). While insurers themselves are adjusting their strategy, regulatory measures taken so far to force life insurers to build further reserves may prove insufficient, and further policy action is being considered. One avenue to protect the interest of policyholders would be to amend a policy that compels insurers to share part of their valuation reserves—including fixed-income securities—with holders of matured or cancelled policies. The insolvency of several mid-sized life insurance companies would be unlikely to have large systemic effects but it might have spillover effects on banking sector financing as bank-insurance linkages remain significant. The authorities noted that the case for further unconventional monetary policy measures in the euro area was not strong as of the time of the mission. Counterparts saw the ECB forecast as still showing euro area inflation rising to a level consistent with the price stability objective at the end of the forecast horizon; at the same time, inflation expectations in the euro area were seen as still well anchored. In their view, very low inflation in the euro area periphery was the natural, temporary consequence of a necessary structural adjustment, and thus saw the effectiveness of additional monetary stimulus at this point as low. Furthermore, they argued that the European monetary union legal framework might not be consistent with the implementation of certain types of asset purchase programs, including in light of the recent German Supreme Court ruling on the ECB’s Outright Monetary Transactions. They agreed that a persistently low interest rate environment could present financial stability challenges. Even though they did not perceive any significant deviation of economy-wide housing prices from fundamentals, they had decided to step up their monitoring of the housing market and had conducted a detailed survey of banks’ mortgage lending practices, which was still under analysis. They saw the FSB’s and staff’s recommendations on the macroprudential framework as in line with their current work program, and explained that the first Financial Stability Committee report to parliament this summer would contain several elements aimed at clarifying its mode of Page 28 operation. On risks in the life insurance sector, they were confident that the government’s planned policy measures would help improve insurers’ capital positions. They remained wary of the possible spread of search-for-yield behaviors to German financial institutions, though noted that close supervisory scrutiny through the ECB Comprehensive Assessment allayed concerns in the short term.