The growth momentum remains steady as strong domestic demand is offsetting weak foreign demand (Figure 1). Private consumption growth reached a 15-year high last year, while public consumption surged to accommodate higher social benefit spending and provide support to a record number of asylum-seekers. The recovery of investment in machinery and equipment continued as capacity utilization remained above historical averages. Buoyant domestic final demand, however, was partly countered by a slowdown in import demand from trading partners, which translated into stagnating exports in the second half of last year. In spite of a tight labor market, prices have been nearly flat over the past year, due to falling energy prices. Core inflation remained low and stable around 1 percent, while the GDP deflator rose by 2.1 percent in 2015. Real wages remain dynamic and keep outpacing labor productivity (Figure 2). Employment growth has been supported by persistently high economic immigration and has remained robust in spite of the implementation of an early retirement scheme. The unemployment rate, at 4.2 percent, reached a new post-reunification low in March. So far, the introduction of a statutory minimum wage on January 1, 2015 has not had a visible impact on average wage growth or the aggregate employment trend (Box 1). External imbalances are widening reflecting new shocks. The current account surplus continued to widen significantly in 2015, reaching 8.5 percent of GDP, reflecting lower commodity prices and currency effects (Figure 3). It is now the second largest in the world behind China’s when measured in U.S. dollars. The narrowing of the oil and gas trade deficit accounted for 62 percent of the trade surplus increase. In addition, lower oil prices (together with lower lending rates) have stimulated global demand for automobiles, benefiting German exports (Box 2). On a regional basis, the surplus vis-à-vis the rest of the euro area widened by 0.7 percent of GDP, as the energy deficit with the Netherlands shrank. Exports to Asia, on the contrary, decelerated reflecting the ongoing rebalancing in China. From a saving-investment balances perspective, the surpluses of non-financial corporations and the general government, at 4.0 percent and 0.7 percent of GDP respectively, reached their highest levels since 2000. By end of 2015, the CPI-based real effective exchange rate had depreciated by 5.3 percent from its 2014 average primarily as a result of nominal depreciation vis-à-vis the dollar and the renminbi. AUSAUTBELCANCZEDNKESTFINFRA DEU HUNIRLISRITAKORLUXMEX NLDNOR POL PRT SVKSVNESPSWECHEGBR USA w f ee Growth of Productivity and Employee Compensation 1/, 2008-2015 (Percent, annual average) Sources: OECD and IMF staff calculations.1/ Productivity and employee compensation are measured per hour worked. Productivitygrowth 45°line Total asylum applications 1/ Asylum-seekers entering Germany Germany: Asylum Seekers (Thousands) Source: Federal Office for Migration and Refugees.1/ Includes first-time applications and follow-up applications. Page 11 The persistent CA surplus has boosted the Net International Investment Position (NIIP). The NIIP reached 48.3 percent of GDP at end-2015 (2.2 percent of world GDP), with gross assets exceeding 256.3 percent of GDP. The net direct investment position was 18.2 percent of GDP and the net portfolio position was 3 percent of GDP at end-2015. Foreign claims of German banks declined sharply after the global financial crisis, from 95 percent of GDP in 2008 to 59 percent of GDP by end-2015, with an exposure to major emerging markets of less than 5 percent of the total. In general, foreign assets are well diversified by instrument, while a sizable share of foreign liabilities consists of government bonds. The implicit return earned on assets has been higher than that paid on liabilities by 0.6 percentage points on average over 2010–15. However, adverse valuation effects have kept the pace of NIIP build-up short of the cumulated capital outflow recorded in the financial account (6 percent of GDP cumulative over 2010–15). Strong revenues supported the fiscal balance in 2015. The general government surplus rose to 0.6 percent of GDP (from 0.3 percent in 2014), on the back of buoyant revenue—due to robust growth of employees compensation and domestic demand—and declining interest payments (Figure 4). However, the structural balance remained constant at 0.7 percent of GDP, resulting in a neutral fiscal stance. The unforeseen spending associated with the refugee inflow (about ¼ percent of GDP in 2015) was comfortably accommodated within the government’s budget target. Public debt declined to 71 percent of GDP, while the federal government met for the second consecutive year its commitment to no new net borrowing (the so-called “black zero”). Credit growth, long subdued, is picking up, and housing price inflation continues to outstrip disposable income growth. Following the implementation of QE by the ECB, negative yields on government bonds now extend to maturities up to 8 years and bank lending rates have declined to historically low levels (Figure 5). After years of stagnation, real credit growth accelerated to 3 percent in early 2016, half of it accounted for by the mortgage segment, as borrowers took advantage of record-low interest rates. As a result, housing prices keep trending up in the context of a slow supply response to surging housing demand. Though firms continue to finance most of investment needs from retained earnings and cash reserves, credit to non-financial corporations is also picking up somewhat as bank lending standards are gradually loosened. The banking sector faces multiple challenges, which translate into low profitability. Negative interest rates have not been passed on to retail depositors so far. Thus, while they stimulate credit demand, they erode net interest margins, especially in banks with traditional business models. The aggregate cost-to-income ratio is high in international comparison, while technological changes and the new regulatory environment require business model adaptation. Further consolidation to cut costs, especially among the large number of small retail-focused institutions, is proceeding but slowly. During market turbulence earlier this year, the equity prices of the largest German bank declined more markedly than those of other global banks, and its CDS spreads climbed more rapidly, possibly indicating market concerns about future profitability in the context of ongoing restructuring (Figure 6). Page 12