Major transitions in bank regulation, supervision, and resolution frameworks are entering a critical phase. Beyond changes driven by membership in the European Union (capital, leverage; and liquidity requirements, recovery, and resolution—including a bail-in framework, structural measures, deposit insurance) and the euro area (Single Supervisory Mechanism – SSM, Single Resolution Mechanism), or by foreign regulators (U.S. rules on Foreign Banking Organizations), German banks are also subject since the beginning of this year to the Act on Ring- fencing and on Recovery and Resolution Planning (see Chapter VIII, Selected Issues). In line with the requirement of this Act, all domestically systemic banks have submitted a first draft of their recovery plan, which are now being fine-tuned through discussions with supervisors. With respect to the bail- in tool, the authorities conducted last year a survey of 13 large banks to assess their respective amount of available bail-inable liabilities. The issue of creditor burden sharing is of particular relevance to the insurance sector since 30 percent of German insurers’ assets are banking sector liabilities (mostly vis-à-vis German banks). Robust domestic supervision remains a priority in the new European framework . Both domestic supervisory agencies (BaFin and the Bundesbank) will continue to play a key role in the transition to the SSM, as well as in the new steady state. They will be part of joint supervisory teams for banks under direct ECB supervision, and robust collaboration within these teams will obviously be of the essence. All other banks—including all cooperative banks and most savings banks—will remain under the domestic supervisors’ purview. In that regard, staff echoed several recommendations made in the recent FSB peer review, in particular those pertaining to the further enhancement of the frameworks for prompt and comprehensive risk identification as well as timely and effective intervention. Banks’ capital building efforts should continue while the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment is in progress. The Assessment is an important milestone for the German banking system. Twenty percent of the banks included in the exercise are German. About 1600 auditors are reviewing portfolios representing over 50 percent of these banks’ risk-weighted assets, including legacy exposures to foreign commercial real estate, the euro area periphery, shipping, and securitizations. These exposures can be hard to value and reach multiples of Common Equity Tier 1 capital in a few banks already under restructuring. In general, however, asset quality is better than European peers’ (for additional details see Chapter IX, Selected Issues). Assessed banks and supervisors are in discussions about their capital plans, and two of the largest privately owned banks have recently been or are in the process of raising fresh equity to bring their capital buffers closer to those of peers. Page 29 The authorities were focused on the implementation of recently agreed financial sector reforms. When transposing the European directive on bank recovery and resolution later this year, they intended to make the bail-in tool immediately available (i.e., not wait until January 1, 2016 as allowed under the directive). They did not expect bail-in to be a possible source of contagion to the German insurance sector as insurers’ exposures to banks are well diversified and 70 percent of these exposures are collateralized. While recognizing that further progress toward addressing the too-big-to-fail problem would be desirable, they planned to advance at the same pace as regional and global initiatives. They supported the European approach according to which the leverage ratio would be introduced as a complement to risk-based capital ratios in line with international agreements. They thought that reporting obligations for institutions would allow appropriate review and calibration with a view to migrating to a binding measure in 2018, and that the final decision should take into account the impact of the leverage ratio on different types of business models. Eventually, they believed the banking union would need to be put on a stronger legal footing. Their view was that current EU treaties were not drafted with the objective of a banking union in mind and therefore did not provide a sufficient legal basis for a genuine European supervisory or resolution authority. In particular, they argued that there was insufficient separation between monetary policy and banking supervision under the current framework. While work on the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment was still ongoing, the authorities were confident German banks were generally well positioned for the exercise. They noted the continuous and significant improvement in banks’ capital ratios over the past several years, but agreed that shipping loans could be a source of further impairments. Should a capital shortfall be identified in a bank and should the public sector be the only available source of fresh capital, they would support recapitalization only for banks with a viable business model and only after burden- sharing with junior bondholders as required by the EU state aid law. They conceived of ESM involvement in the form of a loan to a member state for recapitalization purposes. Page 30