The more favorable external environment should support the growth momentum . The robust private consumption dynamics of the past three quarters is projected to persist with the help of lower energy prices and strong real wage growth. The euro depreciation and lower real interest rate (as QE pushes up inflation expectations) should buttress exports as well as the long-awaited recovery in machinery and equipment investment. Although corporate credit demand is expected to remain muted in a context of cash-rich corporate balance sheets and increasing profit margins for exporters, QE-induced lower real interest rates should translate into somewhat firmer credit growth. The fiscal stance should remain slightly expansionary in 2016 (see below). Employment growth should slow down as the adverse effect of the lower statutory retirement age for some categories of workers on labor force participation kicks in fully and the already low unemployment rate becomes harder to reduce further. All in all, GDP is expected to grow by 1.6 percent this year and 1.7 percent next year. The output gap should close this year and remain positive but small in the medium term. Together with a better anchoring of expectations because of QE (and despite only limited expected pass through from the exchange rate depreciation and the introduction of the minimum wage) this positive output gap should gradually push up core and headline inflation. Although German inflation is expected to exceed that in the rest of the euro area throughout the forecast horizon, it is not projected to rise above the ECB price stability objective. Fiscal balances are set to remain comfortably within the boundaries of the fiscal rules For the remainder of the legislature (2015–17) and beyond, budget plans are centered on a zero balance at the federal level with small surpluses for the general government, backed by buoyant revenue forecasts. Staff expects larger surpluses than the authorities, mostly on account of lower projected interest payments (Table 2), enough to bring public debt below 60 percent of GDP by 2020. Although the structural fiscal balance is expected to decline by 0.6 percent of GDP through 2015–17, debt sustainability analysis shows that the medium-term position is well anchored by the fiscal rules (see Appendix IV). The current account surplus is projected to grow further in 2015 and decline only moderately in the medium term. The oil and gas trade balance is expected to continue to improve as energy prices remain lower on average than in 2014. In addition, the real exchange rate depreciation (of 6 percent in effective terms relative to 2014) will also put upward pressure on the external balance. As a result, the surplus is expected to exceed 8 percent of GDP, a record high, and decline gradually to 6.7 percent in 2020, as the terms of trade windfall is gradually spent, private investment recovers modestly, and stronger wage growth relative to euro area trading partners contributes to realign competitiveness. Risks to the baseline are more balanced than a year ago, but important sources of uncertainty remain. There is upside risk to the outlook if the stimulus from monetary policy and oil prices that is in the pipeline proves more effective than expected. On the downside, a number of external risks could affect Germany, with possible impact ranging from low to moderate (see Appendix I): Page 18 A protracted period of slower growth in key advanced and emerging economies or a deeper- than-expected slowdown in China would dampen economic activity in Germany. Unusually for a large economy, Germany is very open, with an exports-to-GDP ratio over 45 percent, and thus highly sensitive to external demand fluctuations. While the geographic structure of exports is well diversified, a simultaneous shock to major emerging economies would have a sizable impact on Germany (Box 1). Renewed stress in the euro area, triggered by policy uncertainty, faltering reforms, or political unrest in some countries might erode confidence and postpone once again the projected investment recovery. Further monetary stimulus at the euro area level would be forthcoming in this scenario, but it may need to be reinforced by demand-support measures in Germany. Uncertainty about the persistence of the oil supply shock and the underlying price decline could undo part of the recent improvement in consumer and business confidence, both domestically and in key trading partners. This would be a low-impact shock. An escalation of trade sanctions with Russia would hurt Germany because of its heavy dependence (30 percent) on oil and gas imports from that country and might require a reform of the energy strategy. Other direct trade ties and financial exposures are limited. Germany could also experience safe haven inflows if tensions rise. The authorities agreed with staff that the moderate expansion of the German economy is likely to continue. They expressed confidence in a consumption-led upswing, amid lower energy prices as well as solid wage growth underpinned by a tight labor market and closed output gap. While they concurred with staff that inflationary pressures would be muted this year, the Bundesbank underscored that prices were likely to accelerate owing to pass-through from exchange rate depreciation as well as the introduction of the minimum wage and recent wage dynamics more generally, so that inflation would reach close to 2 percent in 2016. The authorities agreed that the current account surplus would decline only gradually. They also concurred that public debt is well- anchored by EU and national fiscal rules, although they foresaw convergence to the 60 percent Stability and Growth Pact objective at a slower pace than in staff’s projections. The authorities saw the risks to the outlook as generally balanced. On the upside, they noted that private investment could turn out stronger than expected and drive a more forceful recovery. On the downside, the authorities saw instability in the euro area as a result of renewed sovereign stress, possibly amplified by relatively low liquidity in some market segments, as the most relevant risk at the moment, though they noted that the system was now much more resilient than in the past. They also pointed out that heightened exchange rate volatility was a source of risk, and was seen as such by many German corporations. Page 19 Box 1. Impact on Germany of Slower Growth in Emerging Markets Growth in emerging markets (EMs) was disappointing in the last two years and there is mounting evidence that a sizable part of the growth slowdown may have been structural (see World Economic Outlook, April 2015). Based on simulations using the Fund’s G20-MOD model, this box analyses the consequences on the German economy of a further slowdown in EMs (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, South Africa, and Turkey). In this scenario, the EM deceleration is due to a permanent decline in the level of total factor productivity (with respect to baseline) that is initially perceived as cyclical. As a result, EM monetary policy is loosened and currencies depreciate. As successive negative growth surprises occur, agents gradually become aware that the slowdown is in fact structural and the monetary loosening is gradually reversed. Germany is among the most affected economies in the euro area under this scenario. Lower growth in EMs (GDP is 3 percent lower than in the baseline at the end of the fourth year) spills over to the global economy, including through a significant negative impact on commodity prices. Among Advanced Economies (AEs), the negative impact is the largest for Japan and the euro area given their trade exposures to EMs and their lack of (conventional) monetary policy space, though lower commodity prices help soften the blow somewhat. The drop in German GDP (-1.5 percent at the trough) is sizable and reflects Germany’s large exposure to EMs. The current account surplus is almost unaffected (-0.4 pp of GDP) as domestic demand and imports also drop. Lower exports translate into lower labor demand, higher unemployment, lower wages, lower inflation, and higher real interest rates (given the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates), which combined with lower growth prospects, income and wealth lead to a permanent decline in investment and consumption compared with the baseline. Moreover, looser monetary policy in EMs initially depreciates their currencies against the euro, which further impacts Germany’s competitiveness and weighs on exports. As EMs’ central banks gradually realize that the slowdown is structural, they start normalizing policy thereby progressively correcting domestic and external imbalances. Germany's real exchange rate converges back to the baseline as does its current account, but the negative impact on consumption, investment and real GDP of the slowdown in EMs is much more persistent. Emerging Markets Real GDP level (% deviation) Current account (%pt of GDP deviation) Real competitiveness index (%deviation; +=appreciation) Real GDP level (% deviation) Current account (%pt of GDP deviation) Real consumption (% deviation) Real investment (% deviation) Page 20