The projected sharp decline of the working age population after 2020 calls for measures to boost labor supply and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of aging on potential output . In recent years, immigration flows more than offset the natural decline in the working age population. In the medium-term, however, some of the relevant push factors behind immigration (the EU enlargement to the East, severe recessions in several other euro area countries, ARGBOLBRACANCHLCOLCRI ECU MEXPANPRYPERUSAURYVENAUSCHN HKG INDIDNJPNMYSNZLPHLSGPKORLKATWNTHAVNMAUTBELCZEDNKFINFRADEU HUN IRLISRITANLDNORPOLPRTROMRUSSVKZAFESPSWECHETUR ARE GBR nn ee ( bp ) IP addresses to total population, ratio Internet Access and Connection Speed Sources: Akamai's State of the Internet 2015Q4 report and IMF staff calculations. Page 19 conflicts close to the EU borders) may not persist. In addition, the population is aging rapidly also in many countries of origin in Eastern and Southern Europe. As net immigration flows normalize over the medium-term, the working age population will resume shrinking and will do so at an increasing rate. This calls for measures to boost the labor supply along three main axes: successfully integrating the current wave of refugees into the labor market, incentivizing greater full-time female labor force participation, and extending working lives further. Some, though not all, of these reforms entail a small fiscal cost. If they were to be implemented in the short run, when the space available under the fiscal rules is limited and should be used primarily to increase investment, the cost could be financed by reprioritizing spending within the budget. In the medium run, on the other hand, there is space to accommodate these costs without breaching the fiscal rules. Integrating the refugees and other immigrants into the labor market Germany’s willingness to accept a large number of refugees has provided an important global public good, and the challenge going forward will be to integrate into the labor market the refugees who stay. While the strong current labor market situation is supportive, in the past immigrants have faced sizable obstacles, resulting in significantly lower labor force participation, higher unemployment, and lower wages than native workers with similar characteristics. These gaps narrow with the length of their presence in Germany, but never fully disappear. More recent cohorts and previous immigrants from the same countries of origin as the current wave of refugees typically had worse labor market outcomes than other immigrants. Though many measures have been taken and more are underway, further policy action should be considered to promote a successful labor market integration of refugees . Remaining restrictions on work during asylum procedures could be further lowered (Box 3). In parallel, active labor market policies (such as temporary wage subsidies) that have proven successful in the past in other countries should be vigorously used; the temporary exemption from the minimum wage currently available to long-term unemployed could be extended to refugees, and the decision on how much to raise the minimum wage next year should take into account the challenge of integrating them. Lowering the effective taxation of labor income at the low end of the income scale may also help moving many refugees and other low-skill workers from social assistance to work. The cost of these policies is likely to be small, particularly when considering the associated savings from reduced use of social assistance. Policies should also ensure that refugees access higher-quality jobs and job training In this respect, the traditional, formal approach to job qualifications acquisition and recognition may not work well for refugees (or other immigrants), who are often older than typical trainees, may have skills learned informally, and may not be able to afford lengthy schooling periods with low earnings (the typical vocational training duration is three years). Initiatives to make informal skill recognition See “Emigration and its Economic Impact in Eastern Europe,” forthcoming IMF Staff Discussion Note. See Beyer, R. (2016), “The Labor Market Performance of Immigrants in Germany”, IMF WP 16/6, and Aiyar et al., “The Refugee Surge in Europe: Economic Challenges”, SDN 16/02. Page 20 possible and design more flexible forms of vocational training, with language training and a stronger on-the-job component relative to standard formal schooling, should be given priority. While all these initiatives may require some additional fiscal outlays in the short-term, they would have a potentially large payoff down the road through better employment prospects and less reliance on social welfare. They may also help successfully absorb future non-refugee immigrants. Incentivizing more active female labor force participation More active participation of women in the labor market would not only increase labor supply but also enhance productivity. While female labor force participation is relatively high in Germany, close to half of employed women work only part time. Thus, women work on average 30.5 hours per week, 9 hours less than men do. Limiting constraints to full-time work by women would boost labor supply. It would also strengthen incentives for on-the-job training provision and make firms more likely to have women in senior management positions, which can improve corporate profitability. To this end, the supply of full time schooling services should be expanded further. Distortions that increase the marginal tax burden for secondary earners should also be reduced, specifically by moving towards a system in which health insurance contributions depend on the number of household members covered, with targeted support for poorer households. Greater provision of childcare services and after-school programs would have the further benefit of facilitating the social integration of immigrant children. Also in this case, fiscal resources deployed now—about ¼ percent of GDP if, for example, Germany were to raise spending in this area to the OECD average—would have potentially important medium-term payoffs through higher potential GDP. Extending working lives Germany’s unfavorable demographic trends are weighing on the outlook. A recent government report estimates that age-related government spending is set to rise between 2 and 4½ percentage points of GDP by 2040 under current policies. Without further reforms, already-high social security contributions would have to rise further or already-declining replacement rates would have to fall further. Past reforms will push the statutory retirement age from the current 65 years to 67 years by 2030 (when pension outlays are expected to accelerate), but no further increases are foreseen, and some workers can still retire about two years earlier than other workers. Although participation rates in the 55–64 age group is high in Germany compared to other OECD countries, the opposite is true for those older than 64. While conditions to extend employment contracts beyond the statutory retirement age have been relaxed, there is a loss of pension wealth for those who remain employed. See Christiansen and others (2016), “Unlocking Female Employment Potential in Europe: Drivers and Benefits”, IMF Departmental Paper, and “Women in the Labor Market and the Demographic Challenge”, Selected Issues Paper for the 2015 Article IV Consultation. “Fourth Report on the Sustainability of Public Finances” (2016), German Federal Ministry of Finance. Page 21 Extending working lives can bring the double dividend of increasing old-age incomes while improving the fiscal outlook. To guard against the risk of steep declines in pension benefits or increases in contribution rates—whether mandatory or voluntary—in the long term, retirement ages could be indexed to life expectancy. Furthermore, the choice to remain in the labor force beyond the pensionable age could be made actuarially neutral, allowing individuals to optimize the timing of retirement. Both policies would aim at encouraging longer working lives on average, increasing retirement incomes, while also shoring up long-term government finances. A reform in this direction would result in permanently lower household savings and current account surplus, thus helping external rebalancing. Outward spillovers Policies to boost labor supply would entail positive―though small―outward spillovers, notably to the euro area. The positive response would be commensurate to the domestic demand effect of each policy and determined by the importance of trade linkages. As all three policies permanently boost domestic consumption and investment, German imports would increase, particularly in the short-run, when domestic production has not fully adjusted yet but demand rises because future gains are anticipated. Short-term demand spillovers would be more pronounced if the fiscal costs entailed by some of the reforms are deficit-financed rather than budget-neutral. For the rest of the euro area, the short-term net trade spillover from either extended childcare provision or training of refugees is estimated at roughly 5 percent of the impact on Germany’s real GDP. For the prospective increase in retirement ages, the spillover effect rises to 7.5–10 percent. Spillovers to other regions would also be positive but smaller. Joint implementation of these policies together with a stronger public investment effort would magnify the beneficial spillover effects. The authorities broadly agreed that the reforms proposed by staff would be beneficial. On refugees, the authorities stressed the importance of qualification and training to prevent the newcomers from being trapped in low-skill and marginal employment. Initiatives to make informal skill recognition possible and design more flexible forms of vocational training are being considered but will take some time to develop. They also emphasized that the high professional standards typical of the German skilled craft sector should be safeguarded. Finally, they explained that no further exemptions to the minimum wage were being contemplated. The authorities agreed that broadening opportunities for women to work full time is a priority, and highlighted the ongoing effort to expand the provision of childcare, whereas changes in tax policies were seen as more politically difficult to implement. They welcomed staff’s call for facilitating longer working lives to better provide for retirement income, but also saw promise in planned initiatives to strengthen second pillar (occupational) pensions—by broadening coverage to more categories of workers—as well as to encourage work beyond the statutory retirement age. See “Macroeconomic Effects of Policies to Expand the Labor Supply in Germany”, Selected Issues Paper. Page 22