The external position is substantially stronger than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desired global policy settings: The current account (CA) surplus was 7½ percent of GDP in 2013, corresponding to an estimated cyclically adjusted surplus of around 8¼ percent of GDP, reflecting Germany’s more advanced cyclical position relative to the rest of the world. A model-based analysis indicates a norm of 2½ percent of GDP for the cyclically adjusted CA balance. The empirical model explains Germany’s CA fairly well until 2000. But it only explains less than a sixth of the subsequent rise in the CA. Also, there are not obvious policy gaps that explain the regression residual. Indeed, part of the residual also likely reflects structural determinants not fully captured by the EBA model, such as limited nominal exchange rate flexibility after the euro area was created and non-linear effects of very rapid population aging. Reflecting these factors, staff assesses the norm at 2¼–5¼ percent of GDP. Thus, the cyclically adjusted CA is 3–6 percent of GDP stronger than that implied by fundamentals and desirable policies Turning to the real effective exchange rate (REER), model-based estimates have an unusually poor fit for Germany, pointing to a highly implausible 11 percent over valuation in 2013. Deviations from historical averages using alternative price/cost metrics (CPI, GDP deflator, total sales deflator, or ULC) or sample periods suggest a REER under valuation of 0 to 10 percent. However, based on an estimate of Germany’s trade elasticity, the CA gap implies a more sizable misalignment of 9–18 percent. All in all, staff’s assessment is of a REER undervaluation of 5–15 percent The current account gap is expected to narrow gradually, but additional policies to foster more rapid rebalancing in the euro area are needed . In the current baseline forecast, the current account surplus is expected to decline gradually to some 5¾ percent of GDP in 2019 reflecting gradual rebalancing of relative labor costs within the euro area, a recovery of investment in Germany, and a partial return of corporate savings to more normal levels. Thus, about half of the gap (some ½–3½ percentage points of GDP) is expected to persist in the medium term. With negative output gaps, no fiscal space, and liquidity traps in many of its main trading partners, as the largest European economy, Germany could play a stronger role to help regional rebalancing. This can be achieved through policies that durably increase Germany’s output while also generating positive outward demand spillovers to the region and reducing the current account surplus. Page 22 Stronger public investment, particularly in the aging transport infrastructure, would address identified needs, bolster domestic demand, and foster potential growth . Although Germany is not widely seen as a country with deficient public infrastructure, the reality is that this has been a neglected area for some time. Public investment in Germany is the second lowest in the OECD, while net public investment has been negative since 2003. Shortcomings in infrastructure may be hurting the productivity of private capital and may be discouraging private investment. While the government’s decision to boost spending in this area is welcome, the amount envisaged (€5 billion over four years, or about 0.2 percent of 2013 GDP) is small relative to estimated needs. Independent studies place the investment needs in transport alone at 0.2–0.4 percent of GDP per year, particularly owing to aging bridges and roadways. Schools and kindergartens, particularly at the municipal level, represent other examples of infrastructure backlogs. Therefore, to take advantage of currently low interest rates and foster private investment, public investment spending should be stepped up more significantly. Germany has the fiscal space to finance an increase in public investment of some 0.5 percent of GDP per year over four years, which would be associated with appreciable positive regional spillovers With the fiscal accounts projected to register a structural surplus of 0.2–0.5 percent of GDP at the general government level and of 0.1 percent at the federal government level over 2015–18, the proposed additional investment spending could be phased out so as to comply with the Medium-Term Objective of the Fiscal Compact (0.5 structural deficit for the general government) and the domestic debt brake rule (0.35 structural deficit for the federal government beginning in 2016). Such an investment program would yield a persistent increase in GDP of ¾ percent and temporarily reduce the current account surplus by 0.4 percentage points of GDP (see Chapter III, Selected Issues). The policy would also stimulate growth in the region, with peak effects on GDP in Greece, Germany: Net Public investment (Percent of net domestic product) Source:Haver Analytics. Page 23 Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain (the GIIPS) and other euro area (OEA) countries of 0.3 and 0.4 percent respectively, in the likely case that monetary policy remained accommodative. Within this group of countries, the size of the effect varies depending on the strength of the trade linkages with Germany, implying larger spillovers to Italy for example. The increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio in Germany would be minimal given the growth offset. Such a substantial increase in public investment would be challenging but feasible . It would be challenging because of its sheer size (½ percent of GDP is large compared with current total public investment of 1.6 percent of GDP) and because of the inevitable politics of ensuring that only the most economically sensible projects are implemented. But it would still be feasible as many of the needs have already been identified by expert studies. More importantly, a significant portion of the program would involve maintenance and refurbishing of existing infrastructure, which implies less complex project selection and execution than new projects. Involving the private sector through public-private partnerships may be appropriate in some circumstances. As public infrastructure investment is partly the responsibility of municipalities, some of which have tight budget constraints, avenues to channel resources to sub-national entities would need to be pursued. Reforms in services sector regulation could boost productivity and growth and lead to a reduction in the current account surplus and modest spillovers. Notwithstanding continuous improvement in economy-wide product market regulation over the past fifteen years, there is still scope for reducing barriers to competition in several areas of the services sector (Chapter IV, Selected Issues). Professional services remain overregulated, and greater openness could be instilled in the areas of exclusive rights, compulsory chamber membership, and regulation on prices and fees. While barriers to competition are generally low in network industries, efficiency gains in rail transportation and postal services could be achieved by reinforcing the regulator’s powers to stop discrimination against the incumbent operators’ competitors, as documented in recent reports by the Monopolies Commission. In the retail sector, the involvement of professional bodies in certain licensing decisions may restrict competition, as may regulation restricting large outlets. In all these sectors, more competition may reduce price mark-ups and/or increase productivity. As an illustrative example, reforms that reduced price mark-ups in nontradable private sector services by a cumulative 2 percentage points over 4 years would raise average growth over a four-year period by 0.1 percent, and reduce the current account surplus by 0.2 percentage point of GDP. Similar results would be Page 24 obtained if instead of a reduction in mark-ups, more competition boosted nontradable-sector productivity by 0.1 percent per year. A reduction in uncertainty about energy costs would also stimulate private investment, help external rebalancing, and generate positive spillovers. Surveys indicate that uncertainty about energy costs and the overall energy policy framework is discouraging investment. In addition, while investment needed to upgrade the energy production, storage, and transmission infrastructure is estimated at 1-1½ percent of GDP per year until 2020, several factors have slowed the pace of transmission infrastructure expansion and the implementation of related projects. An earlier resolution of uncertainty associated with energy policy could boost private sector investment within and outside the energy sector, thereby stimulating economic activity domestically and abroad. An illustrative simulation indicates that additional private investment of 0.5 percent of GDP over four years could raise GDP by 0.5 percentage point, lower the current account balance by 0.3 percent of GDP, and yield positive regional spillovers. The authorities acknowledged that the current account surplus was high . However, they emphasized that it did not reflect policy distortions and that rebalancing within the euro area was under way and expected to continue. In the context of the external sector assessment, they welcomed the approach of indicating ranges rather than point estimates for the gaps to signal a degree of uncertainty in the evaluation. The authorities agreed that the full implications of certain factors such as rapid population aging were difficult to capture in conventional empirical models. They also noted that the cyclically adjusted current account may be biased upward because some of Germany’s trading partners may have suffered more permanent output losses than those built in the staff’s analysis. The authorities concurred that the REER was undervalued, but viewed the degree of misalignment as closer to the lower half of the range presented by staff. The authorities agreed that higher public and private investment would be welcome and lower the current account surplus . While noting that higher investment would be desirable as it would durably raise output in Germany over the medium term, they expressed some skepticism over the need for demand stimulus in the rest of the euro area, and saw structural reforms as the main priority. They also emphasized that any additional public investment should not lead to a Page 25 higher public deficit, as buffers are needed to be preserved under the fiscal rule. They pointed to public-private partnerships as possible avenues to boost infrastructure spending. The authorities were open to further reforms in parts of the services sector but did not fully share staff’s diagnostic and emphasized the progress already achieved. They saw no need for reform in postal services and had no plans to sell the government’s remaining participation in the historically dominant operator. While recognizing that the market share of entrants in railways services was low, they noted that Germany was doing better than most European peers in that respect and that long-distance bus transportation services had been liberalized last year. They saw scope to strengthen the role of the federal regulator, but acknowledged that no new law to that effect was being prepared. In the area of retail, they argued that constraints on the development of large outlets reflected urban planning and environmental considerations. They agreed that certain dimensions of the regulation of professional services such as pricing could be revisited but expressed a preference for doing so in a broader European context. The authorities also saw the macroeconomic effects, particularly those on the current account, of further reforms in the services sector as likely to be smaller than suggested by staff. The authorities stated that the transformation of Germany’s energy system was making headway and reforms were on the way. They noted the progress made thus far, including the rising share of renewables in electricity consumption and lower carbon emissions relative to 1990 levels, and stressed that the strategy led to the development of a renewable energy sector and job creation. They explained that a recent reform proposal approved by the cabinet would maintain existing targets but help contain costs for users by (i) moderating growth in new RE generation capacity thereby improving cost-efficiency by avoiding over-subsidization, and (ii) gradually transitioning to more market-oriented RE financial support mechanisms. They also noted that, while some modifications are likely, the revised European Commission state aid guidelines would allow for continued surcharge reductions (exemptions) for large energy users competing internationally at least until 2020, thus helping to diminish an element of uncertainty regarding the energy sector regulatory framework. The authorities did acknowledge that there may be residual uncertainty about the exemption regime in the long run, and that it was not yet clear how the lack of profitability of conventional power producers would be addressed, or how grid expansion could be expedited amid strong opposition of affected parties, especially in some regions.