The government stepped up initiatives to boost public investment, although there is scope for more ambitious action. Last year, the Fund called for a 2 percent increase in investment in infrastructure over four years to address needs identified by expert studies. The federal government recently announced plans to raise public investment. These include 0.1 percent of GDP allocated to a new infrastructure fund for financially weaker municipalities in 2015 (plus a new allocation of about ½ this year’s size for 2017) as well as new spending mostly in public transportation, the digital infrastructure, and energy efficiency improvements totaling 0.4 percent of GDP over 2016–18. All in all, the 2015 German Stability Program foresees the general government public capital spending to increase on average by 4.6 percent per year during 2015–19, against an average growth rate of 1.7 percent in 2011–14, and going from 2.2 percent of GDP in 2014 to 2.3 percent of GDP in 2019. A further boost to public investment is expected to come from financial relief granted to municipalities, although this effect cannot be quantified yet. Additional increments in infrastructure spending outside the general government (for instance, by public enterprises or private-public partnerships) may also be forthcoming. Overall, however, the new plans appear to be well short of last year’s Fund advice. Delivering on the reminder of the proposed increase would be desirable. If fully financed through the budget, and implemented during the current legislature, such a program would utilize most of the fiscal space available under the MTO, bringing the general government structural balance down to -0.3 percent of GDP by 2017 (Figure 4). The medium-term fiscal position, however, would remain well anchored. The additional investment expenditure would also complement ongoing centralized investment initiatives at the European level, such as the European Fund for Strategic Investment (Juncker Plan). To facilitate ratcheting up public investment, new initiatives to improve the planning process at the local level and facilitate public private partnerships (PPPs) would be useful . A third of public investment is executed at the municipal level. Stretched public finances in some regions have constrained investment budgets in the past and will likely continue to do so in the medium term, as regions need to reach zero structural balance by 2020. In addition, at the federal and general government level mounting aging costs and a normalization of real interest rates are likely to make meeting the fiscal rules in the future more challenging than at present, possibly putting renewed pressure on public investment budgets. Hence, alternative financing mechanisms such as PPPs may be useful to boost public investment now and help ensure adequate investment levels in the future. However, as local authorities may have limited expertise to contract with the private sector, and the planning process for infrastructure is seen as fragmented and less efficient than at the federal level, the creation of a coordinating agency could be particularly beneficial (see Selected Issues). Such an agency would advise on contract design, help improve information transparency, and inform the public debate on project selection by highlighting fiscal risks and cross-project externalities. In addition, sector-specific infrastructure companies, as proposed by the Page 26 Expert Commission on “Increasing Investment in Germany,” would be helpful as long as the associated fiscal risks are appropriately managed, either by a transfer of project risks to the private sector or by including the companies in the general government perimeter. The authorities noted that public investment had been stepped up substantially by the government and underlined the need to maintain buffers under the fiscal rule. The Ministry of Finance viewed the new initiatives of the current government as a substantial investment expansion package, and did not see merit in further increases also in light of other priorities, such as income tax relief after years of “bracket creep.” It also stressed the need to maintain some margins under the fiscal rules in case of adverse budgetary surprises and the benefit of having a budgetary anchor, such as a balanced federal budget, which can be easily explained to the public. The Ministry agreed that a coordinating agency could help mobilize investment at the local level, but pointed out that creating such an agency would take time (hence the importance of support from federal transfers in the short run), and it may prove challenging given the German federal framework.