Full use of the room available under the fiscal rules, including from possible revenue overperformance, to finance additional public investment and growth-friendly structural reforms would be appropriate. Observance of the fiscal rules has served Germany well, and is important especially given the rise in social spending. Nevertheless, in light of the need to fund more public investment and other growth-enhancing fiscal policies (see below), as well as the benign DSA results, a looser fiscal position (closer to the MTO) than currently envisaged through 2016–21 would be appropriate. This would also modestly reduce the current account gap. The additional spending would result in a larger output gap, but this effect would be temporary and limited, because potential output would also increase as the growth effects of the initiatives are realized. In 2016–17, when the policy space is narrower (see Figure 4), priority should be given to public investment, while the other reforms that need fiscal resources could be financed through reallocation within the budget. To avoid continued overperformance in the future, an assessment of structural changes in macroeconomic variables underlying revenue projections may be warranted, and forming contingency plans for the use of unexpected windfalls would be beneficial. See Annex IV for a summary of the Authorities’ response to the policy recommendations made in the 2015 Article IV Staff Report. Social benefits Other primary spending General Government Spending Sources:FederalStatistical Office, Ministry of Finance, and IMF staff calculations and projections. Page 17 A more ambitious public investment program is needed. Based on expert studies, in 2014 staff called for an increase in public investment of 2 percent of GDP over four years concentrated mainly in transport infrastructure— noting also that this policy would give rise to meaningful positive demand spillovers to the rest of the euro area. Since then, the authorities have undertaken to step up public investment by a cumulative 0.7 percent of GDP over 2016–18. In 2015, gross public investment was up by 5.3 percent but net public investment remained negative. The newly-released 15-year plan for transportation infrastructure investment points to a sizable increase in investment over 2016–30 relative to the previous plan adopted in 2003 (from EUR 10 billion to EUR 17 billion per year). However, the plan is not binding and budget appropriations will be decided on a rolling basis. The public investment backlog should be addressed more vigorously already this year and next, particularly if revenue keeps overperforming. Reprioritizing within the budget envelope could also open space for more infrastructure investment in the coming years. Removing administrative and regulatory constraints to public investment by municipalities should be a high priority and recent steps in this direction are encouraging While gross public investment rose in nominal terms at the federal and regional level, it fell in municipalities, where the needs are highest. Out of a EUR 3.5 billion Municipal Investment Fund constituted by the federal government in mid-2015 to provide financial support to local governments, less than EUR ½ billion have been used so far. Infrastructure planning capacity is reported to be limited in some localities, while addressing the refugee surge has also drained administrative resources; strict regulation at the national and European level is an additional obstacle. To address the situation, and in line with past staff recommendations, the government is considering reforms to make Germany’s PPP advisory agency Partnership Deutschland more effective for municipalities, including by changing its ownership structure from private to public and broadening its mandate to also cover infrastructure programs financed through normal procurement. Furthermore, the federal government is discussing with the Länder the creation of a federal transportation agency, which would be in charge of the planning, construction, and maintenance of federal highways and would be financed through user fees. The specialized agency would help limit implementation delays and decouple transport infrastructure investment from the budgetary cycle. For model simulations of the macroeconomic effects of public infrastructure investment in Germany, see “Germany: Selected Issues”, IMF Country Report 14/217, Chapter III. This excludes planned increases for the Ministry of Defense (0.3 percent of GDP through 2020), which also include investment expenditures. Consumption of fixed capital Gross fixed capital formation Net fixed capital formation Public Gross and Net Fixed Capital Formation (Percent of GDP)Sources: Destatis and IMF staff calculations. Page 18 Recent initiatives to facilitate private investment in the digital infrastructure are welcome and could be strengthened further. Recent data indicate that Germany is lagging behind most peers in terms of average internet connection speed and average peak connection speed. The government will provide grants totaling EUR 2.6 billion over 2016–18 to ensure fast broadband expansion in rural areas where a market-based expansion would be unprofitable. In parallel, the government auctioned frequency bands to mobile telecommunications providers in mid-2015. Complementary measures to promote venture capital (including in the context of the EC’s Investment Plan for Europe) and e-procurement were recently taken. However, based on market research on medium-term bandwidth needs, the 2015 Expert Commission to Strengthen Investment in Germany argued that the government should be more ambitious in its strategy and promote a greater rollout of fiber cable now rather than later. The Ministry of Finance stressed its commitment to a balanced federal budget as important to preserving fiscal discipline, and highlighted capacity and regulatory constraints to further expand public investment. The commitment to the “black zero” at the federal level was seen as an important cornerstone of a sound fiscal policy, especially in light of strong and growing pressures from aging-related spending. Also, it was noted that fiscal policy was already expansionary given that the German economy was in a situation of normal capacity utilization. On public investment, the Ministry of Finance considered the current level of public investment as adequate at the federal level. As to the local level, administrative backlogs and regulatory restrictions, including European ones, were highlighted. Reducing the overall burden on labor income through lower taxes and contributions, particularly for the low-to-medium income brackets, was seen as a useful measure to boost output. On digitization and investment in digital infrastructure, the Ministry of Economic Affairs highlighted its recently released new Digital Strategy 2025 as a possible framework for bolder, future initiatives, including the creation of a gigabit optical fiber network.