To counter the adverse effect of population aging on labor supply, stronger policies to spur female labor force participation are needed. Although female labor force participation is relatively high in Germany (above 70 percent), about half of working women work part time (in part because women are the main holders of so-called mini-jobs), a pattern which is often attributed to an insufficient supply of good quality child care services and afterschool programs, as well as disincentives from the tax-benefit system (see Selected Issues). Closing this gap could help stem the projected decline in the labor force over the coming decades. Staff estimates that if the difference in average hours worked by men and women were fully closed, potential output would increase by as much as 7.5 percent. The federal government has recognized this as a priority and increased investment in the expansion of child care facilities by 0.1 percent of GDP in total over the last three years. However, faster progress in this area, for instance by making a comparable investment in the expansion of after school programs, is essential to broaden opportunities for women in the labor market. This would also help reduce poverty among single mothers. In addition, reforms to the tax-benefit system aimed at encouraging full-time work would also be beneficial. These could include lowering the tax wedge for secondary earners by moving closer to a system of individual taxation, reducing differences in the health- insurance premiums for working and non-working spouses, and targeting cash support for non- working parents to poorer households. Addressing both types of constraint simultaneously should allow for a more effective response of female labor supply. The authorities stressed progress under way on female labor force participation. They pointed out that female labor force participation in Germany is one of the highest among advanced economies, while the prevalence of part-time work partly reflects social preferences. Although they agreed that fiscal disincentives for secondary earners were high—in particular free health care coverage of spouses not working or working in a mini-job—they noted that the absence of widespread provision of high quality child care and afterschool programs was likely to be a more important constraint to full-time employment. In that context, they highlighted progress made in these areas over recent years, notably increased child care supply. Labor force participation rateAverage number of weekly hours workedSingle adult, with childrenAdult living in couple, with childrenAdult living in couple, without childrenSingle adult, without children Men WomenShare of Part-TimeEmployment (Percent) SelectedLabor Force Indicators by Gender, 2014 Source:Eurostat. Page 29