The new government’s economic policy package includes increases in pension benefits and other spending priorities and a new national minimum wage . The coalition treaty envisages a balanced federal budget in 2015 and no new general taxes. However, planned declines in social security contribution rates will be foregone and long-term care contribution rates will be raised slightly. New spending will consist of new pension benefits and some additional spending by the federal government. The latter, totaling 0.2 percent of GDP per year (€23 billion over 2014–17), will go to infrastructure, education, childcare, and other priorities, and will be financed by eliminating the federal government surpluses that would have been achieved without the new measures. This additional spending will still leave the federal government with a margin of about 0.5 percent of GDP per year within the debt brake rule (which requires the federal structural deficit not to exceed 0.35 of GDP beginning in 2016), while the debt Past IMF policy recommendations and related authorities’ responses are summarized in Annex I. Page 19 stock will remain on a declining path. In addition, there is a package of measures on pensions (0.3 percent of GDP per year), including higher benefits for mothers of children born before 1992 and more generous early retirement benefits for workers with long contribution periods. This package will be financed by additional subsidies from the federal government as well as by foregoing the reduction in social security contributions, which would have been required in light of the surpluses accumulated in previous years. Finally, a new national minimum-wage of €8.50 per hour will be introduced starting in 2015 and will complement the current system of negotiated sector minima. While additional spending on child care facilities and education is welcome, the measures on pensions are a partial roll-back of previous reforms. The higher pension benefits for mothers with children born before 1992 is particularly costly and does not specifically target lower-income pensioners. Measures to facilitate early retirement for workers of certain cohorts with long contribution periods will likely reduce older workers’ labor market participation and may add to skills shortages in some sectors. As the social security funds need to be financially balanced, the additional spending down the road will likely require an increase in the already high social contribution rates, reduced benefits for other pensioners, or subsidies from general tax resources, some of which have already materialized. Given the high uncertainty in estimates on the take-up of the new benefit, periodic reviews of fiscal costs and adverse impact on labor participation rates are highly recommended. Page 20 The new nationwide minimum wage will help reduce growing wage inequality, but it risks exacerbating unemployment in some regions . The coalition government is introducing a new national minimum wage as a reaction to growing wage and income inequality and the expanding ranks of the “working poor.” A draft law now in Parliament sets the minimum wage at €8.50 per hour, effective in 2015 with certain exemptions and transitional arrangements. The proposed minimum wage is likely to be binding for some 10 percent of workers in the country, but for 15-20 percent of workers in some federal states mostly in the East where unemployment rates are already relatively high. While the employment effects of changes in minimum wage regulation are notoriously difficult to predict, sizable adverse effects in such federal states and among the low skilled could materialize (see Chapter II, Selected Issues). Decisions on the future level of the minimum wage should take the employment effects into account. The current draft law envisages that future adjustments of minimum wage will be decided by the government following the recommendation of a commission comprising of representatives from the employers’ organizations and trade unions (in equal numbers), a chair nominated jointly by both organizations, and two non-voting academic advisors. Staff expressed concern that in its planned configuration the commission may not sufficiently represent the interest of the unemployed or sectors with low trade union representation, such as many low-wage sectors that will be most affected by the minimum wage. In addition, staff pointed out that the effects of the minimum wage on income redistribution toward the working poor may be limited, as the population of minimum wage earners and that of the working poor overlap only partially. Finally, relevant household surveys might need to be strengthened to ensure that the effects of the policy can be properly assessed over time. The authorities agreed with staff that the new pension measures represented a deviation from the spirit of earlier pension reforms. Past reforms aimed at reducing reliance on first pillar pensions while encouraging private retirement schemes. The authorities also pointed out that the early retirement measures would affect potentially 25 percent of workers entering retirement, but that not all those eligible would choose to retire early. They noted that the expected cost of the new measures was expected to be small relative to total pension outlays, and that there would be periodic reviews of the new policies starting in 2018. The authorities were confident that future revisions to the minimum wage would reflect the public interest. Recognizing data limitations and difficulties of estimation, the authorities were of the view that overall macroeconomic effects of the minimum wage would likely be benign. They also pointed out that the law instructed the new commission to take into account all economic effects (including on employment) of future minimum wage increases, and that the decision ultimately rested with the government and thus would reflect broad public interests. The authorities also noted that there is no plan to review in-work benefits as an alternative redistribution tool, and there will be a review of the minimum wage policy in 2020. Page 21