Germany’s external position is substantially stronger than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The cyclically adjusted current account balance stood at 8.1 percent of GDP in 2014, while staff assesses the norm at 3–5 percent of GDP. Hence, the current account is 3–5 percentage points of GDP stronger than the value implied by fundamentals and desirable policies. While the EBA model attributes 0.6 percentage points of the current account gap to Germany’s fiscal policy gap and 0.9 percentage points to the fiscal policy gaps in other countries, 3 percentage points remain unexplained and may be due to factors not fully captured by the model. The REER is assessed as undervalued by 5–15 percent in 2014. Applying standard trade elasticities to the current account gap yields a REER undervaluation of 7–12 percent, while the EBA REER level model suggests an undervaluation of 16 percent. Developments as of May 2015, notably the lower energy prices and depreciated REER, point to a further strengthening of the external position. Preliminary estimations of EBA REER models based on projections point to a larger undervaluation in 2015 if the current depreciation of the euro is sustained. While the current account surplus is projected to expand in 2015, the current account gap may remain stable because the EBA model norm is projected to increase as well, partly reflecting the evolution of demographic factors. Germany’s current account surplus has been associated with a weaker domestic demand than in typical large and sustained current account surplus episodes in advanced countries . Even though the size and the duration of Germany’s surplus so far are in line with those of a typical episode, the weakness of domestic demand and, especially, the relatively strong fiscal position stand out (see Selected Issues). Real exchange rate or terms of trade movements did not play a major role in Germany’s episode or elsewhere, with the exception of the ULC-based REER which depreciated in the run-up to and early years of the German episode. Exits from large and sustained current account surpluses, where they occurred, were typically accompanied by faster GDP growth—reflecting both higher potential growth and a stronger cyclical position. The authorities broadly agreed with the external sector assessment . While they emphasized the difficulty of identifying the ultimate drivers of the CA surplus, they praised the refinements and expansions of the EBA methodologies, particularly the more sophisticated treatment of demographic factors and the improved methods to explain cross-country differences in REERs. They noted that the methodological improvements reduced the size of the unexplained regression residual for Germany and gave a more reasonable model estimate of the equilibrium REER. They broadly agreed with the ESR assessment, though the Bundesbank saw the REER undervaluation at the lower bound of the staff’s range (around 5 percent for 2014). Page 21