Political uncertainty has been resolved . President Mahama’s National Democratic Congress was reelected in December 2012 by a small margin in the popular vote, but with a sizeable parliamentary majority. Following a challenge by the opposition party, the supreme court confirmed the election results in September, ending a period of political uncertainty. Poverty Ratio Avg. 1990-95 Avg. 2005-2010 Ghana has experienced strong and broadly inclusive growth over the past two decades and its medium-term prospects are supported by rising energy production. The country has outperformed regional peers in reducing poverty and improving social indicators. Robust democratic credentials and a highly-rated business climate (Box 1) have helped attract significant FDI, supporting a strong growth record and graduation to lower-middle income status. Over the medium term, growing energy production will boost exports and carry the potential of easing one of Ghana’s main growth constraints by making the provision of energy more reliable. Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013. The government’s transformation agenda is focused on economic diversification, social inclusion, and macroeconomic stability (Box 2). A key aspect of the strategy is a major shift of public expenditure from current to capital spending, to ensure that Ghana’s still new oil and gas resources are channeled into productive investment, as mandated in the Petroleum Revenue Management Act. However, the emergence of large fiscal and external imbalances since 2012 has created significant challenges. The fiscal (cash) deficit rose to 12 percent of GDP in 2012, fueled by a large public sector wage bill and costly energy subsidies. The fiscal expansion was accompanied by a growing current account deficit that exceeded significant FDI, loans, and portfolio inflows attracted by high interest rates on domestic bonds. As a result, public debt increased significantly and the international reserve position weakened alongside a depreciating currency. A swift return to macroeconomic stability in 2013 was thwarted by weaker domestic and external conditions and ongoing difficulties in controlling public wages: Economic growth slowed from previously high levels (Figure 1). While oil production grew strongly, non-oil growth was affected by disruptions in power supply in the first half of the year and falling gold production related to the drop in world prices. High interest rates and rising import costs due to the depreciation began to depress private sector activity. Staff assumes a growth deceleration to 5½ percent in 2013. Page 6 Box 1. Doing Business in Ghana: Opportunities and Bottlenecks Ghana’s governance and business environment is highly rated and has continued to improve. Ghana’s ratings in the World Bank’s governance and business indicators are significantly above those of its peers and regional benchmarks. Its ratings have continued to improve, accelerating past even the average upper-middle income country in most areas of governance and business climate. b g d E Ease of Doing Business (Percentile rank; 100= best World Bank Governance Indicators (higher = better governance) Control of Corruption Voice and Accountability Political Stability Regulatory Quality Government Effectiveness Rule of Law Avg.Upper middle income Avg.Sub-Saharan Africa However, businesses face a number of important constraints. An analysis by the U.S. and Ghanaian governments, based on firm-level surveys, has identified lack of access to affordable credit and unreliable electricity supply as principal constraints on growth. The same factors were confirmed as key bottlenecks in a recent informal sector survey conducted by the World Bank. Both present a particularly heavy burden for small and medium-sized, labor-intensive enterprises, where growth is most inclusive. Manufacturing Services Biggest obstacle faced by informal sector firms E W d g d E m C k w C Sources of financing day-to-day operations d w O Manufacturing Services m k B d d F v Unlocking Ghana’s strong private sector growth potential will require changes in policies. Ghana’s financial sector is relatively well developed and competitive, but will only provide sufficiently affordable credit to the private sector once the government reduces its borrowing needs. New gas production will help meet growing energy demand, but reliable electricity supply will require significant public and private investments in the power sector, which are currently hampered by concerns over the financial viability of the state-owned energy companies. Further tariff adjustments, along with reductions in commercial and technical losses, will be needed to ensure cost recovery. Page 7 Box 2. Inclusive Growth and Economic Transformation Sectoral Employment and Output Shares Ghana has experienced strong and broadly inclusive growth over the past 20 years, evidenced by significant improvements in poverty and social indicators and its transition to lower middle-income status. Nevertheless, about a quarter of the population still lives below the poverty line, and 6–7 million jobs (more than half of the current labor force) will need to be created in the next two decades, to absorb new entrants into the labor market. Success will hinge on complementing rising production from extractive industries with diversified, private sector-led growth in more labor-intensive sectors. The government’s transformation agenda pursues three broad objectives: Economic diversification. Ghana’s economy, and particularly employment, still relies heavily on agriculture, and some 80 percent of jobs are in the informal sector. At the same time, the concentration of exports in three commodities (gold, cocoa, and oil) makes the economy vulnerable to terms-of-trade shocks. The government’s strategy is to leverage Ghana’s new oil and gas resources toward the creation of a robust manufacturing sector and higher-value agriculture. This will require significant infrastructure investments and removal of the main bottlenecks to growth—inadequate electricity supply and lack of affordable financing (see Box 1). To this end, Ghana’s Petroleum Revenue Management Act dedicates at least 70 percent of benchmark oil revenue to investments in identified priority areas, including road and infrastructure improvements, agricultural modernization, and capacity building (including in the oil and gas sector). growth are widely shared, and build a workforce ready to take on higher-skilled jobs, the government wants to further strengthen Ghana’s social safety net and continue investments in utilities, health, and education. macroeconomic environment and sustainable debt dynamics for the achievement of its growth and development objectives. It is targeting a gradual fiscal consolidation to reduce the twin deficit and lower inflation over the medium term. Social inclusion. To make further advancements in poverty reduction, ensure that the benefits of Macroeconomic stability. The government has emphasized the importance of a stable Manufacturing Other Secondary Sector Tertiary Sector GDP Mining and quarrying Employment Agriculture See 2013 Article IV Staff Report (13/187), Appendix II, for a more detailed discussion. Page 8 Figure 1. Ghana: Real Sector Indicators Economic growth, while still solid, has slowed ... ... as a result of weaker non-oil GDP growth. g h g Quarterly real y-o-y GDP growth Quarterly y-o-y CIEA growth Inflation acelerated in the second half of 2013 fueled by sharp adjustments in utility tariffs, ... Headline Food Non-Food Non oil real GDP growth Real GDP growth ... a depreciating curreny, ... (Increase = depreciation) GHc per U.S.$ GHc per Euro b Oil production In the medium term, growth will benefit from rising oil production. 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 h w g h m H G ... and fuel price adjustments during the year. Import cost, CIF Exrefinery gasoline price Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Source: Ghanaian authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. The CIEA is the Bank of Ghana's composite index of real economic activity. Page 9 The fiscal target was missed, despite significant measures to contain the deficit (Figure 2). Faced with shortfalls in tax collection and grants, relative to budget targets, and ongoing overruns in the wage bill, the government imposed levies on certain imports and on profits of specific sectors mid-year. It also reinstated the fuel-price adjustment mechanism to eliminate subsidies; sharply raised electricity and water tariffs (the former by 60 percent); and compressed other spending. While these measures were in line with recommendations in the 2013 Article IV consultation, the weaker-than-anticipated economic environment would have demanded a stronger and earlier effort. The cash deficit reached an estimated 10.9 percent of GDP, versus a 9 percent target. Domestic arrears declined marginally, implying a slightly smaller deficit (10.8 percent of GDP) on a commitment basis. Inflation ended the year at 13½ percent, above the 9+/-2 percent target range. Large administered price hikes contributed to this outcome, though staff’s estimate of core inflation (excluding high administered, but also low food price increases) was even larger at 15 percent. Faced with growing liquidity from a high fiscal deficit and currency swaps with local banks, the BOG ramped up sterilization operations, while steering interbank rates close to the policy rate. The latter was raised in February 2014 by 200 basis points to 18 percent, and in April, the BOG increased reserve requirements from 9 to 11 percent and tightened limits on banks’ net open positions. Government bond rates, which had declined to 19 percent during 2013, helped by a US$1 billion Eurobond, climbed again to 23 percent in early 2014. The external position has become increasingly fragile. H G b Interbank Liquidity Index Interbank liquidity index computed by BOG based on the average daily bid-ask spread; daily change of overnight rate; daily turnover, Sterilization: Stock Open Market Operations 91-DAYS 56-DAYS 182-DAYS 28-DAYS 1-YEAR With weaker gold and cocoa exports, the estimated current account deficit rose above 13 percent of GDP in 2013, with some 7 percent of GDP financed by FDI (Figure 3). As a result, the cedi depreciated by close to 15 percent in 2013 and 18 percent in the first quarter of 2014 alone, while spreads on Ghana’s Eurobonds are now the highest among SSA frontier markets. An exchange market pressure index—combining changes in the exchange rate, interest rates, and reserves—has recently risen above 2009 levels, but remains below 2012 peaks. v N v N Sovereign Spread, SSA Frontier Markets (USD-denominated, basis points) Ghana 2017 * Senegal ** Nigeria 2021 * Zambia ** Rwanda 2023 * b F g O v N b F Sources: * Security specific spread. ** JP Morgan Bond Index Global (EMBIG). Exchange Market Pressure Index (EMP) and components Annualized interest rate on 3-months treasury bill Nominal exchange rate Reserves, net EMP E Jan-09 Jul-09 Jan-10 Jul-10 Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and IMF staff estimates Page 10 Figure 2. Ghana: Fiscal Indicators The fiscal deficit improved less than expected, ... The fiscal deficit improved less than expected ... G Grants Trade taxes Indirect taxes Direct taxes G Budget ... and while previous arrears were reduced, new arrears were accumulated, mainly to statutory funds. b H G Stock of domestic arrears (excluding arrears to state-owned enterprises) RHS b H G Net increase in domestic arrears LHS 1/ ... at high interest rates and with non-residents holding a sizeable share. Domestic debt Residents Bank of Ghana Deposit Money Banks Other Residents Non-residents Avg.nominal interest rate (percent) G Budget Spending was contained, despite overruns in wages and interest payments, ... Interest payments Wages and salaries Capital expenditure Other Budget Government debt now exceeds pre -MDRI ratios, with the bulk in domestic currency... Foreign debt Domestic debt 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 G G Source: Ghanaian authorities and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Includes deferred wages and arrears to state-owned enterprises. Page 11 Figure 3. Ghana: External Indicators = x d I The terms of trade have weakened on the back of decling gold prices. Cocoa Beans Gold Crude Oil Jan. 2008 – Jan. 2014 B O O O O O O U Growing oil production made up for most of the losses from lower gold and cocoa exports… Gold Cocoa Oil ToT index (RHS) 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 x d I …but did not prevent the widening of the current account deficit as a share of GDP. Despite strong capital inflows, the BOP ended the year again in a deficit position. G Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Current account (RHS) 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Gross international reserves are still around 3 months of imports... Gross international reserves Millions of US Dollars Months of imports U B G m h G Official financing Short-term capital Current account deficit Direct investment Financial account .. but have been declining in recent months. Gross International Reserves U B Source: Ghanaian authorities and IMF staff estimates. b F g O v N b F Page 12