Staff supported the tightening of monetary policy. It expressed reservations about the effectiveness of recent foreign exchange regulations, and agreed with the BOG that these measures alone will not solve the underlying pressures in the foreign exchange market. Staff supported the recent policy rate adjustment, anticipating that further tightening may be warranted in light of rising inflation and a depreciating currency. Second-round effects of large administered price increases and rising inflation expectations may call for further rate hikes to steer inflation back toward the end-year target band of 9.5+/-2 percent. A tight monetary policy stance will also support a smooth adjustment of the exchange rate, which should be allowed to adjust to prevent further erosion of an already low reserve buffer. To contain short-term pressures, staff advised the BOG to continue its efforts to lengthen the maturity structure of its existing swaps and bridging loans beyond the third quarter of 2014. Once external pressures subside, reserves should be rebuilt, and the volume of swaps should be reduced and limited to the management of seasonal balance of payments volatility. Staff welcomed improvements in monetary policy operations, while advocating against direct government financing and for more transparent foreign exchange operations. The BOG made progress in strengthening its liquidity management framework, evidenced by the convergence of the overnight interbank rate with the policy rate (Figure 4). Staff also commended the BOG for enhancing the use of its model-based inflation forecasting tool to support Monetary Policy Committee Page 20 Figure 4. Ghana: Monetary and Financial Indicators ... driven by government borrowing and still strong, but decelerating, private sector credit growth,... Sterilization (OMO) Other Items Net Net claims on government Claims on private sector Net Domestic Assets Net domestic assets led money growth,... NDA NFA M2+ g h Y b F ...while the interbank rate converged to the policy rate. g h Y Required Reserves Excess Reserves BOG Policy Rate (RHS) Interbank Rate (RHS) b F g O v N b F b F NPLs declined, but are still high. Bank non-performing loans to total loans H G B On average, banks are well capitalized ... Regulatory Capital Tier one capital/adjusted assets BoG statutory capital adequacy ratio ... and returns are strong. Return on assets (LHS) Return on equity (RHS) Linear (Return on assets (LHS)) Source: Ghanaian authorities; DataStream; and IMF staff estimates. Page 21 decisions and for reducing the gap between its transaction and interbank exchange rate and shifting toward the latter for its own transactions. Staff suggested to: Reduce direct government financing which amounted to 7½ percent of current-year revenue in 2013 (exceeding the BOG’s own target of 5 percent). Besides boosting liquidity, deficit financing raises concerns about fiscal dominance and the credibility of the inflation-targeting framework. The BOG agreed that it will be important to keep its deficit financing at, or below, the 5 percent target in 2014, which is comparable with provisions in other countries in the region. Adopt a unified market-determined exchange rate: The current use of different exchange rates lacks transparency, can create distortions, and gives rise to a multiple-currency practice. Following the introduction of an electronic platform, the BOG is working with banks on establishing a system of more frequent adjustments in the interbank rate to better reflect market conditions. This should facilitate unification, while effective price discovery would be improved by allowing more foreign exchange transactions to pass through the market. Increase the inflation target horizon: Replacing the end-year inflation target with a rolling target, set for a 1-2 year policy horizon, would further enhance the credibility of the IT framework. The BOG will consider this proposal. Staff expressed reservations about some of the new foreign exchange regulations, aimed at curbing foreign currency shortages and dollarization. The new regulations reinforce preexisting requirements for the repatriation of export proceeds, ban foreign-currency denominated loans to non- foreign exchange earners, impose the creation of margin accounts for import bills, tighten operating procedures for forex bureaus, and circumscribe the use of foreign exchange held in foreign currency accounts. While noting that restrictions on foreign-currency loans have been adopted by many countries as a macro-prudential measure to contain exposures, staff recommended a review of all measures after an appropriate evaluation period to mitigate any unintended consequences, such as reduced foreign exchange inflows as a result of rising transaction costs. The BOG agreed with this proposal and with the need to address the root causes of current imbalances. Staff supported steps taken by the authorities to prevent the misuse of foreign exchange bureaus for money laundering, while arguing that de-dollarization is best achieved in a stable macroeconomic environment. The BOG previously conducted all its transactions using the weighted average of reported bank-customer exchange rates of the previous day, after discretionary removal of outliers (transaction rate). It now uses the average interbank rate of the previous day for most of its own transactions. While this shift does not fully remove the existing multiple-currency practice, it is a step toward its elimination. The ban on foreign-currency denominated loans to non-foreign exchange earners, which includes importers, constitutes the withdrawal of a normal, short-term banking and credit facility and gives rise to an exchange restriction. Another exchange restriction arises from the requirement for importers to submit to their commercial bank customs entry forms not yet submitted for any past foreign exchange transactions related to imports before foreign exchange may be transferred abroad for any further import transaction. The BOG assured staff that it will remove both restrictions following its planned review of the regulations in May. Page 22