Rising vulnerabilities were a central focus of the discussions. Staff saw serious risks to the government’s transformation agenda. It cautioned that macroeconomic stability will need to be restored to preserve a positive medium-term outlook. Revenue Oil revenue Nonoil revenue Grants Budget Budget Budget Ghana: Authorities' Budget Scenario, 2013–16 (In percent of GDP) The government’s policy is guided by a gradual reduction in macroeconomic imbalances to preserve economic growth. The 2014 budget foresees a reduction in primary current spending by about 3 percentage points of GDP, mainly through tight limits on the wage bill and elimination of subsidies. This would make room for a larger capital budget, higher interest payments, and clearance of arrears. Revenue is projected to increase by 2½ percentage points of GDP, reflecting tax policy measures and revenue administration reforms (see next section). Based on these plans and projected growth of 8 percent, the budget envisages a deficit of 8.5 percent of GDP this year and a medium- term deficit of 6 percent of GDP in 2016. The fiscal adjustment is expected to be mirrored in a gradual reduction in external imbalances, a stabilization of the currency, and a declining inflation path, with continued strong growth. Total expenditure Wages and salaries Interest costs Other recurrent expenditure Capital expenditure Arrears clearance and VATrefunds Overall balance (financing) Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (millions of GHc) Real GDP growth (in percent) Sources: Ghanaian authorities. Excludes deferred wage payments. Also includes deferred wage payments and discrepancy (for 2013) 105,504 129,289 163,105 Budget Outturn Total revenue and grants Staff saw the government’s targets at risk in the absence of additional fiscal measures, pointing to the macroeconomic costs of large fiscal imbalances. Constrained foreign financing and limited scope to boost exports in the short term will keep pressure on the cedi, forcing an adjustment in imports and keeping inflation high. Staff’s baseline assumes a contraction in the current account deficit by 2½ percentage points of GDP in 2014, with high interest rates and the depreciation slowing growth to a projected 4¾ percent. This will raise government interest payments and dampen revenue, implying a projected fiscal deficit of 10¼ percent of GDP. Any slippages in ambitious primary current spending projections would raise the deficit further. Staff stressed more serious risks to this outlook in the event of a further deterioration in the external environment (see Appendix I). Ghana’s main vulnerability arises from its large twin deficits in the context of a low reserve buffer, sustained by swaps and bridging loans (Box 3). The sum of Ghana’s non-FDI financed current account deficit, amortization on foreign loans, maturing domestic bonds held by non-residents, and maturing swaps and bridging loans, amounts to a total gross external financing need of $4.3 billion in 2014—corresponding to about three-quarters of the reserve stock at end-2013. Against this background, a further weakening in the terms of trade, or a larger outflow of foreign financing, could have a significant impact on reserves and force a more drastic depreciation Page 13 Box 3. Reserve Adequacy Baseline Risk of a shock 50 % Risk of a shock 60 % Optimal Reserve Coverage, 2013-2018 (in Month of Prospective Imports)* GIR are below benchmark levels, but expected to build up to sufficient coverage in the medium-run. After a second year of large balance of payments deficits and ongoing pressures, Ghana’s gross international reserves (GIR) declined to US$4.7 billion at end-March 2014, covering 2.7 months of prospective imports. A standardized approach assesses Ghana’s gross reserves to be below adequate levels. Following Dabla-Norris et al. (2011), the net benefit of holding reserves is calculated based on the expected cost of a crisis given the stock of reserves, fundamentals (exchange rate regime, fiscal balance, institutions), exposure to shocks (external demand, FDI, aid), and the opportunity cost of holding reserves, quantified as the “normal” range of the interest differential over 10-year U.S. bonds (300 to 400 bps). The approach suggests that Ghana’s international reserves should have covered 3.4-4.7 months of imports in 2013, under the 50 percent default probability of a shock. Reserves should be higher (4.1-5.6 months of imports) for a shock probability of 60 percent. In the medium term, with a stronger fiscal position, reserves are expected to exceed benchmark levels. Ghana’s balance of payments is subject to significant short-term and seasonal pressures. A further deterioration in the terms of trade, such as a drop in gold prices to US$1,000 per ounce, could wipe off an additional US$800 million in reserves. Moreover, the traditional weakening of the BOP position in the first three quarters could be exacerbated by prospective financial outflows: Bond rollovers. About one-fourth (GH¢5.6 billion) of Ghana’s domestic debt at end-2013 was held by foreigners. Of this, about GH¢870 million will mature in 2014 (nearly all by June), adding to short-term pressures. Reflecting virtually no foreign rollover in February, the baseline assumes a similar outcome also for other bonds. Early redemptions—costly, due to an illiquid secondary market—are not assumed, but could exacerbate outflows. Commercial banks. During 2013, banks significantly reduced their net foreign assets by borrowing from foreign affiliates to meet high dollar demand. These flows are assumed to be reversed in 2014, with early reversal potentially adding to seasonal pressures. BOG swaps and bridging loans. Gross reserves are subject to rollover risks from swap engagements with several commercial banks and short-term bridging loans with foreign institutions. __________________________ Includes US$600 million of oil funds, the use of which may require parliamentary approval. The analysis uses historical averages to avoid a result where a higher risk perception reduces the reserve benchmark. *Cost of holding reserves of 3 to 4 percent. Page 14 and import compression. Interest rates would have to be hiked by more to contain an accelerating inflation rate, while lower revenue combined with higher interest payments would further widen the fiscal deficit. In this case, the economic costs in terms of growth and employment, and the efforts needed to restore stability, would be significant. Apart from short-term risks, the authorities’ gradual fiscal adjustment implies continuing vulnerabilities and significant costs over the medium term. It would keep the fiscal and current account deficits elevated and above external sustainability benchmarks (Box 4), prolonging the need for a tight monetary policy stance and leaving external buffers low. Moreover, Ghana’s risk of debt distress would be approaching high levels, with the public debt ratio remaining close to 60 percent of GDP and debt service absorbing some 40-50 percent of revenue. Macroeconomic Indicators, 2012-2019 (Percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) Staff recommended a more ambitious adjustment scenario. Additional consolidation of close to 2 percentage points of GDP in 2014, combined with a more significant adjustment over the medium term, could set off a virtuous cycle, where lower fiscal deficits and falling interest rates would create room for higher social and infrastructure spending and a crowding- in of private sector activity. In the short run, growth will be subject to two offsetting factors, with the contractionary impact of fiscal consolidation assumed to be fully neutralized by the positive impact of lower interest rates and contained depreciation. In the medium term, the positive impact is expected to dominate, resulting in higher growth and significantly lower debt and debt-service ratios. Baseline Real GDP (annual percent change) Real GDP non-oil (annual percent change) Inflation, eop (annual percent change) Overall fiscal balance (financing) Central government debt (net) Current account balance (percent of GDP) Alternative Real GDP (annual percent change) Real GDP non-oil (annual percent change) Inflation, eop (annual percent change) Overall fiscal balance (financing) Central government debt (net) Current account balance (percent of GDP) 8.8 13.5 -8.5 -6.3 -12.0 -10.9 49.1 54.8 59.7 59.2 -12.2 -13.2 -10.0 -6.9 Sources: Ghanaian authorities and IMF staff projections. 8.8 13.5 -12.0 -10.9 -10.2 -9.2 49.1 54.8 61.9 65.1 -12.2 -13.2 -10.5 -7.8 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Prel. Indicators of Public Sector Indebtedness Under Alternative Scenarios Public Debt-to-GDP Ratio Public Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio baseline alternative baseline alternative See Supplement on Joint IMF and World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis. Page 15 Box 4. External Sustainability Model Current Account Benchmarks, 2019 projection benchmark gap (in Percent of GDP) MB ES -4.2 -4.4 to -2.1 -2.5 -2.3 to -4.8 Medium-term current account benchmarks for Ghana range from -4.4 to -2.1 percent of GDP. Various approaches to external sustainability suggest that the current account adjustment, and the associated fiscal consolidation, should be stronger than currently projected. Without additional fiscal adjustment, the analysis would imply a modest cedi overvaluation of 6.9-14.4 percent in the medium term. Baseline projections imply a narrowing of the current account deficit to 6¾ percent of GDP in 2019. This reflects moderate fiscal consolidation, less reliance on expensive fuel imports as gas comes on stream, and a significant increase in oil production. The difference to the last Article IV assessment (8½ percent of GDP) is mainly attributed to an upward revision of oil production and the depreciation that has already taken place. Three approaches are used—an external sustainability (ES), a macroeconomic balance (MB), and a model-based approach—to provide a robust assessment of external sustainability. The ES approach yields a current account benchmark of -4.2 percent of GDP. The benchmark is derived on the basis of a fixed NFA target of -40 percent of GDP (the median of middle-income countries), as well as staff’s growth and inflation projections. While useful as an accounting identity, this approach abstracts from the country’s underlying fundamentals. Applications of the MB approach yield current account benchmarks between -4.4 and -2.1 percent of GDP in 2019. This approach estimates Ghana’s benchmark on the basis of its fundamentals relative to its trading partners, with Ghana’s relatively high GDP per capita growth and its oil trade balance driving much of the results. While providing a multilaterally consistent benchmark, the MB approach does not capture the potential use of Ghana’s recent oil windfall for infrastructure investments over the medium term. To account for oil production and infrastructure investment needs, the model by Araujo et al. (2012) is calibrated to Ghana. The model incorporates the main features of a capital-scarce and resource-rich developing economy (including investment inefficiencies and adjustment costs). As the paths of the current account, as well as private and public consumption and investment implied by the model, are the result of a social welfare maximization problem, they can be considered benchmarks. The model provides a current account benchmark of -4.3 percent of GDP in 2019, and advocates for stronger fiscal consolidation than currently projected. Ghana’s optimal paths are calibrated based on a long-run NFA target of -40 percent of GDP, and an efficiency level of public investment derived from Gupta et al. (2011). Given these assumptions, the model suggests that the current account deficit does not strongly deviate from benchmark levels in the short run, though government consumption and investment are too high and private investment is too low. For the medium term, the model implies an “optimal” narrowing of the current account deficit to 4¼ percent of GDP, implying an additional adjustment of 2½ percent of GDP over staff’s baseline projections. Projected Model Adjustment Current account Public consumption Public investment Private consumption Private investment Medium-Term Current Account Adjustment Model vs. Projections (In percent of GDP) Current Account, 2014-2019 (in Percent of GDP) All benchmarks imply that Ghana's current account deficit has to narrow in the medium-term. Macrobalance External Sustainability Model projected Page 16 Box 4. External Sustainability (concluded) The main part of the adjustment would “optimally” come from lower public expenditure (2¾ percent of GDP). The optimal breakdown between consumption and investment depends on the efficiency of public capital. Under the model’s assumption (based on historical data), the projected high level of public investment would account for about 60 percent of the excess public expenditure relative to the model. However, an assumed increase in the efficiency index by only 5 percentage points would raise benchmark capital expenditure to currently projected levels in the medium run. In this scenario, the main part of fiscal consolidation would need to come from a further reduction in public consumption. Current Account (in Percent of GDP) The current account should adjust more strongly than currently projected... projected model Government Investment (in Percent of GDP) Public investment projections are consistent with the benchmark only at higher efficiency levels. Government Consumption (in Percent of GDP) ...supported by lower government consumption. projected model model (higher public efficiency) Private Investment (in Percent of GDP) Private investment is projected to be in line with benchmark levels in the medium run. projected model model (higher public efficiency) projected model ______________________________________________________________________________________________________ Auraujo, Juliana, Bin Li, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Luis-Felipe Zanna (2012): Current account norms in natural resource rich and capital scarce economies. IMF WP 13/80. Gupta, Sanjeev, Alvar Kangur, Chris Papageorgiou, and Abdoul Wane (2011): Efficiency-adjusted public capital and growth. IMF WP 11/217. Official data for consumption and investment have been revised substantially since the last Article IV assessment. Government investment figures include transfers to statutory funds that are primarily used for investment purposes. Page 17