To restore confidence and build resilience, staff recommended a comprehensive policy package that (i) targets additional fiscal adjustment of about 1¾ percent of GDP in 2014, and (ii) entrenches the structural and legislative reforms that ensure more significant and durable consolidation over the medium term. The authorities agreed with staff on the need to reduce the fiscal deficit, pointing to the significant measures already underway. They saw the current challenges as temporary, stressing that their measures will take some time to materialize fully and that their policies needed to be viewed in a medium-term context. In addition to regular adjustments of fuel and utility prices, budget measures include: Revenue mobilization The VAT rate was raised by 2.5 percentage points and coverage was broadened to previously exempted activities; an ad valorem tax on fuel was introduced; and taxes were raised on rent for non-residential accommodation, management and technical services fees, and free zone companies selling on the local market. Wage bill control. Tight budget limits on the wage bill (proposed freeze on wage increases and net hiring in most sectors) are being complemented by a range of measures to improve monitoring and control, including an improved payroll database, audits, and the introduction of an electronic payment voucher system. The implementation of HRMIS (a comprehensive personnel data base) and its integration with GIFMIS, once completed, should greatly facilitate strategic HR management. Prioritized capital spending. This is implemented through a moratorium on new contracts; alignment of investment programs of statutory funds with national priorities to avoid duplications; and the planned creation a Ghana Infrastructure Fund (GIF), to leverage private financing of infrastructure projects and improve their selection and implementation. The authorities took note of the mission’s advice to carefully assess fiscal risks arising from contingent liabilities and to reconsider a permanent earmarking of VAT revenue to the GIF. While agreeing with the thrust of these reforms, the mission argued for deeper irreversible reforms to entrench significant medium-term consolidation. A credible program for reducing the public wage bill, including streamlining of subvented agencies, will be key for addressing imbalances, restoring confidence, and creating fiscal space for priority spending. At the same time, public financial management reforms should be accelerated and combined with a relaxation of rigid earmarking of tax revenue. Staff also saw scope for raising revenue by reducing tax expenditure and increasing compliance, in line with the recommendations of recent Fund technical assistance missions. The mission identified a set of measures (text table) that should allow a larger deficit reduction, in line with staff’s proposed adjustment scenario (4½ percent of GDP deficit in 2016 and 1¾ percent in 2019). In addition, it stressed that increased transparency of revenue and expenditure allocations at all levels Page 18 of the public sector will be important for a successful prioritization of scarce resources to support the government’s transformation agenda. Staff-Proposed Menu of Additional Medium-Term Structural Measures Revenue: Expenditure: (i) Legislative revisions to streamline exemptions permanently and to strictly constrain the power to grant them (ii) Thorough review of tax regime for free zones to reduce tax expenditures (iii) Reconsideration of a windfall profit tax on mining (iv) Strengthening of tax administration, focused on improved compliance —particularly of large taxpayers (i) Multi-year wage agreements consistent with fiscal consolidation plans (ii) Specific program to reduce the public workforce, while improving its skill mix (iii) Streamlining of subvented agencies, with time-bound targets for removing them from the public payroll through closure or commercialization (iv) Full integration of spending by statutory funds in the overall investment program, combined with a review of possible legislative changes to replace rigid transfer rules (v) Acceleration of various public financial management reforms, including GIFMIS, the Treasury Single Account, and payroll and HR management To contain immediate vulnerabilities, staff urged the adoption of additional short-term measures . While recognizing the limited space for large upfront adjustments, staff saw scope for additional savings of about 1¾ percent of GDP this year, through a combination of revenue and expenditure measures (text table). To achieve the desired outcome, staff stressed the need to enforce budget discipline in all areas. Existing commitments, such as tight wage limits and no aggregate subsidies on fuel and utilities, will need to be rigorously enforced. This will require that electricity tariffs rise temporarily above cost-recovery levels—once gas comes on stream—to compensate for the under- pricing that is currently taking place. Staff-Proposed Menu of Additional Short-Term Adjustment Measures Revenue: Expenditure: (i) Introduction or increase of selective tax rates (e.g., higher ad valorem tax, or VAT, on fuel) (i) Reduction in wage costs through streamlining of allowances (starting at higher income levels) (ii) Higher excises on specific products (iii) Higher tax rate on real estate along with stepped up registration and valuation efforts (iv) Immediate freeze on new tax exemptions (v) Better identification and targeted auditing of large taxpayers (ii) Non-replacement of departing public sector employees in overstaffed areas (iii) Further prioritization of capital spending, combined with reduction in transfers to statutory funds to lowest permissible level (iv) Reduction or elimination of transfers to the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation (GNPC) Page 19 In early April, the government issued a policy statement to parliament, aimed at addressing the current economic challenges. Subsequently, it provided a more detailed report on its Economic and Financial Policies for the Medium Term to the Fund and other development partners. The policy document maintains the government’s fiscal targets, clarifies the 2014 budget measures, and outlines additional reforms to safeguard the medium-term consolidation path. The additional measures include intentions to rationalize the public service, restructure statutory funds to reduce budget rigidities, and enhance revenue administration through ongoing GRA reforms and a revision of tax laws. Staff welcomes the government’s homegrown strategy to address the current macroeconomic imbalances. The policy documents provide a clear and comprehensive description of the government’s reform agenda, covering the key fiscal challenges. This is an important first step that now needs to be translated into specific, quantified, and time-bound actions, particularly with respect to the planned rationalization of the public service and tax policy measures. In light of Ghana’s significant fiscal and external imbalances, staff would strongly encourage the government to target a larger and more frontloaded fiscal consolidation.