The ongoing fiscal consolidation should be complemented with stronger efforts to fight tax evasion. As noted above, tax evasion—especially among the self-employed and related to VAT—was a problem even before the crisis, putting pressure on the budget and Tax Evasion among Self-Employed (Euros) Reported Income Evaded Income Evaded Tax Source: Artavanis et al. (2012). VAT Gap, 2014 (Percent) Euro area median Sources: EC, Study and Reports on the VAT Gap in the EU-28 Member States: 2016 Final Report ; and Eurostat. Page 25 leading to an unequal distribution of the tax burden. The authorities should thus redouble their efforts to strengthen institutions and practices in this area to send a strong signal that Greece can no longer tolerate evasion. Amnesty schemes should be avoided, as they encourage moral hazard. Instead, the authorities should fully operationalize an independent revenue agency that employs modern risk-based taxpayer compliance principles and is insulated from political interference. Tax administration practices also need to be brought in line with best practices by adopting a risk-based framework that prioritizes cases of new debt, large taxpayers, and high net-wealth individuals, and by strengthening the use of enforcement tools against strategic defaulters, including AML tools that can facilitate collection and sharing of information with domestic and foreign tax authorities. The authorities must also tackle decisively the large stock of tax debt to help clean up the private sector’s balance sheet. The high and growing private sector debt to the state—of which a large part has become uncollectible—suggests that the problem has reached endemic proportions and is hampering economic activity. Rather than resorting to punitive fines and installment schemes not linked to capacity to pay, the authorities should re-examine the system of fines to ensure that they can act as an effective deterrent to tax evasion, but without bringing the tax debt burden to unsustainable levels. Moreover, the revenue administration should focus on tax debtors’ economic situation and undertake an assessment of their viability. On this basis, the authorities should develop restructuring modalities in line with individual taxpayers’ ability to pay and integrated within a holistic framework that includes bank debt (in the context of the out-of-court debt restructuring framework, see paragraph 24). For viable borrowers, such modalities could encompass selective write-downs of public claims, provided they are adequately tailored and limit moral hazard. Write-downs may also be needed for uncollectible claims of unviable debtors after full use of liquidation and enforcement tools. While concurring with the need to strengthen efforts to combat tax evasion, the authorities believed that installment and other schemes could help boost revenues. They considered that efforts underway to implement the recently legislated revenue agency and to boost enforcement were already producing promising results. Moreover, the authorities were open to considering modalities of restructuring select public claims along with bank debt, while stressing the importance of minimizing moral hazard concerns. However, the authorities continued to believe that new types of installment schemes and voluntary disclosure initiatives, as well as other measures to freeze current debts or allow some bank accounts to be exempted from enforcement, could help improve short-term revenue collections without harming the payment culture. Indeed, a voluntary disclosure initiative and incentives for electronic payments have already been recently legislated. Artavanis et al. in their 2015 paper “Measuring Tax Evasion using Bank Credit: Evidence from Greece” estimate that close to half of self-employed income goes unreported and untaxed. For 2009, this implies €28 billion (near 12 percent of GDP) of unreported income, with significant implications for foregone revenue. See Selected Issues Paper “Addressing the Burden of Large Tax Debt and Social Security Debt.” Page 26 C.