the prospects for success of the authorities’ current policy package: Macroeconomic outcomes remain weak, reflecting the lingering uncertainty about Growth (Figure 3): After a temporary spell of small but positive growth in 2014, output contracted by 0.2 percent in 2015, with private consumption and investment falling following the introduction of capital controls in June 2015. Output has started to recover since mid-2016, supported by net exports and the authorities’ efforts to clear the state’s spending and tax refund arrears with the private sector. The current account remained close to balance in 2016, with both imports and exports declining further by end-September (Figure 4). Harmonized consumer prices fell by 1.1 percent in 2015 and were stable in 2016, notwithstanding recent VAT hikes. The labor market is recovering gradually, with the unemployment rate having declined to 23 percent (seasonally adjusted) at end-October 2016 from a peak of close to 28 percent in 2013Q3, while wages per employee increased by 2.6 percent (y- o-y) through end-September 2016. Fiscal outcomes (Figure 5): After Greece managed to achieve a small primary surplus in 2013, spending pressures built up in 2014 and the first half of 2015. The ensuing easing was arrested with the introduction of new consolidation measures, which helped achieve a small primary surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP in 2015 (ESA2010 basis, excluding bank recapitalization costs). In 2016, the cumulative general government’s primary surplus (cash basis) through end-November was higher by 0.8 percentage points than a year ago. This outcome reflects higher tax revenues due to the new measures coming into effect in 2016 and the Consolidated General Government Accounts (Cash Basis) Jan-Nov Jan-Nov Difference (2016-2015) Revenue Direct Taxes Indirect Taxes Social Contributions Other Revenue Primary Spending Social Benefits Compensation of Employees Other Current Expenditure Investment Cash Primary Balance Source: Greece, Ministry of Finance. Page 17 relatively better macroeconomic performance, partly offset by higher cash spending related to the government’s clearance of its arrears to the private sector. Greece: Private Sector Credit Growth (Percent, y-o-y) Banking sector Banks lost 27 percent of deposits in the first half of 2015 and had to resort to capital controls and emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). Since then, deposits have stabilized and banks have reduced central bank exposure. The banking sector required a fresh round of recapitalization in 2015 (€15 billion, or 8½ percent of GDP) to help bring capital ratios from 8 percent Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) in mid-2015 to around 18 percent at end- September 2016. NPLs have reached 45 percent of total loans in 2016Q3, almost four times as high as in 2010. Provisioning stands at 50 percent of total NPLs. Credit continued to contract in 2016, bringing the total credit decline to 20 percent since 2010. Jan-10 Nov-10 Sep-11 Source: Bank of Greece. Credit to corporates Private sector, total Consumer loans Housing loans Jul-12 Jun-13 Apr-14 Feb-15 Dec-15 Nov-16 Political support for the authorities’ policies remains weak. The Syriza government initially achieved broad support for their new program. However, the government has found it increasingly difficult to maintain the support of opposition parties for the adjustment program now underway. Lingering political uncertainty and specter of new elections have kept yields elevated. The ECB, while having restored Greek banks’ eligibility for monetary policy operations, has not yet added Greece to its QE program. OUTLOOK AND RISKS Ireland Cyprus Portugal 10-Year General Government Bond Yields, 2015 Latest (Percent) Jan-15 May-15 Aug-16 Mar-16 Oct-15 Jan-17 Source: Bloomberg. After modest growth in 2016, output is projected to rebound over the medium term. Growth is expected to have reached around 0.4 percent in 2016, and to accelerate to 2.7 percent this year. Projections are predicated on full and timely implementation of the authorities’ adjustment program, which is expected to be accompanied by rising confidence following agreement on debt relief, access to the ECB’s QE program, and rapid elimination of capital controls. Projections also presume continued clearance of the government’s Page 18 spending and tax refund arrears to the private sector, which would help offset the drag from the ongoing fiscal consolidation. GDP is expected to grow above potential during 2018-20, closing the output gap. The projected recovery is slightly smaller than that projected for Spain and Cyprus, and Greece’s 2020 real output and investment are expected to remain below pre-crisis levels by 15 and 45 percent, respectively. Inflation is expected to stay below the ECB target, reflecting slower productivity growth, and unemployment will fall to just below 19 percent by 2020, given high structural unemployment. Key Economic Indicators (percent change unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP Total Domestic Demand Private Consumption Public Consumption Gross Fixed Capital Formation Foreign Balance (contribution) Exports Imports Unemployment Rate (percent) HICP (period average) GDP Deflator Sources: Bank of Greece; and IMF staff estimates. TFP and GDP Growth, 1970 (Percent) Long-term growth is expected to reach around 1 percent. Adverse demographics are projected to render the contribution of labor to long-run potential growth slightly negative, even as labor force participation is assumed to improve and the unemployment rate to decline gradually to single digits by 2040. Investment growth is expected to remain modest, as financial sector and structural reforms take time to fully materialize. Capital accumulation is thus expected to have a positive but small contribution to growth. Export growth is predicated on a shift of resources from the non-tradable to the tradable sector that occurs only gradually, helping to offset the negative growth impact of higher imports. Ultimately, long-term potential growth will depend on TFP growth, which, given the slow pace of implementation of structural reforms, is projected to reach 0.9 percent, higher than Greece’s long-term average, but below the euro-area average. Sources: AMECO; and IMF staff estimates. h t w o r TFP Growth AUT NLD FRA BEL GRC LUX PRT ITA IRL FIN The primary fiscal balance is projected to reach close to 1 percent of GDP in 2016 and rise to 1½ percent by 2018. This is predicated on full implementation of the package of measures legislated in 2015-16 (estimated to yield 3¾ percent of GDP), entering into effect gradually The authorities plan to clear 3.8 percent of GDP in expenditure and tax refund arrears to the private sector during 2016-17 (of which about 1 percent has been already cleared), while 3 percent in new measures enter into effect. As noted below, fiscal projections are based on staff’s estimate of the primary balance given the authorities’ current fiscal policy package. Page 19 during 2015-18. However, given that some of these measures replace expiring measures or other one offs, their net effect represents an improvement of only around 1½ percent of GDP in the primary balance by 2018. Specifically, in 2016, the balance is projected to increase by 0.7 percent of GDP relative to 2015 on account of ongoing consolidation measures, which are partly offset by a recently legislated one-off bonus to retirees and by the expiration of one-off revenues related to bank liquidity support. The primary surplus is projected to increase to 1 and 1½ percent of GDP in 2017 and 2018, respectively, also on account of new measures, which are partly offset by expiring measures, and a further decline in non-tax revenues, and assuming that the authorities fully finance the rollout of the GMI in a budget neutral way, in line with their ESM program commitments. Primary Balance Sources: Ministry of Finance, and IMF staff estimates. Social benefits Compensation of employees Other expenditure Indirect taxes Direct taxes Social contributions Other revenue General Government Operations, 2015-18 (ESA 2010) Total Primary Expenditure Total Primary Revenue Significant downside risks weigh on the outlook (Annex 1). The key risks remain domestic, related to an insufficient or slow pace of implementation of the authorities’ reform agenda. A stylized scenario based on current policies with no further reform implementation (e.g. incomplete financial and structural reforms, persistence of capital controls, lack of access to QE and absence of a solution to debt), would imply much lower investment and TFP, resulting in growth of only about 1 percent in the medium term and 0.3 percent in the long term. Such a scenario, if prolonged, could lead to renewed liquidity squeezes, which, in the absence of further official support, could rekindle Grexit concerns. But even if the authorities’ policy program stays on track, high risks to the baseline remain, given the four challenges noted above. Frequent and large downward data revisions and uncertainty associated with the size of the output gap complicate the analysis and add to downside risks to the outlook (Box 2). External risks have also increased following the UK referendum, which could affect Greece’s exports, FDI, and growth. Finally, a further intensification of refugee flows could add to fiscal costs and increase political risks. Contributions (percentage points) Downside Scenario Final Consumption Gross Fixed Capital Formation Foreign Balance Primary Balance (percent GDP) Source: IMF staff estimates. Real GDP Growth (percent) This is in line with experience during 2010-14, when legislated measures of close to 28 percent of GDP resulted in an improvement in the primary balance of 10 percent, also on account of temporary measures and one off effects, among other factors. Projections also take into account the recently-legislated budget for 2017. The contribution of investment to GDP growth is assumed at ½ percent, in line with the 2001-2009 and 1961-2015 averages. This is around half of the level assumed under the active policy baseline scenario. Costs related to the refugee crisis are difficult to estimate, with preliminary estimates suggesting 2016 costs at around 0.2 percent of GDP. European partners have indicated an intention to help cover such costs. Page 20 The authorities agreed with staff’s short-term growth projections, but had a more