Despite significant progress in unwinding its macroeconomic imbalances, Greece’s economy has not yet recovered. Greece entered the crisis with exceptionally large fiscal and external imbalances. Policies supported by its two previous adjustment programs helped to address these imbalances, with both the primary and current account deficits having declined from double digits to around balance in recent years. This is an impressive adjustment, especially for a country belonging to a currency union. Exceptional official financing totaling around €260 billion (147 percent of GDP) helped to buttress the adjustment and keep Greece in the euro-zone. Nonetheless, Greece has not managed to return to sustainable growth, with output having contracted by more than 25 percent since 2008, investment down by more than 60 percent, and unemployment at the highest level in the euro-zone. Greece: Current Account Balance and Primary Balance Current account Sources: Elstat; and Haver Analytics. Real Output (Index, pre-crisis peak = 100 1/) Asian crisis 2/ Eurozone crisis U.S. Great Depression t t+1 t+3 t+2 t+6 Sources: Eurostat; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Pre-crisis peaks are 2007 for Greece, 1997 for Asian crisis, 2008 for Eurozone crisis, and 1929 for Great Depression. 2/ Including Indonesia, Republic of Korea, and Thailand. t+4 t+5 t+7 t+8 The reform momentum has slowed, however, in part reflecting fatigue associated with the social costs of adjustment. Greece implemented important reforms early in the adjustment program. However, implementation of structural reforms has since slowed, and fiscal reforms have relied increasingly on one-off and ad-hoc adjustments. This reflects the inability of the political system to maintain popular and political support for the reform effort amid an increasingly frayed social and political fabric and a perception that the adjustment costs were unequally borne by some groups (e.g. wage-earners) while others were protected (e.g. the self-employed, current Political Developments Source: Official government sources. Gourinchas et al (“The Analytics of the Greek Crisis,” NBER, 2016) find that the fiscal correction accounts for 50 percent of the output drop, and the increase in funding costs for firms and the sovereign for the bulk of the remainder; the persistence of the recession was attributed to high NPLs and product market rigidities. Page 11 pensioners). Over the last six years, Greece had seven governments, including from the center right, and center left, as well as technocratic (including two caretaker governments), but none was able to successfully mobilize the broad political support necessary to complete the two previous Fund- supported programs (only 10 out of 24 planned reviews were completed). The uncertainty associated with frequent political crises paralyzed decision-making or led to unwinding of reforms. Against the background of a somewhat weak external environment, such unwinding of reforms fueled occasional fears of Greece’s departure from the euro zone (“Grexit”), leading to confidence shocks and exacerbating the downturn. Greece experienced its latest crisis in 2015 and narrowly avoided Grexit with support from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). Reflecting reform fatigue and weak ownership, reforms stalled in mid-2014, as signs of macroeconomic stabilization and incipient market access emerged. Following the election of the Syriza government in early 2015 on an anti-program and anti-austerity platform, reforms were unwound across the board. This led to a confidence and liquidity crisis, which culminated in Greece running temporary arrears to the IMF and requiring the imposition of capital controls in June 2015 to stem deposit outflows. Grexit was ultimately avoided with the help of a new ESM-supported program of up to €86 billion (49 percent of GDP) agreed in August 2015, in return for which the government reversed the policy backtracking and reaffirmed its commitment to the basic objectives of the program (Box 1). situation, the underlying issues hindering the recovery have not yet been fully addressed: While the new ESM-supported program has helped stabilize the economic First, public and private balance sheets remain deeply impaired Public debt has continued to rise, reaching some 180 percent of GDP by end-2015, about 65 percent higher than its pre- crisis level. This was due to sizeable fiscal deficits and declining growth, notwithstanding the large private sector debt restructuring in 2011-12 and significant flow relief from official creditors. The fiscal problem migrated over time to the private sector balance sheets (Figure 1), with private sector arrears to the banks and the state reaching the second highest level in the euro-zone. General Goverment Debt, 2015 Private Sector Arrears Euro area average Sources: Eurostat; and Haver Analytics. Bank NPE Tax debt 1/ W Sources: EBA 2015 June Report; Eurostat; OECD; and IMF Staff Calculations. 1/ Data for Greece are estimates as of end-November 2016 and include social security contribution debt. H Second, the economy remains fundamentally uncompetitive . Despite commitments in its adjustment program to undertake several rounds of structural reforms, Greece has not managed to fully regain competitiveness. In large part, this is due to a weak investment climate, not least Page 12 because of insufficient progress in opening up the economy in the face of resistance from vested interests, which hampered the price adjustment needed to restore external competitiveness within the currency union. As a result, exports continue to lag those of peers, and, despite some improvement, Greece still ranks poorly on broadly accepted structural indicators relevant for growth (Figure 2). Exports of Goods and Services, 2008 (Change in percent of 2008 exports) Services Goods Total Spain Ireland Portugal Sources: Eurostat; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Greece thus faces four key challenges: Greece: Competitiveness, 2016 (Scale: 1-7; the higher the better) Institutions Innovation Business sophistication Market size Technological readiness Infrastructure Macroeconomic environment Health and primary education Higher education and training Financial market development Labor market efficiency Goods market efficiency Advanced Economies Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index. Challenge 1: An unsustainable fiscal policy mix based on unaffordable pensions financed by high tax rates on narrow bases Greece implemented an impressive fiscal structural adjustment of around 16 percent of GDP during 2010-15. While more than half of the legislated measures have been on the spending side, only about a quarter of the overall adjustment was directed at reducing public sector wages and pensions, which had grown rapidly before the crisis, with the rest being discretionary spending cuts and increases in tax rates on narrow bases. Although the wage bill declined somewhat as a result, the problem migrated to the pension bill through early retirements, leading to a further rise in pension spending relative to GDP from 2010 to 2015. Greece: Changes of General Government Expenditure on Pension and Compensation of Employees (Percentage points of GDP) Pension Compensation of employees Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. The most recent consolidation package adopted under the ESM program illustrates the political difficulties in tackling key remaining structural weaknesses. The package, expected to yield close to 4 percent of GDP in savings by 2018, is heavily reliant on revenue measures (about 3 percent of GDP), of which the bulk constitutes further increases in already high tax rates on narrow bases. Only about a third of structural benchmarks under the EFF-supported program have been fully completed until now, with the rest either not done or only partially completed. The shift of resources from the non-tradable to the tradable sectors has been modest, with only tourism having experienced an increase in employment during 2010-15, while manufacturing saw a sharp decline, also given concentration in low value added segments subject to competition from developing countries (see WP/12/236). Page 13 Reductions in pension spending amount to less than 1 percent of GDP (relative to a system deficit of close to 11 percent of GDP). Greece’s new automatic contingency mechanism—which provides for ex-post across-the-board cuts in discretionary spending in case of deviations of outturns from fiscal targets—adds to distortions, as it does not address underlying weaknesses through structural reforms, but relies instead on further ad hoc temporary cuts. As a result of the sub-optimal policy mix, the pension system remains highly imbalanced (with a deficit four times the euro-area average of 2.5 percent of GDP), discretionary spending is compressed to unsustainable levels, and the tax burden is unevenly distributed due to exceptional exemptions that relieve the middle class from any personal income tax obligation (more than half of wage earners are exempt from paying personal income tax compared to the euro area average of 8 percent). Thus, the current structure of public finances is fundamentally inefficient, unfair and ultimately socially unsustainable, as it favors current pensioners and middle-class households while denying lower-income and unemployed individuals access to the adequate and well-targeted social benefits and other essential public services they need and that are the norm elsewhere in the euro area. Consequently, during the crisis, relative poverty rates declined substantially for retirees, while they soared for the working-age unemployed. State Transfers to the Public Pension System General Government Expenditure on Goods and Services, 2015 (Percent of primary expenditure) Sources: Eurostat, and IMF staff calculations. Change in Poverty Rate, 2010-2015 (Percent of population) Euro area Retired Employed Unemployed Source: Eurostat. Note: Persons at risk of poverty are those living in a household with equivalized disposable income below 60 percent of the national median. Sources: 2012 and 2015 Aging Reports; and IMF staff calculations. Note: State transfers are defined as difference between pension spending and actual contributions, excluding third-party revenues and non-contributory state transfers. Tax-Free Income Threshold in the Euro Area Share of households below the tax-free threshold (2014, percent) Tax free threshold (thousands in euros, lhs) EA Average Sources: Eurostat; Greece MoF; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Share of exempted households for Greece is calculated based on 2016 income tax declaration (2015 declared incomes) using thresholds legislated in 2016. For other euro area countries, the share is based on 2014 Household Budget Survey data and 2015 tax-free thresholds. Taxpayers in the highest income decile pay about 60 percent of personal income tax revenue, while 53 percent of wage earners and 85 percent of farmers are exempt. Persons at risk of poverty are those living in households with an equalized disposable income below 60 percent of the national median after social transfers. The significant reduction in Greece’s poverty rate among retirees during the crisis continues a trend that started well before the crisis due to a rapid increase in pension spending during the boom years. Page 14 Challenge 2: An ineffective tax administration, weak payment culture, and rising tax debt Despite multiple rounds of institutional reforms, tax collection rates have plummeted, while private sector debt to the state has reached 70 percent of GDP, the highest level in the euro- area. Tax debt was already high prior to the crisis, indicative of a weak payment culture and enforcement capacity. Around half of the population is in arrears to the state, also well above the ratio in other countries. The economic downturn was a key factor in the accumulation of arrears. But the high tax rates and punitive penalties and fines added to the debt. The problem has been exacerbated by an ineffective tax administration frequently subjected to political interference, which has been unable to enforce collections, relying instead on outright amnesties or untargeted installment schemes, which have only served to further weaken incentives to pay and are thus self-defeating. Greece: Current Tax Collection Rate, 2010 Assessed penalties (Billions of euros) Assessed taxes (Billions of euros) Collection rate (lhs, percent) Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Collection rates are calculated as the ratio between collected and assessed obligations, including taxes, surcharges, penalties, and interest. Private Sector Debt to the State IRL DEU EST FRA FIN AUT NLD ESP LUX SVN LTU LVA BEL PRT MLT GRC Sources: Ministry of Finance; and OECD Tax Administration 2015. Note: Data for Greece are as of end-November 2016 and include social security contribution debt. For other countries, data are as of end-2013, and for Germany as of end-2012. Challenge 3: Weak bank balance sheets and governance Despite three rounds of recapitalizations since 2010 and massive liquidity support from the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Greece (BoG), confidence in the banking sector is yet to return, and capital controls are still in place. The quality of bank capital is weak, with half being comprised of deferred tax assets (DTAs), which could add to contingent liabilities for the state. Moreover, non-performing loans (NPLs) have continued to rise in recent years, reaching Greece: Total Bank Deposits (Billions of euros) Jan-10 Nov-10 Sep-11 Jul-12 Jun-13 Apr-14 Feb-15 Dec-15 Nov-16 Source: Bank of Greece. Non-Performing Loans (Percent of total loans) Sources: Bank of Greece; and 2016 EBA report. Note: Data for Greece as of September 2016, data for other euro area estimates as of March 2016. The tax collection rate is defined as the ratio of collected to assessed obligations, including taxes, penalties, and fines, the latter of which are largely uncollectible, pointing to a highly ineffective tax administration. Page 15 the second highest level in the euro zone (just behind Cyprus). Finally, governance concerns persist, as early attempts to insulate the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) from political interference have not appeared to yield results, ESM direct recapitalization was not available in 2015, and recent legislation tightening eligibility for bank boards is yet to be fully implemented. Challenge 4: Pervasive structural rigidities, which prevent inclusive growth Greece implemented landmark labor market reforms in 2010-11, aimed at protecting employment by increasing labor market flexibility. The reforms allowed for a significant reduction in labor costs, helping to narrow Greece’s wage-competitiveness gap relative to trading partners. However, parallel reforms intended to address rigidities in product markets have not generated the hoped-for increases in productivity and competitiveness, due to slow implementation in the face of strong opposition from vested interests. As a result, while the burden of adjustment has fallen excessively on wages, prices have adjusted less (even after accounting for tax hikes), and a real-exchange-rate overvaluation of some 5-10 percent remains relative to fundamentals (Annex 1). Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (Index, January 2010 = 100; seasonally adjusted) Labor Cost, Wage Index (Index, 2010:Q1 = 100) GRC PRT ESP IRL GRC PRT While labor market reforms appear to have helped halt the rise in the unemployment and poverty rates (which have been closely interlinked) after 2012 by allowing firms to adjust People Below 60 Percent of Median Income (Percent) Evolution of Inequality, 2008-15 Sources: Elstat; Eurostat; and Haver Analytics. Jun-13 Apr-14 Feb-15 Dec-15 Nov-16 Sources: Eurostat; and Haver Analytics. Jan-10 Nov-10 Sep-11 Jul-12 GRC (constant taxes) 2010Q1 2016Q1 Q3 ESP IRL 2011Q3 2013Q1 2014Q3 Euro area Greece-employed Greece-not employed (rhs) t n e i c i f f e o c i i n Source: Eurostat. Source: Elstat. Non-performing loans are defined as loans that are 90 days or more past due, unlikely to be repaid in full without realizing collateral, and impaired according to accounting rules, as well loans that have been restructured for less than a year. Page 16 their payrolls rather than close down, Greece’s poverty level remains unacceptably high, especially compared to that in the rest of the euro area. At the same time, inequality is relatively high in cross-country comparison and has further increased during the crisis (although to a lesser extent than in other countries, such as Cyprus, Ireland, or Spain), suggesting that while better-off interest groups have been relatively protected, the brunt of the adjustment has been borne by wage earners and the unemployed.