No changes are proposed to the QPCs (MEFP Table 1). The authorities agreed to lower the monitoring target ceiling on public employment for both end-June and end-December 2016―more ambitious than agreed earlier―to maintain employment at or below the end-2015 level. As noted, staff proposes to revise the structural benchmark on public sector modernization to focus it specifically on the management of the public sector wage bill, and to rephase it to provide the authorities adequate time to consider recommendations from the FAD TA (MEFP Table 2). Consultations with TA experts will inform the government’s position in ongoing negotiations with unions in 2016. Modifications to the definition of the continuous QPC ceiling on the contracting of non-concessional external debt by central government are proposed. Previously, all borrowing from the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) and the World Bank (WB) was excluded from the zero ceiling. However, to comply with the Fund’s new policy on Public Debt Limits, modifications are proposed to the QPC in the TMU (¶10) to include borrowing from the CDB and WB in the definition but with associated adjustors for CDB and WB borrowing for set amounts and purposes. The ceiling and adjustors state the specific nature of the development loans expected to be contracted and set a cap on the borrowing permitted under the adjustor for the QPC ceiling. The projected borrowing from these institutions (US$30 million for the CDB and WB, respectively) is expected to occur primarily under their respective Development Policy Loans (DPL), regional partnership strategies, and project loans. These programs/projects aim to support Grenada’s national development strategy with a focus on strengthening growth, competitiveness and resilience, including improving the investment climate, strengthening tourism and linkages to agribusiness, building resilience to natural disasters with regulatory and physical planning reforms, and improving the targeting of social programs (see Informational Annex). The latter has been synchronized with conditionality under the ECF arrangement, where a feature of the Bank’s policy loan is related to the identification and registration of eligible recipients for social assistance to ensure that social spending is allocated to those most in need. As previously agreed, debt instruments issued as part of the restructuring continue to be excluded from the QPC ceiling as, consistent with the Public Debt Limits policy, these borrowings are for debt management operations to improve the overall profile of public debt. Financing assurances are in place for the fourth review. The completion of several debt restructuring agreements (¶9), along with the continued improvement in the macroeconomic outlook, have narrowed financing needs in the baseline scenario. The remaining financing gaps are expected to close over the program period with exceptional financing expected from International Financial Institutions (Tables 3 and 6). The authorities remain in arrears to three official bilateral creditors (Algeria, Libya, and Trinidad and Tobago) pending agreement on debt restructuring with these creditors. Staff is of the view that, given the relative IMF, “Reform of the Policy on Public Debt Limits in Fund-Supported Programs”. December 2014. Page 23 financial contribution of these bilateral creditors to the ECF-supported program, the agreement reached with Grenada’s Paris Club creditors in November 2015 is not adequately representative under the Fund’s policy on the non-toleration of arrears to official bilateral creditors. Grenada continues to engage in good faith discussions with its remaining official bilateral creditors to whom it remains in arrears and these creditors have indicated that they consent to the completion of the review.