The program envisages a primary fiscal consolidation of 7 ¾ percent of GDP over three years, with upfront legislated measures. Together with debt restructuring and fiscal structural reforms, this should set public debt on a firm downward path to the regional target of 60 percent of GDP. Evidence from available wage data for St. Lucia (which is often used as a proxy for the ECCU region) points to public wage growth leading private wage growth. Page 19 Fiscal Consolidation The authorities and staff agreed that significant fiscal consolidation is needed to address Grenada’s fiscal imbalances . In the absence of debt restructuring and consolidation measures, the overall deficit would remain in the range of 8–9 percent of GDP as debt servicing costs would continue to rise. As a result, public debt would increase from about 110 percent of GDP at end-2013 to over 134 percent of GDP by 2020, more than twice the regional target. The authorities’ program targets a sizeable fiscal consolidation of 7¾ percentage points of GDP, aimed at reaching a primary surplus of 3½ percent of GDP by 2016 (Box 1; MEFP ¶17). This consolidation effort would put debt on a firmly downward path, and, in staff’s view, would strike the right balance between short- term growth and long-term fiscal sustainability considerations. Despite the significant fiscal consolidation, in the absence of a complementary debt restructuring, debt would remain high at around 89 percent of GDP by 2020 and the fiscal financing gaps would not be covered by marketable instruments. Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios: Without Restructuring (percent of GDP) Primary Balance (Left) Baseline Debt (Right) Program The authorities envisage substantially front-loaded measures to turn around the fiscal position, but the impact on growth is expected to be moderate. Three quarters of the fiscal consolidation effort will be undertaken in the first two years of the proposed program, with most revenue measures needed for the entire adjustment already approved (Tables 2a and 2b; MEFP ¶18-19). The adjustment will focus on curtailing current spending and widening the tax base. To minimize the impact of the fiscal adjustment on growth, staff and the authorities agreed that the fiscal consolidation should protect social spending and growth-enhancing capital investments and this has been reflected in the design of the authorities’ proposed program: Half of the adjustment effort will focus on boosting the revenue base, since with a tax revenue-to-GDP ratio of less than 20 percent Grenada’s tax intake is low compared to the both the region and many countries at similar income levels. An essential revenue measure is the reduction in the minimum threshold for paying the personal income tax, which—at three times per capita income—was the highest in the region. The authorities have nearly halved the threshold as of January 1, 2014, increasing the coverage of income tax from 5 percent of income earners to an estimated 19 percent. Other revenue measures include: increases in property tax rates and a revaluation of assessed property values; an increase in the custom The personal income tax threshold was lowered from EC$60,000 to EC$36,000 as of January 2014. The marginal tax rate will be 0 percent up to EC$36,000, 15 percent between EC$36,000 and EC$60,000, and 30 percent above this threshold. Page 20 services charge; a broadening of the base of income, VAT and other taxes through a reduction in exemptions; and the introduction of new taxes, such as a financial activities tax and a small business tax. The tax incentive regime will also be reformed as part of the structural reform agenda to ensure the integrity of the tax base going forward. Tax to GDP Ratios of Middle Income Countries (In percent, 2013) Other Caribbean countries Average Grenada Source: WEO. On the expenditure front, restraint in current spending will contribute more than a quarter of the total fiscal savings. With about two thirds of revenues financing the cost of the civil service (wages and pensions), the authorities’ expenditure measures going forward will focus on tackling the large wage bill. The program envisages a freeze of the nominal wage bill at current levels and its further reduction to historical levels through attrition, elimination of vacancies, and structural reforms of civil service employment and pay. The government has already reached agreement with the trade unions to defer all wage negotiations for the duration of the program to avoid disruptive retroactive payments in 2015-16, and will cap the growth of the wage bill from 2015 to a level that can be sustained by tax inflows in the forthcoming fiscal responsibility legislation. Other expenditure measures include: a reduction in spending on goods and services through savings in the utilities bill, rental and communication costs, as well as a nominal freeze in most other categories of current spending. While restraint in capital spending appears to contribute significantly to the adjustment effort (about a quarter), it does so only when compared to the 2013 level, when non-grant-financed capital spending was high by historical standards due to an increase in spending on social programs. Tax administration reforms will be critical in supporting the fiscal adjustment effort . The authorities will focus on implementing the reform agenda already put together with extensive support from the regional technical assistance center CARTAC over the past several years. This agenda includes increased focus on risk management and large taxpayers; improving incentives for tax collections by appropriately designing the compensation structure for tax collectors; connecting the customs and inland revenue information systems and ensuring exchange of information between the two departments; enactment of the newly drafted Customs Bill that will modernize the existing legislation and introduce penalties for noncompliance, among other things; and the creation of an internal audit unit at customs (MEFP ¶18 & ¶25). Many social projects are classified under capital spending, a statistical issue that will need to be addressed in future reform efforts. Page 21 Revenue measures Personal income tax Grenada: Adjustment Measures (In percent of GDP, full impact by end of program) Measures Start in Full yield Reduce threshold to EC$36,000, with a marginal rate of 15 percent on income up to EC$60,000 Widen the income and withholding tax base to winnings from lotteries and games of chance Property tax Increase rate on both buildings and land to 0.25 percent in 2014 and to 0.5 percent in 2016 Revise valuations to market value Value-added tax Reduce the list of exempt items (nonbasic foods, private accommodations) Restore 15 percent rate on construction materials Increase VAT paid by St. George's University from 5 to 15 percent Excises Excise tax of 5 percent on motor vehicle parts, tires, batteries, motor oil, and luxury goods Increase excises on tobacco and alcohol (at least 10 percent) Customs exemptions Halve customs exemptions to GRENLEC, statutory bodies, St. George's University and returning nationals Other Increase in customs service charge from 5% to 6% Introduce a 10% tax on financial activities Introduce a small business taxation regime Increase fees for motor vehicle license, professional licenses, and gun license Current expenditure measures Wage and pension bill Freeze wage bill (including allowances) for 2014-2016 at May-December 2013 levels Reduce wage bill by another 0.4pp of GDP after freeze (attrition, reform) Freeze personal allowances for 2014-16 at 2013 levels Goods and services Goods and services spending fixed in nominal terms at 2013 levels for 2014-2016 Additional measures from efficiency savings (LED lights, air conditioners, rental bill agreements, reduced mobile and land telephone bills) Transfers and subsidies Freeze in nominal terms at 2013 levels for 2014-2016 Total revenue and current expenditure measures Streamline non-grant-financed capital spending Total fiscal adjustment effort Page 22 Box 1. Fiscal Adjustment Effort and the Fiscal Impulse (In percent of GDP) In the case of Grenada’s program, the fiscal measures are more frontloaded and larger than suggested by the headline fiscal numbers. The headline primary balance is programmed to improve by 7.2 percentage points of GDP between 2013 and 2016, but the underlying adjustment effort amounts to 7¾ percent of GDP. Also, the headline numbers Grenada: Underlying Fiscal Adjustment Effort suggest the adjustment is focused on the last two years of the program, whereas the underlying effort is much more front-loaded at 3.0, 2.6 and 2.2 percent of GDP respectively during 2014-16. This difference between the headline numbers and the fiscal effort is explained by one-off factors that affect the outcomes in 2013 and 2014, such as (i) the 1.4 percent of GDP license fee received as non-tax revenue in 2013; and (ii) retroactive wage payments for the 2009-2012 period, with payments of 0.8 percent of GDP in 2013 and 1.2 percent expected in 2014 (table below). The planned fiscal adjustment effort envisaged in the program is ambitious. At 7¾ percent of GDP, the planned adjustment is at the 97 th percentile of all fiscal consolidations recorded during the past two decades for the advanced and developing countries with debt ratios larger than 60 percent of GDP. The average annual adjustment (in percent of GDP) in Grenada’s program is also large compared to other PRGT-supported programs. 2013 2014 2015 2016 One-off items, o.w. Windfall revenue Retroactive wage/pension payments Est. Prog. Underlying primary balance Cumulative fiscal adjustment Headline primary balance Cumulative fiscal adjustment ECF Grenada Adjustment in Context y p B P s g v Planned Fiscal Adjustment Under Fund Programs, Annual, % of GDP Dominica 2002 Sao Tome 2005 Grenada Malawi 2010 Sao Tome 2008 Mongolia 1997 Solomon Islands Moldova 2000 Mogolia 2000 Yemen 1997 Sources: WEO, program staff report, and IMF staff estimates. debt to GDP ratio Upper quantile Grenada 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 3-year adjustment in cyclically-adjusted PB, percent of GDP Source: Data on historical adjustments included in the recently introduced realism-check feature of the MAC-DSA template. Distribution of all advanced and emerging economies with debt greater than 60 percent of GDP for the period of 1990 to 2011. p y q f s s L Page 23 Box 1. Fiscal Adjustment Effort and the Fiscal Impulse (Concluded) Program Fiscal Impulse (% of GDP) The contractionary effect of the adjustment effort, especially in the first years of the program, will be mitigated by grant inflows and payment of the retroactive wages in 2014. The fiscal impulse, measured as the change in the cyclically-adjusted overall balance excluding grant revenues , is expansionary in the first year of the program despite the strong consolidation effort of the authorities, because the impact on the domestic demand is offset in part by the 1.2 percent of GDP in retroactive wage payments and about 4½ percent of GDP in expected investment spending financed by external grant inflows from China and PetroCaribe, among other. The mitigation of the contractionary effect of the adjustment in the first year of the program will provide the needed respite for the economy to pick up some momentum before the full effect of the adjustment is felt later in the program. _______________ The permanent component of the wage increase is not counted as a one-off factor. The program sample includes only the PRGT programs that had a fiscal adjustment of at least 6 percentage points of GDP planned at the outset of a Fund-supported program. Grant revenues but not expenditures are excluded to better capture the impact of fiscal policies on domestic demand. The overall balance excluding grants has been adjusted for the cycle by assuring a unit elasticity of the revenues to the output gap and a zero elasticity of the spending Fiscal impulse Fiscal effort (chg. in underlying primary deficit) Output gap y s p x E y C The authorities and staff agreed on the need to accommodate increased social spending for the most vulnerable groups during the period of fiscal adjustment. With assistance from the World Bank, the authorities are strengthening their flagship social assistance program SEED (Support for Education, Employment, Empowerment and Development) an amalgamation of several smaller programs that now accounts for 18 percent of total social spending through the establishment of a beneficiary registry and the introduction of proxy means testing as the eligibility criterion. During the program period, cash transfers under the SEED program will be increased by an estimated 0.3 percent of GDP, a floor on spending under the program will ensure the adjustment is not achieved by a retrenchment in targeted transfers, and further assistance to support social safety nets will be sought from the donor community (MEFP ¶15). To further rationalize social programs going forward, the government has approved at end-March 2014 a Social Protection Strategy (Box 2). The major objectives of the new social development strategy are to: (i) strengthen the production and use of household poverty data for better policy design of social programs; (ii) increase the poverty reduction focus of social safety net programs though consolidation of social programs; (iii) undertake social and legal reforms to improve access to services for the poor and vulnerable by rationalizing the social programs; (iv) help families make the transition from welfare dependence to economic self- sufficiency; (v) ensure an efficient, effective, transparent and accountable social protection service delivery by using the proxy means test to develop a common targeting mechanism for all major safety net and social protection interventions, and harmonize the eligibility criteria and Page 24 application processes. This strategy will serve as a basis for government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper that will be finalized by June 2014 and will ensure that poverty reduction remains a priority. Box 2. Social Safety Nets P G f Total Spending on Social Programs Others Emergency Recovery Debushing SEED IMANI Total Social protection spending has increased significantly during the crisis , from 1 ⅓ percent of GDP in 2009 to 2½ percent of GDP in 2013. There are about 25 social protection programs in Grenada, covering both social safety nets for the most vulnerable groups and employment support programs, and largely financed by donor funds. The three main social programs, which currently account for over two thirds of the social spending, are SEED (consolidated cash transfer program encompassing public assistance, student support and school feeding), IMANI (youth training) and De-Bushing (employment program, clearing up of road sides). Overall, the social programs have been developed without a coherent strategy, many programs are poorly targeted, duplication of benefits and beneficiaries are very likely given lack of a beneficiary database and uniform eligibility criteria, and the programs are poorly monitored. Within this context, the Government has launched a two-pronged approach to strengthening the delivery of social protection programs . With assistance from the World Bank, in 2010, the Government designed and created a pilot program to consolidate its three top safety net programs (giving rise to SEED) and set out to improve its targeting. For this purpose, the government is currently developing a database with full demographic and economic background of the existing beneficiary households of the SEED program (about 3,500 households) and is developing criteria for a proxy means test. Once tested, these criteria will be applied to the existing SEED beneficiary households to determine eligibility, likely before end-2014. At the same time, the Government has developed with assistance from UNICEF and UN Women a coherent social protection strategy aimed at strengthening the social safety nets more broadly through the consolidation and rationalization of the social programs, increasing the poverty reduction focus of social safety net, rolling out the proxy means testing to other social programs to ensure an effective, transparent and accountable social protection service delivery, and harmonizing the eligibility criteria and application processes across programs. There is a need to strengthen and rationalize existing programs to ensure that they better address priority groups. Risks to the fiscal outlook are significant. The main risks stem from underperformance in revenues due to weaker-than-expected growth or a lower than expected yield of the new revenue measures. Risks on the expenditure side stem from potential difficulties in controlling expenditure commitments of line ministries before the programmed structural reforms come into effect and from potential disaster-related spending hikes. To deal with these risks, the program has identified contingency measures on both revenues and expenditures to bring the fiscal flows on track with program targets (gradual release of spending appropriations and the expansion of the income tax base), as well as contingency financing. On the latter, the authorities will save the budgetary receipts from the recently established citizenship-by-investment program (CBI) Page 25 which could yield revenues, as it currently does in other ECCU countries for contingency financing during the program period (Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) ¶5). The government is also seeking donor assistance to support the program by purchasing additional natural disaster insurance for the duration of the program to ensure that government policies are not derailed by natural disaster shocks (MEFP ¶20). Debt Restructuring and Regularization of Arrears The authorities and staff agreed that comprehensive debt restructuring is essential to bring the overall public debt to sustainable levels . While the planned fiscal adjustment would reverse the upward debt dynamics and put debt on a downward path, public debt would remain at a high level over the medium-term in the absence of debt restructuring. As shown in the debt sustainability analysis (Annex II), the risk of debt distress would continue to remain high as all debt and debt service thresholds would be breached even in the absence of unanticipated shocks. The comprehensive debt restructuring being pursued by the authorities is critical to reducing debt to sustainable levels, lowering the risk of debt distress, and putting the ECCU debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2020 within reach (Annex II, MEFP ¶22). With assistance from financial and legal advisors, the authorities have initiated debt restructuring negotiations to address the debt overhang . The authorities have reached out to all affected creditors to achieve a comprehensive and collaborative debt restructuring (MEFP ¶23). Because of the diversity of the affected creditors, the pace of negotiations with various groups of creditors will differ: Formal discussions with creditors holding the US$ 2025 bond (30 percent of the eligible debt) started in March 2014 with consultations on the economic program and the underlying macroeconomic framework, and have continued through scheduled weekly conference calls. On April 9, 2014, the government published restructuring scenarios for the holders of EC$ 2025 bond (11 percent of the eligible debt), which are indicative of the restructuring terms that the government is seeking in order to bridge its multi-year financing gaps and achieve meaningful debt reduction. The initial offer from the government included two bond options that would be issued in exchange for tendered debt: a 60 percent and a 50 percent principal haircut, maturity extensions, and coupon reductions (Box 3). Some creditors have already indicated their willingness to accept the 60 percent haircut option. After further discussions, a formal offer is expected to be launched for these creditors. Negotiations have also expanded to domestic financial institutions, including the National Insurance Scheme (NIS The program does not yet include these receipts as a financing item given the uncertainty surrounding their magnitude. Page 26 Box 3. The Published Debt Restructuring Scenarios In the context of its ongoing consultation with affected creditors, the government offered two indicative restructuring options to the holders of its EC$ 2025 bond and to the Taiwanese bank Export- Import Bank of the Republic of China. The first option entails a 60 percent principal nominal haircut, extends maturity to 15 years with equal installments of principal payments, and sets interest at 6.5 percent throughout. The second option entails 50 percent principal nominal haircut, extends maturity to 20 years with 2 years of grace period followed by increasing installments of principal payments, and sets interest rate at 5 percent throughout (table and figures). Both options, albeit with different terms, imply the creditors would receive around 33-43 cents on the dollar, for discount rates ranging between 8 and 12 percent, levels at or above which the bond is currently trading in the secondary market. Haircut Option 1 Option 2 Indicative Restructuring Options Principal payments Equal installments Increasing installments Maturity 15 years 20 years Grace period Interest rate Interest arrears 60% reduction, 40% capitalized 50% reduction, 50% capitalized Indicative Restructuring Option 1 (Debt service projections, millions of EC$) Indicative Restructuring Option 2 (Debt service projections, millions of EC$) Principal Interest Principal Interest Source: Government of Grenada. Source: Government of Grenada. The Export-Import Bank of the Republic of China (5.4 percent of eligible debt), whose litigation in the U.S. courts to recover their outstanding claims on Grenada is still ongoing, have indicated a willingness in principle to participate in the restructuring. The indicative scenarios presented for the EC$ 2025 bond were also presented to the Export-Import Bank of the Republic of China, along with a proposal on the treatment of outstanding arrears. With regard to other bilateral creditors, the government will request financing assurances from Paris Club creditors (1.7 percent of eligible debt) prior to the IMF Executive Board meeting and will seek agreement on a date to discuss the treatment of its debt (including outstanding arrears) following the approval of the proposed ECF arrangement. The On March 4, 2013, the Export-Import Bank of the Republic of China filed a lawsuit in New York court to recover payments outstanding on their claims since the 2005 debt restructuring on the basis of the pari passu arguments used by creditors against Argentina. Page 27 government of Trinidad and Tobago has also been contacted to initiate discussions on debt restructuring. An agreement was reached with the Kuwait Fund in March 2013 to clear the outstanding arrears by end-2015. The Kuwait Fund resumed new disbursements in 2013 and will continue to provide further financing during the program period. The published debt restructuring scenarios are consistent with achieving debt sustainability and reducing near-term debt servicing obligations If all debts other than (i) multilateral debt, (ii) treasury bills issued in the RGSM, and (iii) loan facilities extended by the ECCB were to receive a haircut on the nominal value of the claims, a haircut of 50-60 percent, as pursued by the authorities, would put debt on a firm downward path towards the regional target of 60 percent of GDP by 2020. Given the scope of the restructuring and the diversity of the creditor base (see Table 4 for the breakdown of debt by creditor), the range of instruments to be offered will likely comprise combinations of principal haircuts and maturity extensions, all aimed at yielding equivalent NPV terms. Therefore, the likely outcome of the debt restructuring will be a combination of scenarios on equivalent NPV terms, resulting in a range of possible outcomes for reductions in nominal debt. Under any scenarios that fall within the range presented by the 50-60 percent nominal haircut being pursued by the authorities and their NPV-equivalent terms, the fiscal financing gaps for the near and medium term would be covered (see section “Program Modalities”). Structural reforms for fiscal sustainability Fiscal structural reforms aim to address the root causes of fiscal imbalances and will focus on overhauling public financial management (PFM) practices and introducing a rule-based fiscal policy framework. In the near term, the authorities will focus the fiscal structural reforms on strengthening their ability to achieve the targeted fiscal outcomes through reforms to public financial management (MEFP ¶25). With ongoing technical assistance from the IMF, the authorities will revise the PFM legislation before end-August 2014 to strengthen budgetary discipline. The new legislation would mandate strict commitment controls, require all spending in excess of the originally approved budget to be appropriated by parliament ex-ante through a supplementary budget, establish clear rules for accessing any contingency appropriations or the contingency fund, limit extra-budgetary funds held outside the Consolidated Fund, and impose meaningful enforcement mechanisms. The new legislation would also prohibit changes to the tax system without parliamentary approval, strengthen within-year budget reviews and multiyear budgeting, and improve the capital budgeting process. In addition, to identify other reform priorities across the spectrum of PFM functions, the authorities have requested the IMF to carry The existing stock of debt arrears will be regularized as part of the debt restructuring negotiations, while the supplier arrears will be fully cleared by end 2015, under the agreed schedule (see TMU ¶8-9). Page 28 out a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment during the coming twelve to eighteen months. Subsequently, the fiscal policy framework will be strengthened to better anchor fiscal policy decision-making (MEFP ¶25). The existing framework does not impose meaningful constraints on the conduct of fiscal policies and does not provide a fiscal anchor to guide policy decisions. It also limits government’s control over its income policies, as wage negotiations with the trade unions are retroactive and not constrained by economic or fiscal considerations (Box 3). The authorities will introduce fiscal responsibility legislation before end-2014, with technical assistance from the IMF, to transition to a rule-based framework that would anchor fiscal policies during the annual budget cycle and would steer them towards the achievement of the regional debt target. Following the achievement of the desired fiscal balance, the authorities envisage capping real spending growth at potential GDP growth (2-2½ percent), while allowing revenues to absorb cyclical fluctuations; this will ensure that the desired fiscal balance is broadly maintained over the cycle. The legislation would also establish a more systematic approach to wage setting by capping personnel spending as a share of tax revenues to secure their sustainability and by requiring forward-looking rather than retroactive wage negotiations. The need to reduce personnel spending will require broader reforms to rationalize employment and the wage structure in the public sector (Box 3, MEFP ¶25). In addition to the planned reduction in public sector employment through attrition, the government will undertake a strategic review of the public sector structure, employment and wages, to eliminate inefficiencies and right-size the public sector. The review will cover government functions, human resource management, as well as civil service size, composition and remuneration structure. The reforms will be undertaken in the first half of 2015 with grant support from the European Union. Targeted reviews, focused on functions and employment in selected ministries, are currently being undertaken with assistance from the World Bank. The authorities will also tackle the ubiquitous tax incentives, which have weakened the tax base in many countries throughout the region (MEFP ¶25). In line with the recommendations of an ongoing regional technical assistance from the IMF’s fiscal affairs department, the authorities will make the process for granting incentives more transparent, predictable and aligned to government’s policy priorities. This will be done through the elimination of discretionary exemptions and the codification of all exemptions in the legislation with clear qualification criteria aligned with government policy priorities. Legislation to this effect will be prepared before end-November 2014, and will include requirements for regular reporting to parliament on revenues foregone and for periodic Sources: Norregard, Crivelli, Franzsen, & Krelove, 2013 and Krelove, Crivelli, Franzsen, & Ś wistak (2014). Revenues Foregone, 2012 (percent of GDP) VAT Customs Others (incl. excise) Corporate St. Kitts & Nevis Dominica Grenada St. Lucia Page 29 review of the existing exemptions in terms of their rationale, cost and benefits. To minimize risks to the fiscal position, vulnerabilities in a number of other areas will also be addressed (MEFP ¶25) The statutory bodies are on a weak financial footing, poorly monitored and controlled, and present an important source of contingent liability for the central government (Annex V). With technical assistance from CARTAC, the government will undertake a strategic review of statutory bodies’ functions and rationale, and will develop a plan for their liquidation, privatization, or retention before end-October 2014. The revised PFM legislation will strengthen control over the finances of the statutory bodies, especially in cases where central government financing is required to support them. As the government is considering PPPs to bridge the infrastructure gaps, it will safeguard against potential risks by introducing a comprehensive PPP framework before entering into PPP arrangement (technical assistance will be provided by the World Bank). To strengthen its capacity to monitor the fiscal risks associated with parastatal entities and PPPs in particular, the government will create a fiscal risk unit to monitor and manage these risks. Other fiscal structural reforms under the program will focus on strengthening debt management (with technical assistance from the IMF and the World Bank), strengthening cash management through a transition to a more comprehensive Treasury Single Account and more effective cash flow forecasting, and reforming the public pension system to make it more equitable and streamlined (the latter two with assistance from CARTAC). Box 4. The Cost of the Civil Service At about 12 percent of GDP or two thirds of government revenue (excluding one-off costs), the cost of the civil service in Grenada consumes a significant share of public resources. The compensation of current civil servants accounts for about half of total government revenue or 10 percent of GDP, somewhat higher than the 9 percent of GDP on average in small states. Public pensions consume another 10 percent of revenues or 2 percent of GDP. This leaves little room for high-priority public investment, and reduces the ability of the government to respond to shocks. Significant rigidities in the public wage setting and in public hiring/firing decisions has made the management of the wage bill, including its reduction, quite difficult: Employment. The procedures for disciplining or firing public servants are very cumbersome, resulting in de facto life-long employment. As a result, the overall government and the individual ministries have little latitude in managing their human resources. For this reason, ministries often rely on contractual (un- established) employees that can be hired outside the Public Service Commission and the public wage scale, and these kinds of employees now account for about a quarter of total public employment. Total public sector employment has increased by about 12 percent over the past six years, to about 6½ percent of population (relatively modest by regional standards). Cost of Civil Service (EC$ millions and percent of GDP) EC$ millions Percent of GDP (rhs) Include government wage and pension bills. Wages . The wage setting mechanism is also not conducive to government’s ability to control its income policies. Wages are negotiated with public sector trade unions, which yield significant power given their ability Page 30 Box 4. The Cost of the Civil Service (Concluded) Public Sector Employment in Comparison (percent of population) Public Sector Employment (Persons) 11.9 12.3 established workers unestablished workers Sources: ECCB; national authorities; ILO; and staff estimates. Note: 2012 and 2013 numbers are provisional. 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 to boycott key institutions in the country, such as customs and ports. The negotiations cover periods of three years, but are retroactive, and the need to make large retroactive payments soon after the negotiation imparts significant uncertainty to fiscal policies and creates financing pressures. In addition, the wage negotiations are not framed by macroeconomic developments or productivity increases in the public sector. Over the past fifteen years, wage increases averaged 1.9 percent a year in real terms. In the last negotiations which were concluded in 2013 and covered the period 2009-12 the previous government agreed to a 6 percent nominal increase in wages or a 3 percent wage decline in real terms. The cost of this agreement was 2 percent of GDP in retroactive one-off payments that pushed up the government’s wage and pension bill in 2013 and 2014. Government Wage Bill and Wage Agreements (EC$mn, percent) 15% (5%) 15% (8%) 9% (0%) 6% (-3%) Negotiated wage index nominal (real) 6% (-3%) 20% (3%) Real wage bill Wage as share of tax revenue 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011 2014 Note: Numbers in data labels represent nominal wage increase (real wage increase) from the wage agreements. Retroactive Wage and Pension Payments, Illustrative Retroactive payments Backpay agreed in Dec 2012 of GDP of GDP 6% increase 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Pensions . The public pension scheme is non-contributory and covers only the civil servants who joined the public sector before 1983 (those who joined later receive pensions through the national insurance scheme (NIS). The civil servants covered under the scheme receive both an NIS and a public pension, introducing inequities among various cohorts of public retirees. Although not required by law, public pensions are traditionally indexed to wages. A significant rigidity associated with the pension scheme, however, is the constitutional requirement that anyone who is “required to retire on abolition of his office or for the purpose of reorganization” is entitled to a full pension, regardless of the time in service. _______________________________ Hiring and firing decisions are delegated by the Constitution to a five-member Public Service Commission operating outside the government, although three members represent the government and two members are from the trade unions. Page 31