The authorities have requested a three-year arrangement under the ECF with access of 120 percent of quota (US$21.9 million, or SDR 14.04 million). The ECF-supported program is expected to catalyze significant IFI and donor assistance, helping to meet balance of payment needs and provide space for the country to undertake the needed fiscal and structural adjustment. Given Grenada’s current credit outstanding with the Fund (152.4 percent of quota as of March 2014), the proposed arrangement would imply high access, as it is above the norm of 75 percent of quota for a country that already has outstanding concessional credit of 100-200 percent of quota. Nevertheless, staff considers that high access is justified by the strength of the proposed adjustment program, a protracted current account deficit, and the large financing gap. A Fund program would also play a catalytic role by unlocking needed financing for Grenada: Financing needs Based on the programmed fiscal adjustment, total balance of payments financing needs generated by the fiscal financing gaps could reach about US$233.4 million (about 27 percent of GDP) during 2014–17 (Table 6). About 65 percent of this gap is to be filled by savings from the debt restructuring and regularization of arrears, and the rest (US$82 million) by exceptional IFI financing. Fund support would account for a quarter of the IFI support, and would be used for direct budget financing. The World Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) are preparing new lending arrangements for Grenada, each for disbursements of US$30 million during the three years of the program. The European Union will resume its support for Grenada (expected at €12.4 million over the next five years) once a Fund supported arrangement is in place. Strong adjustment program The authorities’ economic program is ambitious and they have already undertaken numerous bold policy actions upfront, including obtaining legislative approval of most of the measures required to support the adjustment program. Given Grenada’s weak track record of past program implementation, program disbursements will be broadly evenly phased over each review to avoid front-loading. The first disbursement available upon Board approval of the program will be SDR 2.04 million, with the remaining disbursements of SDR 2.0 million each contingent on completions of reviews, including the financing assurances reviews (Table 10). Given the catalytic role of the Fund, financing support from other donors is expected to become available only after the Fund arrangement is in place. The quasi-currency board arrangement restricts the central banks’ ability to provide budgetary support. Page 35 Program conditionality is focused on monitoring fiscal targets and implementation of structural reforms. Prior actions included meeting the 2013 budget targets, demonstrating satisfactory progress in the debt restructuring discussions, obtaining Cabinet approval of the draft 2014 budget consistent with the program, and securing parliamentary approval of the relevant adjustment measures needed for the programmed consolidation. The program will be monitored through compliance with program conditionality in the context of semi-annual reviews: Quantitative performance criteria (PCs) include a floor on central government primary balance, a ceiling on central government primary spending, and a ceiling on the stock of central government domestic arrears. There are also continuous PCs on the non- accumulation of external debt arrears and the contracting of non-concessional external debt. Indicative targets include a ceiling on central government direct and indirect (guaranteed) borrowing and a floor on social spending. Memorandum items . The wage bill and the public employment will also be monitored relative to the agreed targets. Structural benchmarks focus on supporting the achievement of fiscal targets, improving public financial management, and removing obstacles to growth. Staff concludes that the authorities are in compliance with the Fund’s policies, based on satisfactory progress on the debt restructuring process, and that the program is fully financed for the next 12 months, with good prospects to fill the financing gap subsequently. The authorities have initiated collaborative discussions with all creditor groups in a transparent and equitable manner; discussions with commercial creditors are proceeding through weekly scheduled conference calls; and the authorities have made initial offers to some groups of creditors that are consistent with the debt sustainability and financing objectives underlying the program. Staff believes that it has adequate assurances that a debt restructuring will be successfully completed that will fundamentally address Grenada’s fiscal imbalances and restore debt sustainability. As such, staff believes that the proposed program financing is adequate as required under Fund policies: A sustainable debt position . Successful implementation of the program will set debt on a downward path over the medium-term (Table 4). In addition, staff has adequate assurances that debt restructuring, which assures debt stock sustainability over the medium-term and the financeability of the programmed fiscal position (and hence capacity to repay) is likely to be concluded. The authorities aim to make significant headway in the debt restructuring by end-2014. Financing assurances In line with the Fund’s policy on obtaining financing assurances in programs involving debt restructuring policies, the authorities have engaged with the creditors and are pursuing a credible debt restructuring that will ensure that the financing gaps for 2014-15 are closed, with good prospects for adequate financing during the Page 36 remaining arrangement period. For the purposes of the program, staff and the authorities agreed that satisfactory progress in the negotiations with the creditors would require: (i) initiating the negotiation phase of the restructuring with private and bilateral official creditors; (ii) seeking agreement on a debt restructuring consistent with closing the financing gap under the program and reducing debt to 60 percent of GDP by 2020; (iii) obtaining financing assurances from the Paris Club; and (iv) developing a credible timetable for advancing the restructuring discussions with private creditors through mid-2014 (MEFP ¶24) that provides adequate assurances the restructuring will be successful. As discussed above, the authorities have already complied with steps (i), (ii) and (iv), and will request financing assurances from the Paris Club (step (iii)) prior to arrangement’s approval. With regard to the financing gaps, they are projected at about US$350 million during 2014-17, of which US$230.5 million is generated by overdue payments accumulated through end-2014 (Tables 3a and 3b). If all eligible debt is restructured through a 50-60 percent nominal principal haircut as pursued by the authorities, the cash flow savings could range between US$354- 410 million, sufficient to cover the projected gaps. Arrears . In compliance with the Fund’s arrears policy for official creditors, the authorities are taking steps to regularize arrears with official creditors during the program period (Table 5). With regard to multilateral creditors, arrears are owed only to the OPEC Fund and they have been recently regularized through an agreement to repay in full by the end of the third quarter of 2014. On bilateral official debt, the authorities will request financing assurances from the Paris Club prior to the IMF Board approval of the arrangement, and arrears to the Paris Club creditors will also be discussed in the context of the debt treatment negotiations following program approval. Arrears to the Kuwait Fund have been rescheduled and will be repaid in installments through 2015. Consistent with the Fund’s lending into arrears policy: (i) prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of Grenada’s adjustment program; and (ii) with respect to arrears to external private creditors comprising missed coupon payments on the US$ and EC$ 2025 bonds Grenada is making a good faith efforts to reach a collaborative agreement in the context of the debt restructuring negotiations.