The top priority in 2016 is to strengthen management of the public sector wage bill. During the first phase of the program, direct controls on nominal wages and attrition successfully contained the wage bill, but now must be replaced with more sustainable measures. Moreover, public sector wages have important impact on private sector wages in small states. In response, the authorities have committed to develop a rational mechanism to manage the wage bill, including pay and grading reform, compensation guidelines, and systematic indicators to inform regular wage negotiations (MEFP¶7, 11). The authorities will receive TA from IMF Fiscal Affairs Department to conduct a review of existing policies, which is tentatively scheduled for May 2016. Approval of a “focused strategy to manage the public sector wage bill”, informed by the TA recommendations, is proposed as a revised and rephased structural benchmark for end- September 2016. As a complement, the government has begun consultations on public sector pension reform as part of addressing the overall cost of the civil service and of ensuring the sustainability of the NIS. Finalizing and implementing Grenada’s new fiscal policy framework remains a priority for 2016. The exhaustive legislative reforms to strengthen the framework are nearing completion (Table 11), but signing into force the tax incentive regime ( prior action ) and the tax administration act remain outstanding. The regulations for the public debt management act need to be finalized and the act and regulations brought into force―important given weaknesses noted in debt management. Labor laws and investment promotion are important elements of pro-growth reforms this year. In this respect, the authorities have drafted a new Act for the Grenada Investment Development Corporation (GIDC) and revised Labor Code. The new acts will come into effect following parliamentary approval, which are currently on track to meet the structural benchmarks for end-June 2016 (MEFP ¶15) and end-August 2016 (MEFP ¶17 ), respectively. These reforms should strengthen investment processes and prospects, improve labor relations, and motivate job search, key ingredients for raising potential growth and lowering unemployment. IMF Country Report No. 14/196, Box 4 on the civil service and wage-setting mechanism. See IMF Country Report No. 14/196, Annex IV. TA in support of pension reform took place in February 2016. Page 22