The recovery is expected to be modest in the near term and inflation to remain subdued. Downside risks dominate for now and stem from the uncertain impact of the fiscal consolidation on growth, faltering confidence, and a continued weak global recovery. The pace of economic recovery is expected to be modest over the program period. Staff projects growth to average 1½ percent during 2014-17, supported by a broadening of the recovery as the new resort boosts tourist arrivals (Table 1). The recovery is also expected to be supported by an easing of government financing constraints as the fiscal crisis is gradually resolved with the implementation of a comprehensive fiscal adjustment and the completion of the debt restructuring. Nevertheless, a faster recovery is expected to be held back by the drag of the fiscal adjustment and the weak credit growth as banks repair their balance sheets. The unemployment rate is expected to remain high over the medium-term, reflecting a significant structural component. Over the longer-term, growth is projected to recover steadily to about 2½ percent as domestic and external conditions normalize. Inflation is projected to remain subdued in the face of weak demand and moderate commodity inflation. Staff projects that inflation would average 1½ to 2 percent a year over the program period as spare capacity persists and the external price pressures remain modest. Over the medium-term, inflation is projected to remain around 2 percent, in line with imported inflation. The external current account deficit is expected to improve gradually with the fiscal consolidation and a recovery in exports. Exports are projected to rebound steadily, as nutmeg production recovers from hurricane-related damage and as global tourism demand improves. A See Grenada Country Report 14/19. Page 15 compression of public sector imports due to the envisaged fiscal consolidation is expected to more than offset a projected pickup in private sector imports as the economy recovers. As a result, the current account deficit is projected to narrow during the program period, from 27.1 percent in 2013 to about 18.9 percent of GDP by 2017. Nevertheless, without a significant pickup in private capital inflows, and in the absence of debt restructuring, external financing requirements are expected to remain high, with an external financing gap estimated to average of US$58.3 million (6¾ percent of GDP) per year during 2014–17. Grenada: Macroeconomic Outlook Real GDP growth (%) CPI inflation, period average (%) Primary balance Current account balance Savings Investment Est. (Percent of GDP) Downside risks to the macroeconomic outlook are high for the time being (Annex I) . The economy may be slower to recover or the drag of the fiscal adjustment may have a higher impact than projected by staff. The main risks to the outlook stem from faltering confidence if progress is not made soon in addressing the fiscal crisis, from a continued weak global recovery (on which Grenada depends for tourism) and from potential natural disasters. The impact of potential spillovers from the international financial markets (including changes in the U.S. monetary policy) is likely to be low, given the relative insulation from traditional capital flows, although some nonresident deposit outflows in case of narrowing interest differentials could put pressure on the balance of payments. At the same time, risks from unfavorable developments in the fragile regional markets could have large disruptive effects on Grenada’s economy if they materialize. Based on the historical variance of growth outcomes, staff estimates that the probability of negative growth during the next three years is about 40 percent. Source: Fund staff estimates. The distribution is based on Monte Carlo simulations (1000 draws each year) using a normal distribution with Grenada's historical variance. The shocks are capped at 3%. Grenada: Growth Outlook (in percent) 20-10th 30-20th 40-30th 40th-60th The authorities agree with staff’s views on the macroeconomic outlook and share staff’s concerns regarding downside risks to growth. While committed to undertaking the necessary consolidation to restore fiscal sustainability, the authorities are particularly concerned Page 16 that the sizeable fiscal consolidation may thwart the fragile recovery. Therefore, the authorities stressed the importance of unlocking concrete gains in Grenada’s competitiveness and growth through structural reform to attract more private investment and grants.