Structural reforms are advancing Tax administration : The new Tax Administration Act was approved by Parliament in February 2016 (November 2015 structural benchmark ) and the restructuring of the Inland Revenue Department (IRD) is now complete, with the Large and Medium (LMTU) and Small Taxpayers Service Units operational by mid-January 2016 (end-2015 structural benchmark ). To maximize the revenue yield from these efforts, the Act should be brought into force expeditiously and IRD provided with sufficient resources to fulfill its mandate. Tax incentive regime : The reform of the tax incentive regime to make it rule-based, predictable and transparent should be finalized in early May 2016. Relative to the initial legislative reforms approved in 2015, additional amendments were made to the individual acts primarily to codify incentives for qualifying investments in priority sectors, which are currently provided through Cabinet discretion. With approval from CARICOM partners, amendments to the list of conditional duty exemptions to remove discretion were also finalized. Regulations under the Investment Act of 2014 were also completed. With the new regime in place, bringing it into full force is a prior action for completion of the fourth review. While the transition to the new regime is expected to be broadly revenue neutral, the authorities have committed to taking immediate action should there be revenue losses (¶30, MEFP ¶10). Public finance management (PFM) : The authorities undertook to prepare the 2016 budget under the new Chart of Accounts (CoA) classification (end-2015 structural benchmark ). However, several recurrent spending items and some wage spending related to capital projects were still recorded incorrectly under the capital budget. Consequently, the end-2015 structural benchmark was not met. However, all monthly budget accounting and reporting in Other social spending SEED actual spending Total social spending SEED spending floor Social Spending (in millions of EC dollars) Page 18 2016 has been converted to the new CoA and, consequently, staff does not propose to rephase the structural benchmark. To support the proper classification of spending under the new CoA, further progress is needed to correctly record recurrent components of capital projects into their proper classification under the new CoA (MEFP¶10). To that end, CARTAC has agreed to provide focused TA in this area this year. Grenada’s Strengthened Fiscal Policy Framework ili        nnu          V dd  V dd  = = ill Page 19 PROGRAM PRIORITIES FOR 2016 Discussions focused on completing the programmed fiscal consolidation, finalizing reforms to Grenada’s fiscal policy framework, and improving competitiveness and growth prospects to support sustainability over the medium-term A. Completing the Fiscal Consolidation The programmed fiscal consolidation is on track, but there is little room for maneuver in 2016 . With the VAT on banking services effective (MEFP¶4), all 2016 adjustment measures are in place. Primary spending and the primary balance for 2016 are projected in line with their nominal program targets under conservative forecast assumptions, but nevertheless require close monitoring. Successful implementation of the final year of the programmed fiscal consolidation would put Grenada in the top quartile (93 rd percentile) of all fiscal consolidation efforts recorded globally during the past two decades for countries with debt ratios higher than 60 percent of GDP (chart). While projected to meet the nominal QPC, the primary surplus could fall below the 3.5 percent of GDP target set out in Grenada’s FRA. This target is required until public debt is reduced to 55 percent of GDP. The deviation is driven by expenditures related to the restructuring of two SOEs, which are accommodated under the ECF-supported program by an adjustor on the floor of the primary surplus for this purpose ((TMU¶5). While projected to meet the 2016 nominal QPC on the primary surplus (after adjustors), staff assess that these expenditures could put at risk the government’s primary surplus target of 3.5 percent of GDP under the FRA. Staff forecast the primary surplus to meet the FRA target of 3.5 percent of GDP in 2017 but urged the government to make additional efforts as needed in 2016 to deliver a surplus that complies with the FRA target, to safeguard the credibility of the rules-based fiscal policy framework. The main downside fiscal risk for 2016 could be overly-ambitious capital spending, but safeguards have been put in place . The budget assumes a significant scaling up of CBI program funds and a commensurate increase in grant inflows from the National Transformation The nominal program target for the primary surplus, after program adjustors are applied, is equivalent to 3.1 percent of GDP (see ¶ 21). Y nnu nd q il Page 20 Fund (NTF) to finance above-program capital spending (3 percent of GDP) on infrastructure and social projects. Some of the planned capital spending is on recurrent projects and could not be easily scaled back in the event of a shortfall in grant financing. As a result, staff concluded that the December structural benchmark for “approval of a budget consistent with program commitments” was not met. However, the authorities have put in place corrective measures to align the budget with program commitments (MEFP¶4), including by revising capital budget allocations (TMU¶20), and are closely monitoring execution. They also reduced their capital budget allocation to reflect lower- than-expected grants from the Petrocaribe arrangement, which are projected to decline to 0.1 percent of GDP from 0.4 percent in 2014. Rising wage pressures also present a downside risk. The budget made additional provisions for wage expenditures to address staff shortages in health care and strengthen revenue administration. While relatively small (0.2 percent of GDP), these provisions would push the wage bill slightly over the ECF monitoring target, although they would still be accommodated within the QPC on primary spending and also be under the ceiling on wage expenditure under the government’s FRA (9 percent of GDP). At the same time, public wage negotiations have commenced and unions are demanding payment of automatic grade increments for the 2014-16 period (MEFP ¶7). Staff projections for wages include cautious assumptions regarding the risk of payment of increments. While this raises the staff projection further above the monitoring target, total primary spending is still projected under the QPC ceiling. To ensure sustainability of the public sector wage bill over the medium-term, the authorities have committed ( structural benchmark ) to implement measures to strengthen management of the public sector wage bill (¶25, MEFP¶11). Authorities’ views: The authorities reasserted their commitment to the contingent fiscal measures outlined in the MEFPs from 2014 (see MEFP¶8). They concurred with staff about the importance of complying with the parameters of the FRA, and noted that under their own Under Grenada’s Petrocaribe arrangement, a portion of the fuel import bill is converted into a concessional loan for social projects (Country report No. 14/196, Annex VI). This share depends on international oil prices; the concessional financing portion has fallen from 60 percent to 30 percent since 2014. mm tt 2015 OutturnBudget 2016IMF Projection 2016 CBI Program Revenues: NTF Application Option (millions of EC$) Available Grant Financing NTF Contribution 1/ Sources: Grenadian authorities and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Contributions to the NTF are consistent with the requirement in the NTF regulations to save 40% of inflows into the NTF for arrears repayment, debt reduction and contingency financing. In 2015 all contribution to the NTF were utilized for arrears repayment consistent with ECF program commitments. Page 21 projections, they continue to target a 2016 primary surplus of 3.5 percent. They indicated that they would monitor budget outcomes closely. The government is committed to executing the capital budget in line with program commitments. With respect to wages, the government had committed in 2014 not to pay any wage increase or increments during the program, but discovered subsequently they had a contractual obligation to some public sector employees to pay increments. On this issue, they agreed with staff on the need to overhaul civil service compensation practices to address rigidities and deficiencies (¶25). B. Structural Reforms to Support Fiscal Sustainability and Growth The top priority in 2016 is to strengthen management of the public sector wage bill. During the first phase of the program, direct controls on nominal wages and attrition successfully contained the wage bill, but now must be replaced with more sustainable measures. Moreover, public sector wages have important impact on private sector wages in small states. In response, the authorities have committed to develop a rational mechanism to manage the wage bill, including pay and grading reform, compensation guidelines, and systematic indicators to inform regular wage negotiations (MEFP¶7, 11). The authorities will receive TA from IMF Fiscal Affairs Department to conduct a review of existing policies, which is tentatively scheduled for May 2016. Approval of a “focused strategy to manage the public sector wage bill”, informed by the TA recommendations, is proposed as a revised and rephased structural benchmark for end- September 2016. As a complement, the government has begun consultations on public sector pension reform as part of addressing the overall cost of the civil service and of ensuring the sustainability of the NIS. Finalizing and implementing Grenada’s new fiscal policy framework remains a priority for 2016. The exhaustive legislative reforms to strengthen the framework are nearing completion (Table 11), but signing into force the tax incentive regime ( prior action ) and the tax administration act remain outstanding. The regulations for the public debt management act need to be finalized and the act and regulations brought into force―important given weaknesses noted in debt management. Labor laws and investment promotion are important elements of pro-growth reforms this year. In this respect, the authorities have drafted a new Act for the Grenada Investment Development Corporation (GIDC) and revised Labor Code. The new acts will come into effect following parliamentary approval, which are currently on track to meet the structural benchmarks for end-June 2016 (MEFP ¶15) and end-August 2016 (MEFP ¶17 ), respectively. These reforms should strengthen investment processes and prospects, improve labor relations, and motivate job search, key ingredients for raising potential growth and lowering unemployment. IMF Country Report No. 14/196, Box 4 on the civil service and wage-setting mechanism. See IMF Country Report No. 14/196, Annex IV. TA in support of pension reform took place in February 2016. Page 22