Grenada is on the road to fiscal and debt sustainability, but has a ways to go . While the fiscal adjustment and debt restructuring have contributed to a significant reduction in public debt since 2013, debt remains elevated and well above the regional average. The policy resolve and commitment demonstrated so far will need to continue to entrench lasting fiscal and debt sustainability. Tax policy changes have supported an increase in revenues by over 3 percent of GDP since 2013. However, revenues as a share of output remain lower than in peer countries (figure) and there is scope to broaden the tax base further. The new fiscal policy framework has established the foundation needed to promote fiscal discipline over the medium-term. Grenada is the first independent ECCU country and second CARICOM country to put in place fiscal rules. The debt ceiling of 55 percent of GDP is more ambitious than the ECCU target of 60 percent by 2030 and the framework has broad coverage over general government which will help reduce fiscal risks emanating from state enterprises. The challenge will be to follow through―full implementation of the fiscal policy framework to ensure its effectiveness as the anchor for policy-making. Revenue measures have supported fiscal adjustment, but more could be done to broaden the tax base and support growth. The government lowered the income threshold for the personal income tax (PIT) and reduced exemptions under the VAT and customs duties. To further widen the tax base and promote equity, the PIT income threshold remains relatively high and could be lowered further, and the tax base broadened to include investment income. Completion of the tax incentive reform also remains critical to ensuring the integrity of the tax IMF, “Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors”. December 2015. The authorities have continued to engage all external creditors to whom it remains in arrears. Page 24 Grenada’s Fiscal Performance Relative to Regional Peers Box 1. Implementation of the 2014 Article IV Consultation Recommendations Recommendations Strengthen medium term growth and competitiveness by improving the investment environment, lowering energy costs, liberalizing agriculture markets, and containing wage growth. Restore stability and debt sustainability with ambitious fiscal adjustment and comprehensive debt restructuring. Key elements comprise lowering controlling the wage bill, broadening the tax base. Overhaul the fiscal policy framework to ensure sustainability, including with a fiscal responsibility law, tax reform, stronger public finance management, and reform of state owned enterprises. Safeguard social protection for the most vulnerable during fiscal adjustment, and improve the targeting of social spending toward those most in need. Strengthen the banking system with improved regulation and supervision, including with an asset quality review of Grenada’s banks; improve regulation and oversight of non bank financial sector. Outcome: In the areas of growth, fiscal adjustment, debt restructuring, re-design of the fiscal policy framework, tax reform, and financial sector reform, over the past two years the government has implemented or is implementing Fund recommendations. The areas where progress is underway but not complete include improving tax administration and debt management, and finalizing regulatory reform in the energy sector. While greater social spending has occurred, the government has not fully implemented an improved system to target social assistance to the most vulnerable. While the public wage bill has been contained with a wage freeze and attrition, there has been little or no progress to reform the public sector. The government has committed to a more focused approach in 2016 to correct this shortcoming. K tt V CC K tt V CC Antigua and BarbudaDominicaGrenadaSt. Kitts and NevisSt. LuciaSt. Vincent and the GrenadinesECCU Average Grenada: Primary Balance Relative to Regional Peers (In percent of GDP) K tt V CC Page 25 base. The government introduced an alternative minimum tax regime for small businesses and, once the tax incentive reform is brought into force, will accelerate investment allowances and introduce a deduction on business training costs to encourage investment. The corporate income tax base could be broadened by restricting deductions and taxing foreign-source interest, rents, royalties, and fees. When fiscal space is available, the corporate income tax rate could be lowered. Finally, the list of priority sectors under the tax incentive regime is too comprehensive and could be streamlined to focus on key growth sectors. Ongoing efforts to strengthen tax administration will support improved fiscal outcomes over the medium-term . With a strengthened legislative framework for tax administration and the restructuring of the IRD complete, the authorities are focusing on taxpayer compliance. In line with Fund TA advice, they are developing a Compliance Strategy and working to strengthen compliance risk management within both IRD and Customs. To support further improvements, IRD needs to update urgently its SIGTAS technology system and both Customs and IRD need to make full use of the modern ASYCUDA World system. Both will also need adequate resources and leadership to fulfill their mandates. Public finance management continues to improve (MEFP¶10). The preparation of the 2016 Budget was vastly improved relative to prior years―a direct consequence of the 2015 PFM Act. The Budget was accompanied by a medium-term fiscal framework and an assessment of performance for the previous fiscal year, included information summarizing the financial condition of each SOE, and was consistent with the FRA. Moreover, assessments are now being prepared on the impact of all policy proposals on fiscal and debt sustainability. The results of the 2015 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment noted the contribution that strengthened PFM practices have made to improving fiscal outcomes and achieving targets. Going forward, strengthening cash forecasting and commitment control remain priorities. Grenada is leading the region on management and accountability of SOEs. CARTAC experts report that Grenada’s strategy to strengthen the accountability and performance of SOEs and their new oversight framework is the strongest in the region (Box 2). While the budget included important financial information, there is room to improve the monitoring of SOE financials and their compliance with the new reporting requirements. Importantly, resources available within the Ministry of Finance should be allocated to the SOE monitoring unit and outreach is needed to boost compliance on reporting, the dividend policy, and salary guidance. Debt management needs to be strengthened to support fiscal sustainability and facilitate compliance with the FRA. The challenges observed in the accurate reporting of central government budget expenditure arrears (¶15) are symptomatic of broader challenges in The authorities continue to benefit from a peripatetic revenue administration advisor supported by FAD. See IMF Country Report No. 15/333 Annex IV for a summary of the PEFA results. The authorities received further TA from CARTAC in February 2016 to assist with their efforts. Page 26 debt management. The authorities’ efforts to strengthen the legislative environment for debt management are welcome, but need to be complemented with more fundamental reform of debt management in Grenada. The Debt Management Unit (DMU) is focused on back office operations including debt recording, reporting and payments monitoring rather than on fulfilling its analytical, strategic, and resourcing responsibilities mandated by the 2015 PDM Act. The DMU should be comprehensively restructured along functional areas (front, middle and back office) in line with TA advice based on international best practice, with its operations refocused on implementing the government’s medium-term debt strategy to achieve its debt management objectives in support of fiscal sustainability. Additional resources will also need to be allocated to the DMU in support of these objectives and the draft medium-term debt strategy should be finalized as an urgent priority as the debt restructuring is now nearing completion. Authorities’ Views. The authorities’ reiterated their confidence in and commitment to the FRA framework. In light of the significant tax policy changes implemented over the past two years, they did not see scope for further reforms at this time and indicated that they are focusing on strengthening tax administration, where there is considerable scope for raising yields. They noted the significant progress made to strengthen PFM and agreed with staff’s assessment of the priority areas for reform. With respect to SOEs, they agreed to steadfastly improve compliance and oversight and stressed the continuous efforts made so far despite staffing constraints. Page 27 Box 2. Update on the Reform of State-Owned Enterprises and Statutory Bodies System-wide reform. The government put in place a Performance Monitoring Framework, developed with CARTAC assistance, which, together with the new PFM legislation, provides a legal basis to the oversight of SOEs/SBs and to directives on both salary levels and dividend requirements. A Letter of Expectations was sent to the SOE/SB Boards in 2015 which sets out their obligations going forward. The strategy is supported by the new PFM legislation and regulations which provide incentives to promote improved financial reporting and performance. So far, reporting has improved significantly: the 2016 Budget for the first time included a summary of financial indicators for each SOE/SB and as of March 2016, more than half of the SOEs/SBs had met the new reporting requirements. However, fewer had submitted their strategic business plans—needed for the Policy Unit to advise on capital expenditure needs/financing and dividend levels, and recently an SOE announced plans to award a wage settlement conflicting with the directives. Oversight responsibility. This resides in the Policy Unit; with only one staff currently assigned, the Unit needs more resources to fulfill its monitoring function. Reforms within individual SOEs/SBs. The new monitoring framework has been a catalyst for driving reforms at the enterprise level, with structural changes in the cost base of a number of SOEs having led to improvements in operating performance. These reforms included greater private sector involvement in service delivery, balance sheet restructuring, and revenue and cost improvement measures. For example, Gravel, Concrete & Emulsion Production Corporation (GCEPC) has focused on cost reductions and is now generating cash profits from operations. Within the Housing Authority, the accounts have been reorganized according to profit centers with accountability on each operating unit to generate profits. Targets have been established for sales that will allow the Authority to break even or generate a small profit. In terms of the Phase I (2015-17) institution-level restructuring, efforts are focused on improving the financial position of those facing the most difficulty. Cabinet approved a reform agenda in 2014 broadly consistent with CARTAC recommendations which, if implemented, provides a sound basis for addressing performance issues. To date, however, implementation has focused on the restructuring of the Postal and GCEPC Corporations. Grenada Postal Corporation: The private sector has been involved in the restructuring process. Staff redundancy was resolved in February 2016, whereby 150 workers were retrenched and received severance packages based on years of service, which paved the way for private participation in the operation of the postal service. The total severance cost is estimated at EC$7.5m, or 0.3 percent of GDP. Greater transparency about the plans for this new entity and/or and the timing of conclusion of the deal would be desirable. GCEPC (Gravel and Concrete): Private partnerships are planned as a way to raise funds given the capital intensive nature of this business. The government is still in negotiations with parties on final terms of the restructuring, which is expected to take place during the course of 2016. Total severance cost for resolving staff redundancy is currently estimated at EC$5.6m, or about 0.2 percent of GDP. Next steps . While the strengthened framework serves as a strong foundation on which to build best practices, only enforcement will make it effective. The Ministry of Finance will need to review progress and consider what might be needed to strengthen compliance. With respect to enterprise restructuring, progress could be accelerated. While incentives and management performance has improved, SOE/SBs could examine the possibility of tariff increases and broader private sector participation in service delivery, as CARTAC has recommended. 1/ See also ANNEX III of IMF Country Report 15/193. & )( & il W )( CC W Page 28