Grenada is participating in the ongoing regional strategy to strengthen financial stability in the ECCU and will undertake additional reforms to further strengthen Grenadian financial institutions. The financial sector remains vulnerable, not least to a deterioration in the economic environment and spillovers from the regional financial system. Weak economic activity could result in a further deterioration of banks’ asset quality and erode their capital base. With banks in the region facing notable financial challenges, Grenada is exposed to potential cross-country contagion risks, including through confidence channels and interconnections between banks in the ECCU. Thus far these have been contained in light of the confidence in the regional authorities’ ability to provide full depositor and creditor protection, but a proactive strengthening of banks’ balance sheets would be important to safeguard financial stability and avoid materialization of potential contingent liabilities from weaknesses in the financial sector. Private sector solutions should be sought to address problem banks and to safeguard fiscal sustainability. Stronger balance sheets would also help to limit the impact of the debt restructuring. The impact of the debt restructuring on the financial sector is expected to be manageable: Banks have relatively limited exposure to the central government. Excluding non- restructurable debt, their exposure accounts for 5 ⅓ percent of assets (about 7 percent of GDP as of September 2013). Some banks are also exposed to statutory bodies, however, and could be affected if the debts of these institutions (some not guaranteed by the central government) are restructured as well. The authorities have requested the ECCB to undertake a stress test of the potential impact of the debt restructuring on banks’ income and capitalization. In the nonbank financial sector, credit union exposure to the central government is modest, concentrated in only two of the ten credit unions and largely in non-restructurable short- term bills. Insurance companies are more exposed, with a tenth of their assets in government paper, although a fifth of this exposure is holdings of T-bills. The national pension scheme has the highest exposure to the central government: about one-fourth of its portfolio (about 9 percent of GDP as of September 2013) is invested in government paper. Therefore, the debt restructuring would curtail its income stream and accelerate its loss in reserves (Annex V). This is particularly true in the context of the ECCU’s quasi-currency board arrangement, which limits the central bank’s ability to provide liquidity support. Page 32 Grenada: Financial Sector Assets Government Exposure Capital Adequacy Ratio 1/ NPLs (% of loans) Financial System Banks (Sept-2013) Restructurable debt US$m % GDP US$m % GDP % Assets Sources: Grenada authorities, ECCB, World Council of Credit Unions 1/ The captial adequacy ratio for credit unions is an approximation, where capital was devided by total assets Credit Unions (March-2013) Insurance Com. (end-2012) NIS (September-2013) minus cash deposits. Spillovers to the regional financial sector from the debt restructuring are expected to be limited. The regional financial sector’s direct exposure to Grenadian government debt is primarily concentrated in treasury bills issued in the Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM), which are being excluded from the debt restructuring for the explicit purpose of avoiding contagion to other ECCU sovereigns that tap that market. The authorities are participating in regional efforts to strengthen the banking system, supported by the Caribbean Development Bank, the World Bank, and the IMF (MEFP ¶26). The regional strategy consists of three key pillars: (i) banking sector diagnostics to assess banks’ capital needs and viability; (ii) legal and institutional reforms to strengthen the banking system and bring the regulatory framework in line with international standards; and (iii) bank restructuring and recapitalization based on the results of the banking sector diagnostics. As part of the program, should the regional banking sector diagnostics not be initiated before September 2014, Grenada will undertake a comprehensive and independent valuation of Grenadian bank assets. Subsequent to the valuation exercise, the government will reach understandings with the ECCB, the regional bank supervisor, to strengthen the financial position of commercial banks in Grenada and address the results of the valuation exercise by implementing restructuring and recapitalization strategies. The government will seek private sector solutions to strengthen the financial position of commercial banks in Grenada and will seek to limit fiscal costs. In the nonbanking sector, Grenada has been at the forefront of regional efforts to revamp insurance regulation and supervision, and proactively addressed weaknesses in the sector (MEFP ¶26). The authorities support regional efforts to integrate nonbank supervisory authorities − including through the creation of the Eastern Caribbean Financial Services Regulatory Commission, which will be responsible for regulating insurance companies throughout the ECCU − and improve the regulatory framework for nonbanks. With respect to Page 33 credit unions, the government continues to promote the consolidation of the credit union sector as a means of strengthening the financial safety net. Meanwhile, to further strengthen credit union regulation, the authorities will: (i) develop, together with the ECCB, options for providing liquidity support to solvent nonbank institutions; (ii) strengthen the requirements for retaining profits in the context of the new regional regulations; and (iii) require credit unions to increase capital to assure adequate capitalization over the next three years. They will also complete the move to a full risk-based supervision model for credit unions before end-2014. Box 5. Structure of the Financial Sector Grenada has a mid-sized financial sector compared to its peers in the region, which is dominated by banks. Financial sector assets amount to 159 percent of GDP (about 193 percent of GDP including the national pension fund). ECCU: Financial Sector Structure (Total assets, latest available, in millions of EC$) Banks Credit unions Insurance companies Offshore banks Grenada: Structure of Financial Sector (Percent of total assets) 1/ 192.6% of GDP BNS (Canada, branch) 127.8% of GDP RBTT (T&T, subsidiary) NIS (1) Insurance Com.(23) Savings and Loan Associations (1) Credit Unions (11) Banking Sector (5) GCB (indigenous) Republic Bank (T&T, subsidiary) FCIB (Barbados, branch) Sources: ECCB, country authorities, and World Council of Credit Unions. Numbers above the bars represent total assets of financial sector as percent of 2013 GDP. Sources: Grenada authorities, ECCB, World Council of Credit Unions 1/ Number of instituions is given in parantheses. Note that there are also 40 Pension Plans and 2 Money Service Providers. Banks . There are five banks in Grenada: (i) the only indigenous bank (Grenada Cooperative Bank) accounts for about a quarter of total bank assets, and is the second largest bank; (ii) two foreign-owned but locally incorporated banks RBTT Grenada and Republic Bank Grenada account for another 42 percent of banking system assets; and (iii) two foreign banks branches, with headquarters in Canada and Barbados Scotiabank and FirstCaribbean International Bank (branch of a Barbados subsidiary of the Canadian bank CIBC) account for the rest of the assets. The banks are supervised by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank. Offshore banks are not permitted in Grenada. Credit unions. There are 11 credit unions, with assets of about 18 percent of GDP and a relatively high penetration of 62 percent of the population. . Credit unions provide mostly mortgage and consumption loans by mobilizing member deposits and shares. Credit unions have been supervised by Grenada Authority for the Regulation of Financial Institutions (GARFIN) since March 2007. Insurance companies . There are 23 insurance companies, with total assets of about 12 percent of GDP. Insurance companies are also supervised by GARFIN. National Insurance Scheme . In addition to these financial institutions, an important financial player is the national insurance scheme (NIS), which provides a defined benefit plan to the entire population. The NIS holds total assets of around 35 percent of GDP, with a relatively large share of its investment portfolio allocated to Grenadian government securities. NIS is also regulated by GARFIN. ___________ The penetration rates are from World Council of Credit Unions, with data covering 101 member countries in 2012. Page 34