Sustainable Growth The program aims to strengthen competitiveness and improve medium-term growth prospects by tightening income policies, removing constraints to growth through reforms in the energy and other sectors, improving the investment environment, and putting in place the legal infrastructure for public private partnerships (PPPs). World Real GDP Growth, 1999-2013 (average, percent) Stronger and more sustainable growth is needed to address the economy’s pressing social challenges. At 2¼ percent a year over the past fifteen years, Grenada’s growth lagged behind that of emerging markets (5.9 percent) and other small states (3.2 percent), and one in three Grenadians is currently unemployed. The public sector has traditionally picked up the slack in terms of supporting growth and providing employment, but the strategy has not been sustainable in light of the deep-seated cost and structural competitiveness challenges. In particular: Costs are high throughout the economy, reflecting both scale disadvantages and policy- Source: WEO Grenada induced costs: (i) electricity tariffs are among the highest in the world, reflecting the small scale of production and the monopoly position of the electricity provider, including in the market for renewable electricity generation; (ii) institutional and labor arrangements in the public sector have made it difficult to pursue predictable and macro-consistent incomes policies and contributed to high port charges, resulting in import costs that are among the highest in the region; (iii) financing costs are high with real lending rates at about 9 percent in 2013; and (iv) staff estimates suggest that the real effective exchange rate could be overvalued by more than 30 percent (Annex III). The electricity provider (GRENLEC) has monopoly over electricity generation, transmission and distribution until 2073. In addition to some deficiencies in the tariff-setting mechanism, the monopoly over electricity generation has thwarted entrance into the renewable electricity market. Page 17 Average Electricity Tariffs in Selected Caribbean Islands (US$/kWh, 2013 or latest available) Residential Rates LAC Average Costs to Import (US Dollars, 2014) Grenada ECCU Latin America and Caribbean Sub-Saharan Africa East Asia and Pacific Sources: Annual Reports; Caribbean Electric Utility Service Corporation (CARILEC); and SIEE-OLADE. Customs clearance Ports and terminal and technical control handling Documents preparation Inland transportation and handling Source: World Bank, Doing Business. Structural impediments have also contributed to weak competitiveness. Impediments to higher growth and investment include closed distribution markets in Grenada’s main agricultural products (cocoa and nutmeg), red tape throughout the investment process, and inefficient public services. Natural disasters have further exacerbated the challenges. Further, enterprise surveys conducted by the World Bank show companies are particularly concerned about the unskilled workforce, ineffective tax administration, and to a lesser extent, trade regulations as impediments to doing business. Doing Business Overall Rankings (2014, 1/189, best/worst) 94 101 106 107 115 117 Obstacles to Business (Percent of firms surveyed express concerns) Grenada Latin America & Caribbean L S d d g m V S s m h B s d b B m s K S z B d G y G R H m S Source: World Bank Doing Business , 2014. Sources: World Bank Enterprise Surveys , 2010. Policy space to adjust to external shocks and to provide support to growth has also been limited, if not exhausted. As part of the currency union, Grenada cannot use the nominal exchange rate as an adjustment tool, and its fiscal space has been exhausted. In light of Grenada’s competitiveness challenges, a key objective of the authorities’ program is to create a propitious environment for the private sector to take over as the main growth driver. Page 18 The fiscal consolidation and tight income policies in the public sector (see below) should help boost the country’s competitiveness and external sustainability. Given the strong linkages between public and private sector wages, restraint in public wages is expected to be transmitted to private wages and contribute to a lowering of unit labor costs. As part of the strategy to promote internal devaluation, the authorities will pursue other avenues to improve cost efficiency including, most importantly, a reduction in energy costs. Complementing wage moderation, the government will focus its efforts on policies aimed to reduce markups through liberalization of some sectors and improving the investment environment to attract new capital inflows (MEFP ¶9). In particular, it will liberalize key sectors in the economy (renewable energy, nutmeg and cocoa trade) and aim at lowering electricity costs by operationalizing, with assistance from the World Bank, an independent regulatory authority for a more efficient pricing of electricity (MEFP ¶12-13). The authorities also aim to improve the business environment to address bottlenecks in the investment process, transform the Industrial Development Corporation into a functioning one-stop shop for investors, and codify all the tax incentives that could benefit investments. The government will also explore PPPs, first by putting in place a comprehensive framework to safeguard against associated risks (MEFP ¶10). The government will review the labor agreements with the port authority and, more generally, will revise the Labor Code to introduce a shift system to help reduce costs and increase efficiency (MEFP ¶14). To ensure broad ownership of reforms to support growth and reach a consensus on economy-wide wage restraint, the authorities have undertaken national consultations with trade unions, private businesses and other social partners (MEFP ¶14). As a result of these consultations, the stakeholders have recently finalized a Social Compact with the government on a framework for fostering sustainable development, which includes improved competitiveness and wage moderation.