Grenada is participating in a regional strategy to strengthen the financial system that includes: i) banking sector diagnostics, ii) legal and institutional reforms to strengthen the regulatory framework, and iii) bank restructuring and recapitalization The authorities have supervised non-banks closerly with a view to ensuring they meet prudential requirements and have taken measures to strengthen the weak institutions After almost four years of decline, real GDP is estimated to have grown by 1.5 percent in 2013 (Table 1). The recovery was largely driven by a large resort construction project and increased enrollment at Grenada’s off-shore medical school, the second largest Page 9 employer on the island. Except for the small, but rapidly growing fishing sector, growth in other sectors remains anemic. Tourism arrivals are suppressed relative to Grenada’s Caribbean peers, in part because of a heavier reliance on arrivals from the UK, which were affected by an increase in the UK’s air passenger duty (Figure 2). Staff estimates that output was at about 3 percent below potential in 2013. Unemployment was recorded at 33.5 percent in the same year, with youth unemployment as high as 55.6 percent. Unemployment Rates (in percent, latest available observation) Tourism-Based Commodity-Exporting h Y h Y h Y h Y Suriname Guyana Barbados Jamaica h Y Trinidad & Tobago Sources: Country Authorities and Fund staff estimates. h Y Belize h Y h Y h Y Bahamas St. Lucia Grenada The external position worsened considerably in 2013 due to a one-time surge in FDI-related imports and weak tourism receipts. In 2013, the current account deficit is estimated to have widened to 27.1 percent of GDP from 19.2 percent in 2012 (Figure 3 and Table 6). The deterioration was primarily driven by a sharp increase in imports related to the resort construction project, estimated at about 6½ percent of GDP. Tourism receipts remained weak, but exports of goods improved slightly on the back of the continued recovery in nutmeg production after the 2004-05 hurricanes and the strong performance in the fishing industry. In the financial account, while the resort construction project boosted FDI inflows in 2013, but the large current account deficit continued to be financed by debt-related inflows and accumulation of external arrears in the public sector. The overall balance of payments was in a surplus of 2 percent of GDP in 2013, pushing up reserves to 3½ months of imports from about 2½ months of imports in 2012. Economic slack and tight monetary conditions brought the economy into deflationary territory. On average, consumer prices declined marginally in 2013, held down by declines in telecommunications and clothing prices in the first six months of the year (Table 7). In the last four months of the year, prices fell for goods that account for about a quarter of the CPI basket. The downward drift in inflation reflects in part weak demand and tight credit conditions: the central bank’s discount rate has not changed over the past nine years and lending rates have declined only marginally despite ample liquidity in the banking system, held up by high delinquencies in existing portfolios and by the 3 percent interest floor on saving deposits. The new Sandals Resort International project has undertaken works estimated at US$80 million (10 percent of GDP) during 2013, reviving Grenada’s construction sector after a seven-year slump. An excise duty charged on passengers flying from the U.K. The U.K. government has recently announced reforms of the air passenger duty that will come into effect in 2015, which will reduce rates for “long-haul” flights, including the ones to most of the Caribbean destinations. It takes 7-10 years for nutmeg trees to reach the harvest level and 13 years to reach peak production. Most trees were wiped out in the 2004 hurricane and, as a result, production remains at about 15 percent of pre- hurricane levels. Page 10 Constraints on both the demand and supply side of the credit market led to a 5 percent decline in private credit in 2013, which continued in early 2014 (Figure 4). The real effective exchange rate has depreciated slightly since mid-2013, reflecting low inflation and the depreciation of the U.S. dollar against major currencies. Inflation, Interest Rates and Exchange Rates Inflation (percent change, y-o-y) Introduction VAT Headline inflation Food inflation (RHS) Fuel inflation (RHS) Sources: Ministry of Finance and Fund staff estimates Interest Rates (in percent) Lending Rate (Grenada) Policy Rate (ECCB) Interbank Rate (ECCB) Deposit Rate (Grenada) U.S. Bank Prime Rate Sources: ECCB and Haver Analytics. Total Weight of CPI Components with Negative/Low Inflation (Percent share of total) Less than 1% Less than 0% Real Effective Exchange Rates (Based on CPI, index, 2005 = 100) Trading-partner REER Tourism-customer REER Tourism-competitor REER Financial sector balance sheets have been increasingly strained. Impaired assets continued to increase with weak economic activity and are estimated at 13.8 percent of total bank loans in December 2013 under existing loan classifications; however, the level of impairments may be significantly higher under stricter international norms (Table 8). The related increase in provisioning and decline in profitability weakened capital adequacy to a reported 13.6 percent of risk-weighted assets in December 2013, but capital adequacy would be lower under stricter loan classification and provisioning rules. The erosion of capital over the past few years also reflects provisioning against financial institutions’ exposures to the failed regional insurance company, the CL Financial Group, which was fully written off by end-2012 by banks, credit. Page 11 unions, and insurance companies. In the non-bank financial sector, the consolidation in the sector continued and the financial position of credit unions has improved marginally from 2012 in terms of the capital position, liquidity and non-performing assets. Grenada: Selected Banking Indicators, 2008Q4-13Q4 CAR NPLs/Total Loans Provisions/NPLs Return on Assets (x20) Liquid Assets/Deposits Subdued activity also weakened the 2013 fiscal position despite efforts to rein in current spending. Tax revenues weakened across the board reflecting sluggish activity outside growth sectors and, to a lesser extent, fiscal stimulus to the manufacturing sector since 2010. Overall revenues held up, however, due to the receipt of a one-off licensing fee. On the spending side, the need to make large retroactive wage settlements agreed by the previous government for the period 2009-12 put pressures on government spending. By mid-2013, to alleviate the mounting pressures on the fiscal accounts, the government stepped up tax administration efforts Grenada’s exposure to the CL Group which includes British American Insurance Company (BAICO) and the Colonial Life Insurance Company (CLICO) was estimated at 3.9 percent of GDP. Of this, banks’ had investments of 0.7 percent of GDP, credit unions of 1.3 percent, insurance companies of 0.05 percent and individuals of 1.2 percent. The resolution of BAICO’s ECCU operations is almost complete, with the sale of its traditional insurance portfolio to a large regional insurance company completed in March 2013, and planned full repayment of its deposit-like liabilities underway – both with financial assistance from the government of Trinidad and Tobago. However, progress on the resolution of CLICO remains slow. Important growth drivers in 2013 (construction, education and fishing) have not contributed to an improvement in tax revenues due to significant tax exemptions received by these sectors. The main pillars of the stimulus (the manufacturer’s rebate program) included a halving of VAT rates on selected construction materials and a reduction in non-VAT tax liabilities equivalent to 10 percent of manufacturers’ gross annual sales. The revenue loss to date was limited (0.3 percent of GDP) due to the low non-VAT tax liabilities, but the manufacturers have accumulated unused “rebate” balances of about 1.3 percent of GDP. The triennial wage negotiations between the government and the unions for 2009–12 were completed by the previous government in December 2012. The agreement involved a 6 percent wage increase (4 percent for 2009 and another 2 percent for 2012) and some one-off payments, which will translate into a 0.5 percent of GDP permanent increase in wages and a 1.7 percent of GDP retroactive (one-off) payment. Half of the retroactive cost was settled in 2013 (0.8 percent of GDP), with the remaining half to be settled in 2014. Page 12 and took action to contain spending on goods and services. It succeeded in containing the primary deficit to 3 ⅔ percent of GDP, within the budgeted targets although still significantly wider than the previous year. A step up in the coupon on the 2025 bond (issued in the 2005 restructuring) and the high cost of the bank overdraft to which the government had to resort, have pushed the interest bill to 3½ percent of GDP, with the overall 2013 deficit widening to 7 percent of GDP (on an accrual basis) from 5½ percent in 2012. The weak fiscal position has continued to stoke financing pressures. Overall public debt increased to about 110 percent of GDP by end-2013, among the highest debt ratios in the world. Gross financing needs totaled 33.8 percent of GDP in 2013, which the government was unable to meet in full (Figure 5): Unable to secure financing for an upcoming coupon payment, the newly elected government announced on March 8, 2013 that it would undertake a “comprehensive and collaborative” restructuring of its public debt. The restructuring is to exclude treasury bills issued in the Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM) to avoid contagion to other ECCU sovereigns that tap that market, as well as debt to multilateral institutions. Together, these account for 31.3 percent of GDP (29 percent of public debt). Thus, about US$638.5 million (78.5 percent of GDP) in debt outstanding at end-2013 would be eligible for restructuring, affecting a diverse group of creditors, including bilateral official creditors, private commercial creditors holding the bonds issued in the 2005 restructuring and maturing in 2025 (US$2025 and EC$2025 bonds), as well as private creditors holding Treasury bills, bonds and loans. Public Debt (2013, percent of GDP, 175 countries) Sources: WEO, IMF Staff Estimates Grenada Following the restructuring announcement, the country credit rating was downgraded by both Standard and Poor’s (to selective default) and Moody’s (to credit negative) and Grenada’s bonds are currently trading at less than 35 percent of their face value. The government has hired financial and legal advisors (White Oak Advisory and Cleary Gottlieb, respectively) and initiated discussions with creditor groups, including through a creditor representative committee. The government has also requested support from the Fund and other international financial institutions for their efforts to restore fiscal sustainability and restart growth. Total Arears External Arrears Multilateral Official bilateral Paris Club Non-Paris Club Commercial creditors Unpaid contributions Outstanding arrears as of end-December 2013 US$ mn % of GDP The standstill on debt service since the debt restructuring announcement alleviated some of the Domestic Arrears Domestic Debt ECCB Domestic suppliers Page 13 financing pressures, with the remaining needs met largely through bilateral borrowing (Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, and Kuwait), the rollover of Treasury bills in the regional securities markets, overdraft facilities, and build-up of arrears. By end-2013, overall arrears have increased to 15.3 percent of GDP, of which 10.7 percentage points were on external obligations and about 4.6 percentage points on domestic obligations. Grenada: Public Sector Debt, end-2013 (In percent of GDP) External debt, Domestic debt, Treasury bills, Restructured bonds, 8.8 Other, Compensation claims, 1.8 Commercial bank loans, 1.3 Overdraft, 0.7 Domestic arrears, 3.8 Central government guaranteed, Commercial, 24.6 Multilateral, 27.1 Unpaid contributions, 2.6 External interest arrears, 1.4 Non-Paris Club, 12.3 Paris Club, 1.3 Central government guaranteed, 3.2 CDB, IDA, 6.7 IBRD, 1.4 IMF, 3.4 Other,