The strong economic growth experienced in 2015 is expected to moderate. Real GDP is estimated to have expanded by 4.6 percent (market prices) in 2015 due to continued expansion in agricultural, tourism, and tourism-related construction. Growth is expected to moderate to 3 percent in 2016 as agriculture output approaches capacity and tourist arrivals decelerate. Construction activity is projected to remain vigorous as several large tourism projects get underway. Unemployment remains elevated . The unemployment rate has fluctuated around 30 percent since 2013, with unemployment particularly high among the youth and first time job seekers, suggesting potential skills mismatch and other rigidities that prevent adjustment. Recent growth has helped reduce long term unemployment, but has not been particularly job-rich because of spare capacity in the tourism sector and, to some degree, the entry of informal agriculture producers into the formal sector. Persistently high unemployment has led to large income gaps, with inequality in Grenada above the Caribbean average (Figure 1). Deflation persisted for the third consecutive year, though core inflation turned positive. Owing to low international oil prices, headline CPI declined by 1.3 percent (y/y) in 2015 and is expected to fall by 0.9 percent in 2016. Core CPI (excluding fuel and food), however, turned positive (0.3 percent) in 2015 as domestic demand recovered. Grenada’s external position continues to strengthen. Fiscal consolidation, rising tourism demand and falling oil prices helped narrow the current account deficit to 14.5 percent of GDP in 2015 from 23.3 percent in -1.00.01.02.03.04.05.0Taxes less subsidiesAgricultureOther private servicesTourism-related industriesConstruction Wholesale & Retail Trade UtilitiesFinance less FISIMOther goods industriesPublic administration and services Grenada: Contribution to 2015 Real GDP Growth Estimates (percentage points) Sources: IMF staff projections. RealGDP Growth ProjectionFourth Review RealGDP Growth ProjectionThird Review RealGDP Growth ProjectionFourth Review RealGDP Growth ProjectionThird Review … W & il … … ili ag Page 11 Over the medium term, the current account deficit is forecast to remain around 15 percent of GDP. The deficit has remained adequately financed by tourism-related FDI and other private capital inflows, which more than offset banking sector outflows. As a result, foreign reserves rose to 5.7 months of imports in 2015. Concerns about external competitiveness remain on the radar, but signs are mixed. Tourism growth has been strong, with stay-over tourists rising by 5.6 percent in 2015. Grenada’s market share is gradually recovering to pre-2005 hurricane levels, although it still lags behind ECCU peers. Grenada’s terms of trade have improved notably due to recent falls in oil prices given the country’s high dependence on imported commodities. The real effective exchange rate (REER) has appreciated by 3.6 percent since mid-2014 owing to the strengthening U.S. dollar, which was partly offset by deflation in Grenada. Measured against tourism-markets only, the REER has appreciated by 5.8 percent over the same period. In addition, Grenada dropped from th to 135 th in 2016 in the World Bank Doing Business index. Monetary conditions eased in 2015, but bank lending remains weak. The reduction in the floor on savings deposit rates from 3 to 2 percent in May 2015 reduced banks’ cost of funds and lending rates fell. Combined with real exchange rate depreciation, this contributed to a moderate easing in Grenada’s monetary conditions in 2015. However, bank lending contracted by 3.8 percent due to tightened loan conditions and ongoing efforts to strengthen balance sheets: credit to the manufacturing and construction sectors expanded, but not by enough to offset the reduction in household credit. Balance of payments statistics prepared with improved and updated methodologies under BPM6 are currently under review and will be finalized by late 2016. See Box 3. cc cc V Y Y GG TT Z V K Y X V ag W EE Page 12 The loan-to-deposit ratio declined from 69 percent to 61 percent and banks’ liquidity rose further. In contrast, Grenada’s credit unions expanded credit at a rapid pace. Credit unions saw a steady increase in their deposit base and assets. Faced by increasing interest expenses, credit unions expanded their lending portfolios as total loans grew by 18 percent in 2015 following a 9 percent expansion in 2014. As a result, aggregate lending to the private sector increased slightly in 2015, for the first time since 2012, with credit unions’ share of total lending increasing to 25 percent compared to 15 percent in 2013. Credit unions’ NPLs remained relatively stable at 5 percent of total loans at end-2015, of which roughly half was provisioned. Capital reached 11.2 percent of total assets at end-2015, above the regulatory requirement of 10 percent for credit unions. The health of Grenada’s commercial banks is slowly improving, though vulnerabilities remain. Profitability improved in 2015 as the lower deposit rate significantly reduced banks’ interest expense, but remains weak with a return on assets of 1.5 percent in 2015. The NPLs-to-loans ratio declined to the lowest level since 2011 at end-2015, but remains elevated at 10 percent. The reported capital adequacy ratio declined from 13 percent in 2014 to 12.2 percent in 2015, still well above the regulatory requirement of 8 percent. External debt remains in distress but prospects for a restoration of ‘sustainability’ are much improved. Grenada’s debt restructuring is nearing completion (See DSA). Restructuring agreements have been reached with creditors representing about 64 percent of total debt under restructuring negotiations and valued at 34 percent of GDP. Since November, most of Grenada’s domestic debt to the National Insurance Scheme (NIS) was restructured, resulting in cash flow relief of approximately 58 percent in NPV terms. An agreement was finalized with the Grenada Ports Authority to restructure a privately placed T-bill, with a 50 percent haircut, agreements were reached with some commercial banks, and some state-owned enterprise (SOE) debts guaranteed by the government were restructured (MEFP¶9). The completed agreements have contributed to a reduction in public debt from 107.6 percent of GDP in 2013 to 94.3 percent in 2015. Negotiations with remaining creditors are CC With agreed debt restructuring 1/ With agreed and prospective debt restructuring 2/ FRL Debt Target PublicDebt (In percent of GDP) Projection 1/ Agreedrestructuring includes the debt stock reduction resulting from the debt exchange with the holders of Grenada's 2025 international bonds executed in November 2015 and the Export-Import Bank of Taiwan Province in 2014 . 2/ Prospective restructuring includes prospective restructuring of non-Paris Club bilateral creditors, domestic creditors, and of publicly guaranteed debt. Page 13 ongoing. Assuming successful completion of the ECF-supported program and restructuring of remaining outstanding debts, the debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to fall to 79 percent of GDP by end-2017 and to below 60 percent by 2020. The baseline outlook sees growth converging at potential and inflation stabilizing. Robust growth over 2013-15 has helped close the output gap, which had widened significantly during the global crisis. Going forward, growth is expected to gradually converge toward potential, estimated at about 2.7 percent. This has risen slightly (from 2.5 percent) because the production capacity of the economy is expected to increase as Grenada gradually attracts new investment, including related to the CBI program, confidence rises, and as the labor force expands further. Consistent with the recovery, CPI inflation is expected to rise gradually to about 2 percent over the medium term, in line with imported inflation. Risks to the outlook remain balanced (Annex I). Upside risks to the outlook are posed by the potential for a larger demand response to the oil price decline, stronger than anticipated tourism inflows, and higher than expected proceeds from the CBI program. Downside risks arise from a stronger impact from fiscal consolidation on growth, reputational and fiscal risks stemming from a dispute between the government and a major hotel property, natural disasters, a possible Zika virus outbreak, and externally, a weaker global recovery, the appreciation of the Grenada’s official bilateral creditors to whom it remains in arrears pending agreement on debt restructuring (Algeria, Libya, Trinidad and Tobago) have consented to completion of the review. The potential growth rate is estimated with a Cobb-Douglas production function and suggests that productivity growth has been negative (estimated at -0.6 percent per year on average) in Grenada during the past decade, in line with the findings from WP/12/235, despite recent improvements during the recovery. Staff has assumed zero productivity growth over the medium term. nn ill tt cc ii iii dg cc ay il K W Page 14 U.S. dollar, an opening of U.S.-Cuba tourism, and a reduction in financial services by global banks, i.e. de-risking. Authorities’ Views. The authorities share staff’s views on the outlook and risks, but are more optimistic about growth prospects for 2016 based on the potential impact of several tourism-related construction projects. They agreed on the importance of finalizing the debt restructuring and indicated that all negotiations are expected to conclude in 2016.