A decade of natural disasters and economic shocks coalesced into a deep economic crisis by 2011-12. In 2004, Grenada was hit by one of the strongest hurricanes ever recorded in the North American Basin, which was followed by a protracted and costly recovery (Figure 1). Before the economy was able to fully recover from the hurricane, Grenada was severely affected by the global financial crisis. Economic activity declined by over 8 percent of GDP from peak to trough (2008-12) as tourism and construction collapsed. This compares to a 1 ⅓ percent decline in emerging markets and a 5 ⅓ percent decline in the tourism-based Caribbean over the same period. As a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU), a regional quasi-currency- board arrangement with a common currency pegged to the U.S. dollar, Grenada lacks an independent monetary policy, and therefore resorted to fiscal policy to try to counteract the effects of the global financial crisis. However, the impact of the fiscal expansion on growth was constrained by Grenada’s long-standing competitiveness challenges and small fiscal multipliers due to the openness of the economy. As a result, fiscal imbalances widened without a commensurate increase in growth. Hurricanes in the North American Basin since 2000 (top wind speed, miles/hour) Hurricane Ivan Real GDP (indexes, 2008 = 100) Emerging markets excl. Asia Other tourism based Caribbean Grenada 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Sources: National Climate Data Center Sources: World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. Two consecutive Fund arrangements during 2006–13 supported the authorities’ efforts to maintain macroeconomic stability following these shocks, while also addressing Grenada’s underlying fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances The first arrangement during Hurricane Ivan (September 2004) caused catastrophic damage in Grenada (at about 150 percent of GDP). The remainder of the ECCU and the wider Caribbean were much less affected. In terms of damages and affected population, this was the largest storm in the Caribbean region in the last decade. Another hurricane, Emily, struck the island in 2005. The ECCU includes six independent countries (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines) and two dependent territories of the United Kingdom (Anguilla and Montserrat). The EC dollar has been pegged at EC$2.7 to US$1 since 1976. The first arrangement during 2006-10 was under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (now Extended Credit Facility (ECF)), originally approved for US$15.2 million (SDR 10.53 million), and later augmented twice to help mitigate the impact of commodity price shocks and the global downturn to US$24.9 million (SDR 16.4 (continued) Page 6 2006–10 was successfully completed after several revisions to deal with unanticipated shocks related to hurricanes, commodity price increases, and the global crisis. The second arrangement went off-track soon after its first review in November 2010, as the authorities considered initiating a debt restructuring and as approaching elections and a faltering economy led to notable policy loosening. The second arrangement expired in April 2013. Grenada: Programs vs. Actual Performance Economic Growth (in percent) Overall Fiscal Balances (percent of GDP) ECF1 (2006) ECF2 (2010) Actual ECF1 (2006) ECF2 (2010) Actual Public Debt (percent of GDP) ECF1 (2006) ECF2 (2010) Actual Note: Differences between the starting points of the program and actual data reflect data revisions. By 2011–12, with the Fund-supported program off-track, Grenada faced a perfect storm of low growth, large fiscal and current account deficits, high debt, and increasing financing pressures Widening fiscal imbalances. Following the hiatus in the IMF-supported program, the fiscal situation deteriorated rapidly with a sharp cutback in grants, a fiscal stimulus that involved tax breaks for the manufacturing sector and temporary employment schemes, and an overall weakening of revenues. The overall central government deficit widened to 5½ percent of GDP by 2012, and public debt increased to 103 percent by end-2012. Growing financing constraints . The government’s cash flows came under severe pressure as the deteriorating fiscal position dried up multilateral financing and domestic banks limited their exposure to the government. During 2011–12, most of the financing needs were met through nonmarket placement of government paper with the national insurance scheme and PetroCaribe, borrowing from the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), sale of assets, and accumulation of arrears. million or 140 percent of quota). The second arrangement was under the ECF, approved in 2010 for US$13.3 million (SDR 8.8 million, or 75 percent of quota). See also the Ex-Post Assessment of Longer-Term Program Engagement for Grenada (Press Release No. 14/29). Budget support from donors declined once the ECF-supported program went off-track. In this report, public debt refers to central government contracted and guaranteed debt. Page 7 Grenada: Central Government Financing Sources (In percent of GDP) Grenada: Fiscal Developments (In percent of GDP) ECCB Non-market Arrears Market External Debt (rhs) Primary balance Overall balance External imbalances. Weak domestic demand narrowed the current account deficit to 19.2 percent of GDP in 2012, from an average of about 25 percent of GDP over the previous five years. With the drying up of FDI inflows, the large current account deficits had been increasingly financed by debt inflows, especially as banks accumulated foreign liabilities through inflows of nonresident deposits and borrowing by foreign banks from their headquarters. This increased Grenada’s external debt to 144½ percent of GDP in 2012, up by about 40 percent of GDP since 2007, and kept reserves broadly stable at about 3 months of imports. Most recent Article IV consultation s. The most recent Article IV consultation was concluded in July 2012, with Directors emphasizing the need for a vigorous domestic policy response to improve weakening competitiveness and foster private-sector-led growth, while undertaking the needed consolidation to ensure fiscal sustainability. Directors acknowledged the challenge of achieving lasting fiscal consolidation while protecting the fragile recovery, and stressed the need to protect social spending and public investment, while focusing the adjustment efforts on widening the revenue base and streamlining current spending. Since the last Article IV consultation, the authorities continued efforts to strengthen public finances, including through improvements at customs and tax administration, but more meaningful reforms were hindered by the difficult political and economic landscape. Under the proposed new program, however, the authorities aim to address the recommendations from the last Article IV consultations (discussed below). ECCU regulations maintain a floor on saving deposit interest rates of 3 percent. The floor has increasingly widened interest rate differentials with deposit rates offered outside the ECCU region. This has led to a gradual inflow of nonresident deposits into the banking system, which reached 20 percent of GDP by March 2014, up about 2 percentage points of GDP since the onset of the global crisis. Page 8 Main Recommendations of the 2012 Article IV Consultation Status Grenada: Main Recommendations of the 2012 Article IV Consultation Enhance growth and competitiveness ● Improve tourism competitiveness, through strict wage discipline, infrastructure enhancements and linkages between the agricultural and tourism sectors ● Raise productivity by improving labor skills and increased labor market flexibility ● Focus on pro-growth spending ● Improve the investment climate through measures to modernize customs clearance procedures, harmonization of company registration, improvements in contract enforcement, and streamlining procedures for starting and closing a business ● Promote SME development by strengthening support services, increasing labor market flexibility and clearing public sector arrears to SMEs ● Expedite the process of exploring alternative energy, with World Bank assistance Implementation of the country's tourism strategy has started, with focus on better management of tourist attractions and stronger backward linkages to the economy, including agriculture; strict wage discipline is to be addressed during the program The government introduced vocational training at domestic universities to address the skills mismatch problem; labor market flexibility is to be addressed during the program Addressed in the program To be addressed during the program Grenada Development Bank has been tasked to provide project finance to small industries The World Bank is currently assisting Grenada with reforms in the energy sector, and further assistance is expected during the program ● Systematize the monitoring and financial reporting of SOEs Work is already underway to reforms the SOEs, and reforms will be undertaken during the program Pursue fiscal consolidation and reduce debt ● Allow the manufacturer’s rebate to expire by September this year ● Limit ad hoc tax exemptions ● Contain the wage bill ● Enhance efforts to streamline spending on goods and services ● Protect priority capital expenditures, including co-financing for donor financed projects As part of the prior actions for the program, the rebate was significantly limitted in scope and set to expire at end-2016 As part of the prior actions, legislation was passed to halve tax exemptions to GRENLEC, statutory bodies and returning nationals; and to eliminate some VAT-exempt goods Agreement has been reached with trade unions to cap the nominal wage bill during 2014-16 Spending on goods and services has been reduced by savings on utilities bill and communication costs Addressed in the program ● Remain current on both domestic and external obligations Addressed in the program ● Put in place a strong credible fiscal framework for the medium-term, through a combination of revenue and expenditure measures Will be done during the program Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities ● Seek and implement the recommendations of the Financial Sector Task Force at the regional level for the banking sector ● Ensure the non-bank institutions meet all prudential requirements and follow closely the developments at the weak institutions