Pressing structural and social needs could justify a temporarily higher deficit. The primary balance is expected to remain near zero in 2016 with the output gap closed. Hence, from a cyclical perspective there is no need for fiscal support While the first-best option is to quickly mobilize revenue to cover the originally planned budget spending in 2016, a temporary relaxation of the overall deficit (to its historical average of 2 percent of GDP) could be justified to prevent further cuts in social and capital spending in the event of revenue shortfalls. The acute problem of extreme poverty and malnutrition as well as the dire infrastructure and security needs could warrant maintaining a deficit at 2 percent of GDP, or even modestly higher, over the medium term to allow the time needed for revenue mobilization. This would not jeopardize fiscal sustainability (Annex III) and be consistent with current implementation capacity. The authorities agreed with staff view and the Minister of Finance saw room for a temporary deficit higher than 2 percent of GDP. Reform of tax and customs administration is a key priority, both to raise revenue and reduce corruption. In this regard, measures to address governance, management and operational difficulties in line with IMF technical assistance recommendations are crucial. These include: (i) strengthening management and broadening the implementation of pro-integrity measures internally; (ii) strengthening customs by ensuring more effective control of goods, more accurate valuation of imports, and stricter control of special trade regimes; (iii) more effective control of large and medium-size taxpayers’ compliance; (iv) taking measures to improve VAT administration, including the enforcement of issuance of VAT invoices; (v) increasing the effectivity of audits; and (vi) improving taxpayer services, including by broadening e-services. There is a need for a short- and medium-term reform strategy encompassing these measures, with clear priorities, and timetables. The authorities agreed on the main steps and have started implementing some of them but emphasized that these measures will take time to bear fruit. The monetary policy stance is broadly appropriate but the central bank should be ready to tighten if inflationary pressures intensify . The financial conditions index (FCI) suggests that lower real lending rates, strong credit growth, and higher housing prices contributed to a small loosening of financial conditions in 2015 despite an appreciation of the REER (AN). The estimates of the neutral policy rate point to an accommodative monetary stance (although there is significant uncertainty surrounding these estimates). However, core inflation has been below the target range since 2013, and inflation expectations are firmly within the target range. Despite this, there are upside risks to inflation due to the possible food price pressures, which could have second-round effects, and the 2007Q12008Q12009Q12010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q1 Loans real interest rate Housing Prices Real effective exchange rate Deposits real growth Credit real growth Overall FCI Real GDP growth, rhs Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Monetary and Financial Conditions Index (2007-15) (Percentage points of y/y real GDP growth, quarterly) Page 24 delayed effects of the past monetary easing (AN). As such, the central bank should be ready to raise the policy rate promptly if signs of inflationary pressures intensify. The central bank reiterated its commitment to its inflation goals and emphasized the hard-earned credibility of the monetary policy in Guatemala. Table 5. Guatemala: Neutral Interest Rate Figure 6. Guatemala: Inflation Developments Core inflation has remained below the target range… … and inflation expectations are within the target range since 2012. Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Proxy of 12-month ahead expectations based on Consensus Forecast monthly survey of end-year inflation expectations for current and next year (weighted average, with changing weights over the year). Sound financial sector policies have contributed to financial stability. So far, Guatemala has not been materially affected by a loss of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs) but other risks related to financial integrity have increased supervisor’s vigilance and contingency planning (Box 3). As a result, banks are facing increasing pressure to comply with AML/CFT regulations. Staff commended the authorities for the recently taken steps to strengthen control of customer identification, perform national risk assessments, increase the frequency of on-site inspections, and increase protection of supervisors. Staff also welcomed the ongoing initiatives to develop a bp NN bp Core Inflation: Alternative Measures (Percent, y/y) Official Core Inflation Without Food Without Food or Fuel Target Band Inflation (Percent, y/y) CPI Expectations 1/ Target Band Page 25 comprehensive macro-prudential program and strengthen the resolution framework through the introduction of an “open bank” intervention. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue implementing risk-based AML/CFT supervision, and bring the framework in line with the 2012 FATF standards. Box 3. Financial Integrity in Guatemala The loss of CBRs has been limited but the risks from money laundering activities are real. So far, only four correspondent banks have canceled accounts with four small Guatemalan banks. The small scale of business in Guatemala, high operational and compliance costs, the risk of enforcement actions, and the change in the business model of foreign banks, are the likely reasons for the loss. Nonetheless, three of the affected local banks have foreign credit lines with other correspondent banks. Moreover, the overall value of the foreign credit lines has continued rising in 2015 and the amount drawn stands at $4.9 bn (22 percent of credit to the private sector). The number of correspondent banks has also increased. However, there are other risks. Several bank managers and small individual customers are under money laundering investigations though the banks involved have remained well-capitalized and liquid. The supervisor has stepped up vigilance and contingency planning. Tougher AML/CFT laws aimed at strengthening controls on activities such as remittances transfers, leasing, and factoring are under consideration. The supervisor is improving enforcement of the policy of knowing the final beneficiaries of bank operations. Harsher penalties for non-compliance with the reporting of suspicious transactions are under way. Guatemala’s Financial Intelligence Unit (IVE) has undertaken a national risk assessment and has increased the number of on-site inspections, which helped uncover several money laundering schemes and enhance customer due diligence. The authorities have also developed a proposal for an “open bank” intervention, which could facilitate the strengthening of ailing systemic institutions by temporarily placing them under public sector management. Dec-10Dec-11Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14Dec-15 Contracted Amount266133243967492155746300Amount Used140122522954361142564852Guarantees, Letters of Credit100125192248Margin Available12601072913118511271201Contracted Amount (annual percent change)2519241313Amount Used (annual percent change)6131221814 Number of Correspondent Banks 3338*3539Interest Rate Paid on Credit Lines, Weighted Average (%)34433 Source: Superintendecy of Banks of Guatemala.* The analysis done for 2013 did not include the determination of the number of correspodent banks. Banking System, External Credit Lines Millions of US$, Unless Otherwise Indicated Page 26