The 2015 political crisis has brought an anti-corruption agenda to the fore. Corruption is deeply-rooted in Guatemala. The global competitiveness report (2015–16) lists corruption as one of the most problematic factors for doing business in Guatemala. During 2015, the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG) helped unveil cases of tax graft, money laundering, and illegal funding, which led to the arrest of top officials in the Tax and Customs Authority (SAT) and the Social Security Institute, and to the indictment of former President Perez Molina and Vice President Baldetti. Amid broad national discontent, traditional political parties lost support in favor of President Morales, who took office in January 2016 on a platform of no-tolerance against corruption (Box 1). Growth remains robust. The economy has been growing slightly above potential and the output gap is closed (Selected Issues and Analytical Notes (AN), Figure 1). Growth remained at 4.1 percent in 2015 despite the slowdown in public consumption and investment during the political crisis. Private consumption was lifted by lower oil prices and strong remittances The latter grew faster in Guatemala than elsewhere in the region. At 3 percent of the labor force, unemployment rate remains low, but a large share of population, in particular, indigenous and rural, is employed in the informal sector. Female labor force participation (LFP) is low, in part, due to the low level of education among indigenous women (AN, Figure 7). [ ]) " " ? pp nn ee Page 11 Box 1. Key Elements of the Anti-Corruption Strategy A central priority in the fight against corruption is the tax administration (SAT). Unveiled cases of tax graft in 2015 have sharply eroded the credibility of an already ailing SAT, weakened tax compliance, and led to collection losses. The new government has adopted emergency actions to regain control over customs and institute a new SAT law recently approved by Congress aimed at strengthening governance and removing bank secrecy constraints to tax enforcement starting in 2017. A strategic plan for tax and customs administration is being developed, with Fund assistance. In late 2015, Congress approved changes to strengthen the governance and transparency of government’s procurement practices. Key innovations are the creation of an e-outlet (“Guatecompras”) to provide transparent information on procurement transactions and the introduction of reverse auctions to enhance competition among suppliers. The new bill on procurement forbids government contracts with state officials and sponsors of political parties. It also improves the technical capacity of government’s awarding committees, and sets up penalties for collusion or noncompetitive practices in supplying the government. The authorities are also developing a strategy to increase fiscal transparency, with Fund assistance. The anti-corruption effort extends to Congress, the Judiciary, and political parties. New organic laws were passed to improve the accountability of Congress and enhance the independence of the Judiciary in 2016. The bills reduce conflict of interest by discouraging deputies from switching political parties and constrain their hiring of excessive staff. The bills also reduce discretion in the removal of the general attorney; grant him/her with broader powers to designate prosecutors and strengthen criminal investigation. More recently, Congress passed bills to increase the transparency of funding of political parties, set guidelines to develop the judicial service, and enhance recruitment and promotion of civil servants in Congress based on merit. A civil service initiative for the Executive is also under way. The government plans to reform the Constitution to further strengthen the Judiciary. Congress will soon consider reforms to broaden access to justice, strengthen the role and protection of judges, and reduce abuses of immunity granted to government officials. In the meantime, a stricter application of the rule of law has led to multiple legal proceedings against the illicit use of government funds, money laundering, and bribery, which have led to the recovery of past-due taxes and other assets. Inflation rose in 2016 but remains close to the center of the target range. Inflation was below the 4±1 percent target range during most of 2015 driven by lower transportation and utility tariffs (Figure 1). It returned to the target range in 2015, and exceeded the center of the range in early 2016, driven by higher food prices as well as dissipation of last year’s declines in transportation and utility tariffs. High food inflation reflected both higher demand associated with strong remittances that eased constraints on the poor as well as weather-related supply shocks (Box 2). Core inflation slowed further in early 2016, likely due to the second-round effects from lower oil prices and appreciation of the real effective exchange rate (REER). Inflation expectations remained well- anchored and are now close to the center of the target range. Page 12 Figure 1. Guatemala: Recent Developments, Real Sector and Inflation Private consumption and investment drove growth in … but a large share of population, in particular, indigenous and rural, is employed in the informal sector. Basic food items have been driving the increase in food price inflation. The output gap is closed and growth is close to potential. Unemployment remains low … Inflation rose in 2016 driven by higher food inflation and dissipating impact of last year’s declines in regulated prices linked to oil. 1/ Bread, grains and vegetables. Sources: Haver, National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Investment Net Exports Consumption Real GDP RealGDP Growth: Contribution of Demand Components (Percent) nd Page 13 Table 1. Guatemala: Potential Output Growth and Output Gap Estimates Box 2. Food Price Inflation Guatemala-specific factors are behind consistently high food price inflation (AN). While rising global prices of wheat and corn —the main food imports of Guatemala— contributed to high food inflation in 2010-11, this has not been the case since 2013. Differences in food inflation across Central American countries suggest that country-specific factors have likely been at play. Strong remittances have been an important driver of the recent increase. A few products have driven the pickup in food inflation—especially, vegetables and meat. These products tend to be added to the basic diet of poor households as incomes rise. The prices of some vegetable products rose strongly in late 2015 due to the weather-related shocks. However, demand factors, including strong remittances growth, have also likely played a role, not least because remittances constitute an important income source for mid- and low-income families in rural areas. Other structural factors may also be at fault. Higher transportation and intermediation costs, compared to regional peers—possibly due to poor transport infrastructure, particularly in rural areas, or competition issues—could prevent rapid adjustment in the face of demand or supply shocks and contribute to persistently high food inflation. Non-tariff barriers, such as sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures, could also be limiting regional trade of food products. Supply side policies could help. Increased investments in transport infrastructure, stronger competition policies, including the adoption of the new Competition Law and the establishment of the competition agency, further advances in regional trade integration, and policies to support agricultural production, including through programs to improve access to irrigation, financing, and technical assistance, could help reduce pressures from food prices. il K K il K il Page 14 Box 2. Food Price Inflation (Concluded) il il il il il nnu nu du nd du pu Page 15 The balance of payments strengthened significantly in 2015. The current account deficit shrank by 1¾ percent of GDP while the REER appreciated by 10 percent on the back of low oil prices and robust remittances. Net international reserves (NIR) stood at US$7 billion or 4.2 months of imports at end-2015, above the alternative IMF reserve adequacy metrics. The net debtor international investment position (20 percent of GDP) is low, compared to peers (Annex I). The external position is moderately stronger than implied by fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Annex I). Staff’s preferred EBA-lite current account (CA) methodology suggests a CA gap of about 2 percent of GDP, implying a moderate (7 percent) REER undervaluation. Lower-than-desirable fiscal deficit accounts for most of the identified policy gap. Competitiveness weaknesses appear linked to crime and corruption, low fiscal spending on education and infrastructure, weak legal system, and relatively shallow financial system. The fiscal deficit fell below the budget target of 2 percent of GDP in 2015 and public debt remains low. Revenues underperformed budget goals by 1¼ percent of GDP in 2015, bringing the revenue ratio to its lowest level in more than a decade (10¾ percent of GDP). The shortfall, however, was offset by even larger cuts in spending, in part, a result of delays in multilateral loan disbursements (Figure 2). As a result, the fiscal deficit was ½ percent of GDP lower than the budget target. At 24 percent of GDP, public debt is among the lowest in the region though is moderately high in relation to revenues. EE EE = GTM Median of Emerging and Developing Countries Guatemala and Emerging and Developing Countries:Revenue 1/ (Percent of GDP)Sources: WEOand Fund staff calculations.1/ Whiskers represent 5th and 95th percentile while the boxes show 25th and 75th percentile of the EM and developing countries distribution Page 16 With inflation contained, monetary policy has been loosened to support growth. The central bank cut the policy rate three times in 2015 by a cumulative 100 basis points (to 3 percent). The nominal exchange rate has remained broadly stable vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. In 2016 the exchange rate fluctuation margin under the central bank’s intervention rule was widened slightly— from 0.7 to 0.75 percent of the five-day moving average—as part of a gradual process to allow for more exchange rate flexibility. The financial system appears sound, although vulnerabilities remain. Banks meet Basel I capital requirements, have sufficient liquidity, and NPL ratios are low (Figure 3). However, capital levels are low by regional standards and insufficient to cover market and operational risks under Basel II. Credit expanded rapidly in 2015, mostly in foreign-currency. Credit growth has subsequently slowed as large electricity projects, financed by loans in foreign currency, have been completed and there are no indications of a buildup in credit risks (Table 3). Nonetheless, credit dollarization stood at a moderately high 36 percent of total loans at end-May2016 (up from 27 percent at end-2010). Reliance on foreign funding has continued rising with bank foreign liabilities currently at a decade high (15 percent of total bank assets) and among the highest in the region. Government bond holdings are relatively large (11 percent of bank assets) and about half of the bonds are in the available-for-sale portfolio used to manage liquidity. Private sector balance sheets appear healthy with limited accumulation of debt in the last decade, and foreign currency loans are concentrated in the corporate sector (AN). Table 2. CAPDR: Financial Soundness Indicators Costa RicaDominican RepublicEl SalvadorGuatemalaHondurasPanamaCAPDRLA6 Regulatory Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets16.417.217.114.114.314.915.715.0Capital to Assets9.79.513.86.910.710.210.19.9Non-performing Loans to Total Gross Loans1.71.72.31.33.52.12.12.7Return on Assets1.02.01.11.72.61.41.61.9Return on Equity7.117.97.818.626.814.315.417.9 mm Page 17 Figure 2. Guatemala: Recent Developments, Fiscal Sector The stagnation in revenue amidst the political crisis… …. was matched with even larger expenditure cuts driven, in part, by delays in multilateral loan disbursements,... … resulting in an improvement in the fiscal position . Social spending is below the typical levels of countries with Guatemala’s income level. Public debt is low when compared to GDP but is moderately high when compared to revenues. Spending inefficiencies are more pronounced in education. Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Guatemala data are for the central government. 2/ 1.0 means maximum efficiency. nu nu nnu nnu nu GTM GDP per capita, PPP Emerging and OECD Countries: Social Spending, 2013 Page 18 Table 3. Guatemala: Financial Sector Heat Map Progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) has been slow. Only one fourth of the MDGs targets for 2015 were met, with none met for the rural and indigenous population (Figure 3). Moreover, there have been reversals in reducing extreme poverty and raising school enrollment. Low fiscal revenues and the need for a comprehensive social strategy remain key hurdles to achieving the new sustainable development goals. MMMMMMMMMM LLLLLLLLLL pp nnu nnu ee undn MMMMMMMMMMM ee MMMMMMMMMMM an X ab ab X an an ee LLLL LLLL ag MMMMM LL MM ab LLLLLLLLLLL LLLL MMM LLLL nnu Page 19 Figure 3. Guatemala: Recent Developments, Financial Sector Credit growth, in particular, in FX has been robust though decelerated sharply more recently. …while fast-growing bank foreign liabilities are raising banks’ vulnerability to rollover risks. A moderately high degree of credit dollarization makes the banks vulnerable to credit risk,… Nonetheless, the system as a whole meets regulatory capital requirements and NPLs are low. Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Liabilities to Non Residents (Percent of Total Assets) Guatemala CAPDR (not including Panama) Page 20 Poverty, malnutricion, and inequality are high, compared to regional peers. Moreover, poverty and extreme poverty have risen… Figure 4. Guatemala: Social Indicators …highlighting the challenge of meeting the SDGs… …in particular, on poverty and malnutrition. Sources: INE, WDI and Fund staff calculations. 1/ National poverty line.