The macroeconomic outlook remains solid. Growth is set to return to its trend rate of 3¾ percent in 2016 as weaker public expenditures and lingering effects of the REER appreciation offset the positive impact of lower oil prices and monetary stimulus from 2015 (AN) . Potential growth is expected to rise gradually to 4 percent in the medium term reflecting the positive impact of efforts to increase transparency and efficiency of public spending on investment climate and productivity. Inflation is projected to remain within the target range. The external current account deficit is set to widen to 1¾ percent of GDP by 2021, driven by gradual reversal of the oil price decline and strong domestic demand, while remaining more than fully financed by FDI. Reserves are expected to remain stable in light of the authorities’ commitment to maintain exchange rate flexibility with reserves-to- import cover declining somewhat over time. Staff welcomed the move towards more flexibility and stressed the need to maintain reserve adequacy. nu nu Poverty National Line Poverty $1.25 PPP Prevalence of Stunting Prevalence of Wasting Selected SDG Indicators GTM LA5 Target (2030) Page 21 Table 4. Guatemala: Medium-Term Outlook The fiscal deficit is expected to remain at 1½ percent of GDP in 2016 and hover around this level in the medium term. The 2016 budget envisions a deficit of 1½ percent of GDP—lower than the historical average of 2 percent of GDP. Staff expects the actual deficit outcome to be close to the budget. However, there is a possibility of a somewhat higher deficit in 2016 in the event of continued revenue shortfalls. Near-term risks are on the downside, owing to global uncertainties and domestic policy constraints (Annex II): External risks. Deeper-than-expected slowdown in advanced and emerging markets, including due to increased protectionism, could reduce growth. Extreme bouts of financial volatility could inflict damage, with a substantial depreciation vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar increasing credit risks from un-hedged borrowers (Figure 5, AN). Conversely, continued REER appreciation in line with the U.S. dollar could negatively affect competitiveness. There are also downside risks from potential reductions in provision of financial services by global banks, including the withdrawal of correspondent banking services. Domestic risks. Failure to credibly address the crisis at the SAT could endanger efforts to increase revenue and jeopardize much needed social and investment spending. Anti-money laundering efforts that implicate staff or owners of domestic banks could lead to transitory financial pressures (although recent arrests of delinquent bank managers have not had broader effects on financial stability). A further deterioration in the security situation would jeopardize growth. nnu )( gg il ee Page 22 Figure 5. Guatemala: Outlook and Risks Guatemala is more affected by growth shocks in the rest of CAPDR and the U.S. than in other large EM partners. The moderately high share of loans in FX and rising foreign bank liabilities represent vulnerabilities. Continued REER appreciation in line with the U.S. dollar could negatively affect competitiveness . In particular, bouts of market volatility that result in notable exchange rate depreciation could notably reduce growth through increase in NPLs and decreased risk appetite. Sources: Bloomberg and Fund staff estimates. 1/ An impulse response generated by a VAR model described in detail in “Guatemala: Selected Issues and Analytical Notes, 2014, Chapter: Cross-Border Linkages and Spillovers”. 2/ An impact of 1 percentage point reduction in domestic demand growth in the U.S./ Germany/ Brazil/ China/ CA6 on Guatemala GDP growth. 3/ The impact generated by an IMF’s Flexible System of Global Models (FSGM) - a system of multi-region globally consistent general equilibrium models.