Rebuilding fiscal space and enhancing fiscal sustainability The authorities recognized that continuing increases in public debt are a source of vulnerability, while stressing that risks are not immediate. Staff projections show government debt as a share of GDP increasing into the medium term, though slowly, even at the current low level of interest rates. Moreover, public debt ratios could resume a faster ascent if the politically-induced funding problems that have constrained spending since 2013 are resolved. Staff noted that Guatemala cannot rely comfortably on debt financing for prolonged expansionary counter-cyclical policies. Funding risks could escalate rapidly, especially in light of the low government revenues and fairly high debt-to-revenue ratio compared to its peers. And shallow domestic financial markets (with a highly concentrated investor base and virtually non- existing secondary government debt market) as well as political rigidities that curtail access to multilateral lending provide thin coverage against spikes in global risk aversion. Page 15 Guatemala: Long-Term Fiscal Sustainability (Percent of GDP) Primary Balance Baseline 1/ Gradual adjustment 2/ Immediate adjustment 2/ 3/ Overall Balance Baseline 1/ Gradual adjustment 2/ Immediate adjustment 2/ 3/ Central Government Debt Baseline 1/ Gradual adjustment 2/ Immediate adjustment 2/ 3/ 1/ This path is the baseline through 2019, with a constant primary balance thereafter. 2/ Adjustment begins in 2015. Assumes a long-run real interest rate greater than the potential growth rate for the whole period. 3/ Assumes that the full fiscal adjustment takes place in 2015 and has no impact on growth. Page 16 Hence, it was agreed that fiscal sustainability should be gradually bolstered over the medium term . Stabilizing the debt-to-GDP ratio at its current level—thereby unlocking the ability to implement expansionary counter-cyclical policies without exacerbating budget funding risks—would require a permanent improvement in the primary balance of about ½ percent of GDP (AN IV). If the actuarial deficit of the social security system were taken into account, the sustainability gap would be correspondingly larger. With no pressing cyclical need for cooling off measures, domination of downside risks to growth, and estimated fiscal multipliers of about 0.4 on average (with activity at potential, multipliers tend to be lower), staff advised a moderately paced adjustment beginning in 2015–16 with modest frontloading and spaced over several years, that would strike the right balance between reducing the sustainability gap and limiting the negative impact on growth. This conclusion is supported also by the positive impact from faster growth in the U.S. and minimal spillovers from fiscal policy tightening in trading partners (AN II). The authorities reiterated their intention to reflect medium-term consolidation requirements, already included in the 2013 medium-term budget, in the formulation of the 2015 budget. The authorities favored additional efforts to mobilize revenue beyond budget consolidation needs. Guatemala needs not only to achieve long-term fiscal sustainability, but also to maintain macro stability while addressing pressing social needs a nd paving the way toward high, inclusive long-term growth. Meeting these objectives will depend upon raising the currently low level of government revenues to support priority public spending. In particular, staff counseled reducing tax expenditures (equivalent to about 8 percent of GDP), and realigning VAT rates (from 12 to 14 percent) with those prevailing in the region. Lowering the currently high degree of revenue earmarking (about 50 percent) will also be important to widen the fiscal adjustment toolbox. In this regard, staff cautioned that tax exemptions and other special treatments included in the draft competitiveness law currently under consideration by congress could threaten fiscal revenue. Weaknesses in tax administration accentuate this concern. Primary Expenditure (Percent of GDP) Guatemala and Emerging and Developing Countries: Public Revenue, Expenditure and Investment (Average of 2010-13, percent of GDP) Guatemala Median of emerging and developing countries General government revenue General Government expenditure Public gross fixed capital formation (rhs) HND NIC SLV PAN CRI DOM GTM Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Sources: WEO and Fund staff estimates. Whiskers represent the 5th to 95th percentile range. The box represents the 25th to 75th percentile range. Page 17 Tax Revenue, 2010 (Percent of GDP) Upper-middle income countries Lower-middle income countries NIC HND CRI SLV DOM PAN GTM Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Tax Effort in the Region (Actual/Potential Tax Revenues) 2010 (percent) Upper middle-income countries Lower middle-income countries Estimated dividends from Panama Canal CRI NIC HND PAN SLV DOM GTM Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. Potential Enrollments Gains in Latin American Countries, from 2000-10 (Additional enrolled students for every 100 students) There was also support for strengthening budgetary management and improving the efficiency of public expenditure. Officials explained that the recently approved amendments to the Organic Budget Law can enhance transparency and efficiency of public spending and help re a llocate resources toward high priority areas. In turn, this would strengthen the credibility of government policies and break the widespread culture of tax avoidance. The delays in approval of IFI loans in 2013 highlighted the need to streamline the approval of official financing, thus preventing the under-execution of IFI-supported spending and also providing room for a greater counter-cyclical cushion, if needed. Staff stressed that a key element of such a reform would be a requirement for Congress to approve all government financing—including external loans—as part of any overall budget package. Source: Grigoli, F. (2014) "A Hybrid Approach to Estimating the Efficiency of Public Spending on Education in Emerging and Developing Economies". IMF Working Paper. B B B Z V E X E V T T T V E U Y J K T G G B B Y E U G T Strengthening the financial system and setting the basis for its orderly deepening The authorities concurred that monetary policy transmission should be reinforced to anchor further low and stable inflation . The transmission channels of monetary policy remain feeble, while pass-through effects from commodity prices continue to influence inflation heavily. Staff identified a four-pronged approach for enhancing monetary policy transmission. First, it is desirable to continue raising gradually XR flexibility, credibly conveying to the public that the inflation target is the monetary authorities’ primary objective. In this regard, consolidating the operational independence of the CB from government and private sector interests would be important. Second, efforts ought to be stepped up to de-dollarize credit, mainly by allowing the XR to fluctuate and thereby forcing agents to internalize FX risks and promote hedging. Additional prudential measures for dollar credit could also be adopted (¶26). Third, public debt and private securities markets need to be developed. To this end, it is also important to finalize the draft capital markets law in compliance with IOSCO best practices and Page 18 enact it. Finally, the framework for monetary operations—including with technical assistance from the Fund—should be further refined. The authorities broadly endorsed this advice, though emphasizing that the rule-based FX intervention allows for significant XR flexibility over time and CB intervention has been minimal. Staff observed that the regime introduced in 2005 has not been seriously tested so far and the risk exists that, if strong pressures for depreciation arose, serious loss of reserves might occur. Officials saw private credit growth as generally appropriate, but acknowledged the need for greater vigilance. It was recognized that credit expansion has recently moderated, but that the slant of new loans toward foreign currency warrants caution, especially given the growing reliance on external credit lines. Moreover, while there is no immediate cause for concern, continuation over a long period of high rates of credit expansion could eventually undermine stability of the financial system. At the same time, it was noted that Guatemala’s financial system is shallow and financial deepening will require moderate but sustained credit growth over that of nominal GDP. Staff advised that macro-prudential measures be considered, notably higher reserve requirements for dollar-denominated deposits, higher capital requirements for FX loans to non-exporters, and the prohibition of FX mortgage and consumer credit, particularly should evidence emerge of deterioration in the loan portfolio. Staff also recommended that extension of the loan register system to non-bank lenders would improve monitoring of household leverage. There was agreement that efforts to buttress regulation and supervision of the financial system should progress further. Consistent with the findings of the 2014 FSAP update, staff highlighted that significant reforms have been undertaken in response to the previous FSAP in 2006, but stressed that urgent efforts are still needed. In particular, the danger of overestimating capital levels always exists. This could be exacerbated by flaws in consolidated supervision — including lack of a definition of economic group for supervisory purposes — insufficient supervision of financial entities that pose material risks to the conglomerate, and lax definitions of related parties and controlling interests. Moreover, the special nature of off-shore banks (operating in Guatemala but incorporated in other countries) still poses systemic risks. In light of comfortable core tier 1 capital levels in the banking sector, its high profitability, and excess systemic and individual liquidity levels, staff indicated that the time is appropriate to require higher capital and liquidity buffers to raise resilience to adverse shocks. In this regard, a phased move to Basel III standards appears the right course of action. Filling in data gaps and adopting robust methodologies for financial stability analysis should be a policy priority. Finally, further strengthening on the anti-money laundering (AML) framework would assist the authorities in their efforts to address financial crimes and corruption. The authorities also concurred that rising financial interconnectedness presents opportunities but also risks. Financial systems in CAPDR are becoming increasingly integrated. Growing economic ties, economies of scale, and regulatory arbitrage provide incentives for the development of regional financial conglomerates. Guatemala is well involved in this process, with Guatemalan banks expanding operations in the region and foreign investors, particularly from Colombia, have taken a larger stake in Guatemalan banks. Ongoing financial integration may bring important benefits, but it increases contagion concerns in case of a banking crisis. Regional financial integration also poses challenges for consolidated and transnational supervision of Page 19 financial conglomerates with implications for risk management. To capitalize on the opportunities, officials are taking steps to implement regulation and supervision arrangements that minimize regulatory gaps, arbitrage, and cross-border contagion.