The authorities agreed that the macroeconomic outlook remains benign. Growth is expected to return to its trend rate of 3½ percent into the medium term, supported by ongoing buoyant domestic demand and private sector credit, while inflation converges toward the center of the CB’s target range. The external current account deficit, largely financed by FDI, stays around 2½ percent of GDP until 2019, underpinned by robust export prices. This baseline scenario envisages a broadly neutral budget stance in 2014 and modest fiscal expansion through the 2015 election cycle, with measured consolidation thereafter. By 2019, the central government (CG) deficit is projected to stabilize at 2 percent of GDP with gross financing needs hovering around 3–3½ percent of GDP in the next five years—among the lowest in the region—and public debt rising slowly to around 27 percent of GDP. The Outlook for Guatemala is Generally Positive, but Structural Weaknesses Will Constrain Growth Guatemala: Baseline Scenario Projections Real GDP Consumer prices (end of period) Central government balance Central government primary balance Public sector debt Current account balance Capital and financial account External debt Reserve adequacy 1/ Output gap 2/ Fiscal impulse (Annual percent change) (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Sources: Bank of Guatemala; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Stock in percent of weighted aggregate of M2, exports of goods and services, short-term external debt at a remaining maturity, and other external portfolio liabilities. For more details, see Assessing Reserve Adequacy (IMF Policy Paper 11/31). 2/ In percent of potential output. However, near-term risks are prevalent on the downside, owing to global uncertainties and domestic policy constraints (as detailed in the Risk Assessment Matrix): Page 11 Guatemala: Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) Up/down Risk Impact Policy Response Surges in global financial market volatility, triggered by geopolitical tensions or revised market expectations on UMP exit/emerging market fundamentals, which could lead to pressures in the exchange rate market, acceleration of inflation and capital outflows, and a substantial increase in government financing cost. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies: Advanced economies: Lower-than- anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation due to a failure to fully address legacies of the financial crisis, leading to secular stagnation. Emerging markets: Maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth. Growth slowdown in China: Continued buildup and eventual unwinding of excess capacity, eventually resulting in a sharp growth slowdown and large financial and fiscal losses (medium-term) Significant slowdown of growth in 2014. Growth may fall significantly below the authorities’ target, with the slowdown caused by a variety of possible reasons and absent offsetting stimulus measures. A sharp increase in geopolitical tensions surrounding Russa/Ukraine that creates significant disruptions in global financial, trade and commodity markets. ↓ The central bank should stand ready to increase the policy rate and step up liquidity absorption promptly if inflationary pressures emerge. Fiscal consolidation should continue to reduce external financing needs and XR flexibility should be enhanced. Implement structural reforms to spur growth from domestic sources. Increase fiscal and monetary policy space for maneuver in case domestic stimulus is needed, including by raising revenues and monetary policy rates in case inflationary pressures emerge as well as by increasing exchange rate flexibility to make economy more resilient to external shocks. ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ Allow full pass-through, maintain strict wage policy, and strengthen social safety net. Tighten monetary policy if inflation expectations rise. Heigtened geopolitical risks in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices, with negative spillovers to the global economy. Sustained decline in commodity prices, triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming-on-stream of excess capacity (medium term). Weaker public revenues. (Driven by tax reform reversal and/or introduction of tax incentives). The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly Reach consensus with stakeholders on the need for tax revenue reforms. Spending cuts should safeguard social and investment programs. Use the exchange rate and international reserves as shock absorber. ↓ ↓ ↓ Page 12 External conditions. Risks related to the normalization of monetary policy in the U.S. are balanced. If U.S. growth accelerates faster than expected, the positive spillover effects— U.S. is the destination of 40 percent of Guatemalan exports and primary source of remittances—could spur growth in Guatemala and more than offset tighter global financial conditions in the short run, if exit is orderly (AN III). However, extreme bouts of volatility could inflict serious damage. Moreover, global risk realignment and intensified inflationary pressures from faster U.S. growth may push up interest rates in Guatemala more than anticipated, putting brakes on investment and growth. In addition, deeper- than-expected slowdowns in emerging markets, less favorable-than anticipated- developments in Europe, and disruptions in commodity markets due to geopolitical tensions could also hamper Guatemalan growth. The effects of global factors may be amplified by Guatemala’s strong linkages with other economies in the region (AN II). Domestic risks. The continued lags in implementing the 2012 tax reform and the political impasse on the 2014 budget may endanger much needed government programs. On the other hand, if lower revenues were not to be met with spending cuts, the fiscal trajectory could be derailed, aggravating debt dynamics, and lowering Guatemala’s resilience to shocks. Longer-term risks are also tilted downwards. On the domestic front, insufficient revenue mobilization could persist, deterring investment in physical and human capital. In turn, this could significantly weigh on the country’s growth and social prospects in the long run. A further deterioration of the security situation could also put a drag on economic expansion.