Growth has returned to potential. Rebounding from the global crisis and natural disasters in 2010, real GDP surged by 4¼ percent in 2011, helping close the output gap that opened during 2008–09. Economic expansion decelerated to 3 percent in 2012, but recovered to 3¾ percent in 2013 (around its estimated potential —― Analytical Note I (AN I)), spurred by healthy private consumption, despite less favorable external conditions and the onset of the coffee roya disease. Accordingly, activity remains at capacity. Potential GDP Growth and Output Gap: Main Results Potential GDP growth rate Output gap Cycle extraction filters Hodrick-Prescott Butterworth Christiano-Fitzgerald Baxter-King Production Function Approach State-Space Model Deterministic Drift Mean Reversion Average Page 6 Inflation picked up in 2013, but stayed within the target range, and has declined in early 2014. In 2012 inflation fell sharply to 3½ percent from 6¼ percent in the previous year, as commodity prices stabilized and domestic demand pressures weakened. While prices accelerated in the first half of 2013, mostly owing to fast rising food prices, inflation abated in the second semester and closed the year at 4.4 percent, within the central bank (CB)’s target range of 4±1 percent. By June 2014, y-o-y inflation was reduced to 3 percent amid deceleration in both food prices and core inflation. The balance of payments was stable in 2013. The current account deficit as a share of GDP was virtually unchanged at 2¾ percent of GDP. The trade balance turned out the same and a slight deterioration in the balance of services was offset by an improved income balance, amid continuing robust remittances. The deficit remained comfortably financed by steady FDI and public sector borrowing, with no significant impact from U.S. monetary policy normalization due to limited financial integration. Thus, net international reserves (NIR) reached US$6.4 billion at end-2013, with import cover constant at 3.9 months, providing a comfortable reserve cushion. External debt stays low compared to peers. Total External Debt (Percent of GDP) Change GTM CRI HND DR SLV NIC Sources: WEO and Fund staff estimates. PAN (rhs) Reserve Coverage (End-2013, percent of GDP) Reserves 100 % of Short-term Debt Composite metric 1/ 3 months of imports CRI DR SLV GTM HND 2/ PAN Sources: WEO and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Composite Metric (floating exchange rate) = 5% × Exports + 5% × Broad Money + 30% × Short-term Debt + 10% × Other Liabilities Composite Metric (fixed exchange rate) = 10% × Exports + 10% × Broad Money + 30% × Short-term Debt + 15% × Other Liabilities 2/ 3 months of imports refers to the following year's imports of nonmaquila goods. The composite metric was calcualted based on Dabla-Norris, Kim, and Shirono (2011) Optimal Precautionary Reserves for Low-Income Countries: A Cost-Benefit Analysis. Competitiveness is broadly adequate. The Fund’s multilaterally consistent estimates under the External Balance Assessment (EBA) methodology as well as CGER and WHD staff’s own approach imply that Guatemala’s REER is generally in line with medium term fundamentals (Box 1). The external deficit is mainly explained by Guatemala’s relatively young and growing population and relatively low income level. An improvement in the external current account balance over the past decade, despite substantial appreciation of the CPI-based REER during that period, supports the assessment that the REER is close to equilibrium. However, some signs of competitiveness strains have emerged (see Box 1). Page 7 Box 1. Guatemala: External Stability Assessment Guatemala’s real effective exchange rate (REER) is generally in line with medium-term fundamentals. Staff used a variety of approaches to assess Guatemala’s external balance and exchange rate, including changes in the CPI-based real effective exchange rate, regression-based methods to assess the current account balance, and stability conditions for net foreign assets. Since 2003, the CPI-based REER has appreciated by about 30 percent but the current account balance has improved. The substantial real exchange rate appreciation was partially driven by Guatemala’s inflation differential with its main trading partner (the U.S.). Relative productivity increases in Guatemala may have alleviated the impact of this appreciation on competitiveness, however, ULC-based REER indicators are not available. At the same time, the current account deficit improved from 4¾ percent of GDP in 2003 to 2½ percent of GDP in 2013, largely on account of a stronger trade balance. The financing structure of the current account deficit, high reserves and low external liabilities mitigate external risks. Guatemala’s net IIP position is relatively small at negative 20 percent of GDP in 2013 and FDI comprises about 40 percent of total liabilities. The stock of net international reserves stood at 4.1 months of imports at end-2013 and is well within the Fund’s composite reserve adequacy metric. Thus, current reserve levels provide an adequate buffer against potential shocks. At this stage, staff projects little further reserve accumulation in line with the authorities' intention to emphasize greater exchange rate flexibility going forward. As a result, reserve ratios are expected to fall over time, approaching minimum levels considered appropriate, particularly when compared to imports. The move toward flexibility is appropriate but the authorities should remain vigilant to ensure continued reserve adequacy. Guatemala: Implied Undervaluation ("-" = Undervaluation) Current Account Current Account Norm Reference REER deviation CGER-like models Macroeconomic Balance External sustainability EBA Macroeconomic Balance WHD staff model 1/ Average Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ For details see "Current Account Imbalances: Can Structural Policies Make a Difference?" by Anna Ivanova, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=25750.0 IMF’s multilaterally consistent estimates suggest that Guatemala’s REER is broadly in line with fundamentals both in the short term and relative to medium term benchmarks: The External Balance Assessment (EBA) estimates Selected Countries: Annual Average Deviation of Country's Real Exports Growth from World Real Exports Growth, 2003-12 (Percent) based on existing fundamentals and desirable policies point to a sustainable cyclically- adjusted current account deficit of 4 percent of GDP, which is 2¼ percentage points above the actual cyclically-adjusted deficit of 1¾ percent. CGER methodologies, which rely on medium-term fundamentals, point to either a moderate overvaluation of 7 percent (external sustainability approach) or a moderate undervaluation of 2 percent (macroeconomic balance approach). The & E V T G V Sources: WEO and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Excludes China and Asian Tigers (Hong-Kong, Singapore, Korea, Taiwan, Indonesia, Malasia, Philippines and Thailand. & E Page 8 Box 1. Guatemala: External Stability Assessment (Continued) CGER methods based on the equilibrium real effective exchange rate and the PPP, however, would suggest a substantial overvaluation (between 25 and 40 percent), but are less reliable due to large forecast errors, thus, staff does not attribute much significance to those estimates. The WHD staff model is based on a current account regression that is similar to the CGER macrobalance approach, but includes an additional variable capturing the speed of aging, the youth dependency ratio instead of population growth, changes in oil price for oil producers instead of the oil balance, and a measure of trade openness. This approach suggests slight undervaluation of about 3¾ percent. A simple average across the different reliable methodologies implies a slight undervaluation of 2¾ percent and, given model uncertainty and standard errors, the conclusion is that Guatemala’s REER is broadly in line with fundamentals. Nevertheless, there are some signs of competitiveness problems. Between 2003 and 2012, Guatemala’s share in global trade decreased by 25 percent. However, other emerging markets, excluding China and Asian Tigers, experienced a similar loss during this period. Survey-based competitiveness indicators also highlight some challenges for Guatemala as its already low-ranking position deteriorated to the 86 th position out of 148 countries in 2013-2014 from the 83 rd in 2012-2013. The weak ranking reflects concerns about crime, corruption, excessive government bureaucracy, inadequate infrastructure and human capital. Its position in the Ease of Doing Business Index, though, improved substantially in 2013 to the 79 th position out of 189 countries from the 93 rd in the previous year. The Global Competitiveness Report, World Economic Forum, 2013. The results of the 2012 tax reform have been disappointing. The package broadened the base of the corporate and personal income taxes, eliminated several VAT exemptions, increased vehicle taxes, and streamlined customs duties. The measures aimed to raise revenues by 1–1½ percent of GDP over the course of 2013 and 2014. The reform faced many obstacles, including numerous claims before the Constitutional Court, reflecting the long-standing reluctance by influential sectors to accept a higher tax burden. So far these challenges have been largely unsuccessful, though associated uncertainties have weighed down on collections. Moreover, the tax administration has been plagued with implementation and governance problems. As a result, thus far, the reform has yielded only around ¼ percent of GDP in extra collections. Even these meager gains are outweighed by shortfalls not related to the reform, mainly on international trade taxes, owing to administrative shortcomings at the customs agency. Notwithstanding the revenue shortfall, the fiscal deficit declined in 2013 and remained well below planned levels, amid financing constraints. Expenditures were constrained by delays in congressional approval of IFI loans owing to political wrangling within the fragmented legislature in which the government lacks a secure majority. With under- spending exceeding collection losses, the overall deficit (slightly above 2 percent of GDP) fell below the budget target (2½ percent of GDP). The narrower deficit implied a mildly contractionary fiscal stance and maintained public debt nearly constant and low as a share of GDP. However, public debt is high in relation to fiscal revenue when compared to regional peers. Page 9 Monetary policy has been slightly relaxed and FX intervention has remained low. The CB lifted the policy rate by 25 bps to 5.25 percent in April 2013 to stem incipient signs of inflationary pressures. Amid private sector concerns for growth, this increase was reversed in November 2013, and the rate was reduced by additional 50 bps to 4.5 percent in the first half of 2014, in the wake of declining inflation. The exchange rate (XR) has remained broadly stable, with minimal CB net cumulative FX purchases under its rules-based intervention framework (Figure 2)—in early 2014, the authorities increased the XR fluctuation margin for intervention from 0.65 to 0.7 percent of the five-day moving average of the XR. Private Credit Growth, CAPDR (Percent) Credit has risen rapidly, slanted toward foreign currency loans, though it has recently slowed and FSIs remain solid. Albeit credit to the private sector continued to expand fast last year (about 16 percent), its growth has decelerated substantially since end-2013 (to 12 percent), in part because of substitution of domestic bank loans with external borrowing by a large telecom company. Overall, private sector credit as a share of GDP has only recovered to levels marginally above those before the crisis, suggesting that its rise is largely a catch-up process. That said, the faster surge of FX loans— 18 percent in 2013, compared to 9 percent for domestic currency loans—raises concerns about currency mismatches and credit risk of non- exporters. Banks have turned to greater reliance on wholesale external funding, but appear profitable, liquid, well-capitalized, and generally resilient to financial spillovers from advanced countries (AN II). Guatemala has joined GAFISUD, the Latin American regional arm of FATF. Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. GTM Avg. (excl. GTM) J J l u J J J J J l u J J l u J l u J l u J J l u J l u J Guatemala has made strides towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), but poverty and crime are widespread. Modest-to-strong progress has been Financial Soundness Indicators (In percent) Guatemala Costa Rica El Salvador Honduras Dominican Republic Panama CAPDR 2/ LA6 3/ Regulatory Capital to Risk- Weighted Assets Ratio Capital to Assets Ratio Nonperforming Loans to Total Loans Ratio Return on Assets Return on Equity 15.7* 16* 9.9* 3.2** 2.3** 11.7* 0.9* 1.8* 7.3* 23.2** Source: FSI tables, June 2013, IMF, http://fsi.imf.org/fsitables.aspx. 1/ As of December 2012 unless otherwise noted. * As of June, 2012 ** As of July, 2012. 2/ Comprises Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama, and the Dominican Republic. 3/ Comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay. Page 10 recorded for 12 out of 16 MDGs: extreme poverty has declined somewhat, primary enrollment has risen (albeit from low levels), and maternal mortality has fallen. However, a third of the population is below the minimum dietary energy consumption, and chronic malnutrition of children younger than 5 years is pervasive at about 50 percent. At the same time, the level of informality remains very high, while security concerns are very serious.