There was agreement that budget policies are adequate in the short run. Owing to the inability of the politically divided Congress to pass a budget for 2014, the nominal expenditure and financing ceilings of the 2013 budget were carried over into 2014. Congress also increased the 2013 spending limit by ¼ percent of GDP for health and education. Consequently, it is now anticipated that the headline CG deficit will hold steady at just above 2 percent of GDP in 2014. These estimates are predicated on a modest improvement in revenue collections, execution of the 2014 budget based on a “continuing resolution” of the 2013 budget, and parliamentary approval of planned IFI disbursements. This implies a broadly neutral fiscal stance, which, with output staying at potential, was deemed appropriate by both authorities and staff. The authorities reiterated their resolve to implement fully the tax reform. With elections in 2015, it was recognized that congressional approval for additional revenue measures is unlikely. Therefore, virtually the only prospect for increasing collections in the short term lies in settling the court challenges and addressing the implementation setbacks of the 2012 reform. The authorities concurred that this will require efforts to resolve ongoing administrative problems, notably in the customs agency. They also confirmed that any revenue and financing shortfalls will be offset by spending cuts. Besides the problems with tax collections (¶s7, 16), another threat to spending implementation is approval of IFI loans. In this regard, the authorities noted that, in contrast to 2013, when external bonds worth US$700 were sold, in 2014 they have filled entirely with domestic issuances the total bond ceiling prescribed by the 2013 budget. This still leaves a financing gap of around 1 percent of GDP to be covered by IFI loans or domestic bonds, both of which must be approved by Congress. The authorities are confident that parliamentary backing will be forthcoming, though marked delays could force some spending retrenchment. Officials stressed that Guatemala has a track record of maintaining fiscal balance through expenditure restrictions. Staff cautioned that, if shortfalls do materialize, the government should refrain from across-the-board cuts to already low public expenditure and safeguard priority social programs and investment. In addition, improvements to public financial management are needed to avoid domestic spending arrears. In this connection, staff recommended finalizing a reliable estimate of their outstanding stock, and establishing a strategy for their clearance. The authorities attach great importance to formal adoption of the 2015 budget and staff anticipates little change in the deficit next year. Officials acknowledged that operating on a “continuing resolution” basis constrains flexibility of budget execution and a proper 2015 budget would allow for better targeting of outlays on priority programs. At this early stage in the budget process, a fiscal deficit of about 2½ percent of GDP is envisioned for 2015, though, in light of likely persisting expenditure under-execution, staff believes it will end up being somewhat lower (below 2¼ percent of GDP). Staff argued that next year’s budget should include All bonds have been issued domestically with 24 percent being denominated in U.S. dollars. The estimated stock is Q3.5 billion (¾ percent of GDP), though not certified by the Office of the Comptroller. Page 14 both the overdue and current refund to the CB to cover its operational losses. Officials concurred, but noted that the decision is up to Congress. The Central Bank has undertaken legal actions to require Congress to fulfill its obligations in that regard. Inflation (Period average in percent) Monetary policy is slightly accommodative, calling for heightened vigilance of inflation, though the authorities may contemplate further modest loosening . Staff’s analysis suggests that the monetary policy stance is somewhat expansionary, though still generally appropriate (AN V). On the one hand, the financial conditions index points to broadly stable conditions after credit growth moderated fast since the end of 2013. Moreover, headline inflation is at the bottom of the target range, core inflation is persistently low and on a declining trend, and inflation expectations have lately declined close to the mid-point of the target range. On the other hand, estimates of the neutral policy rate point to a mildly expansionary monetary stance after the cumulative 75 basis points cuts since the third quarter of 2013. In addition, bank credit continues to expand quickly and domestic demand will be further boosted by strong remittance flows. Thus, with the domestic output gap closed, food price increases starting to accelerate in the region, and increasing risks of an upturn in imported prices, staff recommended that the authorities should refrain from additional cuts to the policy rate. Indeed, the CB ought to stand ready to increase the policy rate promptly to better anchor expectations if signs of an inflation upswing emerge. The authorities affirmed readiness to tighten monetary policy if needed. Nonetheless, in their view, risks prevailed that inflation could turn out lower than currently projected through 2015, in which case there could be room for further rate cuts. Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates. HND GTM SLV PAN CRI NIC DR