Progress toward the Millennium Development Goals, particularly in health and education has been sluggish , despite some satisfactory initial steps in addressing the infrastructure gap and meeting the health and educational challenges. At the same time, reducing unemployment and tackling income inequality continue to feature prominently among the government’s developmental priorities. Hence, they have initiated an international audit of the ill-managed fund for processing of agricultural products (FUNPI) with support from the World Bank. The results from this audit (which are expected by end-September) would help define a new strategy to promote the cashew nuts sector and to reduce rural poverty. In addition, the authorities are committed to the three main pillars at the core of their request for donor support—(i) significantly increasing investment in infrastructure; (ii) encouraging industrialization; and (iii) improving urban development—to support inclusive growth. Maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment and improved quality in social spending could help progress towards inclusive growth . The authorities plan to focus on measures to improve access to education and health services, strengthen social protection, empower women, and increase employment opportunities through economic diversification and expansion of access of credit by small and medium size enterprises. They agreed that quick-wins in the transformation process could emanate from a re-structuring or closure of the fund for industrialization of agricultural products (FUNPI), which should create a level field for private sector development and economic diversification, while helping reduce rural poverty. Structural reforms to address corruption and endemic rent-seeking should be pursued to foster more inclusive growth . Initiatives taken by the authorities to implement an asset disclosure regime are a welcome development. However, for these initiatives to be meaningful the asset disclosure regime must focus on high-ranking public officials across the executive, legislative and judiciary branches and the accuracy of the declarations must be adequately verified. For this purpose, the entity responsible for verifying the accuracy of the declarations must be given sufficient autonomy and resources to effectively conduct its functions. In addition, these efforts would be completed by strengthening and effectively mobilizing the Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework, which could assist in detecting, prosecuting and deterring corruption-related offenses and smuggling. In this context, although preliminary steps have been taken to implement the existing AML/CFT framework, the legal framework must be swiftly brought in line with the 2012 FATF standard and effectively implemented. Page 27 Box 6. External Stability Assessment Based on the external balance assessment for developing and emerging markets (EBA-lite), Guinea-Bissau’s real effective exchange rate (REER) appears to be broadly in line with the country’s fundamentals. However, the economy remains exposed to shocks due to high export concentration and the country’s fragile status. The business environment remains difficult. The EBA-lite approach suggests that Guinea-Bissau’s REER would be broadly in line with its fundamentals in 2015. To determine a possible REER misalignment, the EBA-lite methodology compares Guinea-Bissau’s short-term current account balance to a current account benchmark implied by its macroeconomic fundamentals and policies (relative to the world’s fundamentals, an optimal policy stance and the difference between actual and optimal policies in the rest of the world). The current account benchmark obtained for Guinea-Bissau is -2.7 percent of GDP, of which -1.5 percent of GDP are driven by the policy gap and another -1.2 percent by Guinea- Bissau’s macroeconomic fundamentals. As the actual current account deficit is projected to increase to 3.6 percent of GDP in 2015, the misalignment of the current account thus amounts to -0.9 percent of GDP, implying a statistically insignificant overvaluation of the REER by 6.5 percent. As a result, the REER appears broadly in line with Guinea-Bissau’s fundamentals. However, Guinea-Bissau’s external position remains vulnerable to a range of risks. A stable political and security situation is the necessary condition for a sustainable external position. From the macroeconomic perspective, Guinea-Bissau’s very high export concentration in cashew nuts poses the main risk to external stability as it leaves the country vulnerable to international price fluctuations. An increase in currently favorable oil prices could exert pressure on the current account as the economy is highly dependent on the import of petroleum products. In the medium term, continued flows of grants and access to concessional loans will be necessary to finance huge infrastructure development needs which in turn are the precondition for Guinea- Bissau’s export base to develop. The authorities concurred with staff’s analysis and policy recommendations on inclusive growth. They explained that addressing infrastructure gaps in energy, telecommunication, and water supply are key priorities. In addition, strengthening public institutions is critical, to lay the foundation for a business environment conducive to private sector development, economic growth and job creation. They maintained that progress on the security sector reform would provide a necessary pre-condition for progress in their planned economic and structural transformation of the country, and that it is a cost that the country has to pay to maintain peace and political stability.