Guinea-Bissau’s financial sector is shallow and faces diverse challenges that hamper its effective support of growth (Box 5). The number of people with an account at a financial institution has increased recently, owing to the government’s decision to pay salaries only through the banking sector. However, Guinea-Bissau’s financial intermediation remains the lowest in the WAEMU region, credit to the private sector remains lower than implied by the country’s fundamentals, and the sector contributes only marginally to firms’ investment programs, with banks preferring to invest in Treasury bills or deposit excess liquidity at the BCEAO as they perceive credit risk in the private sector as very high. Recent financial soundness indicators point to financial sector vulnerabilities but a market-based solution to curb high levels non-performing loans (NPLs) and re-capitalize those banks affected by them is underway (Table 7, SIP section III). As a result of the 2012–13 decline in international cashew prices, and fueled by political uncertainty, credit quality has declined substantially. In particular, Guinea-Bissau’s NPLs increased substantially (from 6.5 percent as of end December 2011 to 25.7 percent in June 2014), far above the average for the WAEMU despite lower provisioning rates. Profitability remains low, with average rates of return on assets below 3 percent. The banking sector remains overly exposed to the retail and wholesale trade, restaurants and hotels, Page 22 and other services, which together account for around 75 percent of total credit. However, those banks which have been plagued by high NPLs have started to seize collateral and one bank agreed with the WAEMU Banking Commission on a phased increase in capital from CFA 5 billion to 20 billion. Enforcing compliance with key prudential ratios would help safeguard financial stability and requires action on both regional and national levels Recent capacity building efforts at the Banking Commission need to be reinforced by strengthening risk-based supervisory tools and processes. Timely provision of data by the national BCEAO branch to the supervisory authorities will be essential in this regard. A stronger corrective action framework should be put in place in order to reduce regulatory forbearance and better enforce compliance with prudential norms, including by taking timely and effective corrective measures against weak and/or noncompliant banks. The move to Basel II/III standards will take time but offers an opportunity to bring prudential rules closer to international norms. In the mean time, the regional authorities should step up the enforcement of the current rules, as well as start tightening certain rules where improvements are most pressing, for instance on concentration risk and provisioning of non- performing loans, and increase banks’ capital adequacy levels, including through raising operating banks’ minimum share capital to CFAF 10 billion by June 2016 as envisaged. The authorities shared the staff’s assessment of the need to develop the financial sector, enhance access to credit, and reduce financial sector vulnerabilities. They intend to revise the national strategy document for the microfinance sector by consolidating existing initiatives and by signing a partnership agreement with the African Microfinance Network to boost the development of microfinance in rural areas and credit facilities for small- and medium-sized enterprises. They have adhered to recent recommendations of an MCM TA mission and shunned public intervention to avoid fiscal costs and moral hazard.