Performance under the previous ECF-supported program (May 2010–May 2012) was overall positive. Prior to the 2012 , macroeconomic stability had improved and economic growth accelerated, while consumer price inflation rose as global food and fuel prices soared. Structural reforms included in the ECF-supported program included measures to restore fiscal sustainability, strengthen institutions, and reduce widespread poverty—most of these measures required TA and support from development partners. Progress in implementing measures to bolster public financial management was largely positive with some advancements made in tax The Board approved a new three-year ECF arrangement on May 7, 2010 (SDR 22.365 million). On December 2, 2011, the Board completed the third review and approved SDR 2.414 million of disbursement. The program was disrupted by the of April 2012, and lapsed subsequently. Page 14 and customs administration, including the adoption of indicative ceilings on exempted fuel imports by embassies and international organizations, preparation of a comprehensive inventory of non-tax revenues, and establishment of SYDONIA++ in two border posts. Public debt management was strengthened through the introduction and use of DMFAS to record, monitor, and manage all public debt (external and domestic). RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND SHORT-TERM OUTLOOK Economic growth recovered in 2014, while inflation remained muted due to weak domestic demand (Figure 2 and Table 1). With a favorable cashew nuts harvest and a pickup in construction and telecommunication services, real GDP growth is estimated at 2½ percent in 2014 (up from 0.8 percent in 2013). Reflecting depressed domestic demand during the first half of 2014 and weakening in global food and fuel prices, consumer prices were depressed, and average inflation declined to -1 percent. Growth is projected to average around 4.7 percent in 2015, supported by the same drivers and continued public investment (MEFP ¶¶12, 13, and 14). Domestic revenue mobilization exceeded expectations on account of quick-win measures (Tables 2 and Figure 3). Customs and tax revenues improved sharply in 2014 (by 39 percent and 9 percent, respectively), as the government tightened controls over fuel imports and streamlined tax exemptions (mainly on fuel), rehabilitated customs posts and intensified auditing of large taxpayers. These measures, led with the increase in tax revenues on account of output expansion and collection of FUNPI-related receipts by the Treasury (1 percent of GDP), increased total revenues to 12.0 percent of GDP in 2014 (from 8.1 percent in 2013). Expenditures also increased sharply in 2014 due to one-off spending related to elections, earmarked spending linked to EU fishing compensation, which resumed in 2014, as well as accounting of expenses that were previously recorded outside the budget. Enhanced revenue mobilization enabled the government to clear a large amount of arrears accrued in recent years. The increase in revenues, the financial assistance from the World Bank through the payment of six months of teachers and health workers’ salaries, and the placement of CFA 15 billion (2.7 percent of GDP) in one-year Treasury bills on the regional capital market, allowed the government to clear almost all wage arrears. At the same time, the government cleared all external arrears (excluding debt in technical arrears for which the government is reaching out to the creditors to start or formalize rescheduling negotiations). Guinea-Bissau has an old stock of domestic arrears dating to before 2013 and estimated at around 10 percent of GDP. However, only 26 percent of these arrears have been audited and recognized by the Government. The Government also has quota membership arrears to several international organizations, and is devising a plan to deal with them. It is making best efforts to conclude rescheduling agreements with the bilateral creditors, and has a credible plan and projected financing in place to eliminate the arrears with multilateral creditors. Page 15 The external position improved significantly in 2014, and the real effective exchange rate appears to be in line with fundamentals (Table 4, Figure 2, and SIP section II). The current account deficit dropped from 4.4 percent of GDP in 2013 to 1.2 percent in 2014. The improvement reflects an increase in cashew-nuts export value, and more generally a sharp improvement in the terms of trade (31.4 percent) as cashew nut prices increased, global food and fuel prices declined, and current transfers increased substantially. The terms of trade are expected to improve further in 2015, and cashew export volumes to increase somewhat. Nevertheless, the current account deficit would increase to 3.6 percent of GDP on account of an expected increase in imports as foreign investment is scaled up and incomes recover, particularly in the context of the resumption of traditional support by development partners as expressed in the promising results of the recent roundtable conference. (Box 1 and MEFP ¶2). Based on the external balance assessment for emerging markets and developing countries (“EBA-lite”) Guinea-Bissau’s and the WAEMU region’s real effective exchange rate appears to be broadly in line with fundamentals.