The authorities’ baseline scenario envisions a strong economic recovery over the medium term . The authorities’ baseline projections, consistent with policies under the post-Ebola Recovery Plan (Box 3), assume growth would rebound to 5.1 percent from 2.2 percent on average during 2011–15. The growth performance is to be driven by improved infrastructure services—notably, health, energy and transport infrastructure—to reduce Guinea’s infrastructure service gap and catch up with peers (Figure 1), and continued support for the agricultural sector to exploit Guinea’s comparative advantage. Mining sector projections assume resumption in 2016 of operations at the Simandou iron ore project, and successful expansion projects for the two largest bauxite exporters (CBG and SMB). Inflation would decline gradually to 5 percent in 2019 and stabilize at that level onwards. The current account deficit would increase to around 17 percent of GDP reflecting the deterioration of Guinea’s terms of trade and imports linked to large mining projects, and would be financed by FDI. Reserve coverage would increase to 3.8 months of imports. For banks holding foreign currency deposits, a depreciation of the GNF mechanically raises reserve requirements as these are constituted in local currency. Part of these liquidity problems result from rescheduling of FX loans guaranteed by the central bank. For instance, as of early May, the Treasury owed 2.6 million euro to a bank due mid-April 2016, and $20.8 million to another bank falling due early March 2016. On-site inspections are envisioned to examine the nature of the problem and take corrective measures. Banks generated income mainly from credit with their clientele (representing 41 percent of the NBI in 2015). Other contributions to the NBI in 2015 included: banking fees (26 percent, mainly on FX operations); cash and interbank transactions (22 percent, notably interest on Treasury bills); and other products (11 percent). Banks involved in the central bank-guaranteed loans for a road project obtained uncollateralized refinancing at the central bank at 6 percent interest rates, compared with 11 percent for other banks. Some of these banks were also granted waivers for non-compliance on the reserve requirements. Page 16 Box 3. Guinea: The Post-Ebola Recovery Plan, 2015–17 The post-Ebola recovery plan (40 percent of GDP) aims to repair the socio-economic damage of the Ebola epidemic and prepare Guinea for withstanding future health challenges. It complements the 2012–15 PRSP and will serve as basis for the preparation of the successor planning document. Its main objectives in the social sector are to upgrade the health system to meet immediate needs and challenges related to Ebola- like epidemics, and provide universal access to potable water, sanitation and hygiene for schools and health facilities. Priorities in the economic domain include improving the business environment, accelerating the diversification of the economy; renewing support for agricultural intensification; building economic infrastructure; supporting the processing and storage of agricultural products; and revitalizing and rationalizing advisory support, the organization of producers, and research in the agricultural sector. However, the plan is under-financed as identified financing covers less than half of the estimated costs, highlighting the need to step-up domestic revenue mobilization efforts. The authorities are drumming up support from donors, including by following up on financial pledges made in the context of the 2014–15 donor conferences in Washington, Conakry, and Brussels. The authorities are also working on an alternative macroeconomic scenario that will reflect the new government’s objectives and development strategy (¶5). Under this scenario, growth is projected to reach 8.6 percent on average based on more ambitious investment plans. Compared with the authorities’ baseline scenario, the new PIP under the alternative scenario includes the Souapiti project (Box 4), faster upgrades of the country’s road infrastructure (3 percent of GDP), and higher investments in irrigation, land fertilization and agricultural equipment. The private sector would also play a role through the execution of 7 projects in the bauxite, iron-ore and gold sectors, the establishment of transformation units of agricultural products to increase the value added of Guinea’s exports, and the development of large residential housing projects and administrative buildings through PPPs. The authorities insist that an ambitious investment program is necessary to fulfill the population massive social demands (Figure 1). In addition, the authorities emphasize the importance of good public infrastructure services to attract private investment. As spelled out in the Prime Minister’s statement of economic policies to the National Assembly. The projects underpinning this strategy as regards the agriculture sector, the Souapiti project, and the education and health sectors were also presented by the relevant ministers to the mission as priority projects for the years ahead. By 2021, these projects would lead to (i) a doubling of the current 20 million tons installed bauxite production capacity; (ii) a slight increase in the installed capacity for gold production; and (iii) the ramping up of iron ore production from 0 to 16 million tons. The cost of these projects is estimated at $17 billion (260 percent of 2016 GDP). mm z PP PP Page 17 Figure 1. Guinea and Comparators: Human Development and Infrastructure Indicators Sources: Human Development Report (2015); World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report, 2015–16. V ee V V V SS V – Page 18 Staff’s more conservative scenario takes into account the limited financing available and structural bottlenecks to higher growth (Table 1–5) While higher public investment would indeed be desirable, the authorities’ ambitious new plan is not linked to any sustainable source of financing, leaving the projected overall budget deficit above 5 percent of GDP (Text Figure 4). In addition, deep-seated impediments to private investment that are holding back Guinea’s competitiveness need to be removed for a noticeable increase in private investment to be realistic. To support the policy discussions, staff prepared a more conservative scenario based on identified financing, the continuation of sound macroeconomic and structural policies (see section on policy discussions below) and capacity constraints. The scenario does not include the Simandou and Souapiti projects (the financing for the former is uncertain, and is under discussion for the latter), and assumes a less optimistic path for the expansion of capacity in several mining projects (notably SMB and CBG’s). Under this scenario, growth would average 4.5 percent over the next five years, and inflation would decline gradually to 5 percent by 2019 and remain at that level thereafter. Given historical external financing trends Guinea would only be able to maintain its public investment rate at 9 percent. The current account would deteriorate reflecting the worsening terms of trade and higher imports to sustain higher economic activity, and would be financed by debt and FDI. The overall balance will improve, allowing reserve coverage to increase gradually to around 3 months of imports. Text Figure 4. Guinea: Medium-term Macroeconomic Scenarios, 2016–20 Sources: Guinean authorities; Fund staff estimates and projections. The scenario includes only projects for which financing has been secured. The Souapiti project was not included in the scenario, as the financing structure has not been finalized. Staff Aut. baseline Aut. alternative Real GDP Growth (Percent) Staff Aut. baseline Aut. alternative Basic Fiscal Balance (Percent of GDP) Staff Aut. baseline Aut. alternative Gross AvailableReserves (Months of imports) Staff Aut. baseline Aut. alternative Total Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Page 19 The authorities are confident in their capacity to mobilize funding for their ambitious PIP Over the medium term, they project tax revenue to increase significantly, buoyed by high growth, the full application of the VAT increase, the creation of the property taxation unit, higher mining sector revenue from the expansion of existing bauxite production capacity, and closer coordination between the Tax and Customs departments. Additional fiscal space would be mobilized thanks to savings on public pensions and electricity subsidies resulting from the biometric census of pensioners and the deployment of pre-paid electricity meters, respectively. The remaining financing would come from pledges under the Ebola Recovery Plan. Box 4. Guinea: The Souapiti Hydroelectric Dam Project The authorities have announced their plan to build the 450-MW hydroelectric Souapiti dam estimated to cost $1.567 billion (23 percent of GDP). The project will improve electricity services by tapping Guinea’s large hydroelectric potential and alleviate a major constraint to private investment and growth. Under the current plans, the project will have an 85/15 debt to equity component. A debt contract of $1.175 billion is being negotiated. The equity portion would be funded by a divesture of part of the government’s shares in the Kaleta dam. Unconstrained Tax Adjustment Given its size, the project will have significant implications on fiscal sustainability. The results of the Debt, Investment and Growth model (see accompanying SIP) suggest strong fiscal adjustment will be needed to maintain debt at sustainable levels, even after taking into account the impact of the Souapiti dam on growth. For example, under optimistic assumptions that the dam will increase growth of GDP per capita by 1 percentage point over the next five years, the authorities would need to increase the VAT rate by 10 percentage points to keep debt sustainable. This would be equivalent to raising revenues (or reducing spending) by 2–4 percentage points of GDP in the short-run. An improvement in structural factors (higher efficiency of investment, higher rate of return and a higher rate of infrastructure user fees) would have a considerable impact on growth and keep debt below the baseline level, but would still require a large adjustment. This exercise supports the analysis undertaken in the Debt Sustainability Analysis conducted for the 6 th and 7 th Reviews under the ECF arrangement (Country Report 16/95). Public investment (infrastructure) (in percent of GDP) Real GDP per capita growth (in percent, year on year) Consumption Tax (in percent) Total Public Debt (in percent of GDP) BaselineSouapitiSouapiti and better structural factors Unconstrained Tax Adjustment Public investment (infrastructure) (in percent of GDP) Real GDP per capita growth (in percent, year on year) Consumption Tax (in percent) Total Public Debt (in percent of GDP) Baseline Souapiti Souapiti and better structural factors Page 20 POLICY DISCUSSIONS: ADDRESSING DEVELOPMENT NEEDS