While Guinea-Bissau’s real effective exchange rates appear broadly in line with fundamentals, significant improvements to governance and the business environment are necessary to safeguard external stability in the medium term (Box 6 and Figure 4). Guinea- Bissau has made significant progress in improving its business environment during 2005–11 but the country’s relative rating in the Doing Business ranking has deteriorated compared to the last AFRITAC WEST conducted a TA mission to Bissau in June 2015 to help the authorities assess the system of debt data and related operational risks, examine the legal and institutional framework for public debt management, and review the domestic and external debt contracting processes. The mission also developed a roadmap for further TA in debt management. Page 25 assessment: only 10 out of 189 countries evaluated are currently ranked worse. While the emergency plan to provide electricity has shown first results, further improvements in access to and reliable electricity supply will be crucial. Starting a business and enforcing contracts are particularly challenging areas compared to other WAEMU countries and a benchmark group of fast-growing African economies. Guinea-Bissau’s institutions and policies are also consistently ranked weaker than in other WAEMU countries in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment. Going forward, major investments to close the infrastructure gap, with a view to decrease high transportation and communication costs, develop human capital, and improve governance will be critical to boost the economy’s overall competitiveness. Figure 1. Ease of Doing Business, 2015* (Rank among 189 economies) * These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, a limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. The authorities agreed with staff’s external stability assessment for Guinea-Bissau. They acknowledged the need to further improve the business environment and diversify th e economy. They plan to design a strategy to promote the production and export of the main export product, cashew nuts, while leveraging international support to improve the quality of institutions and public delivery of health and education services. Page 26