The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that Guinea-Bissau faces a moderate risk of debt distress, based on an assessment of public external debt, but a heightened overall risk of debt distress, reflecting the high level of total public debt. Under the baseline scenario, all indicators are expected to remain under their indicative thresholds throughout the projection period (2015–35). However, the present value (PV) of debt-to-exports breaches its threshold under the most extreme shock scenario. Stress tests point to vulnerability to adverse shocks affecting key macroeconomic variables. Finally, the current debt management hard and software has serious shortcomings that need to be urgently addressed. The PV of debt is calculated using the standard discount rate of 5 percent. Page 23 Box 5. Financial Deepening and Inclusion in Guinea-Bissau Credit to the private sector in Guinea-Bissau remains lower than implied by the country’s fundamentals and financial access is low. The use of mobile payment services could make financial services more accessible to a wider population in the short-term. Social spending, infrastructure investments, and improvements of the business environment will be essential to deepen the financial market. Guinea-Bissau’s ratio of private sector credit to GDP is below the level implied by its fundamentals; Following the methodology Al Hussainy (2011) and Barajas et al. (2013), this benchmark ratio is derived based on a number of structural factors in a panel of over 120 emerging and developing countries for the period from 1986 to 2013. For the case of Guinea-Bissau, this benchmark level is much higher than the actual level of private credit in percent of GDP, implying that financial depth is lagging behind the level implied by the country’s structural characteristics. A regression of the financial gap (actual private sector credit-to-GDP minus its benchmark) on macroeconomic, institutional and policy variables helps identify the drivers of the deviations from the benchmark for 2004–13. While causality is hard to establish in this empirical exercise and the effects represent mostly associations, increasing trade openness, health (social) spending, FDI inflows and improved infrastructure to the top performing WAEMU country in the category could decrease the financial gap by 4½, 3, 1¾, and 1¼ percentage points, respectively. Direct contact with financial infrastructure remains low but mobile phone penetration could be a promising venue to increase financial access. Recent numbers suggest that around 36 percent of the population possess at least one SIM card, and two mobile payment providers currently operate in Guinea- Bissau, with equal market shares. In addition, the magnitude of remittances in Guinea-Bissau suggests a substantial market for cross-border mobile payments. The development of mobile financial services could thus serve as a means to increase financial inclusiveness for the unbanked population. In the medium term, improvements in the business and legal environment will be necessary to improve access to financial services. The authorities need to address weak transparency, underdeveloped judicial and business environments, limited financial skills, and distortive taxation and suboptimal prudential regimes and regulatory forbearance, which remain the main obstacles to financial sector development. Lower collateral requirements stemming from a better legal environment and higher accounting standards could increase firms’ access to financing and boost investment and GDP. F D I T r d O p ss F c B c I f o H h S p d g I u o T p h o L I r U Factorswhich Close the Financial Gap (Increase in Percent of GDP from Adjusting Each Factor to the Top Performer in the WAEMU in 2013) WAEMU range KEN GNB Mobile Cellular Subscriptions (Per 100 People)Sources: World Dvelopment Indicators 2014 WAEMU-Range WAEMU Africa-Benchmark Guinea-Bissau Depositors with Commercial Banks (Per 1000 Adults) Sources: IMF, Financial Access Survey Benchmark Actual Guinea-Bissau: Credit to the Private Sector (In Percent of GDP) Page 24 Staff emphasized that the authorities should immediately address operational risk, continue to implement prudent borrowing policies and strengthen debt management capacity . In view of existing vulnerability, seeking grants and concessional loans for priority infrastructure projects remains important for Guinea-Bissau. In addition, improving debt management capacity is increasingly critical in light of the country’s likely access to a mix of credit/lending offers following the promising results of the Brussels donor roundtable in March 2015. In view of this, staff encouraged the authorities to leverage TA in debt management from the IMF and other development partners to review the legal and institutional framework for public debt management along with debt contracting procedures. As an immediate step, staff urged the authorities to urgently repair their debt management soft and hardware. To contain the risk of debt distress and support long-term debt sustainability, it will also be critical for the authorities to strengthen debt management, maintain prudent borrowing policies, periodically produce reports on external debt commitments, agreements and disbursements (structural benchmark), sustain fiscal consolidation efforts, continue implementation of growth-enhancing structural reforms, and promote economic diversification. The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s views on debt sustainability and its recommendations. They agreed that debt sustainability depends crucially on sound macroeconomic policies that would in turn increase their chances of accessing concessional financing. They maintained, however, that the pace of public investments would be determined on the basis of available external concessional resources. Thus, some risks identified in this DSA would not materialize if funding were not available. The authorities recognized the contributory role of prudent debt management and implementation of structural reforms to improve the business environment and to enhance overall growth and export prospects.