EBA-based estimates suggest that the current account is broadly in line with its norm and that the REER is broadly in line with fundamentals The real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by approximately 18 percent during July 2014–January 2016 and export growth has slowed. The underlying current account is projected to be broadly unchanged in 2016, with the loss of rice exports to Venezuela—a permanent shock—offset by higher gold exports. External reserves appear to be adequate under standard metrics, including when measured against the metric for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) states. Staff noted that while reserves are projected to grow, this is predicated on low oil prices and there is a need to build buffers to reduce vulnerability to adverse shocks. For example, if the price of oil were to rise to 60 dollars per barrel, ceteris paribus, reserve cover would dip below 3 months of imports in 2016 and 2017. Staff’s assessment of the external position, drawing on model-based estimates and judgment, is that it is broadly in line with fundamentals but vulnerable to downside risks. Staff’s proposed fiscal measures would help preserve external buffers and partly unwind the REER appreciation. De facto exchange rate flexibility would soften the impact of terms of trade shocks. Given limited nominal exchange rate flexibility, a strong U.S. dollar contributes to Guyana’s real exchange rate appreciation. Recent adverse shocks to export commodity prices were offset by lower oil prices, attenuating the BOP impact of the former. Guyana remains vulnerable to large terms of trade shocks given its dependence on imported oil and the concentration of its exports on a few commodities. The exchange rate regime is a de facto stabilized arrangement, with very limited movements even in the face of large external shocks. Staff noted that exchange rate flexibility should play a larger role in facilitating adjustment to external shocks, mitigating their effect on growth, and safeguarding reserves. Exchange rate flexibility, supported by appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, can help maintain the current account deficit at a safer level, reducing external vulnerabilities. Authorities’ views The authorities noted that the exchange rate is market determined. Exchange rate stability reflects the confidence that market participants have in the currency and the economy needs that confidence. They also noted that over the past year, exchange rate depreciation was modest, with the central bank making net purchases of foreign exchange.