The financial sector is dominated by commercial banks. There are three foreign banks and three local banks, whose combined assets correspond to about 70 percent of financial sector assets, and are equivalent to 68 percent of GDP. The largest bank is Trinidad-based, followed by a domestic bank, accounting for 40 and 22 percent of commercial bank assets, respectively. That domestic bank plays a relatively large role in lending to businesses, and is the bank with the highest share of NPLs. Among non-bank financial institutions, the New Building Society (NBS), a deposit taking institution that focuses primarily on mortgage loans, is the largest entity accounting for about 7 percent of financial sector assets and over a quarter of non-bank financial institution assets. Vulnerabilities to foreign exchange and interest rate risks appear limited. A depreciation of the exchange rate would improve the financial position of the overall banking system since banks in aggregate carry net long positions in foreign exchange (84 percent of capital and reserves as of December 2015). Interest rate risks are mitigated by banks’ ability to adjust interest rates on existing loans, although a higher interest rate burden on debtors can increase credit risk. However, banks are exposed to credit risk in their CARICOM securities. Stress tests conducted by the authorities also suggest that the weaker banks are also vulnerable to downgrades on their investment portfolio. Banks remain well capitalized, but heightened vigilance is warranted due to increases in NPLs. Since the 2006 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), the authorities have brought insurance companies and the NBS under central bank supervision. Staff supports plans to also include credit unions under central bank supervision. Banking system aggregate capital appears well positioned to absorb an increase in provisioning up to the levels observed prior to the recent rise in NPLs without breaching the prudential threshold of 8 percent, but individual banks with higher NPLs have weaker buffers. While all banks meet provisioning requirements, only 20 percent provisioning is required when the loan is secured by collateral. This exclusion is sensible when risks are assessed in isolation. But collateral can be difficult to Page 19 seize. And from a macroprudential perspective, there is a concern that its value may decline following aggregate or sectoral shocks, suggesting a case for tighter requirements. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue to strengthen financial sector supervision. Given risks stemming from loan concentration, related party lending, potential loan classification weaknesses, collateral valuation and potential challenges in realizing collaterals, staff recommended tightening: (i) provisioning requirements; (ii) large exposure limits; (iii) restrictions on related lending; and (iv) loan classification rules. In addition, the stress testing toolkit could be expanded to include shocks to loan collateral values and also take into account inter-linkages among economic sectors, borrowers, and financial entities. Finally, staff argued for improved coordination of supervision of insurers and banks within the same business group. Risks from global banks’ de-risking activity should continue to be monitored. An FSAP mission will visit Guyana in May, and provide a more granular analysis of financial sector challenges and assist the authorities with strengthening the prudential toolkit. While recent steps towards strengthening the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism framework are welcome, the authorities should address remaining deficiencies promptly. In particular, the authorities are urged to accelerate the implementation of the action plan agreed with the Financial Action Task Force. Authorities’ views The authorities will continue to monitor closely the strength of the financial system and reforms will be guided by the findings of the forthcoming FSAP mission. In the meantime, they will continue their risk-based approach to onsite inspection of banks. They have already urged banks to reduce NPLs to no more than 5 percent and increase provisioning. Their financial stability assessments will continue to be published, including a summary of banks’ stress tests results. They will continue monitoring global banks’ de-risking decisions and are open to supporting potential solutions discussed with CARICOM. The authorities urged the Fund to actively support efforts to find a solution to this pressing issue. Reforms to the macro-prudential framework, including on the stress-testing framework, will be guided by the FSAP findings. The authorities plan to pass the revised draft insurance act by end-2016. This act, which was prepared with technical assistance from the World Bank, aims to correct regulatory and supervisory failures that were highlighted by CLICO’s bankruptcy. The authorities plan to upgrade the AML/CFT framework to international standards in the first half of 2016. The authorities have received technical assistance from the World Bank on this matter. The authorities are exerting efforts to fully address all deficiencies identified by the FATF and implement the agreed action plan. Page 20