Discussions centered on strategies to maintain fiscal and debt sustainability while boosting growth. The expansionary fiscal policy stance is depleting buffers that should be saved for the event of adverse external shocks. The growth in current expenditures should be moderated, the tax base broadened, and non-concessional financing avoided. Staff recommended moderating current expenditure growth to avoid crowding out space for public investment. Non-interest current expenditures are projected to rise by 16.0 percent in 2016, driven by double-digit increases in wages, transfers and goods and services. Staff cautioned that increases in current expenditures are difficult to unwind, particularly in a low inflation environment. A more moderate increase in public sector wages would pose smaller risks and would also attenuate possible competitiveness pressures from spillovers to wages in the private sector. Wage growth moderation alone cannot yield large savings. Staff also recommended a reduction in transfers, particularly to public enterprises, whose reform could underpin a fiscal consolidation effort. Narrowing the deficit by 1.5 percent of GDP in 2017–21 through a reduction in current expenditures would largely stabilize the debt, reducing the debt in 2021 to 53 percent of GDP, compared to 60 percent in the baseline scenario. Staff recommends that consolidation in order to preserve buffers. Staff welcomed the progress on public enterprise reforms. Transfers to the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GuySuCo) were equivalent to 1.8 percent of GDP in 2015 and are budgeted at about 1. 3 percent of GDP for 2016. Staff urged the authorities to adopt a restructuring plan for the sector that will improve cost efficiency, productivity, and alternative revenues streams, drawing upon the reforms proposed by the Commission of Inquiry. The initial steps taken in that Page 15 direction are welcome. The scope and pace of reform should take into account social implications. Staff noted the improved financial performance of Guyana Power and Light (GPL), which no longer requires subsidies for its operations. However, most of those gains stem from low oil prices, which could prove transitory. Further progress to reduce transmission and commercial losses will help place GPL on a more sustainable financial footing. The simplified budgetary process for public procurement by individual agencies brings flexibility, but should not compromise project evaluation and internal controls. Staff stressed the importance of maintaining the quality of public investment by carefully selecting projects, taking into account their financially feasibility, impact on productivity, and social considerations. Staff welcomed plans to improve revenues through better enforcement but cautioned against counting on gains before they materialize. Since the revenue measures in the 2016 Budget are likely to reduce revenue, further tax exemptions should not be granted in expectation of improved revenue collection, especially before achieving concrete results. Broadening the tax base by reviewing tax exemptions would help raise revenues, and staff welcomes plans to review the VAT with a view to improve its effectiveness. The largely concessional nature of the debt is an important source of resilience, and staff cautioned against increases in non-concessional debt. While sustained deficits will lead to an increase in debt over the medium-term, sustainability concerns are mitigated provided debt remains financed mostly in concessional terms. The projected deficits will be financed with a mix of concessional external funding and grants, and domestic borrowing. External financing of about 5½ percent of GDP, in line with recent historical experience excluding PetroCaribe, is expected. Domestic debt consists of short-term Treasury Bills. The authorities envisage issuing longer-term bonds with a view to developing domestic capital markets. Staff supports those plans, which can also help the National Insurance Scheme match its liability profile, but cautions that significant increases in domestic borrowing could crowd out credit to the private sector, raise domestic interest rates, and have implications for growth. Staff welcomes the authorities’ intentions to continue to refrain from non-concessional external borrowing. Staff welcomes the authorities’ exclusion of possible future oil income from their medium term plans. The recently discovered deep water oil fields have relatively high extraction costs. Production may not be commercially viable if oil prices remain low. Exploration is proceeding, but oil revenues are not likely to materialize in the medium-term, and authorities have not factored in such income in their plans. Staff welcomes this cautious approach, and the authorities’ interest in setting-up a fiscal framework for handling eventual oil revenues following best practices. The IMF Board Paper on Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries can provide guidance for these efforts. Staff noted that the Fund stands Available at: https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/082412.pdf. Page 16 ready to help develop the institutional capacity and supportive infrastructure to implement fiscal rules that would facilitate a prudent use of mineral resource revenues. Authorities’ views The authorities stressed their plans to strengthen tax administration. While they acknowledged that some tax measures approved in 2015 and envisaged for 2016 would decrease revenue, they expect the effect to be small and offset by improvements in tax administration. The authorities also noted that they expect stronger growth over the medium- term, which will raise revenue. The authorities also indicated their wish to have technical advice from staff and signaled their intent to solicit CARTAC support to conduct a detailed review of the application of the VAT since its inception to present with a view of benefitting from the resulting recommendations. The authorities noted that the large increase in current expenditure is due to one- off reclassification changes and an adjustment in wages. In respect of the former, they clarified that the increase in transfers was due largely to a consolidation of expenditure items of constitutional agencies into a single category and higher capital expenditure at public enterprises, while the increase in spending on other goods and services could be viewed as a one-off change. As for the latter, they pointed out that wage growth will moderate in the future. The authorities remain committed to restructuring public enterprises to reduce their reliance on government support. The restructuring of GuySuCo aims to reduce inefficiencies and place operations on a financially sustainable footing. One underperforming sugar estate has been targeted for closure and planned budget transfers for 2016 have been reduced by 25 percent. The company intends to transition to a new business model that would ensure its long-run viability, drawing upon the Commission of Inquiry’s recommendations. With regard to the public utility GPL, a recent network modernization project has reduced some transmission losses; further progress is expected under a new IDB/EU project. Lower oil prices have reduced electricity generation cost and tariffs ensure cost recovery. The authorities indicated that they would continue to refrain from non- concessional external borrowing, and expressed interest in developing domestic debt instruments. The authorities agreed that major public investment projects should continue to be donor financed on concessional terms. They also intend to mobilize private sector funding, including through well designed private public partnerships. The authorities expressed interest in developing long term domestic debt instruments with a view to developing financial markets and mobilizing domestic savings. In this regard, technical advice from staff on debt market development would be welcome. The authorities took note of staff’s view that domestic borrowing should be pursued with caution as it could raise the interest burden and crowd out private investment. They also reiterated that they are not factoring in possible future oil income in their medium-term plans. Page 17