The macroeconomic outlook is generally positive for 2013 and the medium term. Policy making has become more complicated since the November 2011 elections. The political party of the President, who is the head of the government, does not control a majority in the Parliament, requiring lengthier debate to secure legislative approval. Over the medium term, infrastructure projects led by construction of the AFHP, along with private mining investments should sustain average growth levels at around 4.4 percent over the next five years, despite the political uncertainty. However, the lack of a Parliamentary majority could add to delays, especially on crucial policy matters that require legislative approval. Nevertheless, relatively high growth along with low concessional interest rates on external borrowing will help to place the debt-to-GDP ratio on a firmly declining path, and the large external current account deficit would be mostly financed by mining-related FDI inflows (Tables 5, 6 and 7). Against the backdrop of continued global uncertainty, risks are tilted to the downside. On the upside, Guyana is poised to benefit from sales of climate services, capitalizing on the country’s vast rainforests. Activity will also be supported by ongoing projects under the Low Carbon Development Strategy (LCDS), including hydropower to lower energy costs, as well as large private sector projects underway in oil and mining. However, deteriorating terms of trade, particularly for gold, and a slowing global economy could adversely impact external stability via shrinking export volumes and less robust inflows of remittances, increasing the risk of a widening current account deficit. Financing constraints could exacerbate downside risks if investment projects, portfolio inflows and official transfers do not materialize as expected. A sharp increase in oil prices could widen further the external current account deficit as well as result in fiscal slippages, particularly from the state-owned electricity company (GPL). Rapid credit growth in recent years and rising house prices warrant continued vigilance to mitigate a potential build-up of financial stability risks.