Two important policy priorities of the authorities are to: (a) sustain high growth rates with less volatility than in the past, which will require tackling infrastructure gaps, raising productivity, and increasing the economy’s resilience to external shocks; and (b) promote more inclusive growth, better monitoring of MDGs, and targeting of social safety nets. Guyana has made considerable progress in sustainable growth and poverty reduction. The country has reduced the poverty rate, one of its MDGs, from 43 percent in 1999 to 35 percent Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). Latest available data from United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Page 18 in 2006. However, growth has been uneven geographically, warranting more efforts to further diversify the economy to spread the benefits of growth across the wider population, particularly those living in underprivileged areas, such as the hinterland, and in extreme poverty. There is a strong positive link between unemployment and poverty . Underemployment, mostly due to skills mismatch, as well as informal employment appears prevalent. In addition, labor force participation remains low. Labor market policies that protect workers, such as restrictions on hiring and firing, paid leave, and severance payments reduce employment flexibility. Nonetheless, Guyana ranks 47 out of 144 countries in the world Economic Forum’s wage flexibility index, the best performer in the Caribbean. Staff supported the authorities’ view that investments to increase productivity in the traditional sectors, primarily agriculture and mining, should be an integral part of a medium- term inclusive growth strategy. Major ongoing investments in the agriculture and mining sectors could support growth and employment and help lift the standard of living of the population in small villages. Advancing reforms and reducing transfers to public enterprises (averaging 5.6 percent of GDP in 2008–12) would create fiscal headroom for more efficiently targeted social safety net and support for small and medium enterprises to create employment, access major export markets, and maintain business growth in the face of frequent external volatility. Recent announcements of large investments in the extractive industries suggest major potential to diversify the economy and create jobs. Staff supported the authorities’ intention to develop an appropriate framework to manage the associated sovereign wealth should the reserves be proven. In addition, staff noted ongoing efforts to build capacity, raise productivity and improve competitiveness to help further reduce poverty. It is important to address the mismatch between the outputs of the educational system and the skills demanded by the evolving Guyanese economy. In general, the pace of change in the Guyanese economy has outstripped the pace of adjustment in the educational system. Secondly, there is potential for improvements in labor market mobility and flexibility which can be achieved by enhanced training opportunities. To that end, the authorities’ initiatives that include vocational training in secondary schools, skill training programs, on-the-job training, and social programs that encourage labor force participation are worthwhile. To boost job creation, the authorities should continue to improve the business climate to encourage investment while reducing the cost of doing business, especially energy. Improving labor productivity is key for job creation in the private sector. Structural reforms, such as investment in human capital, improvements in healthcare, and enhancements to the technical and vocational education and training, would help unlock further potential to grow formal private sector jobs with the pickup in real growth. The agenda should address any shortcomings in regulations to enhance flexibility and adaptability, as well as strengthen the legal framework for necessary reforms. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with staff on the need to diversify the economy to spread the benefits of growth, address labor market issues, especially those pertaining to Page 19 skills mismatch with a view to increase labor force participation, and modernize agriculture and mining. Specifically, steps are needed to encourage labor market participation by the Guyanese population to take advantage of the emerging opportunities in the expanding mining sector. The authorities project growth in agriculture, buoyed by expansion in rice production and stabilization of sugar production. They stressed that innovations in rice production along with potential new agreements with countries in the region could expand exports. The authorities also emphasized that improvements in the new sugar factory Skeldon, which has not performed as expected so far, will boost exports and domestic sales.