Sustainability Guyana weathered the global financial crisis relatively well and macroeconomic policy buffers have been broadly maintained. A strong medium-term policy framework is warranted to safeguard debt sustainability and enhance fiscal and external buffers. Fiscal Policy The Parliament imposed expenditure cuts on the 2013 budget. Citing insufficient information to assess the viability of AFHP, the Parliament approved a budget that cut AFHP-related and other spending by about 4 percent of GDP. The Parliament also delayed approval of the increase in the ceiling on government guarantees and amendments to the hydro-electric power bill which would have facilitated financing agreements. This led Sithe Global, the private sector partner, to withdraw from the AFHP, which could delay conclusion of the financing arrangement and eventual start of the project. Given the previous court ruling on the constitutionality of budget cuts initiated by the Parliament, which overturned expenditure cuts in 2012, fiscal outlays for 2013 are expected to be in line with this ruling. Staff estimates that the revised 2013 budget would yield a NFPS deficit of 5.2 percent of GDP, implying a primary deficit of 3.9 percent of GDP . The revised budget incorporates an increase in central government non-grant revenue of 0.9 percent of GDP vis-à-vis the 2012 outturn (largely on account of higher VAT and excise tax receipts) and a notable cut in transfers (0.7 percent of GDP). Central government capital expenditure is projected to rise by 0.4 percent of GDP while the public wage bill as a percent of GDP will remain broadly stable. The deterioration in the overall fiscal balance is largely related to worsening performance of public enterprises which are projected to return a deficit of 0.4 percent of GDP compared to a surplus of Page 10 1.3 percent a year ago. With the government gradually reducing expenditures on wages, goods and services, and transfers as a share of GDP, the NFPS fiscal deficit is expected to improve to 3.5 percent of GDP by 2018 (Table 9) The mission cautioned that further delays of the AFHP would increase the costs and risks associated with the project and postpone development opportunities arising from it. Should the financing agreements not be completed as planned, Guyana could lose access to GRIF funds currently envisaged to finance US$80 million of government’s share of the equity. Negotiating new funding arrangements from existing or alternative project financers might also result in less favorable lending terms. Contingent upon financial viability of the AFHP, to avoid further delays and advance the implementation of the project, staff recommended that the authorities continue to engage actively with the Parliament and all stakeholders. Staff assumes that the fiscal effects of the AFHP project would be shifted two years into the future to 2015–18, while the authorities aim to continue efforts to finalize the project as soon as possible. The mission also considered that given reduced fiscal space, medium-term risks, and robust external growth, a more ambitious fiscal consolidation strategy is warranted. Staff is of the view that a gradual but slightly more front-loaded effort to lower the overall fiscal deficit to about 2.0–3.0 percent of GDP over the medium term, which is consistent with a primary deficit of about 1.0–2.0 percent of GDP, would help bolster fiscal and external reserve buffers. Achieving this primary deficit target would place the debt-to-GDP ratio on a firmly declining path reaching 55 percent by 2018, and help preserve Guyana’s moderate risk of debt distress. Over the medium term, emphasis should be placed on increasing economic resilience within the context of a strengthened medium-term policy framework anchored on the public debt ratio, providing a cushion against external shocks as well as for conducting countercyclical policy. This would help to lower dependence on unpredictable grants, reduce the risk of pro-cyclical policy and provide a cushion against any cost overruns in major infrastructure projects. Agreement on a medium-term fiscal framework, underpinned by strong policies aimed at safeguarding debt sustainability would boost credibility and reduce the political uncertainty of the current budgetary process. Maintaining current tax revenues (around 21 percent of GDP), while reducing transfers and containing expenditures on central government wages and other goods and services over the medium term would help provide fiscal space of about 1.2 percent of GDP annually on average in 2014–2018. This would help sustain capital expenditure at 10.7 percent of GDP on average over the same period to address Guyana’s significant infrastructure needs and bolster social safety nets. Advancing far reaching reforms at the SOEs is key to stemming the drag on public finances. Pursuing policies aimed at ensuring financial viability of the public enterprises, including Mainly due to lower production of sugar company GUYSUCO and higher payments to creditors. This would be achieved by restraining real outlays to grow at a slower rate than real GDP. Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund. While the economy has grown robustly over the last four years, the fiscal deficit as a percent of GDP has also widened, implying a pro-cyclical fiscal stance. Page 11 further strengthening of GPL’s operational and administrative capacity and distribution network is warranted. Staff recommends reforming electricity tariffs to streamline subsidies and transfers to public enterprises and replacing them with a more targeted social safety net to address more directly the needs of the most vulnerable, and helping to reduce social imbalances. A 2012 actuarial review has recommended a set of urgent parametric reforms to restore the financial viability of the National Insurance Scheme (NIS). In 2011, the scheme experienced its first deficit and the fund is expected to be exhausted in less than 10 years if specific measures are not taken immediately (within 1–2 years) and sustained over the medium term. Among the most urgent measures the report identified, were increasing the contribution rate and pension age, raising the insurable earnings ceiling, freezing pension increases, revising pension accrual rates, and updating the prudential investment framework. Staff welcomes the increase in NIS contribution rates and looks forward to the planned reforms based on the recommendations of the actuarial review to avoid the impact of these contingent liabilities on the central government budget and help put it on a sustainable footing. Authorities’ Views The authorities expressed confidence that policy efforts over the last decade have restored a degree of fiscal solvency and bolstered the economy’s resilience to shocks . Over the medium term, the government proposes to continue its fiscal consolidation efforts by gradually reducing the NFPS deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP by 2018 which would bring the public debt to about 60 percent of GDP over the same period. The envisioned measures are reducing expenditures on wages, goods and services, and transfers as a share of GDP. The authorities are determined to preserve fiscal sustainability but are of a view that a faster fiscal consolidation could jeopardize achievements made thus far. They consider that the current macro framework strikes the right balance between fiscal consolidation and addressing Guyana’s developmental agenda. The authorities intend to keep the current energy pricing policy unchanged, and move to cost recovery once AFHP is in operation. When the project comes on stream, the average cost of electricity generation––currently about 19 U.S. cents/kWh––would be reduced to 11 U.S. cents in the first year of operation and 9 U.S. cents over the 20 year PPA term. Once the company is transferred to GPL after 20 years, generation cost is expected to drop to less than 2 U.S. cents/kWh, largely on account of repayment of loans to the IDB and CDB. On completion of the project, fiscal costs would also be reduced by elimination of subsidies to GPL (US$30 million in 2012), which currently accounts for about 25 percent of end user tariffs. At the same time, the authorities believe that the current fuel pricing regime that allows limited pass-through of international prices has helped keep inflation low while minimizing the impact on the government’s fiscal position By adjusting ad valorem excise tax rates in inverse correlation with imported oil prices, the authorities have contained pass-through of international prices into domestic inflation. Taxes per liter for both diesel and gasoline have fallen since 2007, with the decline most marked in 2011, particularly for diesel. Excise taxes have varied between 7–60 percent for gasoline and 0–40 percent for diesel. There is no VAT imposed on petroleum products, and kerosene is not taxed. Page 12 On the NIS, some measures have been adopted in response to the deficit. Based on the recommendations of the 2012 actuarial review, NIS contribution rates have been increased in 2013 and public consultations are ongoing in advance of the implementation of the other measures. The authorities have also raised their vigilance on the review of benefit expenditures and implemented measures to reduce fraud. The NIS has also established a debt unit, and has been working with the Guyana Revenue Authority on sharing information to recover unpaid contributions. Fiscal Risk and Debt Management Fiscal risks could result in an increase in public debt. These risks stem from the economy’s dependence on commodity prices. Regarding exports, volatility in the price of gold and other key export commodities would dampen growth and tax revenues. On the import side, the current dependence on oil imports exposes the fiscal position to sharp increases in oil prices which would depress demand, reduce tax revenues and increase transfers to GPL. In the absence of alternative energy sources, GPL’s dependence on thermal power generation will continue and its finances will remain exposed to oil price fluctuations, creating vulnerability for the fiscal accounts. Implementation of the AFHP reduces these risks; however, a project of this magnitude and complexity poses its own risks. Going forward, Sithe Global could reengage and the AFHP would experience a short delay but is fully implemented (staff baseline scenario). This would result in lower growth, tax receipts, and capital spending in the period of delay. Over the construction phase of the project, real GDP growth could be higher by projected 1.0–1.5 percent of GDP per year, as well as higher over the medium term, increasing tax receipts. At the same time, government spending on subsidies to support GPL’s operations could be reduced over the medium term. Under a worst case scenario, where the project does not go ahead, the government’s direct liability would be limited to its contribution to the project in the form of equity amounting to US$100 million (3.5 percent of 2012 GDP). In this case, the government would also continue spending on subsidies (0.1 percent of GDP) to support GPL’s operations through 2018. The project would also affect Guyana’s external position–over the construction period driven by large AFHP investment-related imports, the external current account deficit is projected to be higher on average by about 4.5 percent of GDP, which would result in lower reserve coverage by about 0.2 months of imports on average over the same period. In order to limit public sector borrowing and encourage large scale private investment in infrastructure, the government is implementing the AFHP as a Private Public Partnership (PPP). The cost of the project is estimated at US$858 million (about 30 percent of 2012 GDP). The government’s preferred financing plan now appears to be uncertain with the apparent withdrawal of Sithe Global which was expected to contribute US$157 million. The remaining financing was expected from China Development Bank (CDB) and the IDB in the form of loans of US$500.8 million and US$100 million, respectively, and the government’s investment in equity (US$100 million). It remains unclear whether Sithe Global will re-engage; if not, the government would face a challenge in sourcing alternative financing . Under the draft contract, Guyana Power and Light (GPL) would Sithe Global has indicated that it would reengage if all political parties in the Parliament supported the project, which is currently not the case, although the project does currently enjoy the support of a parliamentary majority. Page 13 purchase the entirety of AFHP’s energy output under a 20-year power purchase agreement (PPA) guaranteed by the government. Accordingly, the contingent fiscal liabilities of the guarantees for the PPA could amount to US$122 million (3 percent of projected 2018 GDP) annually during the first 12 years after the construction period (end-2018). At the same time, GPL could save in excess of this amount on fuel and other power generation costs. Staff acknowledged the benefits of cheaper and more reliable electricity to help unlock the full potential of the economy and to realize savings on oil imports. Staff also commended the authorities for their continued engagement with multilateral partners and recommended that efforts continue to ensure a viable and successful AFHP. It would be necessary to strengthen the finances and operations of GPL to enable the company to adequately handle its responsibilities under the project. It would also be essential to strengthen the project and debt management framework in view of the risks that PPPs can pose, particularly in the presence of sovereign guarantees. In this regard, the adoption of international best practices in the management of PPPs to manage potential risks of contingent fiscal liabilities is warranted, utilizing technical assistance to design the legal, accounting and fiscal risk management frameworks. Guyana’s indicators of the risk of debt distress remain comfortably under the relevant thresholds. The results of the debt sustainability analysis (DSA) suggest that the NPV of external debt to GDP stabilizes at 26 percent of GDP over the medium term while debt service would decline to less than 5 percent of revenue. However stress tests underscore the vulnerability of the public debt to standard shocks, including the primary balance and growth as well as contingent liabilities from the AFHP. Staff and the authorities agreed that the goods-for-debt exchange has had a beneficial impact on the debt while stimulating agricultural production, although the terms of the program could change in the future. Authorities’ Views The authorities are confident that ongoing reforms and investment in the electricity sector will ensure that the AFHP project remains economically and financially viable. Staff had comprehensive discussions with the authorities on the AFHP, and the authorities readily shared the relevant documents associated with the project. The authorities have retained a number of legal, financial, and electricity sector advisors to ensure the risks associated with the project remain manageable. While acknowledging that there is room to improve monitoring of public sector investment projects, they argue that projects go through an extensive consultation and rigorous vetting process to insure that the outcomes are optimal. Moreover, should Sithe Global re-engage, the fact that the government’s private partner in the project has extensive experience in hydro sector projects will further mitigate some of the risks. “Amaila Falls Hydropower project”, public presentation by the Government of Guyana, 31 July 2013. The unification of the discount rate has had a favorable effect on Guyana’s debt sustainability. Page 14 Reforms have started at the GPL to improve its efficiency and readiness for the AFHP. The government has committed to invest US$90 million in GPL for capital expenses and US$15.3 million to cover company’s operating costs over 2013–2017. Reforms also include enhancing the legal and regulatory structure of the GPL to enable it to reduce its technical and commercial losses in the distribution of electricity. On this front, a new billing system is being implemented and new tamper proof meters are supposed to record more accurately the use of electricity. Work has also started on the network (transmission and distribution) system.