After several years of accommodative monetary conditions, the authorities should guide sustainable credit growth to safeguard financial system soundness and monitor closely financial stability risks. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies The Bank of Guyana conducts monetary policy by targeting monetary aggregates consistent with output and inflation objectives. The central bank’s principal tool to achieve the targeted amount of broad money in the system are treasury bill auctions. The Open Market Operation Committee (OMOC) determines interventions through treasury bills on a weekly basis. In addition, the central bank deploys other instruments such as reserve requirements, the rediscount rate and moral suasion to fulfill its statutory objectives of promoting domestic price stability and growth. Monetary policy should be tightened to safeguard financial stability and stem appreciation of the REER. In light of negative real T-bill rates, high levels of liquidity in the banking system, continued high credit growth, and closure of the output gap, staff sees room to tighten monetary conditions to help bring inflation more in line with its major trading partners. Abundant liquidity in the banking system has impaired the effectiveness of monetary policy and encouraged potentially risky investments by banks in CARICOM sovereign instruments. However, these remain within strict prudential exposure limits imposed by the Bank of Guyana. Staff stressed that greater exchange rate flexibility is needed, in view of the shocks to the terms of trade from volatile commodity prices. Given wage and price rigidities, a somewhat greater degree of nominal exchange rate flexibility would help reduce the relatively appreciated real effective exchange rate. At the same time, the high pass-through of exchange rate changes to domestic prices along with the volatility of international commodity prices justifies smoothing out exchange rate and price volatility in the face of external shocks. Smoothing of the exchange rate Jan-08Feb-09Mar-10Apr-11May-12Jun-13 (percent)Real T-bill rateExcess reserves/Total reserves Page 15 should be limited reducing the effects of temporary volatility in commodity prices while allowing the exchange rate to absorb permanent shocks. In view of the projected widening current account deficits and uncertainty about external financing sources, the authorities need to continue to implement a policy mix that safeguards international reserves and contains inflationary pressures (see Box 2 for a reserve adequacy assessment). This would also help to cushion the economy against shocks to the baseline scenario discussed in the Risk Assessment Matrix. Along with appropriate nominal exchange rate flexibility, the combination of fiscal consolidation, moderate monetary tightening, and structural reforms, including enhancing the supply of skilled labor and continued improvements in the business climate, would help to curb inflationary pressures, boost competitiveness, contain the external current account deficit, and reduce appreciation of the real effective exchange rate. Authorities’ Views The authorities acknowledged the importance of macroeconomic stability to attract investment and support sustainable growth. In particular, they consider exchange rate stablility as an important anchor for investment decisions and competitiveness and emphasized that the currect arrangement has served them well. The authorities noted that the exchange rate is market determined, but underlined the significance of foreign exchange market intervention to alleviate shortages of foreign currency and avoid excessive volatility in the exchange rate as was the case in the second half of 2012. Going forward, the central bank expects the nominal exchange rate to depreciate on account of the inflation differential between Guyana and its trading partners, thus enabling it to maintain export competitiveness. However, the authorities pointed out that the high cost of electricity is a major impediment to improve external competitiveness. The authorities broadly agreed with staff that there is scope to tighten monetary policy without constraining growth. Nevertheless, they emphasized the potential tension between promoting financial deepening and safeguarding financial stability. They stressed that the Bank of Guyana’s strict financial oversight and regulation has safeguarded financial stability despite rapid credit growth in recent years. Financial Sector The financial sector is dominated by commercial banks. Three foreign banks and three local banks account for about 65 percent of financial sector assets. Among non-bank financial institutions, the New Building Society (NBS), a deposit taking institution that focuses primarily on mortgage loans, is the largest entity accounting for about 8 percent of financial sector assets and almost a third of non-bank financial institutions’ assets. Other non-bank financial institutions include two trust companies, six finance companies including two micro-credit lenders, two asset management companies, a moderately sized insurance sector, and a large number of small credit unions. The central bank supervises commercial banks and the majority of non-bank financial Page 16 institutions. Credit unions are supervised by the Ministry of Labor and data to assess risks in this sector are not currently available. Financial sector risks appear contained, but warrant vigilance particularly against the backdrop of several years of rapid credit growth. The overall banking system appears well- capitalized, profitable and liquid. All banks report capital ratios well above the regulatory minimum requirement. NPLs have remained between 5 and 6 percent over the last three years and provisioning for bad loans stands at comfortable levels. A temporary increase in NPLs at end-2012 to 8.35 from 5.40 a year earlier was related to delays in loan classification at one bank, according to the authorities. The Bank of Guyana is currently conducting an investigation of the matter. Loan concentration, a source of potential concern raised in the 2006 FSAP, remains high due to the limited number of large borrowers. The risk stemming from maturity mismatches on banks’ balance sheets due to funding with short-term deposits is mitigated by high levels of liquidity, but warrants close monitoring, in staff’s view. Foreign exchange and interest rate risks appear limited. Plausible negative exchange rate shocks actually improve the financial position of the overall banking system since banks in aggregate carry net long positions in foreign exchange (46 percent of capital and reserves as of June 2013). Interest rate risks are mitigated by banks’ ability to adjust interest rates on existing loans. Staff welcomed the progress made in enhancing the supervisory framework and data provision. Since the 2006 FSAP the authorities have brought insurance companies and the NBS under the central bank’s supervision. In addition to issue-specific ad-hoc inspections of banks, comprehensive on-site inspections are conducted every two years. The Bank of Guyana conducts credit, liquidity and foreign exchange exposure stress tests on a quarterly basis. The authorities make financial soundness data available on the Bank of Guyana’s website, including indicators for individual institutions. While substantial progress has been made, in staff’s view more frequent comprehensive on-site inspections are advisable for larger institutions. Improved coordination of the supervision of insurers and banks that are part of the same business group would enhance supervision. In addition, staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to bring credit unions under the supervisory authority of the Bank of Guyana. Enhancing financial development while safeguarding financial stability remains a challenge. Banks maintain high levels of liquidity and the ratio of loans to deposits remains below the level in comparable countries despite rapid credit growth in recent years. Savers face very low nominal interest rates on deposits, and other savings products, such as mutual funds, are not available. To address impediments to financial intermediation, staff recommended speeding up the judicial process of collateral recovery and title registration at the land registry which can take up to 8 months, according to the financial sector. Staff welcomed the establishment of a credit bureau which could help improve financial intermediation and lower costs. In 2004, the last available data point, aggregate credit union assets were 0.8 percent of GDP. Page 17 The Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF) in its 2011 assessment report has identified significant strategic AML/CFT deficiencies in Guyana. To tackle the legislative deficiencies identified, government has introduced an amendment bill in the Parliament. However, passage of the bill has been delayed at the request of the opposition for further deliberations. In case of insufficient progress by November 2013, the CFATF will call upon its members to consider implementing counter measures to protect their financial systems from the ongoing money laundering and terrorist financing risks emanating from Guyana, and will consider referring Guyana to the Financial Action Task Force International Cooperation Review Group (FATF ICRG). Staff urged the authorities and Parliament to press ahead with addressing the AML/CFT deficiencies identified by the CFATF by November 2013. Non-compliance with the CFATF recommendations by that date could severely curtail the ability of banks and other companies (including gold exporters) to conduct business internationally. Some banks already reported losing correspondent accounts at major foreign institutions and a slowdown in foreign transactions as a result of the delay in enacting the AML/CFT amendment bill. Authorities’ Views The authorities were in broad agreement with staff and emphasized the progress made since the 2006 FSAP. They stressed the supervisor’s strong track record of maintaining financial stability. They concurred with staff on the need for financial development and deepening, while closely monitoring and regulating financial stability risks. Since the 2006 FSAP, the authorities have brought insurance companies and the NBS under the central bank’s supervision, expanded staff in the supervision department, introduced a risk-based supervisory framework, and conducted stress tests of commercial banks on a quarterly basis. A credit bureau, one of the key recommendations of the FSAP, is expected to be fully operational early next year. On AML/CFT, the authorities shared staff’s concern about the negative ramifications should Guyana not meet the CFATF’s deadline to address deficiencies by November 2013. They stressed that the necessary reforms are in place and the only outstanding issue is the passage of the amendment bill in Parliament.