Structural reforms will focus on removing constraints to growth and completing fiscal and financial sector reforms under way. Actions will be focused and streamlined, in line with EPA recommendations. Their timing will be guided by capacity constraints and the ongoing TA agenda. Growth and social cohesion (MEFP ¶17–22). Actions will target lifting basic constraints to growth in areas of IMF expertise. Energy sector. Strengthening EDH’s financial position will reduce fiscal risks and allow a gradual increase of supply. Accordingly, the main stakeholders in the electricity sector are preparing a work program to be reflected in a protocol for the sector (structural benchmark). The protocol includes provisions to improve governance, strengthen performance, provide timely information for decision-making, and consolidate cross- arrears. The authorities will audit the largest clients to boost billing and collection (structural benchmark). The adoption and implementation of an automatic pricing mechanism for domestic fuel products (to reflect international prices) will improve efficiency and prevent blanket subsidies (prior action and continuous structural benchmark). Property rights. Strengthening property rights will boost Haiti’s growth potential. Transferable property rights will support private domestic and foreign investment, facilitate access to credit by allowing the use of land as collateral, and can be a valuable input to broadening the tax base. A modern cadastre system would improve Haiti’s resilience to natural disasters, as stronger property rights would encourage investments in structural improvements. In line with their ongoing work-program, the inter- ministerial commission on land management will prepare an action plan for This effort is supported by the World Bank and the IDB. While IPPs have a creditor position vis-à-vis EDH,for the provision of electricity, the central government has a creditor position vis-à-vis IPPs for the provision of fuel. Consolidating these arrears will bring clarity to the financial position of the sector’s stakeholders. Efficiency will also increase due to the gradual harmonization of custom duties across products. Page 28 FY2016–FY2017 to strengthen the legal framework and functioning of the cadastre (structural benchmark). Access to credit. A fully-functioning credit bureau will help strengthen access to credit by providing a tool to assess creditworthiness. Regular reporting by financial institutions to the bureau is a crucial first step, but the authorities should allow potential first-time borrowers to build a credit history by incorporating other indicators of creditworthiness into the database, such as proof of utilities payment. The non-bank financial sector (insurance companies, cooperatives, and microfinance) should be further developed, as should new financial instruments such as leasing. Poverty Reduction. The authorities will build on the progress in the MDG framework by targeting consistent increases in domestically-financed spending on education, health, and agriculture (indicative target). Data quality. In the near term, the authorities will prioritize the introduction of an overall quarterly economic index to serve as a leading indicator of GDP growth (currently presented only on a yearly basis). With technical assistance from the IMF and from France, the authorities will revamp national accounts, including the change of the base year. The authorities have also completed a household survey, the results of which will be crucial in improving estimates of poverty and poverty reduction as well on the labor force. The authorities will also address data gaps in the external accounts, and will request IMF technical assistance to this end. Fiscal Reforms (MEFP ¶23–27). Actions were drawn from the Public Finance Reform Strategy adopted last year, and will focus on strengthening tax policy and administration, improving public financial management, enhancing expenditure effectiveness, and creating an enabling environment for the private sector. Tax policy. A working group in charge of producing a draft of the tax code will be appointed by end-July 2015 (structural benchmark). This group will also assess the elimination of a number of small taxes with low yield and high costs, and the adoption of a mining code and of a full-fledged VAT system. The IMF will provide technical assistance in analyzing tax expenditures Tax administration. Actions will focus on restructuring and deepening taxpayer segmentation. Registration and audit of new potential taxpayers (identified with IMF support), the transfer of files of medium taxpayers from the LTO and local tax offices to This effort is being supported by the IDB, France and Canada. This is in line with the recommendations of the Financial Inclusion Strategy recently completed with support from the World Bank. See Selected Issues Paper “Monetary Policy and Financial Intermediation.” Page 29 the MTO (structural benchmark), and strengthening the unit in charge of NGOs and exempted entities will increase compliance. Strengthening IT tax management will improve country-wide monitoring of tax payer filings. Reforms at customs administration will contain tax exemptions, the fight against smuggling and the communication of information from the Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) to the tax department for auditing purposes (structural benchmark) Public financial management . Work on the TSA will continue, including the conversion of spending accounts into Treasury sub-accounts and of specific revenue accounts into secondary accounts; and the establishment of all remaining accounting centers by end-September 2015 (structural benchmark). To this end, the government has implemented the terms of a December 2014 memorandum placing all public accounts at the BRH under the control of public accountants, a measure also to be applied by the state-owned bank BNC (prior action). Actions to strengthen cash and debt management will complement this work. The authorities will make their best effort so that the draft laws on the reorganization of the ministry of finance and on public debt are adopted following the election of a new parliament. To ensure respect of the budgetary process, the government has tightened modalities for the clearance of off- budget commitments (continuous structural benchmark). Improving the effectiveness of public investment will help upgrade infrastructure and reduce costs for the private sector. In the medium-term, the expansion of the TSA to the rest of the NFPS will help improve the coverage of public sector finances. Monetary and financial sector reforms (MEFP ¶28–31). The ECF-supported program targets regulatory and supervisory enhancements and reforms to improve the monetary policy framework, promote financing deepening, and support inclusive growth. Reserve management. Actions to improve the BRH’s reserve management framework will include better documentation of reserve management decisions and better alignment of portfolio management decisions to internal guidelines, in line with IMF technical assistance recommendations. The authorities will prepare periodic reports on the liquidity of gross reserves, and will quantify the BRH’s three goals in managing its reserve portfolio (capital preservation, liquidity, and return). The authorities will refine the investment guidelines and benchmarks agreed with external managers to ensure conformity with the BRH’s objectives. Foreign exchange market. Actions in this area will include improving the reporting of transactions, beginning single-price foreign exchange auctions, setting up an electronic platform for FX transactions, and establishing an interbank market for foreign exchange with an increased number of participants. Safeguards. Actions will be geared at strengthening the investment committee’s autonomy from investment operations, appointing a compliance officer to provide Page 30 independent oversight of foreign reserves policy and investment guidelines, and achieving full adoption of IFRS. Banking supervision and AML/CFT. The authorities will request IMF technical assistance on stress testing, with a view of implementing them on a regular basis to identify risks. The authorities will implement remaining CFTAF recommendations on AML/CFT, and implement the 2012 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standard, with a view to improve governance and address tax evasion.