The macroeconomic framework of the ECF-supported program is underpinned by achievable GDP growth rates (MEFP ¶10–11). GDP growth is projected at 2–3 percent in FY2015, and should pick up to 3–4 percent in the medium term as structural reforms proceed (Box 2). Growth will be underpinned by remittance-driven consumption, construction, a growing textile industry, and will be supported by lower oil prices. Inflation is projected to remain in the mid-single digits, due to a prudent policy mix. The current account deficit is projected to remain under 4 percent of GDP through FY2017, reflecting lower oil prices and fiscal consolidation. Port Authority (APN) Airport Authority (AAN) Postal Office (OPH) Labor and Maternity Insurance Office (OFATMA) Third-party vehicle insurance company (OAVCT) Sugar Factory (USJLDD) Telecom Company (NETCO, 40 percent stake) Private Mandatory Civil Service No No Yes No No No No No No No State-owned Enterprises Electricity (EHD) Source: Ministry of Economy and Finance Local Governments Partially Social Security Comments Only transfers of earmarked national taxes and corresponding spending. Local Governments are small (2 percent of GDP on aggregate) and data are produced with significant lags. Still low dependency ratios result in surpluses. Macro relevant. Small in size and significant lags in data provision. Risks to the baseline GDP growth projections are tilted to the downside. Domestic politics. The complex political situation poses challenges for policy implementation, and for anchoring expectations. Oil prices. The decline in oil prices is a positive terms of trade shock; oil prices remain, however, highly volatile. The risk of a stop in Petrocaribe financing has increased, and this could result in lower GDP growth of about 1 percentage point. Donor fatigue. Aid inflows are decreasing as earthquake rebuilding winds down. Slower aid flows (including due to political stress) are a downside risk. Page 24 Weather events. Weather shocks and natural disasters are responsible for stop-and-go dynamics and combined with low response capacity and institutional weaknesses prevent the accumulation of capital. Agriculture (over 20 percent of GDP), is particularly vulnerable to weather events. U.S. growth. The U.S. is Haiti’s largest export market and the main source of remittances (20 percent of GDP). Higher U.S. growth constitutes an upside risk. The fiscal adjustment stems from the central government (3.7 percent of GDP) and EDH (0.5 percent of GDP) Nonfinancial public sector (I + II) The ECF-supported program is built on a front-loaded fiscal adjustment (MEFP ¶12, 24–25). The deficit (including grants) of the non-financial public sector (NFPS, the program’s fiscal anchor, text table) is set to decrease from about 7½ percent of GDP in FY2014 to 3¼ percent in FY2015, and will decline further to less than 2½ percent of GDP in FY2016 − FY2018. About half of the fiscal consolidation in FY2015 is derived from lower international oil prices, and thus, should not result in a negative fiscal impulse. The reduction in the NFPS deficit should bolster sustainability while preserving poverty- reducing spending, crowd in private sector bank credit and preserve buffers. Expenditure Transfers to electricy sector Non-electricity transfers Transfers to municipalities for street lighting Mitigating measures for fuel price increases Wage bill Petrocaribe-funded investment Exceptional post-Sandy investment Fuel price increase Locked-in windfall revenue Admnistrative measures (incl. vehicle tags) Central government (I) Revenue and budget support Budget support Fuel taxes EDH deficit (after transfers) (II) Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance; and Fund staff estimates. Excluding transfers to municipalities for street lighting. Some wages were previously classified under transfers. The program for FY2015. In March 2015, the central government adopted (as a prior action) a revised FY2015 budget consistent with a deficit of 2.7 percent of GDP, that includes allocations for elections and street lighting, a (warranted) reclassification of current transfers into wages, and a reduction of capital spending towards more sustainable levels, in line with the large decline in Petrocaribe financing. Central Government revenue will increase to 14.7 percent of GDP, given the elimination of fuel subsidies and the lock-in of windfall revenue from the declining oil prices. Grants will decline by 0.4 percent of GDP (with budget support expected from the IDB and the European Union). Current spending will remain broadly stable, as wage bill increases (of 1 percent of GDP, given the reclassification of transfers and increases for teachers and the national police), will be offset by reductions in transfers, including to the electricity sector. Investment will decline, as one-off post-Sandy emergency spending concludes and only ongoing projects receive budgetary financing. In addition, EDH’s board adopted (as a prior action) a revised budget for FY2015 with savings of about 0.7 percent of GDP. Savings will come from reductions in production costs, a more rational utilization of available supply, and improvements in billing and collection at unchanged tariffs. The program for FY2016–FY2018. The FY2016 budgets for the central government and EDH will be adopted before end-September 2015 in line with an NFPS deficit of Page 25 2.3 percent of GDP (structural benchmark). Savings will mainly come from additional efforts at rationalizing domestically-financed investment and additional gains from EDH reforms. The NFPS deficit will decline to 2.2 percent of GDP by FY2018 (Central Government deficit of 2 percent and EDH deficit -after transfers- of 0.2 percent). To control current spending, net recruitments are only expected in the social and security sectors. Wages will not be indexed, and increases will not surpass inflation. Risk Management. A disruption of Petrocaribe flows would create a financing gap of about 1 percent of GDP in FY2015 and of 2 percent of GDP in FY2016 relative to program projections. Additional donor financing and temporary drawdown of deposits and reserves could offset half of the gap this and next fiscal year. The authorities explained that no new Petrocaribe-financed projects will be initiated, and that they have identified projects that can be implemented more slowly should the need arise. Thus, in case of a stop, the authorities stressed that the spending pace will be adjusted to absorb the shock. The authorities argued that the adoption (as a prior action), and the implementation before end-FY2015 (as a continuous structural benchmark) of an automatic mechanism for oil products to reflect international prices should contain fiscal risks derived from a rebound in international oil prices (Box 3). The monetary program under the ECF-supported program is geared at achieving a moderate and stable inflation while preserving a credible reserve buffer (MEFP ¶13–14). The program will target international reserves at 4–5 months of prospective imports and ensure no monetary financing of the fiscal deficit. The program for FY2015. After a decline in NIR of about US$100 million during the first half of FY2015 (as the BRH accommodated the payment of debt to government suppliers at end-FY2014, but also due to increased dollar hoarding by the private sector responding to the political cycle), NIR are programmed to decline by at most US$50 million in the second half of FY2015. The additional decrease will come from the use of government deposits to partially absorb the strong decline in Petrocaribe flows, but also from an expected increase in deposit dollarization until the election cycle concludes. Given the importance of a credible reserve buffer to anchor expectations, increased exchange rate flexibility will be needed to meet the NIR target in case exchange rate pressures are higher than expected. Page 26 Box 3. Haiti: An Automatic Pricing Mechanism Fuel prices in Haiti are similar to those in Caribbean and Sub Saharan African countries. Retail prices at end-2014 were somewhat higher than the average for Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), developing Asia, and the (heavily subsidized) prices in the Middle East and North Africa, but significantly lower than the average for advanced economies (see chart). The small gap that existed with the LAC average was, however, closed after pump price decreases last February. The price structure for fuel products suffers from some shortcomings including a lack of transparency. The base imported prices used in the price structure are not those in invoices paid by importers (based on Platt’s), but rather the “Caribbean posting” quotes, a benchmark that includes insurance and other costs in addition to the base price for refined oil products. This results in the double counting of some costs within the price structure. The gap between actual import prices and the “Caribbean posting” quotes is positive, and has increased since April 2014 (see chart). This gap is transferred to private sector importers, including for payment of storage costs which are not explicitly shown in the price structure. These transfers have increased in the last 12 months. Price Gap Caribbean Posting and Platt's (average, in US$/gallon) Effective Taxes (in percent of retail prices) Retail Prices (in US$/liter, end of 2014) Gasoil Gasoil n u J l u J n J l u J n u J n J l u J n J n u J n u J r r p S c D r r p S c D p S c D p S c D r Gasoline n J r r y p S v o p S v o r y r y p S v o Kerosene Gasoline Kerosene Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Haiti Developing Asia Sub-Sahara Africa LAC Middle East and North Africa Advanced Economies The authorities will implement an automatic pricing mechanism (APM) to protect fiscal revenues from fluctuations in international oil prices. Fuel prices were fixed during March 2011–October 2014. The price freeze implied that taxes were adjusted to keep pump prices fixed. As international oil prices increased (and the gourde depreciated), implicit fuel taxes declined and the gap with fuel prices in the region increased (e.g., in June 2014, pump prices in Haiti were, on average, about 30 percent lower than in the Dominican Republic, where retail prices move broadly in tandem with international prices). In the context of the ECF, the authorities committed to implementing an APM before the end of FY2015. This will ensure that international prices are passed-through into domestic retail prices, preserving fiscal revenues and providing the right signal for resource allocation. It will also depoliticize fuel price adjustments and anchor expectations about the causes of price changes. The APM will include a smoothing mechanism to prevent sharp increases in domestic prices in response to international price hikes. This mechanism will allow for additional (forgone) revenues of up to G 1 billion (0.2 percent of GDP). However, international prices will be fully passed-through (upwards or downwards), whenever additional (forgone) revenues reach G 1 billion in absolute terms. The authorities also committed to revise the price structure so it reflects actual imported prices and all costs in the value chain. The authorities are also planning to implement well targeted mitigating measures. This is in line with best practice. In this regard, in a number of countries the elimination of fuel subsidies was accompanied by the introduction of a social tariff for public transportation (e.g. in the Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Nicaragua and Panama). The authorities have requested assistance from the World Bank to design such a system. The planned fiscal cost of this direct subsidy (0.2–0.3 percent of GDP) is minor when compared with the cost of blanket subsidies in FY2014 (about 2 percent). 1/ The importers are in charge of storing the products they contract through private companies. Installed storage capacity is estimated at 365,000 barrels, which is the equivalent of three weeks of national consumption. Page 27 The program for FY2016–FY2017. As the fiscal adjustment proceeds and the electoral cycle comes to an end, NIR are programmed to rebound as dollarization is gradually reduced and dollar hoarding declines. Over the medium-term, fiscal consolidation will permit a gradual loosening of monetary policy and a crowding in of private sector credit, without unwarranted pressures on international reserves. Monetary financing of the government will be limited to a drawdown of Post-Catastrophe Debt Relief (PCDR) resources. This will ensure that international reserves and government deposits at the BRH are at levels appropriate to serve as cushions against a possible disruption in Petrocaribe and other shocks.