Preserving macroeconomic stability is a prerequisite for growth. Staff and the authorities agreed that a low and stable rate of inflation underpinned by moderate exchange rate depreciation and a sustainable fiscal position should contribute to anchoring investors’ expectations. They concurred that maintaining adequate financial buffers is essential to support Haiti’s resilience in the face of shocks, and avoid stop-and-go growth dynamics. (i) Rebuilding fiscal space and strengthening the quality of fiscal policy Staff and the authorities agreed on the need to cut the central government’s deficit to preserve buffers. This is also needed given expected reductions in available concessional financing between FY2014 and FY2018. External grants and Petrocaribe inflows are each projected to decline by 2 percent of GDP (as earthquake rebuilding winds down and on lower oil prices, respectively). Staff argued that in view of the limited domestic financing prospects, the need to preserve fiscal buffers (in the form of deposits at the banking sector), and to contain fiscal risks, the central government deficit should be reduced from 6¼ percent of GDP in FY2014 to about 2 percent GDP in FY2018. Haiti’s risk of debt distress has improved on the back of expected fiscal consolidation, but importantly, is based on a projection of significantly lower oil prices in the medium term. A rebound in oil prices, however, could result in the risk of debt distress to become high again (see Debt Sustainability Analysis, DSA). The authorities agreed on the need to cut the deficit to preserve macroeconomic stability, but underlined the need for donors to support the adjustment by keeping a steady flow of budgetary and project grants. Staff stressed that lower fiscal deficits will allow a gradual loosening of monetary policy and crowd in bank credit to the private sector. Staff and the authorities also agreed on the importance of reining in EDH’s deficit. The decrease in international oil prices reduces EDH’s deficit by 0.5 percent of GDP in FY2015, given lower generation costs, and unchanged tariffs. The authorities explained that the latter will be adjusted only after an analysis of their structure. They further explained that EDH management presented a revised FY2015 budget with an action plan to increase cash recovery based on improved billing and collection from larger clients. The Ministry of Public Works (which oversees EDH) has selected Electricité de France (EDF) to develop a master plan for the sector, with World Bank financing. Domestic revenue should be increased. Staff noted that Haiti’s revenue-to-GDP ratio is low by regional standards, in part due to forgone fuel tax revenues. Staff urged the authorities to take advantage of the decline in international oil prices to eliminate remaining fuel subsidies, which should yield 1.5–1.6 percent of GDP in FY2015. The authorities agreed, and highlighted that they The DSA also shows that Haiti’s external debt profile remains vulnerable to shocks to borrowing conditions and the exchange rate, while shocks to growth have a negative impact on public debt. The cost of a sudden stop of Petrocaribe financing would be lower than previously assessed provided oil prices evolve as projected. Page 19 had resisted pressures for large decreases in pump fuel prices. Staff further argued that multi-year investment in improving revenue administration (notably by strengthening the large and medium tax payers’ offices and the unit in charge of NGOs and exempted entities), should allow domestic revenue to increase to 15.5 percent of GDP by FY2019. Staff stressed that the elimination of several low-yield taxes will improve clarity of the tax code, and that work towards VAT implementation and a new mining code should continue. The authorities noted that work in these areas is ongoing, with help from donors, including the IMF. Staff and the authorities concurred on the need to strengthen the fiscal policy framework with a view to improving the quality and composition of public spending Strengthening the public investment framework (including the preparation, evaluation, and monitoring of projects) will decrease ineffective spending. Advancing the implementation of the Treasury Single Account (TSA) will improve cash and debt management and control over fiscal policy. The authorities explained that they have made significant progress in both areas with help by the World Bank and the IMF. Staff urged the authorities to develop a more targeted and sustainable social safety net. Eliminating blanket subsidies and reorienting them to poverty-reducing outlays (such as education and health) will build social cohesion and improve human capital. The decrease of transfers to EDH should create fiscal space for priority expenditures, including on health, education, and a fully-staffed national police, in view of the expected decrease in MINUSTAH forces. The authorities agreed that the decrease in EDH transfers will create space for priority expenditure including for the national police, health expenditures, and education spending under the PSUGO program, and they requested technical assistance from the World Bank to design a social tariff for public transportation. Staff urged the authorities to strengthen fiscal transparency. Staff stressed that budget documents should report special accounts and programs, civil service pensions and future pension liabilities, earmarked resources for municipalities, financial transactions with SOEs (including contingent liabilities) and all Petrocaribe-funded transactions. The authorities explained that only central government–related transactions can be included in the national budget, and that all Petrocaribe-funded transactions (with the exception of those related to EDH) are already included in the budget. (ii) Strengthening the monetary policy framework and the soundness of the financial sector Staff and the authorities concurred that monetary policy should be geared at keeping a low and stable inflation rate. Given high pass-through rates, this will require both moderate exchange rate depreciation, and well-anchored exchange rate depreciation expectations. This is only possible if the REER is close to equilibrium, and if the expected path for the fiscal deficit is consistent with keeping international reserves at 4–5 months of prospective imports (i.e., sufficient for credible See accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Public Expenditure in Haiti: Balancing Human Capital and Infrastructure Formation.” See accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Haiti’s Public Sector: Explaining the ECF’s Fiscal Target” Page 20 market intervention). Staff stressed that foreign exchange market intervention should also reduce excess volatility. Staff argued that if fiscal consolidation falters, the BRH should allow for more exchange rate flexibility, as the depletion of buffers can negatively impact expectations and reduce the room to react in the face of shocks. Staff cautioned that unanchored expectations may result in a decrease in gourde demand amid increasing volatility and higher dollarization. Strengthening the communication of monetary policy decisions will assist in managing expectations. Staff urged the BRH to keep the stance of monetary policy tight until the fiscal deficit is reduced. High legal reserve requirements have reduced excess reserves, strengthening the transmission from open market operations (OMOs) to credit growth. Using OMOs for any further tightening should then be preferred to further increases in legal reserve requirements as this will help improving the functioning of the interbank money market and strengthening the transmission mechanism. BRH authorities indicated that this is indeed the instrument that it was used to tighten the monetary stance since mid-2014. Staff also encouraged the BRH to consider using 5-year government bonds acquired at end-FY2014 when conducting OMOs. Staff urged the BRH to avoid the use of exceptions in the computation of reserve requirements, as this undermines their effect and makes the policy stance less transparent. The BRH’s authorities indicated that they are analyzing the use of government bonds in OMOs, as well as their intention to issue dollar- indexed bonds to absorb liquidity and reduce foreign exchange market pressures. Staff noted that, if market priced, such bonds can help discover exchange rate depreciation expectations. However, staff cautioned that they also could exacerbate foreign exchange pressures if the fiscal deficit is not swiftly reduced. Headline and Effective Required Reserves (Percent of Deposits, weighted average of goude and dollar rates) Sources: BRH FMI Weekly; Fund Staff Calculations Headline Reserve Rate Effective Reserve Rate Staff noted that there is room to further improve BRH operations. Reserve management needs strengthening, in line with the 2011 safeguards recommendations and IMF technical assistance. Developing a deeper foreign exchange market would improve monetary policy effectiveness, as would an enhanced framework for foreign exchange intervention. Timely access to information would help improve real-time monetary policy decision-making. The authorities welcomed IMF technical assistance on reserve management, stressing that revised investment guidelines and a more appropriate benchmark could help achieve the BRH’s objective of securing a positive real return on its reserve portfolio without compromising capital preservation and liquidity objectives. They also highlighted the efforts to continue developing the interbank foreign exchange market to reduce unnecessary exchange rate volatility. See Selected Issues Paper “External Buffers and Competitiveness to Absorb Shocks And Support Growth.” See Selected Issues Paper “Monetary Policy and Financial Intermediation.” Page 21 Box 2. Haiti: GDP Growth Projections under the ECF arrangement Average per-capita GDP growth in Haiti in the past three decades has been negative. Per capita GDP growth in the thirty years through 2014 was -1 percent. This situates Haiti in the bottom 5 th percentile when compared with a range of country groups (including countries of all levels of development, low-income countries (LICs), and non-resource rich LICs, see Table). This compares with a median per capita GDP growth rate of about 1.4 percent for all LICs and 1.2 percent for non-resource rich LICs. Political instability, weather and terms of trade shocks produced a number of stop-and-go growth episodes. Although both headline and per-capita GDP growth were positive during non-crisis years, this performance did not offset the negative impact on per-capita income levels , after political crisis. While natural disasters continue to affect Haiti (as agriculture is about 20 percent of GDP), GDP per capita has recovered after those. Standard growth accounting exercises suggest that total factor productivity (TFP) growth was somewhat positive in non-crisis years, but extremely negative during crisis years (see Chart). The macroeconomic framework of the ECF-supported program is underpinned by ambitious, yet achievable, per capita GDP growth rates. Concretely, average per-capita GDP growth for 2015–2035 is assumed at 2.2 percent, about similar to the median for all country groups. This would be the result of a projected average real GDP growth rate of 3.4 percent and population growth of 1.2 percent. Projections are conditional on political and macroeconomic stability, and appropriate buffers to withstand shocks and avoid stop-and-go growth dynamics. Given large space for catch-up growth, positive institutional change could generate large increases in TFP. Accordingly, baseline GDP growth rates are the result of expected labor force increases (in line with demographic trends), increases in the capital stock (mainly due to still-high public investment), and a low (but positive) TFP contribution. Stronger progress in structural reforms could yield larger increases in TFP. Relatively large TFP increases have been observed in LICs that significantly improved their policy performance. Sources: United Nations Database; National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ "Crisis years" are: 1985-87, 1990-94, 2001, 2002-2004, 2008, and 2010. 2/ "Non-crises years" excludes all crises years. GDP and Input Contributions (Percent change, y/y) TFP Labor Capital GDP GDP per Capita 1985-2014 Crises Years 1/ Non-crises Years 2/ Per Capita Growth, 1985-2014 (percent) Transition from Duvalier Economic and political crises Earthquake Coup d'Etat; Embargo Oil and Food price shock 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Haiti: Average and Projected Per Capita GDP Growth As A Percentile of World Averages, 1985-2014 Percentile, all countries (142) Percentile, LICs (51) 1985-2014, Actual -1.0% growth, average 1.7% average growth, ex crisis years Memo: -4.2% average growth in crisis years 2015-2019, Proj. 2020-2035, Proj. Percentile, Non- Resource Rich LICs (34) Source: WEO, Fund Staff calculations 1/ Crisis years in Haiti are defined as 1985-1987; 1990-1994; 2001; 2002- 2004; 2008, and 2010. ________ Data on per capita growth rates for 142 countries (including 51 LICs and 34 non-resource rich LICs) were obtained from the World Development Indicators database. The distinction between all LICs and non-resource rich LICs is based on “Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries” (IMF, 2012) Population projections are those of IHSI and United Nations. Page 22 The banking sector remains well-capitalized and profitable, but some sectors may come under pressure as the post-earthquake relief effort winds down. Staff noted that commercial bank credit remains concentrated mainly in commerce and non-tradable sectors. In particular, the service sector expanded after the earthquake (including hotels and restaurants, mainly in the capital Port-au-Prince) to respond to the increased demand that originated in the international relief effort. As this effort winds down, demand may decrease and thus the service sector may come under pressure. In this regard, staff recommended the implementation of periodic stress testing to spot risks. The authorities noted that financial soundness is safeguarded through periodic on-site and off-site inspections, but would consider stress tests. They explained that they have allowed banks to renegotiate loans to non-tradable sectors to provide time for such sectors to adjust to the demand plateau. Staff cautioned that the use of such renegotiations should be monitored, to assess the effect on capital ratios, and that banks should be ready to withhold dividends or inject new capital if needed. BRH authorities concurred. The authorities stressed that the adoption (in late 2013) of the anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) law addressed a number of the recommendations by the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF), but cautioned that remaining reforms (including reforms to the penal code) will need parliament approval. Staff argued that low access to credit is a constraint to growth. Staff argued that deeper financial intermediation would support inclusive growth. Intermediation can be increased by strengthening property rights and competition among financial institutions. The authorities highlighted their new financial inclusion strategy, developed in consultation with the World Bank, and noted that recent reforms such as the establishment of a credit bureau will result in reliable information about the credit-worthiness of individuals and businesses. The authorities explained that they intend to resume efforts to enact pending laws on financial cooperatives and on microfinance institutions, and stressed that data collection in this sector has improved. A NEW ECF ARRANGEMENT: LIFTING BOTTLENECKS