Doing Business Indicators (2015) (Rank 100=best) Sustained growth is essential for poverty reduction and social cohesion. Given the tapering of aid, staff argued that the impetus to growth needs to come from structural reforms and institutional strengthening. Lower oil prices, if sustained, will also support growth. Potential growth and competitiveness remain low as reforms implemented in recent years are insufficient (impeding, e.g., taking full advantage of preferential trade agreements). The authorities concurred, but noted progress in social indicators and pointed out that the slow pace of reforms is at times rooted in their complex nature, which sometimes affect vested interests. The authorities also highlighted the need to carefully analyze trade policy, arguing that low average tariff rates (below Caribbean Community and Common Market, CARICOM, levels) put domestic producers at a relative disadvantage vis-à-vis countries in the region. Staff and the authorities agreed that the main constraints to competitiveness include: Sources: Doing Business (2015) World Bank Report. Haiti Jamaica DR LAC Starting a business Registering property Ease in getting credit Construction permits Overall Weak institutions. Weak property rights constrain the real estate market, foreign investment, access to credit, and efficient agriculture (which provides the basic livelihood to most Haitians). Predatory practices are widespread. Lack of transparency in government contracting has resulted in, e.g., unfavorable conditions for electricity supply, high electricity costs, and hidden costs in the structure of fuel pump prices (Box 3). A still-large U.N. force continues to ensure security. Domestic Politics. Political crises caused severe decreases in the level of per-capita income during the last 30 years (Box 2). Accordingly, the yield for growth of maintaining political peace would be significant. See accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Opportunities and Challenges for Growth.” Haiti is ranked 147 th (out of 148 countries) in property rights in the World Economic Forum’s “Global Competitiveness Index” for 2014. Haiti is ranked 166 th (out of 177 countries) in the 2014 “Corruption Perceptions Index” by Transparency International. Page 17 Inadequate infrastructure . Port services and electricity supply are inefficient and expensive, and road infrastructure is deficient to keep the country fully integrated. The policy framework needs strengthening. Fiscal policy implementation is constrained by the lack of an integrated framework. A number of small taxes result in informational and operational costs to investors. Administrative formalities for enterprise creation add costs. Low labor productivity. Access to healthcare and technical education is limited, restricting human capital formation, and social infrastructure is the worst in LAC. These factors constrain investment. Data quality. Data provision has serious shortcomings that significantly hamper surveillance. Most affected are the national accounts and labor indicators. Fiscal and external sector data are broadly adequate, but need improvements in coverage and timeliness. Collection, production and distribution of economic data were seriously affected by the 2010 earthquake. This deprives policy-makers and the private sector alike of access to timely and accurate information about the economy, including potential opportunities. Staff argued Haiti’s real effective exchange rate (REER) level is broadly appropriate, but that further appreciation may constrain competitiveness, and thus, that the gourde should remain flexible to respond to changes in fundamentals. The REER drifted slowly upwards since 2010, as exchange rate depreciation has been moderate and inflation, while well-contained, has been higher than in Haiti’s main trading partners. Staff analysis suggests that the moderate upward movement in the REER reflects both strong aid and remittance inflows, as well as a significant improvement in the net foreign asset position following substantial post-earthquake debt relief. Haiti’s exchange system (a crawl-like arrrangement, with no significant restrictions for capital movements) remains unchanged since the 2012 Article IV consultation. Staff highlighted that Haiti’s low competitiveness would be best addressed by removing structural bottlenecks to growth. These range from a lack of basic public services, a cumbersome legal and regulatory environment, to political uncertainty and weak governance. The authorities added that a sharp change in the nominal exchange rate would raise inflation and fuel social pressures without appreciably improving competitiveness, and underscored the need to diversify Haiti’s productive and export base. Haiti is ranked 177 th (out of 189 countries) on the World Bank’s “Doing Business” indicators for 2015. As pointed out in an independent evaluation of the Doing Business survey (see www.worldbank.org/ieg/doingbusiness), care should be exercised when interpreting these indicators given their, at times, subjective nature, limited coverage of business constraints, and a small sample, which taken together tend to overstate the indicators' coverage and explanatory power. See Selected Issues Paper “External Buffers and Competitiveness to Absorb Shocks And Support Growth.” Thus, as in the last Article IV consultation, Haiti’s system is free from restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Page 18