VULNERABILITY Per-Capita GDP Growth, Actual vs. Program Projections (2005-2014, percent) Aid-financed reconstruction following the 2010 earthquake proceeded, but growth was lower than expected. Fiscal deficits increased, mainly financed by Petrocaribe flows, which are decreasing sharply in FY2015. Inflation remains contained, given moderate exchange rate depreciation. The political situation adds to risks. Oil price decreases should be used to improve energy policies and reduce fiscal vulnerabilities. A complex political environment and the devastating 2010 earthquake provide the context for recent economic developments. Policy challenges were related to absorbing large aid flows without compromising sustainability. Repeatedly postponed parliamentary elections resulted in a political impasse at end-2014. As part of the efforts to overcome the impasse, the President appointed, in January 2015, Mr. Evans Paul (an opposition figure) as new Prime Minister to lead a gouvernement d’ouverture . As a result, many of the newly appointed ministers belong to opposition parties. However, without a quorum to function, Parliament will not convene for most of 2015. Election-related tensions eased further following the publication of the electoral calendar in March 2015: Parliamentary and presidential elections are scheduled for the second half of 2015. The new Parliament will be known before end-2015, and a new President inaugurated in February 2016. Current Account and Fiscal Deficits (2005-2014, percent of GDP) Program projection (as of 2010) Actual Sources: 2005-09, PRGF program request; 2010-13: first ECF review; 2014, fifth ECF review. Fueled by reconstruction spending, per capita GDP growth was positive since FY2011, but meaningfully reducing poverty will require higher and sustained growth rates. Haiti achieved its fourth consecutive year of real per capita growth in FY2014. GDP growth last year (2.7 percent) decreased vis-a-vis FY2013 due in large part to a drought. Excluding the volatile agricultural sector, growth has been steady at about 4 percent since FY2011, supported by construction, industry and services. While Haiti has seen progress in meeting its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs, Box 1), per capita income growth since 2010 has not made a significant dent in poverty levels. This reflects interrelated factors, including weak institutions and Aid flows are expected to decrease to more moderate levels in the coming years. See Haiti Ex-Post Assessment, Country Report No. 15/4 (December 4, 2014). Fiscal deficit Current account deficit Source: IMF staff estimates. Domestic and External Debt (2005-2014, percent of GDP) External debt Domestic debt Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 14 governance, lack of competition and predatory business practices, inadequate policy frameworks, weak donor coordination, vulnerability to natural disasters, inadequate infrastructure, and still-low labor productivity. A difficult socio-political environment slowed implementation of structural reforms. Fiscal and current account deficits widened with increased Petrocaribe flows and diminished buffers. The central government deficit increased to 6–7 percent of GDP during FY2013–FY2014, raising the current account deficit. Financing came from Petrocaribe inflows (which averaged 4 percent of GDP during FY2009–FY2014), and by diminished fiscal and external buffers (in the form of government deposits at the banking system and international reserves) during FY2013–FY2014. External public debt (which had fallen to 9 percent of GDP in FY2011 following HIPC completion point and the debt write-offs after the earthquake), rebounded to 21 percent of GDP in FY2014, almost exclusively due to Venezuela-related Petrocaribe concessional financing. Domestic public debt is around 4 percent in FY2014, reflecting shallow domestic financial markets. Social Spending vs. Energy Subsidies (Percent of GDP) The energy sector’s very poor performance and policies are a key driver of fiscal imbalances. The deficit (before central government transfers) of the state-owned electricity sector company EDH increased to 2.5 percent of GDP in FY2014, due to low billing, substantial technical losses and widespread electricity theft. Domestic fuel prices were frozen from March 2011 until October 2014, resulting in foregone tax revenues that peaked at about 2 percent of GDP in FY2014. The combined fiscal cost of regressive fuel subsidies and EDH’s deficit has been larger than social spending, which hovered around 3–4 percent of GDP since FY2010. Lower oil prices provide a unique opportunity to improve energy policies. Education Forgone fuel taxes Health Agriculture EdH deficit Source: IMF staff estimates. Net FX Intervention and Exchange Rate Depreciation Net FX intervention, millions of US$, cumulative since October 2010 gourdes per dollar, percent y/y (right axis) The Central Bank (BRH) has striven to keep gourde depreciation at a moderate rate given a high pass-through to inflation. Large external aid flows coupled with slow absorption resulted in a build-up of international reserves in FY2010–FY2012. Higher fiscal deficits in FY2013–FY2014 prompted the BRH to sell foreign exchange and to tighten monetary policy to keep exchange rate depreciation moderate at 3–4 percent per year. Some easing in the monetary stance at end- FY2014 (to accommodate the payment of debt to suppliers) resulted in pressures in the foreign exchange market, while political risks have increased dollar hoarding and reduced supply. Accordingly, international reserves declined to below 5 months of imports by February 2015. The BRH responded by letting the gourde depreciate more (by about 6 percent y/y See accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Opportunities and Challenges for Growth.” According to the World Bank, about 90 percent of fuel subsidies accrued to the richest 20 percent of the population. Sources: BRH; and IMF staff estimates. Net purchases Net sales Page 15 through March), and by tightening monetary policy in March through increased reserve requirements and policy rates. Anchoring inflation expectations depends on lowering the fiscal deficit and maintaining BRH reserves equivalent to 4–5 months of prospective imports. Box 1. Haiti: Millennium Development Goals Haiti has made progress towards achieving a number of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The proportion of people living under extreme poverty dropped to about 25 percent, while the number of underweight children under 5 years old was halved. Net enrollment in primary education grew from 47 percent in 1993 to 88 percent, attaining gender parity in primary and secondary education. Haiti also made progress in health indicators. Infant and child mortality has decreased drastically since 1990, while access to maternal healthcare improved and maternal mortality was reduced. Haiti has also contained the spread of HIV/AIDS, and nearly 65 percent of households now have improved access to water (see table). Haiti: Millennium Development Goals Indicators Indicator Baseline Current Status 2015 Target No target No target No target No target No target No target No target No target No target Min. 62 No target Millennium Development Goals 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 2. Achieve universal primary education Proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day Proportion of people living under extreme poverty ($1, PPP) Employment-to-population ratio Prevalence of underweight children under five years of age Literacy rate in the age group of 15-24 years of age Proportions of pupils starting grade 1 who reach last grade of primary Net enrollment rate in primary education 3. Promote gender equality and empower women Ratio of girls to boys in: 4. Reduce child mortality 5. Improve maternal health 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 7. Ensure environmental sustainability 8. Global partnership for development Primary education Secondary education Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament Share of women in wage employment Under-five mortality rate Infant-mortality rate Proportion of one-year-old children immunized against measles Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live births) People living with HIV, 15-49 years old (percentage) Prevalence of HIV/AIDS aged 15-24 years old Malaria death rate (per 100,000 population) Proportion of land areas covered by forests (percentage) Proportion of population using an improved drinking water source Slum population as percentage of urban Internet users per 100 inhabitants Source: United Nations - MDG Indicators, 2013 Report Last updated: 07/07/2014 Despite progress, vast challenges remain, due to low capacity, insufficient resources and difficulties to coordinate key stakeholders (including donors). Strengthening safety nets, while increasing spending in health and education, remain key priorities and mobilizing donor support remains essential. Continued migration from rural areas to urban centers creates challenges. Vulnerability to epidemics remains high. The government’s goal is to reduce poverty and achieve free universal education through the implementation of various social programs such as the Ede Pep (Help the People), and the PSUGO ( Programme de Scolarisation Universelle Gratuite et Obligatoire ). The Strategic Plan for the Development of Haiti (PSDH) launched in May 2012, aims at speeding up poverty reduction and making Haiti an emerging country by 2030. These efforts signal the country’s ongoing commitment beyond 2015. 1/ This box was prepared by Daniela Cortez. Staff analysis suggests that international reserves within this range would be appropriate for a country like Haiti that is subject to multiple and frequent shocks. See Selected Issues Paper “External Buffers and Competitiveness to Absorb Shocks And Support Growth.” Page 16 MEDIUM-TERM CHALLENGES: INCREASE GROWTH