Reflecting Haiti’s challenging environment over the past ten years, the two previous Fund-supported arrangements focused on maintaining macroeconomic stability, rebuilding capacity and strengthening the policy framework. Fund-supported programs with Haiti since 2006 focused on maintaining macroeconomic stability and supporting growth and poverty reduction in a difficult environment. Haiti’s 2006 program took place in the aftermath of a period of severe political instability, and the 2010 ECF arrangement was approved after a devastating earthquake. Reform efforts were supported by debt relief under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC), the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), in 2009, and the Post Catastrophe Debt Relief Trust (PCDR), in 2010. Given urgent reconstruction needs, the 2010-2014 Fund arrangement accommodated an ambitious public investment agenda, and anti-poverty spending. In the 2012 Article IV discussions, the authorities were encouraged to maintain macroeconomic stability while redoubling reform efforts to achieve sustained and inclusive growth. Directors called for improved revenue administration to create fiscal space for pro-poor and growth-enhancing spending, as well as public financial management reforms to improve the quality of public spending. Directors stressed that strong and inclusive growth would require structural reforms to improve competitiveness. They identified improving financial intermediation, addressing infrastructure bottlenecks, notably in the electricity sector, and improving the business environment as key reform priorities. The recent Ex-post assessment of Haiti’s longer-term program engagement (EPA) highlighted both achievements and disappointments of Haiti’s previous Fund engagement. The EPA noted that the authorities had been successful in maintaining macroeconomic stability. Monetary policy contained inflation in the mid-single digits, and the authorities avoided excessive exchange rate volatility while maintaining an appropriate reserve cushion. GDP growth, while positive and favorable compared with Haiti’s recent history, was lower than projected and insufficient to reduce poverty. Financed by concessional flows, fiscal and external deficits rose to unsustainable levels, increasing Haiti’s vulnerabilities. Progress on structural reform was also mixed, with ongoing problems at the state electricity utility (EDH), slower-than-projected progress in adopting the Treasury Single Account (TSA), and legislative delays in modernizing the legal framework for the financial sector. The EPA observed limited progress in improving Haiti’s business climate, governance, and competitiveness. Page 13