The 2016 fiscal program focuses on institutionalizing the hard-won gains, while creating the fiscal space to finance high-quality infrastructure projects. Consistent with a higher public investment spending on high priority infrastructure projects, the primary balance of the NFPS is projected to widen by 0.3 percent of GDP. A floor equivalent to 2 percent of GDP has been defined for social spending and an increase in this floor is projected for 2017 as the revenue envelope expands. The authorities have adopted a FRL to institutionalize the hard-won fiscal consolidation, increase accountability, transparency and stability . The law sets out a medium- term ceiling for the fiscal deficit (1 percent of GDP) and a transitional path to achieve it. The FRL also seeks to reverse the current bias against public investment in the composition of public spending. During the transition period, 2016–17, and consistent with the authorities’ economic program, a deficit ceiling of 1.5 percentage points of GDP has been targeted. This target accommodates an increase in public investment, which is also reflected in the medium-term fiscal projections. The law also includes escape clauses for the cases of economic emergency or natural disasters. A clear convergence path is also included to guide the return of fiscal aggregates to the mandated parameters, if the escape causes are used. On transparency and accountability, the law formalizes the introduction of the medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) over the medium-term as the main guideline for the evaluation of policy proposals. It also requires a formal assessment of the central bank on the consistency of the MTFF with the monetary and exchange rate policies. In September 2016, the authorities submitted to Congress the 2017 budget in accordance with the FRL. The FRL should be a catalyst for additional fiscal reforms . Now that the FRL has become the overarching framework that underpins fiscal policy, the authorities need to address the short and medium-term challenges to its implementation. In the short term, the unity of the budget needs to be restored by limiting the use of trust funds. Trust funds should operate under the budgetary framework and their operations should be properly disclosed, recorded, and audited. Building a track record of implementing such restrictions will be critical to assessing the commitment of the authorities to the FRL, particularly during the upcoming electoral cycle, which customarily in Honduras has been associated with the abandonment of fiscal discipline. Additionally, the authorities need to ensure the consistency of the FRL with initiatives such as the Honduras 2020 plan. In sum, strengthening fiscal institutions is required to support an improved external debt risk rating and keep public debt on a sustainable path over the medium term. The new tax administration authority should protect the hard-won gains in tax collection. With the assistance of the IADB, a new tax administration was created in February 2016, Servicio de Administración de Rentas , SAR) and is currently being staffed through a specialized firm. During this transition process, tax collection, particularly for large taxpayers, is being supervised and protected by a new unit in the SAR. Additionally, to strengthen compliance, the SAR has increased Page 22 the number of field inspections. It is expected that the SAR will be fully operational by March next year. The social protection framework law (SPL) should continue to be implemented according to the fiscal program. So far the implementation of the SPL has been slow, owing to the difficulties in expanding the cash-transfer program “ Vida Mejor” . On expanding the health coverage, however, the main challenge is to introduce a subsidized public insurance scheme. The plan is to fund it with resources coming from the expiration of tax exemptions. Additional reforms in the energy sector are required to strengthen ENEE’s finances and foster competition in the electricity market . Over the last 2 years, ENEE’s financials have improved considerably. In 2015 ENEE achieved a balance relative to the 2 percent of GDP deficit obtained in 2013. Last June, the energy regulatory commission (CREE) introduced a new tariff scheme based on cost recovery, which is in line with international best practices. During the first half of 2016, ENEE increased its domestic arrears during the transition to a new management team. Thus far, half of these additional arrears have been cleared and actions have been taken to clear the remainder of arrears before end-December 2016. Reducing the nontechnical losses from the high level of 33 percent (March 2016), however, is the main pending issue, which is expected to be tackled once a new private operator assumes control of electricity distribution. With the rightsizing process of ENEE basically concluded, next steps in the reform of the electricity market need to prioritize the participation of private companies in distribution, transmission, and system operation aiming at foster competition and reducing energy costs. B.