The outlook for growth is broadly favorable, amid low inflation, steady credit growth and an increase in net international reserves. Real output is projected to grow by 3.6 percent in 2016 (the same as in 2015), supported by scaled up public sector infrastructure investment (which partly offsets a slowdown in the import-intensive private investment associated with the completion of several solar electricity plants in 2015) and a supportive monetary policy stance. After the significant fiscal over performance of 2015, and in line with the existing program and the FRL, the The amount of tax expenditures in Honduras is estimated at 6½ percent of GDP, one of the largest in the region. Many of these jobs would be the result of the formalization of workers currently in the informal labor market. Page 17 nonfinancial public sector (NFPS) deficit is expected to widen to 1.5 percent of GDP from 1.0 percent, to accommodate planned investment in infrastructure. Consistent with expanding real sector activity and greater private sector confidence, credit to the private sector is expected to grow by 10 percent (or about 2 percentage points of GDP), in line with a sustainable pace of financial deepening, as judged by observed trends in other low-income countries. Meanwhile, as the negative output gap closes, combined with the projected rise in international oil prices and electricity tariffs, inflation risks may intensify. Against this background, following the reduction of 25 bp in the policy rates adopted last June, monetary policy is expected to remain vigilant. Table 2. Honduras: Medium-Term Scenario Over the medium-term, growth is expected to converge to its potential (3.8 percent) The implementation of the FRL and the planned reforms to the monetary policy framework and exchange rate regime could improve business confidence and private sector This conclusion is based on the use of an excel-based toolkit to assess the likelihood and consistency between real sector and financial sector forecasts based on historical patterns for low income countries. In the simulation for Honduras, the real sector variables are conditioned by real private sector credit growth. bu oo nnu )( Page 18 outlook. In addition, the planned expansion in the maquila sector—could be a fillip for job creation and higher exports. The continued projected steady growth in the U.S. would continue to serve as an important pull factor in Honduras’ growth performance going forward. From the supply side, growth is likely to come from higher capital accumulation and broad-based gains in productivity as a result of the government’s high priority infrastructure investment program, and policy reforms to improve economy-wide efficiency, reduce transactions costs and promote regional integration. Inflation is projected to increase slowly as oil prices rise, but remain in line with the central bank's target. Growth in private credit is consistent with a sustainable pace of financial deepening, which could support growth without causing financial sector instability. Over the medium term credit growth is expected to come primarily from the agricultural, industrial and construction sectors as the authorities move to improve the allocation of credit away from foreign currency credits, while simultaneously promoting more credit to the productive sectors. Risks are predominantly on the downside, because of global uncertainties and potentially volatile domestic conditions (see RAM in Annex III). External risks. A sharper-than-expected global growth slowdown could significantly reduce growth, triggering a reversal in capital inflows and, given the crawling-peg regime, a reduction in international reserves and/or a depreciation of the currency thus increasing credit risk from unhedged FX borrowing. The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) could also potentially challenge Honduras competitive position, as significant tariff reductions in textiles would come into effect immediately once the TPP is ratified. W ithdrawal of correspondent banking relationships by foreign banks may interrupt international financial flows, including remittances inflows. Domestic risks. Failure to address problems of structural competitiveness, such as low human capital as well as other impediments to doing business, including high crime and corruption, and low physical capital and weak infrastructure would retard productivity gains and growth. Reform fatigue, capacity constraints, sluggishness in obtaining faster job creation, and the thin parliamentary majority of the current government could pose challenges to implementing key reforms. Failure to maintain the course on fiscal prudence during a potentially charged electoral cycle would undermine policy credibility and affect investor confidence and thus growth. Finally, in the near term, a worsening of the Zika epidemic and adverse weather conditions, consequent on the advance of “ El Niño ” phenomenon, could impact labor supply and production and through this, short-term growth. The authorities broadly concurred with the outlook and risks . The authorities’ median growth forecast is 3.6 percent in 2016, with slower-than-expected investment growth being the main risk. The authorities have not yet quantified the impact of the Honduras 2020 strategy on growth over the medium term, but expect to raise it to 4 percent, supported by a recovery in commodity exports, the planned implementation of the large investment projects in energy and A number of factors could lessen the impact of TPP on the textile sector, including tariff phase-out periods for some of Honduras key exports products, and the country’s geographic proximity to the U.S. market. See Annex IV on the potential effects of the TPP on Honduras. Page 19 infrastructure and ongoing negotiations for FDI in textiles, manufacturing and tourism. The authorities are, however, concerned about capacity constraints of the government, which could delay reform implementation.