A moderately concentrated banking sector dominates the financial system . In 2015, the financial system contained 15 private banks, where total bank assets represent 97 percent of GDP and 77 percent of total assets of the financial system. In a process driven by a series of mergers and acquisitions to reduce costs and improve efficiencies, the banking system has become more consolidated over time. Most banks are part of economic holding companies which typically include other financial services such as an insurance company and other non-financial companies with increasingly stronger cross-border links and exposures. Given the need to mitigate potential contagion risks the staff advised to strengthen the cross border and consolidated regulatory and supervisory practices. Since 2014, banking system credit to the private sector has been expanding at a pace well below credit boom metrics, but current sectoral allocation may exacerbate vulnerabilities . Credit has expanded at about 1 percentage point of GDP per year since 2014, much lower than the credit boom threshold of 5 percentage points of GDP. Meanwhile the sectoral allocation of the loan portfolio at end-2015 is well diversified, with about 60 percent of loans comprising consumption, real estate and corporate sectors, and the loan-portfolio exposure to households continues to grow at a steady pace of 12.8 percent per year. The high level of un-hedged borrowers in foreign currency across some sectors remains a source of concern . The loan-portfolio exposure to foreign exchange risks remains high. In 2015, the share of foreign currency loans to unhedged borrowers in the corporate and real estate sectors stood at 46 and 80 percent, respectively. This increases the vulnerability of the financial sector to foreign exchange rate risks, and requires sustained efforts from the bank supervisory body to mitigate it. The banking system’s high lending spreads are restricting credit intermediation Although falling somewhat, bank lending spreads, at 10.2 percent in 2015, remain high. Overhead costs, which at 40 percent of income are high by regional standards, are a key driver of high spreads. Other elements explaining high spreads are the high reserve requirements and banks’ business model of placing a large share of resources (16 percent of total bank assets) at the central bank. High spreads can lead to high profits, and thus to capital. More frequently, however, high spreads increase intermediation costs and restrict overall credit growth. Given the importance of bank credit in Honduras, a restricted credit intermediation is likely to lower investment and saving, and through During 2011-2015 ex post spreads have averaged 10.6 percent. In 2011, they were 11.4 percent, but has gradually inched lower each year. A recent study on net interest margins suggests that operating costs are the most important determinant of banks’ interest margins. Other key determinants are high provisions for nonperforming loans and high liquidity ratios, see Koffie Ben Nassar, Edder Martinez, Anabel Pineda” Determinants of Banks' Net Interest Margins in Honduras” IMF Working Papers, WP/14/163, 2014. Page 26 these channels output growth. To improve credit intermediation, the authorities would need to implement measures to reduce costs in the financial system. These measures could include procedures for minimizing the cost of credit information, legal reforms to facilitate easier recoveries and lower reserve requirements. Much smaller spreads would improve credit intermediation and through this, the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Stress tests reveal that the banking sector is broadly resilient to most shocks . Stress tests conducted by staff confirm the banking sector’s relative strength in managing market and liquidity risks, which may arise from a reduction in correspondent banking relationships (see Table 3). Specifically, the system can tolerate shocks such as, deposit withdrawals, and a large depreciation of the currency, suggesting that, liquidity and foreign exchange risks are contained. The system is also able to absorb a widespread increase in NPLs. Note that, when confronted with tail-risk scenarios originating from slower global growth in advanced economies plus tighter financial conditions, the system does not appear to have sufficient capital buffers to fully absorb such shocks. The tail risk scenarios could manifest itself as i) a credit concentration shock where the three largest borrowers default, or ii) a combination (multiple) shock. In both scenarios, the banking system’s CAR is likely to be substantially impacted. That said, rollover risks associated with foreign funding remain manageable even under scenarios of extreme stress in international banking systems. In particular, a 10 percent shock to US banks would reduce credit in Honduras by only 1.3 percent of GDP. In light of the stress test results, the mission advised the authorities to closely monitor developments in the following areas Concentration risks . Given that the default of the three largest borrowers of each bank would impact the banking system’s capital, there is a need to strengthen monitoring and ensure strict compliance with regulations to avoid risks posed by credit concentration. High dollarization . About 30 percent of deposits and 33 percent of loans are denominated in USD. Credit dollarization has decreased recently, in part owing to stronger enforcing of prudential regulations such as: limits on net open position in foreign currency; requirements that foreign exchange loans be granted to borrowers with foreign currency earnings; and stronger limits to the loan-to-deposit ratio in foreign exchange. In particular, since mid-2015, the authorities have adjusted the risk-weighted capital asset ratios to 150 percent for mortgage loans, where debt-to- collateral ratio exceeds 85 percent, and to 175 percent for consumer loans (including credit cards). Household debt . Total household indebtedness as a share of GDP reached 19 percent in 2015 from 15.0 percent in 2011. In this category, credit card debt has grown to about 25 percent of All shocks, except for the liquidity and interest rate shocks, are calibrated as two standard deviations over the mean for the period 1997 to 2015. The liquidity shock is equivalent to the maximum one-month deposit withdrawal faced by individual banks during 2000–08, as stated in the 2009 FSAP report, SM/09/93. On interest rate, staff simulated a 3.3 percentage points increase in the nominal policy interest rate (similar to the one-year cumulative change during December 2008 to December 2009). For instance, the total impact on foreign credit availability in Honduras from a 10 percent shock to asset values of BIS reporting banks is about 3.3 percent of GDP (see SIP, Banking Sector Stability in Honduras). Page 27 total household debt (or 5 percent of GDP). At the same time, non-performing credit card and housing debt is increasing, following a trend decline from the spike of the global financial crisis in 2009. Against this background, to mitigate vulnerabilities in this area, the authorities have agreed to adopt regulations to keep household indebtedness within prudent margins and increase financial literacy programs. Reduction in correspondent banks relationships . Although the Honduran authorities do not, currently, see this as a source of concern, they should continue to work to prevent this becoming an issue, or stand ready to act if the risk does materialize. In any case, given that Honduran banks operate in jurisdictions that are affected by a reduction in correspondent banking relationships, the parent banks in Honduras could be indirectly impacted. Table 3. Summary of The Combination Scenario Stress Test The authorities have embarked on a comprehensive reform of the framework for bank resolution, comprising extensive legal amendments and a significant strengthening of the authorities’ capacity for dealing with financial sector distress . This reform is a significant step forward, in light of the weaknesses which became apparent during the liquidation of Banco Continental in the fall of 2015. The broad objective of this reform is to establish a robust framework that allows for the resolution of banks, while preventing systemic disruption and the exposure of taxpayers to losses. Notably, the reform encompasses legal underpinnings for the scope, objectives, institutional arrangements, powers and tools for resolution and revisions to the liquidation regime. Further reforms should aim to strengthen the AML/CFT framework . In light of the weaknesses which became apparent in the context of the liquidation of Banco Continental in the fall mm W + pp ili ho it ce ea gh V gh Page 28 of 2015, stepping-up AML/CFT supervision of the banking sector and effectively implementing fit and proper requirements for beneficial ownership and control of financial institutions would be a significant step forward. D.