Economic performance in 2015 was better than expected . Real output grew at 3.6 percent, slightly more than projected. From the demand side, growth was supported by the recovery in private consumption—which responded positively to a reduction in gasoline prices and strong remittances inflows—and a boost in investment. Growth of exports of goods and services accelerated on the back of stronger U.S. demand. On the supply side, recovery in manufacturing–– mostly textile and food processing––and agriculture––mainly coffee and banana––which benefited By distinguishing among all possible drivers of oil price movements, staff analysis found that lower oil prices may have raised GDP growth by ½ percent in 2015 (see Selected Issues Paper: Macroeconomic Impact of Oil Prices). Page 12 from introduction of plague and weather resistant species, supported growth. Financial intermediation also continued to grow steadily, benefiting from higher revenues from mortgages and consumption credit (Figure 1). Real GDP through 2016Q2, grew by 4.1 percent (y/y), supported by expansions in net exports and private consumption. This growth performance for 2016 thus far is broadly consistent with staff’s projection of 3.6 percent growth for the year. Lower international oil prices have helped to reduce headline inflation, and narrow the external current account deficit . In 2015, headline inflation decelerated to 2.4 percent from 5.8 percent in the previous year, well below the inflation target of 4.5 percent. Inflation through August 2016, remained temporarily low at 2.5 percent (y/y). This performance reflected lower international oil prices and a still negative output gap. Meanwhile, the external current account deficit narrowed to 6.3 percent of GDP in 2015, because of lower oil imports. As a result, NIR increased by US$307 million, supported by private capital inflows in excess of program projections. Meanwhile reserves have fallen slightly after meeting program targets last June, but remain adequate at about 4.5 months of imports at over US$2.6 billion. The external position is moderately weaker than the level consistent with medium- term fundamentals and desired policies. The assessment is based on the strength of the real effective exchange rate (REER), and robust non-oil import growth. This partly reflects the effects of terms of trade shifts on the appreciation of the USD relative to the currencies of some trading partners. Going forward, the full pass-through to inflation of some partner’s nominal depreciations may partially reverse the recent appreciation, and planned steady fiscal consolidation will help improve competitiveness. The impact of these policies would be enhanced by continued wage moderation and reforms that address weaknesses in the business environment (Box 1). The fiscal position remains strong . The public sector posted a deficit of 1 percent of GDP in 2015. The primary balance moved to the surplus side, implying an impressive fiscal adjustment of 6½ percentage points of GDP relative to the pre-program outcome. This result is mainly explained by a reduction of about 5½ percentage points of GDP in spending since 2013, chiefly in the wage bill and in the purchases of goods and services. With this result, the public sector debt reached 41 percent of GDP. During the first semester of 2016, the public sector posted a surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP, ½ percent of GDP higher relative to the same period of 2015. This result is explained by better results of decentralized institutions and local governments. Staff estimates that a ten percent oil price decrease leads to approximately 0.3 percent decrease in inflation. Fiscal consolidation6.5 Revenue1.2 Of which: taxes 2.6Expenditure5.3 Of which: compensation of employees 2.3Sources: Honduran authorities and Fund staff estimates. Fiscal Consolidation, 2013-2015 (In percent of GDP) Page 13 Recent financial sector indicators for 2015 suggest that the banking system remains sound . Against the backdrop of improved financial conditions and lower risks, balance sheet buffers appear adequate (Table 1). Nonperforming loans to total loans remain relatively low, profitability is high, and the leverage ratio, at 10 percent, is well below crisis threshold rating. Meanwhile, balance sheet risks remain moderate. Specifically, liquidity remains ample, and credit dollarization has fallen by 1½ percentage points to 33.2 percent, mainly because of tighter regulations on foreign exchange exposure. At the same time, credit cycle risk remains low, as private sector credit, currently at about 56 percent of GDP, has been Honduras: Financial Stability Map See the April 2010 Global Financial Stability Report (GFSR), especially Annex 1.1, for a methodology underlying the Financial Stability Map. expanding at a sustainable rate, well below the threshold that defines a credit boom. In line with this, household and private sector balance sheets remain sound, although a wider net foreign currency deficit of the private sector makes it more vulnerable to exchange rate risks. Box 1. External Balance Assessment The Fund’s multilaterally consistent estimates under the External Balance Assessment (EBA) methodology, indicate that the external position is moderately weaker than the level consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies given Honduras’s low income level, young population and strong remittances inflow. The REER regression predicts a REER about 7 percent lower (i.e. more depreciated), considering Honduras terms of trade, trade openness, and other fundamentals. The current account regression finds virtually no misalignment, but this is partly due to a lower than desirable fiscal deficit that accounts for most of the identified policy gap. At the same time, some signs of structural competitiveness problems, such as low human capital as well as other impediments to doing business, including high crime and corruption, and low physical capital and weak infrastructure highlight the need for productivity-enhancing reforms. Private sector credit is expanding amid a decline in lending rates . The gradual easing of monetary policy that followed the implementation of the SBA/SCF-supported program has See Dell’Ariccia and others “Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: How to Deal with Credit Booms,” IMF SDN/12/06, for a methodology describing the computation of these thresholds. Actual CA/YUnderlying CA/YCA/Y normCA/Y gap (Actual or Underlying - Norm)REER gapCA model-6.3-6.70.3-1.1REER model7.1ES approach-5.1-3.1-2.07.0 Source: IMF Staff calculations based on External Balance Assessment methodology. Table. Honduras External Assessment Page 14 contributed to a steady expansion in total credit growth and more importantly to a gradual pickup in credit denominated in domestic currency as lending rates inched lower with a lag. As inflation moved further below the central bank’s inflation target, additional policy rate reductions were made, the last being in June 2016. Lower policy rates have broadly influenced the direction of interbank rates (although the movements have been sluggish) and lending rates by commercial banks. In addition, banking spreads have begun to inch lower with improved conditions and lower risks in the economy. These two factors have created easier financial conditions leading to a reduction in credit dollarization. Table 1. Honduras: Financial Stability Heat Map and Credit Cycle Sources: National Banking and Insurance Commission (CNBS), and IMF staff calculations. ndu MMMMMMMMMMM LLLLLLLLLL pp nnu nnu ee undn MMMMMMMMMMM ee MMMMMMMMMMM an X ab ili ab ili X an an ee LLLLLLLLLLL ag LLLLLLLLLLLL ab ili LLLLLLLLLLL LLLLL MM nnu nnu Page 15 Figure 1. Honduras: Economic Performance since 2014 Article IV Consultation The economy is recovering better than expected…..… aided in part by better terms of trade, specially lower oil prices…… which helped to contain inlfation at low levels…… and also stremghten the domestic financial position……but recovery is supported by stronger fiscal performance …… and better external position…...including on the perfromance of the current account…… public debt over GDP in a downward path ahead of schedule. Real GDP Growth 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV CPI Inflation, eop 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV Public Debt 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV Consolidated Public Sector Balance 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV Gross International Reserves 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV External Current Account 1/ 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV Terms of Trade 2016 AIV Original Program 2014 AIV Total Bank Assets 2016 AIV 2014 AIV 1/ Left axis in reverseorder. Source: CentralBank of Honduras, Ministry of Finance and Fund staff estimates and projections. The economy is recovering better than expected… …aided in part by better terms of trade, especially lower oil prices… …which helped to contain inflation at low levels… …and also strenghtened the domestic financial position.Recovery is supported by stronger fiscal performance… …, enhanced resilience through higher international reserves... ...and narower current account deficit.This placed thepublic debt to GDP ratio on adownward path , sooner than expected. Page 16 During 2015 and the first nine months of 2016, economic policies responded to falling inflation, financial sector stability priorities and laid the framework for inclusive growth. On monetary policy , the BCH commenced in 2015 a gradual easing of the policy stance, reducing the policy rate by 75 basis points (bp) to 6.25 by end-December. In March 2016, it continued the easing path, with a 50 bp reduction to 5.75 percent, and a further 25 bp cut in June, on account of lower headline inflation. At the same time, by August 2016 the BCH depreciated the Lempira by 4 percent on an annual basis against the US dollar, broadly in line with the program. In September 2016, in an attempt to absorb excess domestic liquidity, the Central bank also increased the reserve requirement for banks. On the financial sector , to maintain public confidence in the banking system the CNBS liquidated Banco Continental and paid out depositors after it was listed by the U.S. Treasury under the Kingpin Act. Overall, the impact on real activity was insignificant. Following this event, the CNBS has also moved swiftly to propose new regulations to reform the bank resolution framework, and strengthen its AML/CFT procedures. On fiscal policy , in April 2016 the authorities enacted the FRL to serve as an anchor for fiscal policy. The law places a cap on the size of the overall deficit (as a share of GDP) and imposes limits to the increase in current spending. It also introduces ambitious measures to control, quantify and disseminate the size and impacts of the generous amount of tax expenditures. The 2017 budget was prepared in line with program commitments prioritizing social spending and includes an infrastructure stimulus package to boost employment and competitiveness alongside a medium term fiscal-framework. On structural policies, in March 2016, the government launched a new medium-term economic development strategy – Honduras 2020—to tackle high unemployment and promote more inclusive growth. This program would guide national economic development over the next five years and aims to create 600 thousand new formal jobs (20 percent increase in formal employment) and increase exports by 20 percent. To achieve these objectives, the Honduras 2020 plan will focus on expanding, with the help of FDI, the tourism, textiles, manufacturing of intermediate goods, back office support and agro-industrial sectors.