Staff noted that the current supportive monetary policy stance was broadly appropriate . Inflation has remained below the central bank’s 4.5 percent target, owing to a still negative output gap and low fuel prices. At the same time, net international reserves have fallen slightly after meeting program targets last June, but remain broadly on track to achieve the end- December 2016 NIR target of US$3,005 million (4.7 months of imports). With the policy rate now broadly in-line with the estimated neutral policy rate––staff cautioned against further easing in the near term (see Box 3). Health coverage remains low by regional and international standards (see SIP on Benchmarking Public Spending). Page 23 Box 3. Estimates of the Neutral Interest Rate For 2016, the range of estimates for the neutral policy interest rate fluctuates between 4.7 percent and 9.8 percent in nominal terms. Staff used several approaches to measure the neutral interest rate: the uncovered interest rate parity; the small-monetary policy model; the expected-inflation augmented Taylor rule; the consumption-based CAPM; and an H-P filter on ex- post real interest rates (see Magud and Tsounta (2012)). In nominal terms, the current policy interest rate of 5.5 percent falls within the neutral rate range. Going forward, however, the current level could be on the low side if the slack vanishes quickly or if the rise in inflation, on account of higher energy costs, turns out higher than expected. Given the range of estimates for the neutral interest rate, staff considers the current monetary policy stance to be broadly appropriate. That said, the central bank should stand ready to act should inflationary pressures emerge. The central bank should stand ready to tighten monetary policy if the balance of risks to inflation tilts to the upside . Upside risks include potentially rapid vanishing of the economic slack coming from faster than programmed pace of economic recovery, cost pressures from planned recovery of real electricity costs, the recent wage increase in the public sector, the dissipation of low commodity price effects and faster growth in net domestic assets. At the same time, the uncertainty associated with the US election and a softening of the U.S. growth call for increased vigilance given Honduras’ close trade and remittances links with the U.S. The authorities have decided to adopt inflation targeting as the monetary policy framework . With the recent enactment of the FRL, an inflation targeting framework could give the authorities the necessary tools to respond to external shocks. To facilitate this, the authorities plan to start building domestic and foreign exchange interbank markets, and reform the central bank law to give it a clear mandate to maintain price stability. This framework builds on reforms already )( NN bp K ud ? W W und qu gg gg upp qu * { } + * _ + * _ { + } { + } + * dp _ + e_ _ _ _ { + } dp _ ili + tt Page 24 undertaken to improve the monetary policy operational framework, including: i) better forecasting of liquidity; (ii) upgrade of existing plans to develop the interbank market; (iii) increase the signaling content of the monetary policy rate; (iv) better coordination on liquidity management with the Ministry of Finance; and, (v) gradual phasing-out of banks’ use of government bonds to meet a portion of reserve requirements. Staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to increase exchange rate flexibility as this would improve the monetary transmission mechanism and provide a shock absorber to external shocks . Consistent with this commitment, the authorities would issue the necessary regulations to establish a foreign exchange interbank market, and gradually relax the surrender requirements on foreign exchange earnings during the program period. A more flexible FX market should also be supported by a code of conduct for market participants, transparent criteria for FX transactions including reporting arrangements for FX dealers, strengthened guidelines for banks FX exposures, enhanced reporting arrangements for authorized dealers and the elimination of the system of commissions. The institutional framework of the BCH needs to be strengthened in line with the 2015 safeguards assessment . An updated safeguards assessment, completed in April 2015, found that the Central Bank Law poses significant risks to the bank’s autonomy and also does not provide for sound governance arrangements. In addition, the assessment noted that the bank’s financial reporting framework is not aligned with international standards. The implementation of safeguards recommendations to address these risks has been slow, but the authorities plan to submit to congress reforms to the Central Bank Law to align it with good international practices. The Central Bank also plans to adopt International Financial Reporting Standards from FY2017. The success of monetary reform would depend on the continuation of de-dollarization. Since 2014 an improved policy mix and favorable external conditions have facilitated a rapid re- monetization and a slow de-dollarization process in Honduras. From a monetary policy perspective, de-dollarization could facilitate a stronger transmission of policy rate adjustments to domestic asset prices. In particular, lower liability dollarization and higher lending in domestic currency could improve the credit channel for the transmission of monetary policy. It could also help to reduce the pass-through from exchange rate changes to inflation. In sum, a continuous process of de- dollarization would reduce vulnerability of the overall economy to episodes of larger exchange rate volatility. Against, this background the authorities are encouraged to remain steadfast in their Staff have identified two exchange measures subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 3 in Honduras. These arise from the lack of a mechanism to prevent potential spreads in excess of 2 percent emerging (i) between successful bids within the BCH’s foreign exchange auction; and (ii) between the official exchange rate (TCR) of the day and the exchange rates at which foreign exchange is sold at the auction on that day, giving rise to multiple currency practices. In practice the allocation (adjudication) of foreign exchange in the foreign exchange auction has been given to a single price. The authorities have requested temporary approval of these measures, which are maintained for non-balance of payments reasons. Staff supports this request as they do not materially impede Honduras’s balance of payments adjustment, do not harm the interests of other members and do not discriminate between Fund members. Staff additionally note that the authorities’ planned reform to the monetary policy framework should ultimately eliminate these measures Page 25 implementation of higher capital requirements for foreign currency borrowing by unhedged borrowers. C.