Significant macroeconomic challenges have affected Honduras’ economy. The country has been, for decades, afflicted by a combination of volatile growth and weak public finances, and recently by high crime. The peak of this unstable situation occurred in 2013 when the relaxation of fiscal policy led to a rapid increase in public debt and to cash-flow pressures, resulting in the combined public sector (CPS) deficit rising to 7.6 percent of GDP, from 2.8 percent of GDP in 2011. At the same time, a real appreciation of the exchange rate and less favorable terms of trade led to a sizeable increase in the external current account deficit and limited reserve coverage. In 2014, the authorities adopted an IMF-supported program to achieve macroeconomic stability and improve the conditions for sustainable and inclusive growth. After 2½ years in office the government is succeeding in improving domestic security, stabilizing the economy, and institutionalizing fiscal discipline with the approval of the Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL). It is paving the way to combat corruption—for which the country signed an agreement with the Organization of American States (OAS) to establish a support mission against corruption and impunity. In April 2016, the Supreme Court cleared the legal hurdles to presidential reelection in the upcoming general elections in November 2017. Since the last Art. IV consultation in 2014, near-term macroeconomic conditions have improved considerably . Coupled with better performance on growth and inflation, the reduction in the fiscal deficit by 6½ percentage points of GDP in the two years ending in 2015 improved fiscal sustainability and thus confidence––as indicated by the systematic improvement of international sovereign debt credit ratings. These elements have also bolstered the demand for domestic assets thus contributing to rebuild private sector balance sheets, lowered the cost of capital for domestic investors, and strengthened international reserves. The key priorities for the medium-term are to raise potential growth and reduce unemployment, poverty and crime . To support these efforts, strategies would be needed to improve the efficiency of public spending, upgrade the energy infrastructure, and strengthen financial development.