B. Infrastructure Increased efficiency of public spending can free-up resources for additional growth enhancing public programs . Given the constraints on spending imposed by the FRL and the already high tax effort, additional resources for priority spending over the medium term will depend on efficiency gains in public spending (Box 6). Preliminary estimates by staff show that the potential efficiency gains in spending on health and education can be substantial. A large proportion of these efficiency gains in spending on education can be derived from rightsizing the wage bill. Against this backdrop, staff urged the authorities to take a comprehensive look at public spending with a view to adopting measures to increase efficiency in public spending, particularly in these two areas. Another key priority over the medium term is to streamline tax expenditures . At 6½ percent of GDP, Honduras has one of the largest levels of tax expenditures in the region. This situation was compounded recently with the granting of concessions (total removal) from VAT to the agricultural sector (0.3 percent of GDP). Clearly, some of these tax expenditures have been ineffective in helping to foster inclusive growth and reduce poverty. On the contrary, they foster mm V + mm mm V + + gg gg mm Page 33 rent-seeking behavior in powerful interest groups. The authorities have already committed to gradually eliminate tax exemptions to finance the implementation of the social protection law. In addition, the FRL makes provisions to modernize tax expenditure management by administering tax incentives and improving the control of beneficiaries. Further reforms in the electricity market in line with the 2014 energy framework law would be crucial for raising medium-term potential growth . The 2014 law aims to promote a more efficient and transparent electricity sector and encourage additional private sector participation in transmission and distribution of electricity. Against this backdrop, as a first step in the process, the electricity energy regulatory commission (CREE) have established a new tariff scheme based on the cost recovery, and plan to issue new regulations to improve the functioning of the electricity market. Authorities’ views . The authorities noted the issues raised by staff on the efficiency of public spending. They are planning to do a comprehensive study of the different compensation schemes existing in the education and health sectors by benchmarking them against other public employees and private sector comparators. Apart from this, they are also working on improving efficiency in other areas. On the electricity reform, they acknowledged that reforms had been slower than originally anticipated, but they are aware of the need to get the reforms in the sector right and are pressing ahead with this endeavor. Page 34 Box 5. The Efficiency of Social Spending in Honduras The new fiscal framework creates a need for increasing the efficiency of public spending . The fiscal responsibility law sets out an ambitious fiscal consolidation path. Additionally, the authorities have implemented 2½ percent of GDP in tax measures leaving limited room for more gains. However, with 65 percent of the population living in poverty, Honduras still has a pressing need to expand public social services. Increasing the efficiency of public spending is the way to provide more services in a consolidation scenario. Benchmarking techniques could be used to measure the efficiency of public spending Benchmarking is the comparison of the performance of one unit against others. It is intimately related to the concept of efficiency. In the benchmarking literature, once a model based on inputs and outputs is defined, the efficiency is measured by identifying the best performing units and use them to build an efficiency frontier. The performance of all units is assessed relative to that efficiency frontier. For this exercise, we estimate frontiers for health and education spending using a sample of emerging and low income countries then we estimate individual efficiency scores. Efficiency scores can be calculated based on output-oriented or input-oriented models . In input- oriented models, the scores are the proportional amount by which input consumption could be reduced while leaving outputs unchanged. Scores from output-oriented models are defined as the proportional amount by which outputs could be increased while leaving inputs consumption unchanged. Based on the estimated scores, we found there is ample room for the generation of savings, particularly in health and education spending . For health, we use health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE) as output, public spending, private spending and the educational level of adults as inputs. For education, we use net enrollment rates as output and public spending and the teacher-pupil ratio as inputs. In health, we found an input-oriented score of 0.955 showing limited room for getting better outcomes by using inputs efficiently, however, the output-oriented score is 0.840 meaning that all inputs could be reduced by around 15 percent without a reduction in the output. In education, Honduras performed poorly in secondary education (input-oriented score 0.208) ranking last among 88 countries in the sample and 66/88 in the output-oriented measure (0.522). The results are better in primary education with scores of 0.307 for the input-oriented and 0.948 for the output-oriented measure. These results imply potential efficiency savings in educational inputs between 70–80 percent. Tackling inefficiencies requires structural reforms aimed at introducing a performance culture in the delivery of social services . In both sectors, the priority is to tackle the discrepancies between compensation and productivity. The wage bill represents 80 percent of the education budget and 60 percent of that for health; therefore, there is no way to achieve savings without reforming the compensation policies. The main problem is fragmentation, which is not a result of performance-based evaluations but of the negotiations with powerful interest groups. In education, the priority should be reforming the teachers’ estatuto and implementing the quality evaluations stated in the law. The health sector has six of the eight existing compensation frameworks. These frameworks should be revised in light of the need to expand coverage as stated in the law of social protection Page 35 C.