The SBA needs to be rephased . Given the increase in Honduras’ quota under the Fourteenth General Review of Quotas, the SBA needs to be rephased to take into account the increase in Honduras’ first credit tranche. As a result of its quota increase, Honduras’ first credit tranche has increased to SDR62.450 million from SDR32.3750 million. The remaining SDR15.250million (of the original SBA of SDR77.70 million) has been equally distributed over four reviews (Table 16). Program performance remains satisfactory . The third review under the SCF will be governed by end-December 2015 PCs, while the third review under the SBA will be governed by end-June 2016 PCs. At the same time, the fourth review under the SCF and the SBA will be governed by end-June 2016 PCs. The authorities have met most of the performance criteria and all of the indicative targets for end-December 2015 . The over performance of the fiscal targets was sizeable. The authorities also observed the performance criteria of net lending by public pension funds and public debt, along with the indicative fiscal targets. That said, the NDA target was missed by a small margin. Staff also supports the authorities’ request for a waiver of the end-December 2015 PC on the ceiling of the stock of NDA as the deviation was corrected by end-June 2016 and does not affect the successful implementation of the program. The authorities have met most of the end-June 2016 targets. In particular, the monetary targets on the NDA and NIR were met with comfortable margins. On the fiscal targets, the overall balance for the nonfinancial public sector, the central government and the ENEE were all met with wide margins. This was also the case for the indicative targets. However, the performance criterion on net lending from the public pension funds was missed by a wide margin. The net lending PC was missed due to the implementation of a subsidized lending program for teachers (as part of a wider package of measures announced in June) from the teachers’ pension fund that substantially raised loan demand. This program sought to consolidate/refinance obligations of its affiliates with private financial institutions (banks and cooperatives). The low interest rate offered by this program relative to private institutions has been creating a massive demand for these loans which resulted in net lending well above the program’s ceiling (L2.4 billion compared to a target of L0.2 billion). The authorities also failed to observe the end-June 2016, performance criterion on the accumulation of new arrears by ENEE. This temporary increase in domestic arrears occurred as ENEE transited to a new management team in the first half of 2016. Staff supports the authorities’ request for a waiver on the end-June 2016 PC on the ceiling on net lending from public pension funds and also of the end-June PC (ceiling) on accumulation of new arrears by ENEE, as they are implementing strong corrective measures so that these non-observances do not affect the successful implementation of Page 20 the program. Additionally, considering revised projections, staff supports the request for modification of the end-December 2016, PCs on NDA and the present value of net external debt contracted. Two structural benchmarks for end-September 2016 are proposed for modification. The structural benchmark on public sector domestic arrears is proposed to be moved from end-June 2016 to end-December 2016. This was necessary, as the ongoing audit to verify these arrears is behind schedule owing to delays in the operation of the audit firm. The structural benchmark on the approval by congress of a law to reform the social security institute (IHSS) is proposed to be moved from end-December 2015 to end-December 2016 as the authorities prioritized the passing of the FRL during the first-half of 2016. The authorities however remain committed to enact an IHSS law consistent with the program fiscal targets. Box 2. Response to 2014 Article IV Consultation’s Key Recommendations In December 2014, the authorities’ program included several components of staff’s advice contained in the 2014 Article IV consultation Apply fiscal consolidation measures—relying more on lower expenditures and a cut in electricity losses . The authorities have implemented fiscal consolidation measures, which have put the public finances on a firmer footing. Adopt a more flexible exchange rate regime over the medium-term . The central bank is preparing a plan to eliminate the surrender requirements for foreign exchange and allow for greater exchange rate flexibility over the medium-term. Modernize the monetary policy framework . The authorities are preparing a plan to modernize the monetary policy framework that would form the basis for increased exchange rate flexibility. Implement measures to reduce currency mismatches by un-hedged borrowers . The regulatory commission has implemented additional capital requirements for unhedged borrowers in foreign currency. Amend the public-private partnerships (PPPs) legislation in line with fund recommendations . The PPP framework has been revamped to grant the ministry of finance a leading role in the evaluation and approval of PPP projects. For such purpose, a special unit was created in the ministry of finance and currently is providing mandatory assessments on the fiscal risks involved in PPP projects. Sovereign guarantees for third parties operating PPP projects were also repealed. Reform the social security institute (IHSS) . The authorities have sent to the congress the IHSS draft law. Page 21