Progress on inclusive growth reforms have been good and are set to continue . Staff analysis shows that while some measures needed to improve the fiscal situation have been regressive, such as the increase in the VAT rate, the authorities were effective in redistributing additional resources through direct transfers such as the program Vida Mejor . The joint effect of the two measures alone had a small but negative effect on aggregate output. However, fiscal stabilization also brought macroeconomic stability and lower interest rates, which translated into new business opportunities, especially in the rural sector, thus boosting GDP and decreasing poverty and inequality further. As a result, staff estimates that the economic reforms implemented over the last two years have helped to reduce poverty and income inequality. To lower poverty and inequality further, structural reforms on the labor market to improve labor mobility across sectors will be key (Box 5). Growth-enhancing reforms can break the vicious cycle of high crime and low growth Macroeconomic simulations done by staff using a structural model calibrated to Honduras data, in which economic performance, the crime rate and the decision to become a criminal are endogenous, reveal that higher growth is associated with lower crime. In particular, over the medium term a one percent increase in economic growth could reduce the crime rate by about one percent. This leads to a virtuous cycle, where, as growth increases employment opportunities increase and there is less incentive to become a criminal. Lower crime reduces the perception of high crime, and this encourages productive economic activity, generating more employment opportunities. Higher growth also provides more resources to fight crime and violence. And as Honduras recent experience shows, a combination of increased economic activity supported by enhanced anti-crime strategies has reduced the homicide rate by more than 30 percent in three years. To sustainably reduce the still high crime rates further, the authorities will need to focus on Page 30 crime prevention measures, including by mobilizing the AML/CFT framework to assist in detecting, prosecuting and recovering the proceeds of crime, as well as improving labor mobility to make job creation more attractive and accessible and further strengthening anti-corruption efforts. Once fully articulated within the overall macroeconomic framework, the Honduras 2020 investment plan could help to generate sustainable output growth . The Honduras 2020 plan, launched last April, aims to create 600 thousand jobs and increase exports by 20 percent in five years, but it has not yet been included in the macroeconomic framework amid a lack of details to facilitate a full assessment. If implemented, this plan could have significant implications for Honduras over the medium term, and therefore it is important for the authorities to carefully consider the requirements for its success, the resource needs and the relevant changes that are needed in other public policies. Additionally, it is critical to ensure the consistency of the reduction in tax exemptions envisaged in the FRL and in the Social Protection Law (SPL) with potential fiscal measures included in the Honduras 2020 plan. Authorities’ views . The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s overall assessment of inclusive growth. They noted that the macroeconomic adjustment program had freed-up resources for the social program Vida Mejor to tackle poverty and any fall-out from the economic stabilization program. It also provided resources for increased spending on citizen security, particularly in vulnerable and at-risk-neighborhoods. The authorities noted the program to overhaul the national police as an initiative to address deep rooted corruption issues. These reforms along with the steady improvement in economic growth would help to further reduce criminal activity and poverty. The authorities acknowledged the need to assess the macroeconomic implications of the Honduras 2020 plan and its coherence with other public policies. At present the plan is being implemented with a high level of coordination with the private sector. For its part, the government is looking to invest more in education and affordable housing over the medium term in support of this initiative. Page 31 Box 4. Fiscal Reforms in Honduras: A Foundation for Inclusive Growth The fiscal adjustment has restored macro stability, reduced sovereign spreads, and provided resources for expanding social programs. After a long tradition of fiscal excesses, the government embarked on a path to restore sound public finances. Over the last 2½ years the CPS deficit has been reduced by 6½ percentage points of GDP. This result has been achieved by a combination of spending and revenue measures, including a VAT tax reform. Since VAT increases are potentially regressive, the government also decided to allocate some of the additional revenues to expanding their targeted cash transfers program. Improved public finances and other reforms have reduced economic uncertainties, as reflected in the more than 400 basis points reduction in sovereign spreads. To understand the expected impact of the fiscal reform on output, poverty and inequality, staff developed a general equilibrium model tailored to key characteristics of the Honduran economy The model reproduces qualitatively and quantitatively key macroeconomic and distributional features of Honduras household level data. Drawing on Honduras household expenditure survey, the baseline year in the model captures the size of the agricultural (13%), services (40%) and manufacturing (20%) sectors as fractions to GDP. It also captures the effective collection of VAT, personal income, and other taxes as fractions of total government revenues. To match these characteristics, the differences in total factor productivity across sectors in the economy, as well as the sector specific parameters of the production functions, and implicit tax rates are calibrated. The model simulates thousands of individual households with diverse incomes, thus producing insights into income, wealth, and consumption distributions. The persistence and variance of the households’ particular income shocks are calibrated to reproduce measures of inequality (GINI of 0.55) and poverty (rates of about 60%) observed in Honduras’ household surveys. In addition, the model is calibrated to match households’ consumption patterns with the objective of capturing the distributional implications of the policy changes. The analysis reveals a positive impact of the reform on macroeconomic fundamentals. On its own, an increase in VAT is potentially regressive and may depress aggregate demand and worsen poverty and inequality. However, if the reform is combined with compensatory measures such as cash transfers, private consumption expands and poverty is reduced. Cash transfers are assumed to have modest positive impact (1%) on the productivity of households that receive them. These households tend to have a large marginal propensity to consume, which boosts private consumption. The boost in private consumption is not enough to compensate for the depressing effect on overall aggregate demand that results from the taxes in isolation. However, once we also incorporate a decrease in the marginal cost of capital (due to macroeconomic stability) private investment substantially increases, creating a virtuous cycle that translates into higher GDP (2%), private consumption (1.5%), and private investment (9%), which improve household’s incomes and bring additional tax revenues to finance cash transfers. Urban poverty and inequality fall by more than two percentage points. These results are enhanced with a more efficient and competitive financial sector. Productivity growth in the agricultural sector, combined with targeted training could increase labor mobility and further enhance overall gains from the reform. Page 32 Box 4. Fiscal Reforms in Honduras: A Foundation for Inclusive Growth (concluded) Fiscal Reform Scenarios