The robust regulatory and supervisory framework should help limit the build-up of systemic vulnerabilities. The authorities have a track record as a global standard setter in regulation and supervision and in addressing data gaps. Substantial progress has been made on implementing the 2014 FSAP recommendations (see Appendix V). An independent insurance authority has been established and the new risk-based capital regime for insurance companies is being put in place which will take two to three years to complete. The process of strengthening standards for securities listing is underway. Legislation has been put in place for a resolution framework for financial institutions which is designed to implement the Financial Stability Board’s Key Attributes—an impressive step forward. The HKMA has stepped up guidance and monitoring of bank lending activities, including to mainland China and for property-related activities; is closely checking liquidity risks; and is encouraging banks to reinforce cyber security. Coordination among Government and regulators in the Financial Stability Committee promotes discussion of risks that could transmit across the financial system. The authorities have close links with mainland regulators External Sector Developments in Hong Kong SAR, prepared by Joong Shik Kang. Page 33 and are active in international fora, including supervisory colleges for cross-border banking and insurance groups, for global systemically important financial institutions, and in crisis management groups. Countercyclical prudential policy. Although credit growth has slowed, there is still a positive credit gap. Risks from high corporate leverage and the housing market have not subsided but may actually increase as U.S. interest rates rise. Thus the authorities’ plan to raise the countercyclical buffer (CCYB) to 1.25 percent from January 2017 and up to the Basel III maximum appears appropriate. The CCYB could be paused or reversed only once the credit gap is eliminated and it becomes apparent that there has been a clearly established change of trend and financial cycle downturn. While the financial system is resilient and prudential policy settings are appropriate, with an uncertain external setting, heightened attention is advisable in several areas: Completing the strengthening of the nonbank oversight regime. Further enhancing stress testing and risk analysis across the financial system. This could include complementing the individual risk analyses of the HKMA, the Securities and Futures Commission and the Insurance Authority, with coordinated work in line with emerging best practices. Continuing to increase coordination among regulators, especially on liquidity monitoring, as new markets grow. Reviewing financial institutions’ plans in response to stress events globally or in mainland China. Continued efforts to enhance transparency related to legal persons and trusts and effective implementation of anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism controls in line with the 2012 Anti-Money Laundering Ordinance (AMLO) and international standards underpin Hong Kong SAR’s reputation as a premier global financial center. Contingency planning. In the event of a large adverse shock, a comprehensive and coordinated policy approach similar to the 2008/9 response would be appropriate, combining fiscal stimulus, loosening of macroprudential policies, expanded credit guarantees and HKMA emergency liquidity assistance. Strong collaboration among regulators and counterparts in other jurisdictions would be needed to monitor cross-border risks and provide liquidity support and backstopping of liabilities. The recently introduced crisis resolution framework is strengthening the availability of tools and ability to respond to strains in the banking, corporate and household sectors. Authorities’ Views The authorities’ welcomed the positive assessment of the progress made on implementing the 2014 FSAP recommendations. Approaches to the risk-based capital regime for insurance companies were being put in place and would take two to three years to complete formulating the regulatory framework—mainly due to establishing detailed capital requirements and carrying out quantitative impact studies for each company based on its risk exposure. Coordination among the regulators and government in the Financial Stability Committee promoted discussion of risks that could transmit across the financial Page 34 system, closely following the emergence of best practices on stress testing and risk analysis emerging from leading central banks, the FSB and IOSCO.