With renewed signs of overheating in the property market, the three-pronged approach to limiting risks is as important as ever. This involves boosting housing supply to match demand, macroprudential measures to limit stability risks, and stamp duties to contain speculative activity and external demand. Tackling housing supply shortage. The Long-Term Housing Strategy and Hong Kong 2030+ are aimed at addressing the housing shortage in an integrated manner by guiding land, planning and infrastructure development (see Box 1). Beyond the ten-year rolling target, continued efforts are needed over a longer horizon to keep pace with household formation and the need for urban renewal. Accelerating plans to increase supply faces a number of obstacles—such as the lack of ready projects, planning restrictions and legal and community objections. Nonetheless, to the extent possible, speeding up processes, making land available, and bringing forward public investment would be a double win—tackling the housing problem and supporting the economy at a time of soft growth. Macroprudential measures for housing. Current settings have done their job of limiting financial system exposure to the asset price boom. With house prices rising once more, and valuations stretched, a further orderly house-price adjustment would be helpful. Loan to value (LTV) or debt service to income (DSI) ratio settings should remain fixed. Only once it is clear that the trend has firmly turned down, the overvaluation gap is eliminated, credit conditions tighten and an undervaluation gap opens up together with lower new housing transactions, would there be a case to ease LTV and DSI limits (which are conservative by international standards). Stamp duties have helped contain speculative demand and curbed demand from cash buyers . November’s increase in ad valorem stamp duty for residential property transactions had an immediate impact on sentiment and appears to have curbed market exuberance. Stamp duties can be an effective part of the toolkit to stem excessive price increases and speculation in the real estate market. However, as the distorting costs of duties become more significant the higher they are, they should be rolled back once the trend has shifted towards reduced price and speculative pressures. The authorities should also monitor their effects to make sure it does not negatively affect the supply of smaller housing units, given the need to encourage relatively high density housing and provide affordable housing. 2008M12009M72011M12012M72014M12015M7 Transactions Property prices (RHS) Residential Property Transactions and Price 1/ 1/ Transactions are in thousands. Centa-city leading property price index (1997=100). 2016M11 Page 35 Box 1. Housing and Land Supply, and the Development Strategy 1/ Housing supply dropped sharply in the 2000s, leading to an acute housing shortage which the authorities are now seeking to address. Household formation increased by 40 percent over the past twenty years but the supply of housing was cut sharply following the early 2000s-housing market downturn. New public housing was cut from an average of about 50,000 a year in the early 2000s to less than 15,000 in recent years and private housing was cut from 25,000 to 10-15,000. The private domestic vacancy rate almost halved. Land reclamation and site formation also slowed. This led to a growing demand supply imbalance. Projections point to a further expansion of households by 20 percent through to 2044. Compounding this, the housing stock is aging with close to 20 percent of it expected to reach aged 70 or above by Tackling the housing shortage is now an important goal of government policy: The Long-Term Housing Strategy plans to build 460,000 units over the next ten years from 2017/18 to 2026/27 with a public/private split of 60:40. The strategy includes building more public rental units; expanding subsidized home ownership; and steady provision of land supply for private residential properties and tenancy, keeping supply in sync with demand. The longer-term development strategy is being revised in Hong Kong 2030+. It has been issued for public consultation and is expected to be finalized in 2018. It contains a vision to become a livable, high-density city in an environmentally friendly way. Development of Hong Kong SAR’s land area is challenging with only a quarter of the land supply already developed. Up to 30 percent of the land area is planned or under study for development, other areas face major development, environmental or geographical constraints or are country parks or special areas. Land development typically takes 11–14 years from the preliminary stage to final construction and requires the development of ancillary transport and community services. To push forward a pipeline of land supply the authorities adopted a multi-pronged strategy: Near and medium term . (i) increasing development density if the traffic and environment conditions permit, (ii) changing land use if the provision of public/community facilities and open space is adequate, and (iii) reviewing land use of currently vacant government land and green belt sites Medium to long term . (i) developing five new areas and (ii) extending new towns adding around 200,000 units starting from 2023–2026 (towards the end of the ten-year plan). Longer term . (i) developing Lantau island and New Territory North, (ii) reclamations, and (iii) developing cavern and underground spaces. –––––––––––––––––– 1/ Prepared by Joong Shik Kang. Page 36 Authorities’ Views: Property Market Raising housing supply. This was a central focus for policy and supply was being increased as quickly as possible without compromising planning principles. The authorities were skeptical that there was much scope to bring forward investment given long time lags for development. The long-term housing strategy aims to gradually avert the supply-demand imbalance in housing, while Hong Kong 2030+ would address the need to step up urban regeneration efforts and result in sustained economic development and better quality living. Macroprudential measures. The authorities viewed the current settings of macroprudential policies as appropriate. Since macroprudential measures were first introduced, at an early stage in 2009, the average LTV on new loans had fallen back from 64 percent immediately before the imposition of tightening measures to around 52 percent in 2016. The measures ensured that banks had sufficient buffers to handle potential shocks matching the worst cycles of the past. Stamp duties. Alongside the HKMA’s imposition of macroprudential measures, the government had used stamp duties to contain speculative and external demand for property. The recent increase in the ad valorem stamp duty rate for residential property transactions had been necessary to manage demand, particularly from investors, in an overheated market.