In the low probability event of heightened global financial volatility post-Fed liftoff coinciding with a sharp deterioration in Mainland growth, Hong Kong SAR’s small open economy would suffer a sharp falloff in growth. While the headline trade balance may not register a large impact (since imports and re-exports decline proportionately), tourism and other support services such as logistics, insurance, warehousing, and trade finance will inevitably contract. Staff analysis suggests the contribution to growth from external demand would decline by 1 2 percentage points relative to the baseline, similar to previous episodes of a severe worsening of the external environment. On top of this, the contribution of domestic demand to growth will fall by 3 5 percentage points compared to the baseline. The scenario assumes the Mainland’s growth rate is lower by 1½ 2 percentage points than in the baseline, stock and house prices decline by 30 percent—generating significant negative wealth effects on consumption—and interest rates rise by 200 basis points. As was the case during extreme downturns such as in 1998–99 and 09, the unemployment rate could increase by as much 2–3 percentage points (although the integration with the Mainland has increased since these previous episodes and they may therefore underestimate the extent of the negative impact). Job losses will be widespread, with construction and retail likely to take the biggest hit. The direct negative impact on private spending may be further compounded by banks reining in credit and provisioning for souring loans. In sum, without factoring in a policy response, overall growth will likely fall by 4 7 percentage points relative to baseline. This is along the lines of the calibrated model-based analysis of N’Diaye and Ahuja (2012). Additional risks arise from the presence of globally active banks and the prominence of foreign currency loans in the overall loan book of the banking system in recent years. Funding strains at the bank group level could restrain the ability of local branches of foreign banks to expand credit while, conversely, impaired assets in their Hong Kong SAR loan book could transmit to weaker overall group profitability and retrenchment in other locations. At the same time, if credit risks on overseas exposures of locally-incorporated banks materialize, this could hurt their ability to lend domestically. In particular, fx mismatches (U.S. dollar-denominated corporate and sovereign securities funded by Hong Kong dollar or T il cc mm oo v nu f E x T W h T P v f mm un E P f ss B ss v P b li P v Jul-08 Aug-09 Employment share (Jun-Aug 2008) Unemployment Rate by Industry during GFC Sources: CEIC DataCompany Ltd; and IMF staff estimates. Foreign Currency Loan HKD Loan Total Contribution to Total Loans Growth (In percent, year-on-year, 3mma) Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and IMF staff estimates Page 30 CNH liabilities; dollar loans to emerging markets) leave Hong Kong SAR banks vulnerable in the event of sustained dollar appreciation against the currencies of the EMs where the lending is concentrated, or a slowdown of these economies. Either outcome would create difficulties for the borrowers to service their debt to Hong Kong SAR creditors. Cross-border contagion could also be catalyzed via the asset management industry , which has grown rapidly in Hong Kong SAR, on average 10 percent y/y since the global financial crisis, to over HK$17 trillion (US$2.2 trillion) across close to 600 domiciled funds. Centralized investment mandates, strategic asset allocation imperatives, and position limits could force globally-active fund managers to sell Hong Kong SAR assets based on events elsewhere (and not directly in response to local developments), while, equally, poor returns on Hong Kong SAR exposures could trigger sales in other markets. As an illustration, during the Fed taper tantrum episode in 2013, bond exchange traded funds (ETFs) and mutual funds flows rapidly turned negative once the U.S. Treasury 10y yield volatility spiked and markets reassessed prospects of the Fed tapering its purchases of longer maturity securities. These flows are only a subset of the overall flows into Hong Kong SAR. Furthermore, since 2013, liquidity has become more of a concern in global markets, particularly in high yield corporate and EM bonds, suggesting that price sensitivity to shifts in sentiment has likely increased over the intervening period (see the April and October 2015 Global Financial Stability Reports for more discussion). Authorities’ Views Perfect storm. The authorities viewed the adverse scenario as a very low-probability event, but were nevertheless prepared via internal contingency planning since Hong Kong SAR as a small open economy will inevitably experience inward spillovers from global stress. The several rounds of prudential measures were seen as essential preparation for an eventual return to more normal funding conditions. The authorities felt that bank and household buffers provided substantial padding against adverse outcomes, and the track record of bouncing back quickly after large global shocks suggested that the risk of a protracted downturn in Hong Kong SAR is low. Banks. The HKMA has been particularly watchful of how banks (including branches of globally active institutions) have managed liquidity through tenor matching of assets and liabilities and compliance with stable funding requirements. The authorities noted that the introduction of the stable funding requirement in 2014 had induced branches of foreign banks to rely more on head office funding. Local banks have limited exposure to foreign bank branches through the interbank market, thereby containing potential contagion from global developments to the banking system in Hong Kong SAR. Furthermore, the authorities observed that banks in general had been prudent in managing fx risk exposures. JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDec Net Bond Flows (ETF and Mutual Funds) 10-Year US T-bond Yield Volatility, Coefficient of Variation (in percent, RHS) 2013 Taper Tantrum: Net Bond Flows into Hong Kong SAR (In millions of USD unless otherwise specified) Sources:Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. Page 31 Asset managers. The authorities noted that on account of the long-term institutional investor base in Hong Kong SAR, daily redemptions tended to be relatively low even during periods of stress such as the Mainland equity market correction in the summer. Furthermore, they emphasized that fund managers are required to demonstrate at the product approval stage that they have a robust liquidity risk management program in place to reduce their vulnerabilities to bunched redemption requests. They also considered that fund managers had tools to minimize the risk of large withdrawals—for instance, through passing on trading costs to exiting shareholders so as to protect the remaining shareholders from dilution of net asset value. Nevertheless, they agreed the situation bears close watching, including, if needed, via daily reporting of redemptions relative to assets under management, as they had introduced over the summer. This may become more relevant as global fund managers domicile in Hong Kong SAR and redirect internationally mobilized funding to access the Mainland stock markets through the Mutual Recognition of Funds program.