Context. Fiscal policy is the main demand management tool, since monetary policy is determined through the direct link to U.S. interest rates through the currency board (LERS). Fiscal policy therefore needs to support economic stabilization, when there is a sizeable output gap and when external demand is weak. With a comfortable level of fiscal reserves, there is scope for near-term support which can be removed as the economy recovers (Figure 6). However, over the longer run the structural fiscal position will weaken as the economy faces rapid population aging with one in six people currently 65 or above rising to one in three by 2034. Pensioner poverty and inequality are also issues that the government is tackling. Fiscal policy needs to balance near-term needs against the longer-term weakening of the structural fiscal position and the commitment, enshrined in the Basic Law, to preserve low taxes and fiscal prudence. This can be achieved by aligning short-term fiscal measures to long-term goals and shifting spending forward to help ensure that cyclical support does not exacerbate the long-term fiscal trend. Near-Term Fiscal Policy There is a case for a fiscal stimulus given the soft economic outlook, sizeable output gap, and difficult external environment. The planned fiscal impulse of around 1.6 percent of GDP in the 2016‒17 Budget is therefore appropriate and there would be room for further easing in 2017/18, possibly to total a cumulative 2 percent of GDP over the two fiscal years. However, based on past conservative performance, staff’s baseline projection is that the actual fiscal impulse will turn out to be lower than this and close to zero in 2016/17 as a result of both overachievement of revenues (which has been a persistent trend, given conservative forecasts) and underachievement of expenditures. If growth remains weak, additional discretionary stimulus would be needed in 2017–18. A fiscal package in line with staff’s proposal would still leave fiscal reserves at a comfortable level of around 30 percent of GDP in 2021 and public debt close to zero. Measures could comprise: support to vulnerable households, and the elderly, in the lower income deciles, for example through allowances, rental relief and measures to help keep women and elderly workers connected to the workforce (which would also help the long-run position); support for small businesses which has been effective in previous Budgets; and bringing forward capital spending to boost housing supply and accelerate urban renewal, to the extent feasible. Page 27 Figure 6. Fiscal Policy: Room for Maneuver in Near Term but then Aging Takes Hold A significant proportion of revenues is directly related to real estate… …and nonrecurrent expenditures are high. The 2016/2017 fiscal outturn may not be as supportive as intended… Revenues are underestimated consistently across major categories. …because the authorities have systematically underestimated revenues. Hong Kong SAR’s old age dependency is among the highest in Asia. Sources: Bloomberg; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; UN World Population Prospects 2015; and IMF staff estimates. Page 28 Long-Term Fiscal Challenge An aging population could lead to structural fiscal deficits within a decade. The labor force will start declining after 2018 and population aging is most marked through to 2045. Rapid population aging will create rising demands for social expenditure and could potentially lower growth and fiscal revenues. Without policy changes, the structural fiscal balance is likely to weaken and deplete the fiscal reserves buffer. These challenging demographics set in against a backdrop of already slowing potential growth in a maturing economy that is close to the knowledge frontier. These pressures will test the fiscal framework. The Basic Law stipulates that (i) expenditure must be kept within the limits of revenue; (ii) fiscal deficits should be avoided; (iii) the budget should be kept commensurate with the growth rate of GDP. Early action is needed before fiscal reserves start depleting rapidly. In 2013, the authorities established a working group on long-term fiscal planning (WGLTFP) which issued a report studying the impact of aging on fiscal outlays. The report found that under current policies reserves would be depleted by 2035-40 with the start of structural deficits at around 2025-2030. That leaves some time to implement corrective measures, although implementation should start as soon as possible since the demographic transition will be frontloaded. Moreover, early measures will have the largest cushioning effect as they rein in spending at lower levels. Efforts should concentrate on tackling the impending structural deficits. Under current policies, structural deficits could set in soon and remain in place beyond the end of the demographic transition. Recurrent spending tied to aging could represent an additional cost of 155 percent of GDP over the next 85 years, or 1.9 percent of GDP in constant equivalent flow per year. On the expenditure side , fundamental expenditure reviews to rein in expenditure growth should be accompanied by a reprioritization towards measures that boost labor force participation and promote growth. The June 2015 change in civil service retirement age for new recruits (from 60 to 65) is a welcome step. Revenue raising measures should also be considered, including reinforcing user-pay fees, better administration, avoiding overreliance on direct taxation, and extending revenue expenditure measures nn ii j " nh " nn iii 74 80 Pension expenditure Health expenditure Present Value of Age-related Increased Spending (In precent of 2015 GDP) Source: IMF staff estimates.Note: Calculations based on UN medium-fertility demographic scenario, IMF pension expenditure projections and health expenditures based on no Page 29 tied to labor participation such as tax deductions for child bearing and education. Long-run fiscal anchor . The aim for fiscal balance and keeping overall government expenditure growth in line with GDP growth over the medium term is appropriate, while taking early action to alleviate the structural deficit problem. A drawdown of fiscal reserves could be accommodated as the economy adjusts, but a positive fiscal buffer is desirable to cope with adverse shocks, provide room for countercyclical fiscal policy, and sustain confidence in fiscal strength, the Hong Kong dollar and monetary stability. Measures to boost GDP growth can also help stem the deterioration in the fiscal position. recommendation of the WGLTFP was to set up a Future Fund, to allow a portion of fiscal reserves to be directed to longer-dated, higher-return investments. Rather than conducting purely financial investments, the Future Fund could also be channeled to local real investments in physical and human capital. Tax policies to encourage labor participation, particularly among women and the elderly and to promote active aging are also key. Sustaining a flexible economy and continuing to have an “open doors” policy and integrate foreign workers are also important. Directing more resources towards the provision of land for construction could have a large impact on growth, although current constraints are often not financial but at the regulatory, procedural and planning stages. Monitoring and communication of the long-term fiscal challenge should be stepped up. Producing an independent report every three to five years that updates projections, takes stock of measures undertaken and discusses options, would help demonstrate progress and educate the public on the long run fiscal challenge. It would also illustrate how the authorities balance out long-term concerns against the justified short-term concerns of providing support to the economy and helping those at the bottom of the income distribution. The report could follow the model of Australia’s intergenerational reports or the European Union’s Aging Report. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that fiscal policy must balance short-term needs with longer-term structural headwinds from population aging. Near term. The last few budgets had featured considerable supporting measures—in particular, infrastructure investment and transfers to households in particular—that successfully shielded the economy from growing uncertainty and helped to sustain high employment, while inflation remained contained. The fiscal impulse in the current budget was seen as appropriate, but further easing could be considered in the forthcoming 2017/2018 Budget if external conditions remained challenging. Longer term. The authorities were considering policy options to address population aging, while adhering to the principles for fiscal policy set out in the Basic Law. The establishment of the Future Fund would also help generate higher returns on investment. An important part of the policy response to aging would be to maintain economic flexibility and open to foreign workers and to creating incentives to encourage higher labor participation. With respect to fiscal policy, they had already initiated a program within the government to contain the growth of government expenditure and would proceed with expenditure reviews and a reprioritization of spending. Measures to broaden the Page 30 tax base could also be considered. Maintaining a positive fiscal reserve position was important to retain the credibility needed to operate countercyclical fiscal policy. They were open to the idea of periodic reporting on long-run fiscal sustainability but noted that this would be an intensive exercise and they would need to consider the resource costs, frequency and the scale.