With a persistent housing supply shortage and high levels of demand, the property market has faced a number of boom bust cycles. The rebound in the housing market since the summer has further stretched valuations. Relatively high household debt levels (66 percent of GDP) and high income gearing heighten the risk of an accelerated house price adjustment should interest rates rise faster than expected. Sensitivity to interest rate changes is also likely to be high with over 90 percent of new mortgage loans on floating interest rates. While the debt service index eased to 44 percent in 2016:Q2, sensitivity tests show it would rise sharply to around 60 percent in response to a 300 basis point interest rate shock. Although the buffers built up following macroprudential tightening is likely to ensure that the financial system would be resilient to a sharp house price adjustment, there is a risk to the real economy from an adverse spiral of negative wealth effects, lower collateral values, slower credit growth and weaker household spending. Authorities’ Views Global financial conditions While expecting a gradual pace of monetary policy tightening by the U.S. Fed, the authorities viewed the possibility of a faster-than-expected rise in Hong Kong SAR long yields as a material risk. If this resulted in capital flows out of emerging markets and a heightening in financial market volatility, it would have further knock-on effects to Hong Kong SAR’s domestic economy. In aggregate, banks’ liquidity coverage ratios were at a high level and had increased over time. Recent stress tests also showed that banks typically were holding highly liquid instruments, suggesting that they could withstand a sudden capital outflow. Banks’ asset quality was healthy and banking sector capital remained well above minimum international standards. Property market risks . The authorities agreed that the financial sector was relatively well insulated from shocks to the housing market, following seven rounds of macroprudential measures and the use of stamp duties to curb speculative and external demand. A correction in the property market would have effects on the real economy but such effects would differ across economic and property ili nd ili Page 25 market cycles and would be difficult to measure. Spillovers from the U.K or Europe. Although the banking system had not been much affected by the Brexit vote, the role of the U.K. banking system in distributing international banking flows and the linkages between the financial systems of Hong Kong SAR and the United Kingdom meant that developments were being closely monitored in case of international spillover risks. Similarly, the authorities were monitoring developments in European banks.