Growth. Growth in 2015 is expected at 2¼ percent, picking up slightly to 2½ percent in 2016. Staff estimates indicate this pace of expansion is below potential growth of 3¼ percent (Box 1). The baseline projection assumes interest rates in Hong Kong SAR increase in line with the FOMC’s median target range forecast for the U.S. Federal Funds rate: staff analysis suggests that this pace of increase in interest rates will have a modest negative impact on domestic demand; furthermore, in light of the prudential measures deployed by the regulators, Hong Kong SAR’s financial system appears well placed to handle portfolio adjustments along this path of rising interest rates; a slight moderation in credit for use in Hong Kong SAR: tighter macroprudential measures (additional capital surcharges from Q1:2016) will restrain supply, while higher borrowing costs will weaken demand; Mainland China’s growth slows moderately to a range of 6–6½ percent: tourism spending in Hong Kong SAR and other activity in Hong Kong SAR with direct links to Mainland China’s economy (trade, financial sector) stabilize accordingly; bank buffers are adequate for absorbing associated asset quality deterioration on Mainland exposures; and support from fiscal policy: based on the government’s budget projections, adjusted for revenue overperformance in line with historical outturns, the fiscal stance for FY2016/17 delivers an expansionary impulse of around 1 percent of GDP. Inflation. Inflation is expected to remain below 3 percent in 2015 and 2016, compared to an average of 4 percent over the last five years. The softer pressure reflects weaker global commodity prices and the modest pick-up in real activity projected over 2015/16. In line with the developments over the last three years, nominal wages are expected to continue growing at a moderate rate despite the tight labor market. Unit labor costs are therefore likely to remain contained. Private consumption Government consumption Private investment (incl. inventories) Public investment Net exports GDP Contributionto Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Contribution to Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMFstaff estimates. Proj. Annual CPI Inflation (In year-on-year percentage change) Page 15 Box 1. Potential Output Growth in Hong Kong The Hong Kong SAR economy has been growing moderately since 2012, after a strong recovery in 2010–2011 following the global financial crisis. A key question is whether this slowdown is cyclical or structural. Various estimation methods suggest that the annual growth rate of potential output has been around 3–3.5 percent in recent years, slower than the pace prior to the global financial crisis. The slowdown in actual output growth is in line with slower potential output growth. There has been a growth deceleration since 2012. The average growth rate since 2012 is about 2.5 percent per year, about 2 percentage points lower than 2000–2007. Although some slowdown might be a natural consequence as the economy becomes more advanced, the pace of adjustment seems to be less gradual than expected. A critical question for policy makers is whether the slowdown is reflecting weaker potential output growth or just a cyclical phenomenon. The Hodrick-Prescott filter method implies that the pace of potential output growth is still at about 3½ percent per year. The sample period is from 1961 to 2014. Except for the years during the Asian financial crisis, there has been a clear long-run pattern of gradual deceleration in trend output. The average growth of trend GDP from 2012 to 2014 is about 3.6 percent. The level of actual real GDP has been lower than the HP trend since 2012. The multivariate approach suggests slower potential growth in recent years, although it is still above 3 percent per year. One of the drawback of the HP filter approach is that it is a pure statistical method without relying on any economic theory. A multivariate approach, which includes some underlying relationship among output, inflation and unemployment rate through the Philips curve and Okun’s law, would provide an estimate of potential output that does not create an upward or downward inflation bias. Thus, the moderate inflation and relatively tight labor market conditions in recent years would suggest a stronger cyclical position than that implied by HP filter method. As a result, relative to the trend growth estimated by HP filter method, the average growth rate of potential output estimated by multivariate approach is lower in recent years. The production function approach also points to average potential growth above 3 percent per year. Based on the recent research by HKMA, average TFP growth has dropped from 4.0 percent per year (2000–2008) to about 2.6 percent (2009–2013). The estimation is based on a sectoral growth accounting exercise, covering several key sectors accounting for over 90 percent of GDP in Hong Kong. Since part of the TFP drop is likely to be a cyclical phenomenon (TFP is pro-cyclical), a moderate contribution from physical capital deepening and human capital growth (at least in the medium term) would bring annual real GDP growth rate back to 3 percent or above. –––––––––––––– 1/ IMF working paper, forthcoming, by Si Guo. Actual HP Filter Multivariate Filter Actual and Potential Output (Inlogarithm) Sources:CEIC Data Company Ltd, and MF staff estimates. Actual HP Filter Multivariate Filter Growth Rates of Output and Potential Output Sources:CEIC Data Company Ltd; and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 Authorities’ Views Outlook . The authorities noted that weaker tourism inflows and subdued global trade throughput are weighing on activity, even as domestic demand remains resilient. Labor shortages in many sectors, rising wages, and improvements in job security have supported consumer sentiment. High infrastructure spending has provided additional momentum. However, external headwinds are likely to remain strong into next year and, as such, Hong Kong SAR’s GDP growth is expected to remain subpar, similar to recent outturns. The authorities further noted that inflation is easing and likely to remain contained owing to lower commodity prices, weaker pressure from property rental rates, and the tentative outlook for real activity. External position. The authorities expected a gradual improvement in the current account as the global economy recovers. However, they did not see the external balance returning to the relatively high levels of the precrisis years, in part because of the rebalancing that has occurred in the Mainland since then. In addition, they noted a solid increase in Hong Kong SAR’s domestic demand with the sustained rise in property prices, which has had the effect of compressing the current account surplus.