In its capacity to assess systemic risks, and its track record of closing regulatory and data gaps, Hong Kong SAR’s regulatory and supervisory framework is a global standard setter. With regard to banks, the emphasis is on preserving ample loss absorption buffers, limiting leveraged exposures to asset prices, and containing vulnerabilities to sudden stops in short-term funding. Specifically on Mainland exposures, onsite examination of banks’ credit underwriting has been intensified, asset quality is closely monitored and, where Page 34 necessary, additional provisioning for losses is required. Nevertheless, there is room to further strengthen aspects of the defenses. The main areas that warrant continued attention are completing the process underway for enacting legislation on a comprehensive recovery and resolution framework; further strengthening the oversight regime for securities markets, broker dealers and asset managers as their business model evolves with new channels connecting Hong Kong SAR and Mainland markets; and fully implementing a risk-based capital regime for insurance companies. In addition, the emerging risk from new channels connecting Hong Kong SAR with the Mainland may call for stricter eligibility criteria for participation in stock connect schemes and, if needed, steps to contain risks to the broader financial system (prudential measures including greater provisioning and tighter risk weights on banks’ securities exposures via the new connect schemes). Continued strict implementation of anti-money laundering controls (building on measures already taken last July, when the HKMA issued its first sanction for breach of compliance with the 2012 AML/CFT Ordinance), together with steps to additionally strengthen transparency of legal persons and trusts, would help further protect Hong Kong SAR’s hard-earned reputation as a premier global financial center. Authorities’ views. The authorities reported significant progress in implementing the recommendations of the 2014 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). The legislation for establishment of the independent Insurance Authority (IIA) was enacted in July 2015. The IIA is expected to be set up by end-2016. Components of a risk-based capital regime for insurance companies are being put in place, and the authorities expect to complete the preparation work for the new regime in 2 3 years mainly because determining the capital requirements for each company based on its risk exposure (Pillar I) will take time on account of the diverse insurance landscape in Hong Kong SAR. The other pillars of the regime—corporate governance standards, enterprise risk management, and self-assessment of risks and solvency position (Pillar 2) as well as disclosure standards and enhancing transparency (Pillar 3)—may be instituted sooner. For life insurance companies, the regulators have required weekly reporting of solvency ratios (the ratio of total assets at fair value minus total liabilities, normally adjusted with prevailing interest rates, to the required margin of solvency should be at least 150 percent). General insurance companies are required to maintain at least 200 percent solvency ratio. The authorities further noted that periodic stress testing on assets is also performed. Risks from the new channels connecting the Mainland and Hong Kong SAR were seen as manageable so far. The regulators are attuned to preventing funds from engaging in regulatory arbitrage (for instance, Mainland funds listing in Hong Kong SAR to principally invest back in the Mainland, rather than listing directly in the Mainland itself). More broadly, they view asset management as a potential high growth area and have streamlined taxes, stamp duties, and the legal framework governing fund structures to attract asset managers to domicile in Hong Kong SAR.