While there are some early signs that the property sector is beginning to slow, the potential for a renewed pick up remains high considering the underlying demand pressures and tight supply. Therefore, the See Appendix V. Page 35 three-pronged approach deployed to limit risks—efforts to boost supply; stamp duties on transactions; macroprudential measures to protect banks—should continue to remain in place. Efforts to raise supply. The recent reaffirmation by the government to boost supply, made through the 2014 Long-Term Housing Strategy, is welcome, as is the concerted cross-agency cooperative effort to project demand and identify the land needed to support the construction activity. Of the 480,000 units projected to be supplied over the next 10 years from 2015–16 to 2024–25, 290,000 are public sector units (rental and for sale). Over the next decade, this entails producing an annual average number of units that is nearly twice the yearly average produced in recent years. There is merit in expediting the process for identifying the land and building sites, together with conducting the relevant environmental, transport, and community facility assessments so as to cement public expectations that the target will be met. This will help alleviate affordability concerns, particularly for low-income households, although the full impact will necessarily be felt only with a lag once the actual construction nears completion. Stamp duties. The three stamp duties currently in place—Special Stamp Duty on resale of residential properties within 36 months of purchase; Buyer’s Stamp Duty on purchases by nonresidents; and double ad valorem stamp duty on nonresidential and multiple residential property purchases—have helped curb excess demand by limiting speculative transactions. Barring a precipitous fall in transactions, the stamp duties should not be rolled back. On counter-cyclical macroprudential policies, staff sees a case for holding firm on the tight ceilings on LTV and DSR ratios and the floor on risk weights tied to property loans as a way of continuing to limit banks’ exposure to property sector. These policies have strengthened banks’ mortgage loan origination standards without getting in their way of intermediating credit to the real economy. Adjustments to the property-related macroprudential measures should be made based on evolving financial stability risks and not in response to aggregate demand developments (unless the measures are deemed to impair credit intermediation and disrupt the banking system’s ability to support the real economy). Authorities’ views. The authorities emphasized that boosting supply is a priority. Land for constructing 254,000 of the 290,000 public housing units, which is the target set by the Long-Term Housing Strategy over the next decade, has already been identified. As for private housing land supply, the authorities aimed to maintain land supply from various sources for about 190,000 units over the next decade. With regard to stamp duties, the authorities considered these as effective tools for restraining excess speculative demand, but agreed they would consider adjustments in the event of a sustained decline in transaction volumes with the potential to generate adverse spillovers to the broader economy. On counter-cyclical macroprudential measures imposed on banks, the authorities observed they will continue to monitor the property market closely and introduce appropriate measures as and when necessary to safeguard banking -5 10 15 20 25 30 Planned public rental housing Planned public units for subsidized sales Actual completion of public rental housing Source: HousingAuthority. Hong Kong SAR Public Housing Supply: Planned and Actual Annual Completions ( In thousands of units) Page 36 stability. In considering financial stability risks, it is inevitable that broader macro factors would need to be taken into account.