The exchange rate regime has been supported by coherent and strong policy frameworks that help the economy adapt to changing global conditions. The LERS is underpinned by the flexible economy, ample fiscal and reserve buffers and strong financial regulation and supervision. These features anchor the stability of Hong Kong SAR’s small open economy and its large, globally integrated financial services industry. Exchange rate regime. The LERS has been in place for thirty-three years, has been tested through crises, and remains the best arrangement for Hong Kong SAR. The supporting institutional and policy frameworks, including the preservation of fiscal and reserves buffers, ensure the smooth functioning of the currency board. The link to the U.S. dollar is appropriate, given that Hong Kong SAR is most affected by trade and financial flows between advanced economies and mainland China rather than just the fluctuations of the Mainland economy. Flexibility —through labor, product and asset markets—is critical to the successful operation of the LERS, enabling speedy adjustment through relative prices in the absence of the nominal exchange rate channel. This is important given that U.S. dollar appreciation may initially reduce Hong Kong SAR’s competitiveness. Staff’s study shows that at an aggregate level Hong Kong SAR’s prices and wages adjust more strongly than in either the United States or the United Kingdom (selected Issues Paper 2). The industry level evidence also points to flexible adjustment with downward wage rigidity less binding in Hong Kong SAR than in the United States. Labor Earnings Adjust Faster in Hong Kong SAR Sources: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. External sector assessment. The structure of Hong Kong SAR’s trade has been adapting to the shift in China’s trade patterns and capital account liberalization, with the trade-in-goods surplus switching to a deficit and the trade-in-services deficit to a surplus (Figure 7). The structural current account surplus is now significantly lower (a current account surplus norm of around 1–4 percent of GDP), and the current Wage and Price Flexibility in Hong Kong SAR Prepared by Si Guo (Selected Issues and Forthcoming Working Paper). Page 31 Figure 7. External Sector: A Structural Shift to a Lower Current Account Surplus The current account surplus is substantially lower than prior to the GFC. More than three quarters of narrowing CA surplus was due to large private sector dissaving. Several structural factors have contributed, including external rebalancing of mainland China… …rising imports to meet increased tourist arrivals from mainland China, and… …reversal of gold trade balance due to the opening of a Precious Metals Depository… …steady decline in transport services. Sources: Bloomberg; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; and IMF staff estimates. rr illi rr Page 32 account surplus is projected to remain in the 2–4 percent of GDP range over the medium term (Selected Issues Paper 3). The July 2016 External Sector Report concluded that the external position was broadly in line with medium term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Since then the real effective exchange rate has remained broadly stable, and analysis through October 2016 delivers the same results (see Appendix III). Authorities’ Views The authorities emphasized that the LERS remained the cornerstone of the financial system and the best monetary arrangement for Hong Kong SAR. Stability played an important role in supporting Hong Kong SAR’s role as a trading and financial center. The credibility of the LERS had stood the test of time through a number of global crises and was supported by a sizable net international investment position, prudent fiscal policy and a flexible economy. The anchor to the U.S. dollar remained most appropriate as it is the most commonly used currency in international trade and for cross border financial transactions, and given the depth, breadth and liquidity of U.S. dollar denominated transactions and low inflation track record. They viewed the exchange rate as being in line with fundamentals. They noted that the current account surplus had narrowed since the GFC not because of a loss in competitiveness arising from the currency board but because of several structural factors including subdued global trade flows and the external rebalancing of mainland China. The authorities concurred with staff’s work which showed that wages and prices were flexible when compared with international peers. Following the introduction of the statutory minimum wage in May 2011 the labor market had still remained broadly stable. Wage and price flexibility had enabled the reallocation of resources across sectors without costly disruptions to activity.