The propensity for property price run-ups in Hong Kong SAR is rooted in a fundamental demand-supply imbalance at work for some time (Figure 5). Nevertheless, around the rising trend, there have been times when prices have slowed or hit a plateau before accelerating again. Prices have also declined around periods of heightened financial volatility (2008 09 and 12). At present, the market appears to be experiencing the onset of relative calm after having gathered steam over the past 18 months. Property Price Index Property Price Index: Class A, B & C Property Price Index: Class D & E Property Price (Index; 2003=100) Source: CEIC Data Company Ltd. 1/ Data until Sep 2015. Page 27 Transactions have picked up since mid-2014, but are now showing signs of a moderation. Completion rates of new private units appear to be slowing again this year. Figure 5. The Property Market Nevertheless, strong end-user demand pressure is seen in declining vacancy rates… Demand has stayed firm in the face of tighter ceilings on loan-to-value ratios… …and near-absence of confirmor transactions (properties resold before the original sale is completed). …and down payments have remained high relative to annual income across all locations. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; Haver Analytics; Transport and Housing Bureau, Government of Hong Kong SAR; HKMA; and IMF staff estimates. Overall Primary Secondary Domestic Residential Property Sales Transactions (In thousands) Oct-15 ( ) Private Property Completions (In number of units unless otherwise specified) Population (million,RHS) Class A Properties Class B Properties Class C Properties Class D Properties Class E Properties Vacancy Rate Confirmor Registration (In percent of Total Registration) Loan-to-value ratio Number of new loans approved (thousand, RHS) Loan-to-Value Ratio and New Loans Approved Hong Kong SAR Average New territories Kowloon Hong Kong Minimum Down Payment-to-Income (In multiple of median annual household disposable income, by area) Note: For 45 sq.m. flat, assuming 70 percent LTV and 5 percent income tax rate. 2015Q3 Page 28 In the recent run-up, despite the well telegraphed increases in U.S. interest rates, households have continued to opt for floating rate mortgages which will reset in the aftermath of the Fed liftoff. Over 80 percent of new mortgages have been priced off HIBOR in recent months, up from close to zero in 2012. A turbulent and faster-than-expected increase in interest rates could therefore sharply slow property price growth if demand softens in response to the higher cost of borrowing. Nonresidential property price growth has also accelerated, with particularly sharp increases seen in the category of flatted factories (that is, vacant former manufacturing sites acquired for commercial redevelopment). Prices have run far ahead of rents and average yields are currently around half their levels pre-2009. With early signs now evident of a slowdown, particularly in the retail segment, there is the risk that a price reversal would reduce collateral values and make it difficult for corporates to rollover credit, thus exposing banks to losses in their corporate loan book. Authorities’ Views Residential property, domestic demand and the banking sector. The authorities noted that the property market may lose some momentum with the interest rate upcycle, but the overall impact was hard to predict. Much will also depend on how the demand-supply imbalance evolves. With wages and job security likely to remain firm, household demand was expected to stay solid. Adverse turns in price dynamics were unlikely to have a major impact on banks’ asset quality, provisioning, or capital positions since the macroprudential measures have been effective in increasing buffers. History provides reassurance as well— the 70 percent property price correction over 1997–2003, when starting buffers were smaller than at present, had not severely dented bank balance sheets. Exposures to nonresidential property. The authorities did not view the nonresidential segment as posing a systemic risk to the banking system since banks’ exposure to business loans backed by nonresidential property collateral was regarded as limited. Furthermore, the macroprudential measures apply to commercial property loans as well. Together with the double ad valorem stamp duty on purchases, the measures have made leveraged purchases of nonresidential property an expensive proposition. Corporates would rather use their cash to expand their core business than engage in property investment activities. Proportion of New Mortgage Loans Priced with Reference to HIBOR (In percent)Sep-2015 Source:Haver Analytics. Average yield (percent; RHS) Office price index Retail premise price index Flatted factories price index Nonresidential Property PriceIndices and Rental Yields (Index; 1999 = 100 unless otherwise specified) Sources:CEIC Data Company Ltd;andIMF staff estimates Page 29