ROBUST GROWTH Hong Kong SAR is a vibrant trading and financial gateway between mainland China and the rest of the world. Traditionally the economy was mainly driven by the United States, the global economic cycle and financial conditions; but over time it has become increasingly linked to mainland China’s rapidly evolving economy. The financial services industry ranks fourth in the Global Financial Centers Index and fourth by scale of foreign exchange turnover. Four industries—financial services, tourism, trading and logistics, and professional and other producer services—account for over half of GDP and employ just under half of the workforce. Financial services accounts for around 18 percent of value added but just 7 percent of employment. Prolonged low interest rates and mainland China’s economic development have supported growth and credit over the past decade . With positive spillovers from mainland China, growth has averaged 4.1 percent between 2005 and 2013 and unemployment has remained low. Credit grew rapidly, house prices nearly tripled between 2008 and 2015 for the mass market and doubled for the luxury segment. But growth has slowed since 2015 and the outlook is more challenging. The U.S. rate cycle has turned up, global trade growth is tepid and mainland China is rebalancing. Post-election uncertainty about U.S. economic policies has been accompanied by market volatility which may also weigh on trade and financial conditions. Domestically, the tide also appears to be turning with the financial cycle past its peak and swings in the housing market—with a price correction in the early part of the year followed by resurgent demand. In a longer perspective (though no less urgent), the economy needs to adapt to population aging and mainland China’s move up the value chain and a shortage of housing supply relative to demand needs to be addressed. Strong policy frameworks and ample buffers are in place to weather a less favorable environment. Prudent fiscal policy and intensive supervision of the financial system have built buffers that can be drawn on when needed. The Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS) provides a credible anchor for a small open economy with a large globally-integrated financial services industry that is exposed to cross-border portfolio shifts. Fiscal buffers and a positive net international investment position (35 percent and 315 percent of GDP, respectively) enable the economy to navigate shocks. Wage and price flexibility allows the economy to adapt quickly to cyclical conditions and structural changes. The strong regulatory and supervisory framework is aimed at limiting the build-up of systemic vulnerabilities. P Page 11