Context. Hong Kong SAR’s economy has operated with short-term interest rates near zero and long yields at near-historic lows for the past seven years. During this time, the economy has also experienced generally favorable spillovers from Mainland China. These tailwinds may become less powerful going forward. Interest rates in Hong Kong SAR are poised to increase with the Fed liftoff, through their direct link to U.S. rates via the currency board. The spillovers to Hong Kong SAR from Mainland China could also prove more challenging than in the past as the Mainland transitions to slower, but more sustainable growth. Recent developments. Heading into a potentially testing period ahead, activity momentum has remained steady while credit and asset prices present a mixed picture (Figure 1). Activity. Growth in the first three quarters has been just over 2½ percent, similar to 2014. Domestic demand has been the mainstay of activity (particularly private consumption on the back of a tight labor market, although there are some signs of a moderation in retail sales in recent months). External demand has weakened gradually over the year, reflecting the global trade slowdown. The unemployment rate has remained low, at 3.3 percent. CPI inflation has drifted down to 2.4 percent y/y in October, on lower imported inflation and favorable effects of property rates waivers on the cost of living. Credit. Overall credit growth has moderated since mid-2014, with a deceleration in foreign currency-denominated loans. Growth of loans for use in Hong Kong SAR has moderated somewhat, but remains robust, including to the property sector. The stock of outstanding debt securities where the ultimate domicile of risk is in Hong Kong SAR also appears to be leveling off, with about 75 percent of bonds maturing within 1–3 years. Equity market. The Hang Seng index (HSI) experienced a correction in the wake of the Mainland equity crash, currently down 20 percent from its peak. The China Enterprises Index “H Share” is down 28 percent (compared to the 30 percent decline in Shanghai Composite since June 11). Index of consumer confidence (quarterly; RHS) Retail sales volume Consumer Confidence and Retails Sales (In percent, year-on-year) 2015Q3 Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; andIMF staff estimates. Exports of Goods and Services (In percent, year-on-year; in current prices) 2015Q3Services Goods Sources: CEIC Data CompanyLtd.; and IMF staff estimates. Page 11 Figure 1. Snapshot of Credit and Asset Price Developments Credit growth has moderated since mid-2014, largely driven by foreign currency loans… …but lending related to real estate has increased over the past year on the back of the active property market. Bonds now comprise an important share of intermediation... Asset price dynamics have been mixed, with property prices rising... …but their volume outstanding where domicile of risk is located in Hong Kong SAR appears to be leveling off. …while equities have adjusted in light of the correction on the Mainland. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Total loans Foreign currency HKD Credit Growth (In percent, year-on-year, 3mma) Change inshare of loans, Q3:2015 relative to Q3:2014 (LHS)Sectorshare Q3:2015 (RHS) Loans Outstanding for Use in Hong Kong SAR (In percent, by sector) Wholesale/RetailEnergy/TelecomManufacturingTransport Construction, Property Development,and Investment Individual/Residential Bonds Loans Total Loans and Bonds Outstanding (In percent of GDP)1/ All bonds issued in Hong Kong SAR, excluding CDs and bonds with maturity less than 1 year, regardless of domicile of risk.2/ All loans originated in Hong Kong SAR, including HKD and foreign currency loans. Bonds Loans Loans and Bonds Outstanding, domicile of risk in Hong Kong SAR (In percent of GDP)1/ Bonds issued by entities incorporated in Hong Kong SAR with domicile of risk in Hong Kong SAR.2/ Loans for use in Hong Kong SAR. Private housing completions (thou units; RHS) Property price index: Class A, B & C Property price index: Class D & E Property Price (Index; 1999=100 unless otherwise specified) 1/ Data until July 2015. 2015Q3 Hang Seng index Hang Seng H-shares index Shanghai composite index Stock Price Index (Index, January 2008=100) Page 12 Property sector. Prices resumed their upward rise in Q2:2014. House prices in mass market segments have tripled relative to their level at end-2008, while those in luxury segments have almost doubled. These increases reflect strong local end-user demand colliding against tight housing supply. Completion of private housing units has slowed this year and vacancy rates have declined. A similar dynamic appears to be at work in the nonresidential property segment as well. There are now some early signs of a pause in momentum, especially in the secondary market for residential property and the retail component of the nonresidential sector. External position. The real exchange rate has appreciated 10 percent relative to the 2014 average, and 17 percent since 2012, a product of the link to the U.S. dollar and relatively higher inflation in Hong Kong SAR compared to trading partners. The current account balance has stabilized in the range of 1½ 2 percent of GDP over this time (and is projected to increase to around 3½ percent over the medium term as global demand recovers). Buffers. The economy has augmented its buffers even with the robust credit growth of recent years and the build-up of leverage in an era of low interest rates. Banks. The regulatory framework is geared toward limiting the build-up of systemic vulnerabilities, ensuring that banks maintain healthy liquidity profiles and ample capital buffers. Multiple rounds of counter-cyclical macroprudential measures since 2009 (tighter ceilings on loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-service-to-income (DSR) ratios, risk- weight floors on property loans) have helped contain the growth in bank exposure to the run-up in property prices (Appendix I). In 2014, a bank-specific stable-funding requirement was introduced to ensure that banks with especially rapid credit growth had adequate stable sources of funding to support their loan book. A countercyclical capital buffer (0.625 percent of risk-weighted assets) will be introduced in Q1:2016 and domestic systemically important banks will be subject to additional loss absorbency capital surcharges of 0.250 0.625 percent. These measures will provide further protection to a banking system already capitalized in excess of Basel III levels: as of September 2015, the total capital adequacy ratio (CAR) for locally incorporated authorized institutions is 18.1 percent, Tier 1 CAR is 14.9 percent, and the common equity tier 1 (CET-1) ratio is 14.3 percent. Classified loans (gross) Overdue and rescheduled loans Asset Quality of Retail Banks 1/ 2/ (In percent of total loans) 1/ Classified loans are those loans graded as "sub-standard," "doubtful" or "loss."2/ Figures related to retail banks' Hong Kong office(s) and overseas branches. 2015Q2 Page 13 Fiscal. Budget over-performance in recent years has lifted fiscal reserves to 35 percent of GDP, or about 24 months of total government expenditure. Gross government debt is minimal (around 0.1 percent of GDP). Households. Although the stock of household debt has risen to historic highs close to 70 percent of GDP (around two-thirds of which is residential mortgage debt), the Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s (HKMA’s) mandatory debt service stress tests on mortgage applicants has contained the debt service burden among new borrowers. New borrowers’ debt service relative to disposable income has declined from 41 percent in August 2010 to 35 percent in 2014. Furthermore, the number of owner-occupied households with mortgages or loans has contracted by nearly one-fourth since the global financial crisis with only one-third of owner-occupied households currently carrying mortgages or loans. Corporates. While aggregate corporate debt has increased rapidly in recent years, listed company data suggest that the leverage ratio of corporates in Hong Kong SAR is relatively low in the region (Regional Economic Outlook; Asia and Pacific, 2014). In terms of corporate debt concentration, less than 10 percent of the total debt stock among listed firms is owed by firms with leverage ratios greater than 2. The maturity structure of the debt is generally favorable: the median ratio of short- to long-term debt among listed firms is among the lowest in the region. Furthermore, less than 10 percent of total debt among listed firms is owed by “stressed” companies (with interest coverage ratios below 1). External. Vulnerabilities in the international investment position are low—net foreign assets are close to 330 percent of GDP; foreign exchange reserves, at 120 percent of GDP, are adequate for precautionary purposes. Liquidity Ratio of Retail Banks (In percent; quarterly average) Sources: HKMA; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ The ratioof liquefiable assets to qualifying liabilities. 14Q4 Hong Kong dollar All currencies Foreign currencies Loan-to-Deposit Ratios of All Authorized Institutions Aug-15 <1 [1,5) [5,10) >10 1/ Interest coverage ratio is measured by earnings before interest/total interest expense. Source: Worldscope, IMF staff estimates. Corporate Debt by Interest Coverage Ratio 1/ Page 14