Connections with mainland China’s economy and the financial sector are important for future growth but also add risk transmission channels. A bumpy mainland China transition to sustainable growth would feed through the tourism, trade and financial channels. Tourism and trade contribute significantly to activity and employment . A further slowdown in tourism and trade would dent retail sales, logistics and wholesale warehousing. SME links to mainland China are high, and a downturn in profitability combined with higher interest rates could stretch their debt servicing capacity. Financial linkages have intensified over the past decade. Bank lending to mainland China plus trade finance account for around half of Hong Kong SAR banks’ lending. RMB internationalization, equities market linkages, securities issuance by mainland corporates and asset management activity have all grown. Banking system exposure to mainland banks . External claims on onshore Chinese banks remain sizeable at HK$1.5trillion (62 percent of GDP) (Figure 4). The mainland is the largest systemically important source of potential shock to interbank markets. Banking sector exposure through lending and bond markets expanded rapidly over 2010–2014 as the offshore renminbi market developed and activity was spurred in part by steady gains from RMB appreciation plus the limited options for RMB investments. From late 2014, the change in RMB outlook, lower funding costs onshore, and a fall in RMB deposit pool offshore, led to a scale back in lending to mainland banks. However, the position stabilized in 2016:Q2 and more recent data points to modest pickup in lending to onshore banks once again. Banking system exposure to mainland nonfinancial corporates. Hong Kong SAR banks’ nonbank China exposure—a broad measure including lending, off-balance sheet items and trade finance to mainland Chinese firms and overseas firms operating there—remains close to its historically-high level of HK$4.6 trillion (187 percent of GDP). After increasing rapidly since 2010, the rate of growth has eased since 2015 as mainland companies began to repay foreign currency debt, but the level of exposure is still high. HKMA analysis suggests that leverage has been increasing for nonlocal corporates (i.e., mainland China and overseas) since the Global Financial Crisis, and debt at risk is higher than for domestic firms. Still, the HKMA’s stress tests suggest that the potential credit loss for Hong Kong SAR banks from a China growth slowdown remains manageable. Staff’s analysis (Selected Issues Paper 1) provides support for this view, though banks should remain alert to rising credit risk. Hong Kong SAR banks currently have less direct exposure to riskier mainland corporates than the average of A shares . Based on staff's analysis, debt at risk could amount to 9 percent of Hong Kong SAR banks' mainland China corporate loan book or 4.5 percent of their total loan book. Prepared by Sally Chen and Tak Daniel Law (Resident Representatives’ Office, Hong Kong SAR). The April 2016 GFSR analysis is applied to look at debt at risk (measured by an ICR<1) across Hong Kong banks’ lending portfolios. Page 19 Debt-at-Risk Ratio and Potential Losses (4-quarter moving average) Sources: HKMA; WIND; IMF staff estimates. Note: The debt at risk ratio of HK loans used in the Mainland is calculated as the percentage of the sum of the sectoral debt at risk in the total. The sectoral debt at risk is estimated as the product of the share of liabilities by firms with interest rate coverage of less than one in the sector (estimated from A shares) and the loan amount of this sector. The HKMA has required banks to maintain prudent lending standards. Hong Kong SAR banks' focus on large state-owned enterprises (SOEs), multinationals operating in mainland China and Hong Kong SAR-based conglomerates suggests that they are also not lending to the weakest listed corporates. A significant proportion of the loan book is also backed by bank guarantees or secured by collateral. However, continued caution and monitoring remain warranted. Conditions across banks vary. Some banks are more exposed to mainland SOEs and others to the private sector. While SOEs may enjoy an implicit government guarantee, this may not always be available—for example, as a result of SOE reform in the mainland. The analysis is based on current rather than stressed conditions. If the global environment deteriorated, nonlocal corporates’ earnings would be hit and the impact on the real economy could be sizeable, with second-round knock-on effects on the banks. Offshore RMB market. Hong Kong SAR is the premier offshore RMB center and the net provider of liquidity to other markets (Figure 5). Around 70 percent of the global value of RMB settlement is handled by banks in Hong Kong SAR. This has been facilitated by market infrastructure including an RMB real time gross settlement system, the provision of liquidity facilities, and CNH-HIBOR fixing. This market should continue to grow further over the medium term as RMB internationalization continues and mainland China opens up. However, RMB activity has contracted since August 2015 following the shift in expectations from RMB appreciation to depreciation and with lower cross-border trade settlement. Spikes in the CNH-HIBOR rates in January, September, and December 2016 illustrate the potential for volatility and pressures to emerge with thin liquidity or changes in mainland management of capital outflows. BB Page 20 Figure 4. Exposure to Mainland: Financial Channels Hong Kong banks’ exposure to mainland banks and corporates is high—though it has eased since 2014. Locally incorporated banks and subsidiaries in the mainland account for almost 60 percent of the loans. Lending is focused on SOEs and foreign companies operating in mainland China. U.S. dollar securities issuance in Hong Kong SAR with ultimate risk domiciled in mainland China spans a range of sectors. One half of these bonds mature in the next three years and may face rollover risk in a higher interest rate environment. The bulk of RMB bonds issued in Hong Kong SAR are also maturing in the next two years Sources: Bloomberg; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; and IMF staff estimates. Page 21 Figure 5. Developments in the Offshore RMB Market The RMB rates to the U.S. dollar have shown more daily volatility since the change to the central parity fixing in August 2015. CNH interbank rates have spiked occasionally most recently in December. But volatility and USD/CNH risk reversals were lower during the recent interest rate spike. Dim Sum bond issuance has picked up from a trough. The shift in exchange rate expectations has led to a marked fall in RMB deposits… …accompanied by a slowdown in trade settlement volumes. Sources: Bloomberg; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; and IMF staff estimates. oo Y Page 22 Stock market connections. The Connect scheme allows individuals/institutions with brokerage accounts in Hong Kong SAR or Shanghai to trade stocks in the other market up to a limit—the new Hong Kong SAR-Shenzhen link (which opened in early December) has broadened access to hi-tech mainland stocks and increased the number of mainland small stocks covered from 560 to over 1000. The Mutual Recognition of Funds permits mutual funds in each location to mobilize investment from the other jurisdiction, subject to regulatory approval and an aggregate and daily quota. These schemes boost market activity and enhance liquidity in both markets, and they have prompted closer coordination between the regulators, but they also intensify possible risk transmission between the equities markets. With increased market connections, correlations and spillovers (on returns and volatilities) have been increasing over time across a broad range of sectors. The asset management industry has expanded rapidly with total assets under management almost tripling over the past seven years, although values steadied in 2015. Combined fund management business amounted to HK$17.4 trillion in 2015 and the proportion of assets managed in Hong Kong SAR rose to 55.7 percent of the total, or equivalent to about 50 percent of total banking assets. The authorities are promoting the development of Hong Kong SAR as a global full-service asset management center to enable investors to manage complex risks—including from mainland onshore activity—through risk management products, hedging and derivatives. Legal and tax changes have been made to encourage global corporate treasuries, the private equity industry and open ended funds to domicile in Hong Kong SAR. Continued development of asset management is important for future growth (paragraph 46) but it will also heighten the sensitivity of capital flows to global shocks or shifts in Chinese investor sentiment. Authorities’ views Bank exposures to mainland China banks and corporates. The authorities viewed the mainland China-related risks as manageable. Their heightened attention to the risks introduced four years ago spurred the monitoring of a broad range of exposure indicators to capture all the mainland-related linkages, and had required banks to maintain prudent lending standards. Frequent credit reviews had allowed HKMA to remain attuned to possible vulnerabilities. They agreed that the downturn in the credit cycle and slowing in mainland China’s growth could prove to be a test over the next two years. Thus far, the classified loan ratio of mainland-related lending had remained low (less than 1 percent in June 2016). Gross Equity Spillover :Mainland China to Hong Kong SAR (Index) Returns Volatilities Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations hn ill Page 23 Mainland lending exposures were typically directed to large SOEs and multinational corporates whose income streams tended to be diversified and balance sheets more insulated from specific mainland China- related factors. Moreover, the introduction of the stable funding requirement and countercyclical buffers meant the banks were well positioned to absorb materializing risks. RMB offshore business. The authorities attributed the decline in RMB activity to a temporary cyclical shift in expectations from RMB appreciation to depreciation. This resulted in a tightening of liquidity which had led to occasional temporary spikes in the CNH-HIBOR rates. While the episode in January was pronounced and related to uncertainty about the Mainland's growth prospects, September and December's spikes were more contained. In fact, the Hong Kong SAR market remained a net provider of liquidity in the offshore RMB market as a whole, lending RMB to banks in other centers such as Singapore and London. To facilitate the smooth and efficient operation of the offshore RMB money market in Hong Kong SAR, the HKMA had recently expanded the number of primary liquidity providers in the RMB offshore market and its scale; and had introduced disclosure of the usage of intraday and overnight RMB liquidity facilities. Over the longer term asset allocation to the RMB would continue to rise as mainland China continued to open up, and inclusion of the RMB in the SDR basket had been an important step in carrying this forward. Asset management industry. The authorities viewed the orderly functioning of markets through episodes of turbulence in mainland China's markets as an indication of the resilience of Hong Kong SAR's financial system. More broadly, Hong Kong SAR's economy would benefit by continuing to play its pivotal role as the financial hub and intermediary between mainland China and the rest of the world, as a place to manage onshore China risks, and as an international asset management and offshore RMB center. To make this a success, the authorities were focused on ensuring that the regulatory regime keeps pace and is resilient to fast moving and challenging market conditions. Work was underway to enhance asset management regulation in respect of securities lending and repurchase agreements, custody of fund assets, liquidity risk management and disclosure of leverage by fund managers.