A principal near-term risk is higher volatility in global financial markets in the aftermath of the Fed liftoff, with interest rates rising more sharply than anticipated in the baseline (Figure 2). The highly compressed term premium (the yield on Hong Kong SAR 10y government bonds is currently some 50 basis points below that on U.S. 10y treasury bonds) also raises the possibility of a strong snap back at longer Fuel Food Metals Global Commodity Prices (Index, 2005=100) Proj. Source: IMF WorldEconomic Outlook, October 2015. Nominal Wage Growth Unemployment Rate Nominal Wage Growth and Unemployment Rate Proj. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd,; and IMF staff estimates. Page 17 Figure 2. Impact of Rising Interest Rates Interest rates in Hong Kong SAR are expected to rise for the first time in about a decade… …but the pace may be slower than in previous episodes on account of the abundant liquidity in the system. ...with private domestic demand generally growing at a slower pace in the aftermath of US rate hikes. …in tandem with the U.S. Fed’s rate hike… Changes in Hong Kong SAR GDP growth around Fed tightening cycles present a mixed record… The high stock of debt suggests that a faster-than- expected rise in rates in the upcoming episode could increase debt service ratios and hurt private spending. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 1251501997:Q12000:Q12003:Q12006:Q12009:Q12012:Q12015:Q1 Corporatedebt Household debt:residential Household debt: other personalloans Household and Corporate Debt (In percent of annual nominal GDP, sum of last four quarters) Corporate debt defined as loans ofall authorized institutions — loans to professional and private individuals—loans to professional and private individuals for other business purposes. 2015:Q2 Benchmark Lending Rates Prime Loan Rate (U.S.) Best Lending Rate (HK SAR) Oct-15 -0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.520152016201720182015201620172018U.S. 1/H.K. SAR Expected Pace of Policy Rates Lower bound Median Upper bound 1/Based on the Fed's dot plot as of Sept. 2015 0.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.09.0Before liftoffFirst year after liftoffSecond year after liftoff Private consumption Investment (excl. inventories) 1/ Median of previous6 rate-hike episodes. Growth in Private Domestic Demand (In percent, 4 quarters, median 1/) Before liftoff After liftoff GDP Growth (In percent, 4 quarters) Fund Flow Indicators (In billions of HKD)1/ Aggregate Balance: Sum of clearing account balances of banks with HKMA and payments between banks and HKMA, representing the level of interbank liquidity.2/ Exchange Fund Bills and Notes: Debt instruments issued by the HKMA when there is an inflow of funds. Aggregate Balance Exchange Fund Billsand Notes Page 18 maturities. Long yields could rise faster than expected if the target range for the Fed Funds rate follows a path closer to the upper bound of FOMC forecasts rather than the median (with short rates in Hong Kong SAR and the entire yield curve shifting up in response). A second possibility is that the Fed Funds target range follows the median path, but aggressive portfolio rebalancing back toward U.S. dollar assets leads to a rapid decompression of spreads globally and, as a result, long yields in Hong Kong SAR rise faster than expected. If such a shock were to materialize, domestic demand in Hong Kong SAR could be adversely affected (Box 2). Private consumption would be disrupted if interest rates were to spike (with the debt service ratio for new mortgage borrowers rising from its current relatively low level of around 35 percent to between 60 percent, depending on the magnitude of the rate increase). Rising costs of refinancing and rolling over corporate debt could inhibit investment, although staff analysis suggests that for a given rate increase the impact is likely to be less severe than in the case of private consumption. The overall slowdown in domestic demand could impair asset quality and hurt banking sector profitability, while higher interest rates would affect the value of banks’ securities holdings, thereby constraining their ability to lend. Authorities’ Views Repricing of the yield curve. The authorities considered the possibility of asset price corrections and a repricing of the yield curve in Hong Kong SAR a tangible risk as part of a generalized regional sell-off. They noted that parts of Emerging Asia, where U.S. dollar-denominated debt is high, could be vulnerable to tighter external financial conditions and a potentially stronger dollar in the aftermath of the Fed liftoff. Any resulting financial instability in the region could generate contagion effects in Hong Kong SAR and, depending on the severity of the shock, could also hurt domestic demand. Financial system resilience. The authorities highlighted that the prudential measures, taken ever since liquidity began flooding into Hong Kong SAR with the onset of unconventional monetary policy elsewhere, have strengthened buffers in the financial system and prepared it for the eventual normalization of interest rates. The financial system is therefore expected to remain resilient in the face of rising interest rates even if real activity slows. Furthermore, an overall favorable international investment position would distinguish Hong Kong SAR from economies with weaker fundamentals once investors become more discerning as the era of ultra-cheap money ends.