Under a severe low-probability scenario growth would fall sharply . In a low-probability scenario, heightened policy uncertainty in the U.S., Europe, and the United Kingdom could reduce global growth and be accompanied by a hard landing in mainland China. Global shock. In these circumstances external demand could subtract up to 3 percentage points from growth relative to the baseline over the next few years, reflecting the large openness of the economy and close links to mainland China. Domestic economy . Such an external shock would weigh on equities and the household sector, especially against a backdrop of already high household and corporate debt levels. HKMA work illustrates channels via which banks may rein in lending in response to macro shocks, further dampening growth and adding to the property price decline. Staff’s scenario of a cumulative 35 percent decline in stock and house prices could generate significant negative wealth effects on consumption and investment, reducing the contribution of domestic demand to growth by more than 2 percentage points in the near term. Overall growth impact. Without a domestic policy response, overall growth could fall by 3.5-5.5 percentage points relative to baseline over the first two years after the shock. A downturn would also hit fiscal outturns, as they are relatively dependent on property-related revenues. While vulnerability to shocks is high, there are large buffers to cope with adverse events. Fiscal reserves are 35 percent of GDP and foreign exchange reserves cover seven times currency in circulation and around 48 percent of Hong Kong dollar money supply. Banks’ liquidity and high capital buffers should help contain the exposure of the financial system to adverse shocks—although they do not neutralize the effect on the real economy. The IMF’s FSAP stress tests (2014) found that the banking sector was sufficiently capitalized and liquidity risks were low. Authorities’ views The authorities considered an adverse scenario a low probability event. Substantial buffers were in place to weather a severe shock. As a small open economy with a large financial sector, they had in place contingency planning to ensure crisis preparedness and they were well placed to coordinate both Page 26 domestically and internationally (see paragraph 43). The financial system was significantly better placed to cope with external shocks than it was at the time of the Asian Financial Crisis, although overall economic activity would inevitably slow.