The LERS is the best arrangement for Hong Kong SAR, particularly at a time when the outlook for the global economy and financial markets is turning more tentative. The currency board remains an anchor of stability for this small open economy with a large, globally integrated financial services industry highly exposed to cross-border portfolio adjustments. The supporting policy and institutional apparatus that guarantees the smooth functioning of the currency board remains firmly in place and is viewed as credible and robust—ample fiscal reserves that can be rapidly deployed to cushion macro shocks, strong regulatory and supervisory frameworks, and a healthy financial system. The most recent evidence of the credibility markets attach to the system was seen during the heightened regional financial stress in August-September 2015: the LERS anchored expectations and the Hong Kong dollar traded close to the strong side of the convertibility undertaking even as other currencies in the region depreciated sharply. The possibility of further U.S. dollar appreciation (and therefore Hong Kong dollar against other currencies as well) in the near-term raises concerns of diminishing competitiveness, amplified at times such as the present conjuncture where the RMB faces depreciation pressures. Nevertheless, Hong Kong SAR’s flexible markets allow rapid adjustment and help ensure that departures from the equilibrium REER do not persist. The July 2015 External Sector Report concluded that Hong Kong SAR’s external positions in 2014 and 2015 (through May) were broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The large total gaps implied by EBA-type regressions (about 10½ percent of GDP in 2014) mainly came from regression residuals while the contributions from policy gaps were neutral. An updated EBA-type regression, which reflects the developments through September 2015, delivers essentially the same results (Appendix IV). The overall assessment remains that the external position is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Authorities’ views. The authorities noted that the currency board has continued to function smoothly through repeated episodes of stress in global financial markets in recent years. They did not see the LERS as compromising Hong Kong SAR’s competitiveness and viewed the real effective exchange rate as in line with fundamentals. Domestic wage and price flexibility, together with smooth reallocation of resources across sectors, have allowed the economy to adjust without costly disruptions to activity. The authorities noted that the minimum wage (introduced in 2011 and subsequently raised in 2013 and 2015), has not reduced flexibility in the labor market. As another example of flexibility, the authorities pointed to recent reductions in unit prices in the retail sector as evidence of the domestic adjustment mechanism at work.