The real economy has been operating below trend: Subpar growth. Growth has been below potential since the beginning of 2015 and is expected to be around 1.5 percent in 2016. An anemic global trade environment and a sharp downturn in tourism arrivals from mainland China over the past two years have depressed retail spending, private investment and exports. The decline in tourism has shown signs of bottoming out since the middle of the year and consumption has turned around alongside rebounding house prices. Nonetheless, business activity indicators, retail sales, and consumer confidence continue to point to a slow recovery (Figure 1). Labor market steady. Labor market quantity indicators have been resilient to slower growth. The unemployment rate stayed at 3.4 percent in Q3 and employment has remained robust, though vacancies have declined. Public construction investment appears to have supported employment. Earnings growth has adjusted, slowing to 3.8 percent in 2016:H1 from 4.3 percent in 2015:H1. CPI inflation has remained contained at 2.1 percent (y/y) in October. Subdued external sector. The real exchange rate has appreciated at a more moderate pace in 2016, in line with the U.S. dollar. After January’s volatile external financial conditions, market sentiment improved and the Hong Kong dollar returned to the strong side of the convertibility undertaking. The current account surplus narrowed to around 2.6 percent of GDP in 2016:H1, and goods trade remained subdued in Q3. Equity markets . The Hang Seng index fell to a four-year low in February 2016 following concerns about China’s growth outlook. More recently, Brexit, post-U.S. election volatility and December’s Fed rate hike, and the imposition of higher property stamp duties also triggered brief market declines, but equities are currently 20 percent higher than February’s trough. Capital flows moved with market volatility. Portfolio investment outflows increased substantially in 2015 as residents and nonresidents reduced their equity and investment fund holdings following the stock market decline. This reversed in 2016:H1 as markets stabilized, and equity and bond inflows have increased since August. However, the shift in expectations from RMB appreciation to depreciation has continued to lead to a sharp reduction in offshore RMB liquidity with deposits down by about 35 percent from the 2014 peak. -40-30-20-10010200910111213141516H1 Portfolio investment Assets Liabilities Portfolio Investment (In percent of GDP)Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates Page 12 Figure 1. The Real Economy is Subdued Growth has been below trend since 2014 Exports of goods and services have slowed. The decline in tourism from mainland China appears to be bottoming out. Wholesale, retail, and tourism were hit. Consumer confidence remains below trend. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; WEO. Sluggish U.S. growth and China’s rebalancing have weighed on growth. rr rr rr j Page 13 Fiscal position. With a softer economic outlook, the 2016/17 Budget included measures to support small and medium-sized enterprises, incentives for the tourism industry, tax cuts and an increase in social security allowances. A fiscal impulse of 1.6 percent of GDP is projected by the authorities for 2016/17, although the actual impulse may fall short of this, as revenues usually out-perform forecasts. Signals from the financial cycle are mixed (Figure 2): Credit growth has slowed . Lending for use outside Hong Kong SAR fell back in 2016:H1 as mainland Chinese residents repaid external debt, but has since recovered. Domestic lending for wholesale, retail and manufacturing contracted while mortgages and personal loan growth was relatively subdued until the summer. Measures of the credit cycle point to a still positive but narrower credit gap. And respondents to the HKMA Opinion Survey expect a further decline in loan demand. But the property market has rebounded. Residential house prices fell by more than 10 percent in the early part of the year following the first Fed rate hike and amid uncertainty about mainland China’s growth prospects. But prices have since recovered and were just 3.3 percent off the peak in September. Transactions also bounced back with the monthly average in August to October almost doubling compared to the first seven months of this year (Figure 3). The rebound followed growing market conviction, post Brexit, that the pace of U.S. rate tightening would be gradual. House price valuations still look over stretched—with staff models and user cost measures pointing to overvaluation of around 10–20 percent. To contain speculation, in November, the authorities sharply raised the ad valorem stamp duty for residential property transactions to a flat rate of 15 percent from a scale of 1.5–8.5 percent, affecting all nonresidents and residents owning more than one property (see Appendix IV). This took steam out of the market, with shares in property developers falling on the news. The cost of credit is compressed. Price indicators are liquid and competition among mortgage lenders has resulted in mortgage rates being lowered in 2016 and are currently about 2 percent. Liquidity Map: Quantity Indicators Tightening but Price Indicators Are Liquid Risk appetiteVHSIBalance sheet conditionsCredit spread proxyQuantity indicatorsReal credit growthM2 growth Price indicatorsEFBN 10-yr-2yr spread 3mth HK HIBOR (monetary policy stance)Real discount rate3mth HIBOR-EFBN 3mth spread (TED spread proxy)Prime rate-based mortgage interest rate20162012201320142015Most LiquidLess Liquid Page 14 Figure 2. A Turning Credit Cycle? Household and corporate debt are at high levels. Credit growth (including financial institutions) has fallen back, especially for foreign currency loans… …with weakening in most sectors outside property and construction ...the volume of loans and bonds outstanding whose domicile of risk is in Hong Kong SAR has flattened off. House prices have picked up again and completions have lagged through 2016… Equities recovered post Brexit and eased back after the U.S. elections. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. nnu nnu nnu nnu z + Bonds Loans Loans and Bonds Outstanding, Domicile of Risk in Hong Kong SAR (In percent of GDP) 1/ Bonds issued by entities incorporated in Hong Kong SAR with domicile of risk in Hong Kong SAR. 2/ Loans for use in Hong Kong SAR. Page 15 Figure 3. Property Market Outlook—Acceleration Poses a Challenge Transactions rebounded sharply from lows. Completions have picked up a little but are short of likely demand… …and vacancy rates remain tight. Few confirmor transactions (properties resold before the original sale is completed) after stamp duties were imposed. Demand has risen recently and been accompanied by higher LTVs on new loans. The scale of down payments has dropped back. Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; Haver Analytics; Transport and Housing Bureau, Government of Hong Kong SAR; HKMA; and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 Strict macroprudential measures have contained bank exposure to the property boom. Since 2009 limits on loan-to-value ratios, debt service-to-income ratios, higher risk weight floors on property loans, and interest rate buffer stress tests have helped contain exposures. Banks continue to maintain healthy liquidity profiles (the liquidity cover ratio rose to 158 percent in 2016:Q2) and high capital buffers with a CET1 ratio of 15.8 percent. In line with Basel III, The HKMA will raise the countercyclical capital buffer (CCYB) to 1.25 percent of total risk weighted assets from January 2017. The HKMA’s assessment is that indicators still point to a positive credit gap and a need to continue to raise the CCYB towards the Basel III maximum of 2.5 percent.