Closer integration with the economy of Mainland China has brought several benefits to Hong Kong SAR, but also leaves it vulnerable to inward spillovers. The real sector linkages, especially in tourism, have grown rapidly after the easing of entry visa restrictions on Mainland visitors. Financial linkages have also deepened in recent years with the increase in cross-border bank lending, securities issuance in Hong Kong SAR by Mainland entities, and the internationalization of the RMB. Vulnerabilities from the various channels appear manageable provided the ongoing adjustment to slower and more sustainable growth in the Mainland remains orderly. Page 19 Box 2. The Impact of Rising Interest Rates on Domestic Demand in Hong Kong SAR Since the Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS) was adopted in 1983, the Fed has had six rate hike cycles. Interest rates in Hong Kong SAR have risen in tandem with U.S. rates over these cycles. Comparing pre- and post-rate hike years, growth in Hong Kong SAR has slowed in three instances of these six Fed tightening episodes. Private domestic demand in Hong Kong SAR—particularly household consumption—has generally grown at a slower pace in the aftermath of U.S. rate hikes, but has remained resilient. A key difference this time is that private sector debt is much larger compared to past tightening phases, raising the possibility of a significant retrenchment in spending if interest rates increase more steeply than expected. Provided interest rates in Hong Kong SAR rise in line with the projected median path of the FOMC’s target forecast range for the Fed Funds rate, domestic demand will not be adversely affected. It is likely that the pace of interest rate increases will be gradual especially since the monetary base has expanded considerably since 2009. This will allow households and corporates to adjust spending patterns smoothly. If household income and corporate profitability grow at a steady pace in line with Staff’s baseline scenario for the economy, the increase in debt service burdens will be manageable. To quantify the potential impact of higher interest rates on private sector activity, Staff estimate private consumption and corporate investment functions for Hong Kong SAR. Aggregate consumption is modeled as a function of income (proxied by real payrolls), wealth (real property and stock price), and the debt service burden (ratio of mortgage payments relative to household income, as reported by the Centaline Agency in Hong Kong SAR). Two specifications are estimated – ordinary least squares (OLS) and an error-correction model (ECM)—over 1994:Q1 2015:Q2. Private investment is modeled as a function of lagged investment and cash flow, both scaled by capital stock; leverage ratio (debt / equity); and a variant of Tobin’s Q (sum of market capitalization and total debt, relative to total assets). The model is estimated using annual data from Worldscope, covering about 1000 firms in Hong Kong SAR’s manufacturing and service sectors over 1995–2014. The relationships estimated over the past two decades suggest that private consumption would be affected more severely than investment for a given interest rate shock. A shock of 300bps increase in mortage rates is considered. Households’ mortgage payment-to-income ratio would rise by about 16 percentage points, assuming that there is no income growth at all. The OLS and ECM model coefficients indicate that the elasticity of consumption with respect to debt service burden is around 0.5, suggesting that household consumption would decline by about 7-8 percent if mortgage rates rise by 300 bps. This estimate is potentially a lower bound since the effect on household consumption of a large increase in interest rates will most likely be nonlinear (reflecting an accelerating retrenchment in spending as interest rates rise) In the case of private investment, estimation results show that the direct effect of a 300 bps increase in interest rates is to reduce corporate investment by ½ to 1 percent (assuming that there is no change in other factors including expected future profitability, as captured by the Q ratio, and leverage). As of 2014, the median effective interest rate in the sample of 1000 firms studied was about 4½ percent and the median cash flow-to-capital stock ratio was 0.214. The 300 bps increase in interest rates would reduce the cash flow-to-capital stock to 0.179. In the presence of credit constraints that prevent smoothing of the shock to cash flows, investment declines as reported above. This modest impact based on the response of corporate investment to previous rate tightening cycles is likely to be a lower bound for the overall effect of higher interest rates. Additional indirect effects are likely to be expressed through lower expected profitability. ––––––––––––––– 1/ IMF working paper, forthcoming, by Joong Shik Kang. Page 20 Trade and tourism A sharper-than-anticipated slowdown in the Mainland would hit trade and wholesale warehousing in Hong Kong SAR, with large employment losses (13 percent of the labor force is occupied in these activities). Mainland visitors accounted for around 40 percent of overall retail sales in 2014, up from almost 25 percent in 2009. A downturn on the Mainland would therefore also hurt tourism and retail sales in Hong Kong SAR. This year, with growth in the Mainland slowing, tourist arrivals in Hong Kong SAR have already seen declines, as have re-exports to and from the Mainland. The contraction on both fronts has affected the aggregate amounts of tourist inflows and re-exports noticeably, reflecting the importance of the Mainland components for both categories. Financial channels Banking system claims on Mainland banks. Hong Kong SAR-based banks have gross claims on onshore Chinese banks amounting to HK$2.1 trillion (around 90 percent of GDP). These include surplus RMB funds parked at Chinese correspondent banks or the People’s Bank of China, trade settlement claims, and debt securities issued by the Chinese banks. Banking system claims on nonbank Mainland entities are now at HK$4.6 trillion (195 percent of GDP), nearly four times as large as in 2010 (Figure 3). So far, asset quality on these exposures has remained broadly in line with overall asset quality in the Hong Kong SAR banking system. However, the ultimate risk exposure remains unclear due to possible on-lending in some instances by immediate borrowers. If Mainland growth and financial stresses emerge in some key sectors such as export-oriented manufacturing or real estate, these risks could come to the fore. Local Hong Kong SAR banks—including Mainland subsidiaries of locally incorporated banks—account for close to sixty percent of these claims, with branches of foreign banks in Hong Kong SAR accounting for the rest. Since forty percent of the exposure is accounted for by foreign banks, the direct impact on the financial system in Hong Kong SAR may not be as large as the size of the headline claims suggests. However, depending on the severity of the downturn, the unfolding of events in the Mainland could lead to a sharp deterioration in asset quality in the Hong Kong SAR banking system, leading banks to slow their lending more broadly. Offshore U.S. dollar securities issuance by Chinese firms. In recent years, Chinese corporations have increasingly issued U.S. dollar bonds with relatively short maturities in Hong Kong SAR to take advantage of the low interest rates on offer. The outstanding amount of such bonds with the Mainland listed as the Total Arrivals Arrivals from China Hong Kong SAR: Tourist Arrivals (In percent, year-on-year growth of 3 months moving average) Total Re-exports Re-exports to Mainland China Re-exports from Mainland China Re-exports Growth (In percent, year-on-year change of 3 month moving average) Source: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and IMF staff estimates. Page 21 Figure 3. Exposures to the Mainland: Financial Channels Locally incorporated banks and their subsidiaries operating in the Mainland account for close to two-thirds of the loans. Corporations’ issuance of U.S. dollar securities in Hong Kong SAR with ultimate risk domiciled in Mainland China spans a wide range of sectors. …as may be the case with Mainland entities’ RMB bonds issued in Hong Kong SAR, although magnitudes are smaller. Hong Kong SAR banks’ claims on Mainland entities— particularly nonbanks—have grown rapidly in recent years. On the borrower side, Mainland SOEs and foreign companies operating in China account for 80 percent of the borrowing. One-half of these bonds (amounting to 35 percent of Hong Kong SAR GDP) mature in the next three years and may face rollover risks in a higher interest rate environment… Sources: Bloomberg; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; and IMF staff calculations. Banking Sector's non-Bank Exposures to China Banking Sector's Exposures to China-located banks Exposureto China (In billions of HKD) Overseas-Incorporated Authorized Institutions Hong Kong-Authorized Institutions Subsidiaries in China of HK Authorized Institutions Non-bank Exposure by Lenders (In percent as of 2015Q2)HKD 3,486 billions China State-Owned Entities China Private Entities Non-China Entities Non-bank Exposure by Borrower Type (In percent, as of 2015Q2)HKD 3,486 billions Health Care Utilities Energy and Materials Industrials Government Internet Media Technology Consumer Real Estate Financials USD Bond Exposure by Sector (In percent, as of October 2015)USD 191 billions 010203040506070201520162017201820192020>2021 Maturity Profile of Offshore USD Bond (In billions of USD, as of October 2015) 1/ All bonds issued by entities incorporated in Hong Kong SAR, Mainland China, and Cayman Islands with domicile of risk in Mainland China, excluding CDs. 15202530201520162017201820192020> 2021 Maturity Profile of Dim Sum Bond (In billions of USD, as of October 2015) 1/ All RMB bonds issued in Hong Kong SAR, excluding CDs. Page 22 ultimate domicile of risk reached US$191 billion (around 70 percent of GDP) as of October 2015. The investor base includes Hong Kong SAR banks, global bond funds, and private banking clients. The issuers, some with relatively weak credit profiles, span a range of sectors. B- or BB-rated property developers account for 26 percent of the total amount outstanding. However, the recent opening of cheap funding options via the onshore bond market appears to have lowered the financing risks of these borrowers. Offshore RMB market. The international appeal and use of RMB has grown rapidly since 2010. Measures introduced by the Hong Kong SAR authorities—setting up a RMB Real Time Gross Settlement System, streamlining liquidity facilities, facilitating a CNH Hibor fixing—have consolidated Hong Kong SAR’s position as the premier offshore RMB center during this time. As the Mainland capital account opens further, the volume of RMB transactions in Hong Kong SAR and prospects for revenues (including securities issuance fees, fx option premia, and interest income) from this business are expected to continue on an upward path. While RMB activity in other financial centers (Singapore, London) has picked up in the last 2–3 years, the spread of offshore liquidity pools will complement Hong Kong SAR’s first-mover advantages in this area by increasing the demand for wholesale RMB services. However, as seen in recent months, when markets worry about Mainland growth prospects and RMB depreciation pressures intensify, this temporarily slows the growth of the offshore RMB business in Hong Kong SAR. RMB deposits declined and the CNY/CNH spread widened significantly in the summer as the Mainland authorities tightened their monitoring of arbitrage flows (Figure 4). Staff analysis suggests that dim sum (offshore RMB-denominated) bond issuance is negatively affected when markets expect the CNH to depreciate (Box 3). Going forward, if RMB depreciation pressures re-emerge, this may hurt revenue streams for financial institutions. Pressures in the spot CNH market could also test the derivatives market (the U.S. dollar/CNH cross-currency swap has grown to become one of the most liquid fx options in Asia) and expose financial intermediaries to bunched redemption requests at particular thresholds for the exchange rate. Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect and Mainland–Hong Kong Mutual Recognition of Funds. New channels for two-way flows between the Mainland and Hong Kong SAR have been opened over the past year. The Connect scheme (launched in November 2014) permits individuals and institutions with brokerage accounts in either Shanghai or Hong Kong SAR to trade stocks in the other market, subject to daily and aggregate quotas, while the Mutual Recognition of Funds (inaugurated in July 2015, with the first batch of funds currently going through the approval process) permits mutual funds in either location to mobilize investments from the other jurisdiction, subject to regulatory approval and also within an overall quota. The closer integration of the stock markets facilitates greater trading volumes and enhances market liquidity, but also creates new channels for volatility and financial stress in one location to be transmitted to the other. Staff analysis shows that correlations between Hong Kong SAR stock indices and the Mainland indices have grown in recent months, with particular sectors (construction, financials) more sensitive to spillovers (Box 4). The schemes are in their early stages of rollout at this point but, going forward, should extended periods of high volatility occur, this may hurt real activity in Hong Kong SAR and affect financial intermediation services (including lower appetite for initial public offerings; outflows from mutual funds; losses and debt service difficulties by leveraged investors in the equity market). Page 23 Figure 4. Developments in the Offshore RMB Market Following the change to the CNY central parity fixing in August, the CNH/CNY spread widened dramatically initially. After a strong start to the year, dim sum securities issuance began dropping over the summer… With the shifts in exchange rate expectations, RMB deposits declined as a share of the Hong Kong SAR deposit base… Forward markets pointed to further CNH depreciation ahead while pricing in greater uncertainty about the future level. ...and the fall accelerated in August, most noticeably for issuances by Mainland banks. ...although the slowdown in trade settlement volumes may have contributed as well. Sources: Bloomberg; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; HKMA; and IMF staff calculations. Aug-13Dec-13Apr-14Aug-14Dec-14Apr-15Aug-15 Exchange Rate (In RMB per USD) CNHcloseCentralparityCNY openCNY closeBand 6.06.16.26.36.46.56.66.7SpotO/N1w2w1m2m3m6m9m1y Oct 9 3m ago 6m ago 1y ago Aug 10 CNH ForwardRates (versus the dollar) 1.02.03.04.05.06.07.0O/N1w2w1m2m3m6m9m1y Oct 9 3m ago 6m ago 1y ago Aug 10 CNH Implied Volatilities (In percent, at-the-money options) Bond CD Dim Sum Bonds: Gross Issuanceby Bond Type Non-fin corps Other financials Banks Int'l govt issuers CN Policy banks CN MOF Dim Sum Bonds: Gross Issuanceby Sector RMB demand & savings deposits RMB time deposits RMB deposits/total deposits (%, RHS) Renminbi Deposits in Hong Kong SAR Sep-15 Cross-Border Trade Settlement (In RMB bn) Cross-border trade settlement throughHong Kong SAR banking system Share of goods cross-border trade settlement in China's total trade in goods (percent,RHS) Page 24 Box 3. Determinants of Dim Sum Bond Issuance Since the first issuance in 2007, dim sum bonds have served as a key asset class for offshore renminbi and an alternative source of funding. Among factors that have determined dim sum bond issuance, exchange rate expectations are important but not the only driving influence. A diverse range of issuers has tapped the dim sum bond market. The Chinese government has issued dim sum bonds every year since 2009. Other issuers include financial institutions and corporates from China and elsewhere. In terms of sectoral breakdown, real estate accounts for about 23 percent. Although nonresident issuers are accounting for an increasing share over time, Chinese issuers continue to dominate the issuance. Possible factors that influence dim sum bond issuance include monetary conditions in China and global markets, expectations of exchange rate movements, interest rate differentials between onshore and offshore markets, effective funding cost if bond proceeds are swapped into dollars, excess demand for RMB assets offshore, and policy changes in China and other offshore RMB centers. Regression analysis shows that the net issuance of dim sum bonds has been driven mainly by expectations of the renminbi appreciation. However, in some sub-samples of bonds, other factors are important as well. In a separate regression for nonfinancial corporate bonds, the interest differential between onshore and offshore markets has a statistically significant association with net issuance, but the exchange rate expectation does not. The CNH-CNY basis spread, which reflects in part a measure of excess demand for RMB assets by offshore investors, decreased with net issuance. ––––––––––––––– 1/ IMF working paper, forthcoming, by Tak Yan Daniel Law. Chinese gov and policy banks Int'l govt issuers Financials Nonfin corporate CDs Net issuance Net Issuance of Dim Sum Bonds by Issuer Type Aug-15 Source: Bloomberg; and IMFstaff estimates. Bonds CDs % of CNH deposits (RHS) Dim Sum Bonds Outstanding (In billions of RMB)Aug-15 Sources: Bloomberg; and IMFstaff estimates. Page 25 Box 4. Financial Connectedness between Hong Kong SAR and Mainland: Evidence from Equity Markets Hong Kong SAR’s ties to Mainland China have increased significantly during the last decade or so, especially as the Mainland started liberalizing its financial markets and opening its capital account. Developments in Mainland equity markets inevitably have increasingly spilled over into Hong Kong SAR’s equity market. To understand how the interdependence of financial markets across the Mainland and Hong Kong SAR has evolved over time , this box applies the connectedness index (CI) proposed by Diebold and Yilmaz (2009, 2012). The CI allows one to quantify the contribution of shocks from the Mainland (and other markets) to Hong Kong SAR’s equity returns and volatilities at different points in time. The results suggest that financial interlinkages between the Mainland and Hong Kong equity markets are strong and growing over time . Given the size of China’s economy, it is not surprising that developments in China’s financial markets have become increasingly more important for Hong Kong SAR (as well as the rest of the global economy). First, average connectedness (which measures the gross spillovers from China to other economies) shows that China’s equity markets explain a larger share of Hong Kong SAR’s equity returns (and volatility) than other economies. Second, financial connectedness between China and Hong Kong SAR has increased sharply over the last decade or so, consistent with continuing trade integration and rapidly rising financial integration (evidenced by, inter alia, the volume of cross-border loans and equity listings). In terms of the CI, equity market spillovers from China to Hong Kong have risen sharply (both returns and volatilities). The return spillover has been on the rise (with a spike in late 2014, which may be due to increased market connectedness in November), while the volatility spillover reached a peak in 2011. China’s stock market spillover effects to Hong Kong SAR’s stock market appear to be broad based, affecting several key sectors. However, there is considerable sectoral heterogeneity, possibly reflecting differences in the real/operational linkages with Mainland China. Financials, properties and construction, consumer goods, and information technology have seen a sharper rise in their connectedness with the Mainland. –––––––––––––––– 1/ IMF working paper, forthcoming, by Roberto Guimarães and Gee Hee Hong. Financials Properties and Construction Consumer goods Information Technology Gross Spillover of Equity Returns: Mainland China to Hong Kong SAR (Index) Sources: HaverAnalytics; and IMF staff estimates Returns Volatilities Gross Equity Spillovers: Mainland China to Hong Kong SAR (Index) Sources: HaverAnalytics; and IMF staff estimates Page 26 Authorities’ views Credit risks. The authorities viewed the credit risks on Mainland exposures as manageable despite the concerns about Mainland growth prospects and the health of key sectors such as property, steel, and export-oriented manufacturing. They noted that the NPL ratio for Mainland subsidiaries of Hong Kong SAR banks has risen in recent months. But since Mainland exposures incurred by these subsidiaries account for less than 20 percent of the banking sector’s total, the impact on the overall asset quality of Mainland exposures is not significant. In fact, the NPL ratio of the banking sector’s total Mainland exposures has remained low and is only slightly above the overall NPL of the banking sector’s total credit exposures (0.49 percent as of end-June 2015). Furthermore, they noted that under close monitoring by the regulators, Hong Kong SAR banks and their Mainland subsidiaries have maintained high origination and underwriting standards: large Mainland SOEs and other nonprivate entities account for around half of the total borrowing, international corporations and Hong Kong SAR-based conglomerates with operations in the Mainland constitute a third of the borrowing, and the rest is accounted for by private entities backed by Mainland bank letters of credit or secured by collateral. Offshore RMB business. The authorities viewed the recent stall in activity as a temporary interlude while markets adjust exchange rate expectations. The decline in RMB deposits in Hong Kong SAR was attributed in part to an unwinding of the carry trade converting RMB deposits into Hong Kong dollar or U.S. dollar. The drop in dim sum bond issuance was also viewed as a cyclical phenomenon since onshore funding costs had fallen sharply, making it more attractive to raise funds on the Mainland instead. The authorities also observed that global risk appetite was a significant contributor to the CNH/CNY spread, especially during the summer months. However, they noted they did not see any systemic risks related to activity in the CNH derivatives markets, as speculation on one-way RMB appreciation had eased following some weakening of the currency in the first half of 2014, well ahead of the August 2015 changes to the CNY central parity fixing mechanism. The Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect scheme was also viewed as functioning in orderly fashion even during and after the Mainland equity markets correction during the summer. Looking ahead, the authorities expected that further opening of the Mainland capital account with the extension of the stock connect scheme to Shenzhen, the ‘One Belt, One Road’ initiative, expansion of inward RMB Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (R-QFII) and outward RMB Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor (R-QDII) schemes, and greater take up of RMB cash-pooling programs by firms to facilitate regional corporate treasury operations, would increase the volume of RMB flows through Hong Kong SAR and maintain the steadily expanding international use of the currency.