Casting fiscal policy in a medium-term framework as laid out in the 2014 Report on Long-Term Fiscal Planning is appropriate and warranted, considering the future needs of an aging population. However, since growth has been subpotential in recent years and inflation is moderating, there is merit in privileging the short-term stabilization needs of the economy should activity disappoint in the months ahead. Favorable debt dynamics provide latitude to flexibly implement the medium-term strategy (Appendix III). The fiscal stance for FY 2016/17 implied by this year’s budget strikes a balance between providing near-term support to the economy while maintaining fiscal reserve accumulation consistent with the long-term needs of an aging society (Figure 6). In the event that growth underperforms in the Q4 outturn and momentum heading into 2016 appears to be severely weakened (for example, in retail sales, tourism, retained imports, and credit growth for use in Hong Kong SAR), an additional expansionary bias in the 2016/17 fiscal stance would be appropriate, with an emphasis on expanded relief measures for vulnerable households (extra allowances for the elderly and physically challenged; lower thresholds for providing rental relief to families in public housing; additional property rates waivers); small businesses (tax relief, subsidized / concessionary access to funding through credit guarantee schemes); and accelerated urban renewal and development in Kowloon and the New Territories. Looking beyond near-term considerations, demographic change will place additional demands on public finances. The labor force is projected to decline from 2019, accompanied by the rise of total population and the elderly dependency ratio. With the aging population, GDP and government revenue may grow at a slower pace than expenditure and the fiscal balance would eventually weaken on a structural basis. Page 32 Figure 6. Fiscal Policy: Striking a Balance between Intergenerational Needs and Supporting the Economy in the Near Term The size of the public sector is relatively small in Hong Kong SAR. Fiscal surplus has been substantial, partly due to conservative predictions on fiscal performance. As a result, fiscal reserves have reached 35 percent of GDP. The accumulation will help meet the needs of an ageing population. Sources: CEIC, Financial Service and Treasury Bureau, Immigration Department, Census and Statistics Department; and IMF staff calculations The current pace of fiscal reserve accumulation is therefore broadly appropriate from an intergenerational perspective. The initiative to invest a portion of the fiscal reserves in higher-return assets via the proposed Future Fund will provide a useful mechanism to generate additional resources for an aging population. Once the Fund is operative, the investment strategy should be regularly monitored to ensure that the government’s liquidity needs are adequately safeguarded even as the portfolio allocation strives to achieve higher returns. Authorities’ views. The authorities noted that ever since the Global Financial Crisis the budget has incorporated relief measures for the vulnerable and small businesses, which they assess to have been effective in protecting jobs. They further noted that the fiscal reserves provided them policy headroom to respond based on the needs of the business cycle, as they had done so during the SARS epidemic and the Global Financial Crisis, and they would take steps as required to support the economy, while remaining mindful of looming fiscal challenges over the long run. G U K gd U H K G U K gd U H K RevenueExpenditure General Government Revenue and Expenditure, 2014 (In percent of GDP) Actual surplus/deficit Budgeted surplus/deficit Actual and Budgeted Consolidated Surplus/Deficit (In percent of GDP) Fiscal Reserves (In percent of GDP) Total population Age 15-64 Dependency ratio (RHS) Population (Index; 2015=100unless otherwise specified) Page 33