The banking sector remains under pressure, though its vulnerability to exchange rate risk has declined. Banks continue to face a contraction in their balance sheets and, while aggregate capital and liquidity positions are adequate, MNB’s stress tests suggest that in an unfavorable macroeconomic scenario nearly one-fifth of the banking system could need substantial capital injections. On the other hand, the FX mortgage conversion has significantly reduced private sector’s exposure to exchange rate risk, and––while resulting in a more rapid cross-border deleveraging––is likely to improve asset quality and reduce the banking sector’s reliance on FX swaps. Repairing financial intermediation is critical for sustained growth . With strained balance sheets, banks’ willingness to lend is projected to remain limited. Staff, therefore, called for improving the operating environment for banks, including through removing impediments for portfolio cleanup and reducing the tax burden. In this regard, staff welcomes the government’s recent commitment to gradually reduce the bank levy and to refrain from steps that could harm bank profitability. While the FGS has improved SME access to finance, there is still scope to modify the scheme to better support monetary transmission and enhance its impact on growth, possibly by linking the lending rate to the policy rate in a manner that adequately compensates banks for lending to riskier SMEs. Staff repeated its call to keep the FGS limited, targeted, and time bound. 2008Q12009Q12010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q1 RoE RoA (RHS) Banks' Profitability Source: MNB Page 13 Absent efforts to accelerate the cleanup of bank portfolios, NPLs are projected to remain elevated for a protracted period, undermining lending activity. Staff underscored the need for removing legal, tax, and regulatory impediments to help banks accelerate the cleanup of their portfolio and refocus on core business. In this regard, staff called for streamlining the liquidation process, including by increased out- of-court-framework use, provision of tax incentives for write offs, and introduction of a personal insolvency law. While the establishment of the MARK would help banks clean their portfolio in the absence of private sector demand for distressed commercial real estate loans, it is important to keep MARK’s operations fully independent and transparent to avoid a potential conflict with MNB’s price and stability objectives. In line with the recommendations of the recent MCM technical assistance mission, the MARK should be given an exclusive objective of maximizing the value of purchased assets while ensuring that the transfer of assets be done on a voluntary basis, based on a clear and consistent set of valuation criteria. This would help limit MNB’s exposure and a potential build up of contingent liabilities. The authorities’ recent measures are likely to improve private sector balance sheets and could help re-invigorate credit growth, but staff cautioned against an increasing role of the state in the banking system. The FX mortgage conversion and MARK initiative will reduce private sector vulnerabilities and help banks repair their balance sheets faster, thus supporting investment and growth. However, announcements in favor of banking system consolidation, together with state purchases of banks, have increased uncertainty regarding the future landscape of the banking system, notwithstanding the government’s stated intention to divest bank stakes within three years. Staff stressed that lending activity should be based on adequate risk- management practices, and recommended to limit the state’s role in the banking system, also arguing that, with limited fiscal space, there is no room to build up further contingent liabilities. A strong regulatory and supervisory framework is essential for safeguarding financial stability. The integration of the Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority into the MNB in 2013 equipped it with micro-prudential instruments and re-enforced its macro-prudential tool kit. Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework, including through the recent adoption of a new macro-prudential regulation (that introduces more stringent LTV and PTI ratios, especially for FX loans) to prevent excessive household indebtedness. The authorities were optimistic that recent policy measures will help stimulate credit. They argued that the Settlement and Fair Banking Acts will help boost households’ demand for credit, while the extension of the FGS will continue to support lending to SMEs. They acknowledged that the high level of NPLs continues to weigh on banks’ balance sheets and constrains new lending, but noted that they are working closely with the EBRD to identify ways to expedite NPL resolution. They also argued that the MARK is likely to induce more dynamic portfolio cleaning. The authorities 2010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q1 Households Corporate_commercial real estate Other corporate NPLs Ratio, Percent Source: MNB. Page 14 stressed that the consolidation in the banking sector is warranted to foster competition and improve efficiency through economies of scale. They view the government’s increased role in the banking system as a necessary, but transitory, vehicle, to facilitate the consolidation and restructuring of bank balance sheets.