Although banks are on average very liquid and well-capitalized, bank lending to the private sector remains subdued. Indeed, the willingness of banks to lend has tightened since the crisis. MNB officials noted that relatively high costs and legacy NPLs also impede banks’ willingness to lend. While these factors play a role, market observers and staff see the lack of new bank lending primarily driven by still insufficient demand from borrowers with credible projects. This could be a reflection of volatile external demand, relatively-low potential growth, a weak business climate, sudden regulatory changes, and uncertainty regarding the future landscape of the banking sector. Additional measures to promote lending should properly consider the risks and be time bound. Staff argued that the MNB should not share credit risk from banks’ lending and thus welcomed the expiration of FGS+, while recommending not to lower risk-weights for certain more risky lending. Instead, consideration should be given to further reduce the perils and costs of debt recovery by refining the insolvency legislation and its implementation. Staff supported efforts to resolve legacy NPLs, but emphasized the importance of keeping the operations of MARK fully transparent. The recently enacted Personal Insolvency Law is a good step toward resolving household NPLs, and it is encouraging that improvements to make the procedures less cumbersome are already under way. While welcoming the beginning of Page 18 operations of MARK, which would entail the transfer of assets on a voluntary basis and at market- related prices, staff urged the authorities to further strengthen MARK’s governance structure in line with IMF technical assistance recommendations. To this end, staff welcomed considerations to transition to private sector funding and also, when a track record has been established, to revisit the ownership structure. Improving financial intermediation should also entail lower state presence in the banking sector. The authorities noted that the recent expansion in state ownership of banks was necessitated by market failure as some foreign parent banks had decided to exit Hungary. They reiterated their commitment though to improve banks’ operating environment and to privatize the restructured MKB Bank and later Budapest Bank. Staff welcomed this commitment and stressed the importance of lifting uncertainty regarding the banking sector landscape, including by letting the number of credit institutions be market determined.