Monetary policy has been appropriately accommodative, but may have to ease further if downside risks to activity and inflation materialize. An uncertain external environment, oil price dynamics, highly-accommodative monetary conditions in the euro area, and the negative, albeit closing, output gap call for continued accommodation, as long as inflationary pressures remain subdued. Should inflation fail to pick up as projected and/or downside risks to activity threaten to materialize, monetary easing should be the primary line of defense, especially if fiscal policy is tightened as recommended by staff. On the other hand, should wage increases continue to outpace productivity gains, the output gap closes faster than expected in light of the ongoing fiscal easing, further monetary easing should be put on hold. Finally, if the downside risks materialize with large capital outflows, monetary tightening may be needed if the exchange rate overshoots and inflation threatens to durably rise above target. The use of unconventional monetary policy instruments has eased the monetary stance more than indicated by the base rate cuts. The MNB is of the view that the reduction of vulnerabilities has effectively eased the monetary policy stance. Staff noted that although many of these measures have indeed reduced risks, part of the risks have been shifted between balance sheets. For instance, while the FX risk of households has largely been eliminated, most of the refinancing is now at variable interest rates, making households sensitive to domestic interest rate hikes. Official reserves are now lower, even if still broadly adequate, while the self-financing program has increased bank-sovereign links. Moreover, part of the self-financing program for the government as well as part of the new initiative to promote bank lending mean that the MNB accepts interest rate risk by issuing interest rate swaps. While this may be sensible in circumstances where the private sector is very risk averse, it becomes less appropriate as activity and inflation begin to normalize. MNB officials hinted that, subject to inflation developments, it is more likely to ease using unconventional instruments than lowering of the base rate . They noted that the pausing Page 17 in the easing cycle in July 2015 was warranted on the basis of already accommodative monetary conditions, the absence of underlying deflationary pressures, and substantial uncertainty about the impact of the many recent unconventional measures. In their view, further easing could include additional unconventional measures, while keeping the policy rate at the current rate, given that the base rate deflated with inflation expectations is already negative. Subsequent to the mission, and in the backdrop of a downward revision in inflation projections and further easing by the ECB, MNB cut the policy rate by 15 basis points to 1.20 percent. Staff welcomed MNB’s commitment to maintain adequate reserves thus helping safeguard financial stability. Reserves are broadly adequate at 114 percent of the IMF’s reserve adequacy metric and above the standard rules- of-thumb. Although reserves would fall in 2016– 17, as MNB would provide FX liquidity to help banks close their open FX position that emerged from the loan conversion, they would remain within the Fund’s adequacy range, albeit close to the lower bound. The authorities noted that the envisaged decline will be accompanied by a reduction in short-term external debt, keeping reserves above the adequacy range in the medium term. There was agreement on the importance of maintaining adequate reserve coverage because of still elevated risks and volatile global conditions.