The economy has been growing at a robust pace. Driven by strong domestic demand, output expanded by just below 3 percent in 2015. Export growth was robust on the back of an improved external environment and new automobile production lines, while import growth slowed down due to lower commodity prices. As a result, the current account surplus continued to widen. Private consumption expanded significantly, benefitting from a boost to disposable income from higher employment and wages, lower energy prices, and lower household indebtedness. Investment decelerated as the previous EU funds programming period (2007–13) reached an end and manufacturing capacity upgrades in the automotive industry have been largely completed. Contribution of domestic demand Contribution of external demand Real GDP growth Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. (Percent) Page 10 Unemployment declined sharply, amid a continuous rise in labor participation. Solid employment growth—led by the private sector, but also continued expansion of public works— helped reduce the unemployment rate to 6.2 percent in 2015:Q4, below pre-crisis levels. The labor participation rate reached an average of 68½ percent in 2015 (up from 67 percent in 2014), but remains well-below the EU average. Unemployment Rate and the Sectoral Contribution to Employment Growth (Percent change (yoy)) Inflationary pressures have remained subdued. Headline inflation has hovered at zero due to declining oil and initially also low food prices. Core inflation has been increasing steadily reaching 1.4 percent y-o-y in February 2016. Average monthly gross earnings grew by 5¼ percent y-o-y in 2015:Q4, while asset (stock market and real estate) prices also picked up. Inflation expectations appear anchored around the lower end of the Central Bank’s (MNB) inflation band (2 percent). Contribution of the budgetary institutions Contribution of the business sector Unemployment rate (RHS) Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Debt Change (Percent of GDP) Better-than-budgeted fiscal performance last year helped reduce the public debt ratio. The overall deficit is estimated at 1.9 percent of GDP against the 2.4 percent target. Revenues over- performed helped by the strong economy, improvements in tax administration, and sizable one-off corporate income tax and excise revenues. The effect on the deficit was partially offset by higher expenditures on wages, co- financing of EU projects, and refugee-related outlays (Box 1). Gross public debt declined to 75.3 percent of GDP from 76.2 percent in 2014. The total positive impact from a primary surplus was mitigated by government asset purchases and delayed EU funds transfers. Meanwhile, the MNB’s self-financing program helped reduce the shares of FX-denominated public debt and of non- resident holdings. Nevertheless, net public debt has plateaued since 2013. Primary balance r-g stock-flow adjustment change in debt 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Sources: Hungarian authorities and Fund staff estimates The monetary stance has remained accommodative. Comforted by subdued inflationary pressures, and in line with staff advice (Annex I), the MNB resumed its easing cycle in March 2015, and cut the policy rate by 75 basis points in five equal steps to 1.35 percent in July. Moreover, several refinements of the traditional and unconventional monetary instruments have Inflation and Policy Rate (Percent change, year on year) CPI Core CPI Base rate 1/ ‐ Feb-07 Feb-08 Feb-09 Feb-10 Feb-11 Feb-12 Feb-13 Feb-14 Feb-15 Feb-16 Sources: Hungarian National Bank (MNB); Hungarian Central Statistical Office (HCSO); and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Base rate of the MNB. Page 11 aimed at strengthening the interest rate, credit, and expectations channels; reducing vulnerabilities; promoting lending to small-and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs); and ensuring cheap government financing. Total Bank Loans 1/ (Percent of GDP 2/) The recovery has so far been “credit less.” Bank lending to the private sector has continued to contract. Compensation paid by banks and the conversion of FX-denominated loans contributed, respectively, to a sharp decline in household indebtedness and their FX risk. Bank lending to non-financial companies continued to decline, although this decline is masked by: (i) a few large companies having switched financing to foreign sources; and (ii) the Funding for Growth Scheme (FGS), which was successful in increasing lending to SMEs. While many of these operations have reduced vulnerabilities, they have also shifted risks, including to the MNB. Sources: Hungarian National Bank (MNB); and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Covers credit institutions supervised by the MNB. Includes FGS-funded loans. 2/ Rolling annual GDP based on previous four quarters. Total HUF loans Total FX loans FX loans (Percent of total loans) 2006Q4 2012Q4 2008Q4 2010Q4 2014Q4 Banking sector soundness indicators have been improving, although lending remains subdued The loan-to-deposit ratio has declined sharply and permitted a further reduction of foreign funding. On average, liquidity is ample and the capital adequacy ratio is comfortable. After large losses in 2014, profitability is recovering. The NPL ratios have declined, although some of the improvement for household loans is temporary. Loans issued after the crisis typically have lower NPL ratios but initiatives to reduce the legacy NPL stock are also helping, including the new Personal Bankruptcy Law and the asset management company for commercial real estate (MARK) (Annex II). Macro-prudential measures for new loans were tightened effective January 2015, but have not yet been binding. Finally, state ownership in the banking system has increased with the acquisition of Budapest Bank, but the purchase of a stake in Erste’s Hungarian subsidiary has been delayed. External vulnerabilities have declined substantially, but external stability concerns remain. Large and persistent current account surpluses, and cross-border deleveraging have contributed to a substantial decline in gross external debt and an improvement in the international investment position (IIP). The FX-loan conversion along with MNB’s self-financing program have further reduced external vulnerabilities: e.g., the share of FX-denominated public debt dropped from 52 percent in 2011 to 35 percent in 2015. Markets responded by pushing five-year credit default swap (CDS) rates and bond yields lower. However, gross external financing needs of 20 percent of GDP, a still-sizable reliance on non-resident funding of domestic public debt (26 percent), and a highly negative IIP (-79 percent) continue to raise concerns, especially at the current juncture of elevated levels of risk aversion. See http://www.mnb.hu/en/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-instruments. Page 12 The real exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals, but non-price indicators suggest that Hungary faces competitiveness challenges. The EBA methodology yields mixed results with a negative current account norm (Box 2). However, to further improve Hungary’s external position and its IIP, there is a need to maintain current account surpluses over the medium term. While price indicators do not point to competitiveness problems, Hungary’s export market share had stagnated until recently compared to its peers; and low FDI weighs on future export performance. Finally, Hungary’s ranking in the global competitiveness index has slipped, with the business and regulatory environment providing a drag. Share in EU's Exports (2008Q1=100) Czech Republic Poland Slovak Republic Sources: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics and Fund staff calculation.