While welcoming the authorities’ commitment to fiscal consolidation, staff noted that their current strategy falls short of reducing public debt significantly over the medium term. The 2015 budget implies a broadly neutral fiscal stance. S taff projects the 2015 deficit at 2.7 percent of GDP—vis-à-vis a budget target of 2.4 percent—in light of sizeable unidentified Page 9 revenue sources and less optimistic assumptions on expenditure restraint and gains from tax administration improvements. This would imply only a moderate decline in public debt. The expenditure-to-GDP ratio is expected to remain high, while large allocations to discretionary programs compromise the quality of spending and inefficiencies are significant, particularly in the health sector (Box 3). Moreover, the budget continues to rely on (and includes new) sectoral taxes. Staff projects the public debt ratio to come down only modestly over the medium term. In staff’s view, the authorities’ medium-term fiscal target (1.7 percent of GDP structural deficit) is not ambitious and not backed by well-specified policies. For example, although the intention to downsize the public sector is welcome, more concrete steps are needed to rein in spending and add credence to such objectives. The authorities saw limited scope to reduce distortionary sectoral taxes beyond the announced reduction in the bank levy over 2016–19. Based on staff’s baseline macro scenario and current policies, the deficit would hover at around 2½ percent of GDP and public debt, at around 72 percent, would remain a significant vulnerability (Appendix II). Staff advocated a growth-friendly fiscal consolidation strategy aimed at reducing debt. To this end, staff recommended a moderate annual structural fiscal tightening by about ½ percent of potential GDP starting in 2015 consistent with a reduction in public debt to below 60 percent of GDP by 2022. The adjustment should be anchored in a medium-term budget framework that would incorporate reforms aimed at enhancing the economy’s human and physical capital, while also providing necessary fiscal space and being mindful of equity considerations. With expenditure close to 50 percent of GDP, priority should be given to a sustainable expenditure retrenchment and enhanced composition of spending, which would also create room to gradually rationalize the tax system. Staff thus recommended a menu of options for measures that could be adopted over 2015–20 (text table), including: Steps to enhance the efficiency and progressivity of the tax system, including by reducing exemptions and gradually eliminating distortionary sectoral taxes that undermine the simplicity and predictability of tax policies, and reduce profitability with adverse consequences for private investment and growth. In particular, streamlining of financial taxation should contribute to the much-needed restoration of financial intermediation and a recovery in credit growth. Special taxes are imposed on financial institutions, energy service providers, telecommunications, and retail and advertizing companies; pertinent revenues are projected at 1.9 percent of GDP in 2015, with the majority (1.2 percent) accounted for by taxes on financial institutions. Baseline Proposed Adjustment Fiscal Stance of the General Government(In percent of GDP) Public debt (RHS)Structural overall deficit Overallbalance Page 10 Tackling compliance issues, such as VAT fraud, through a comprehensive approach, that focuses on preventing fraud by identifying fraudulent companies at the registration stage and enhancing detection by further mobilizing the AML/CFT framework A more efficient social welfare system based on targeted, conditional transfers linked to revamped active labor market policies that focus on individualized skills-training and job-search assistance. A scaling down of costly and inefficient programs, such as the public works program, along with the envisaged reduction in public sector employment to streamline responsibilities, and improved spending efficiency in education and health (see accompanying SIP). Fiscal Impact of Potential Measure (2015–2020) (in percent of GDP) The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to fiscal consolidation. While they agreed in principle with some of the fundamental weaknesses of the 2015 budget—for example, the unidentified revenue sources—they underscored their strong commitment to adhering to their national and European fiscal targets. They also saw scope to improve the efficiency of public investment and spending on health and education, and argued that the impact of recent and on- going reforms is yet to yield results. Over the medium term, they project a substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit largely on the basis of past adjustments to the social transfer system and discretionary spending freezes, supported by a stronger macroeconomic outlook than staff’s. Should fiscal space materialize, they would reduce the corporate income tax, and cut the flat income tax to lower the still-high tax wedge. Differences in views centered on the efficiency and desirability of select fiscal policy instruments. The authorities strongly defended the public works program—which they plan to Fiscal impact of potential measures (2015-2020)(in percent of GDP) Total 4.2Reduction in public sector employment 0.6Rationalization of spending on non-EU-related goods and services 1.5Scaled-down public works program and improved ALMPs and targeted transfers0.3Reduction of public transport tariff subsidies by 50 percent0.2Reduction of operational subsidies to transport enterprises by 50 percent0.4Streamlining of VAT rates from 3 to 20.2Elimination of selected CIT exemptions (sports, entertainment)0.3Elimination of excise exemptions for diesel fuel and tobacco0.4Reduction of VAT fraud Total adjustment exceeds recommended net adjustment due to the need to eliminate distortions in the tax system. Reduce employment (rather than wages) through consolidation of institutions and responsibilities, attrition; and rationalization of local government employment.Sources: IMF staff estimates, based on data provided by the authorities, and FAD and LEG TA reports. Assumes implementation of measures, which focus on preventing fraud by identifying fraudulent companies at the registration stage and enhancing detection by further mobilizing the AML/CFT framework. Savings largely associated with the proposed public sector consolidation and limiting discretionary spending of the central government. Page 11 expand and include all able-bodied welfare recipients—notwithstanding the recovery of private employment and the scheme’s uncertain benefits with regard to helping participants re-enter the primary job market. They also disagreed with the desirability to re-introduce some element of progressivity in the tax system (to counter rising inequality and create fiscal space), and the need to improve the targeting of the Job Protection Act.