Economic activity is expected to decelerate in 2016 . Private consumption will remain robust on the heels of higher disposable income and employment, but the projected slowdown in EU fund absorption will weigh on growth. Over the medium term, output growth is set to stabilize at around 2 percent. Favorable terms-of-trade will underpin a further improvement in the current account, which will remain in surplus over the medium term, albeit declining due to a slowdown in deleveraging and an aging population, thus contributing to a sharp IIP decline. Headline inflation will remain low in 2016 on account of low import prices and a still negative—albeit closing—output gap, and reach the 3 percent target in late-2018 as the output gap closes and energy prices recover (Box 3). Hungary: Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 2013-21 (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Proj. Real GDP Growth (percent) Inflation (period average, percent) General government overall balance General government gross debt Current account Reserves (billions of Euros) Gross external debt 1/ Sources: Hungarian authorities, and Fund staff projections. 1/ Excluding special purpose entities. Including inter-company loans, and nonresident holdings of forint-denominated assets. Est. Page 13 The balance of risks—highlighted in the Risk Assessment Matrix—is tilted to the downside. A sharp deterioration in global or emerging market risk perceptions could lead to capital outflows with adverse effects on government financing and private balance sheets. Further, weak external demand, notably from the euro area but also indirectly from China and other emerging markets, would weigh on exports. An escalation of the refugee crisis in Europe could impact trade and economic activity. On the domestic front, policy uncertainty and continued expansion of the state’s role in the economy could adversely affect confidence and investment prospects. Upside risks are associated with persistently lower energy prices, which would reduce production costs and boost purchasing power, while initiatives to boost housing construction and stimulate credit could increase near-term growth. While broadly agreeing on the near-term outlook, the authorities were more optimistic about Hungary’s medium-term growth prospects and the balance of risks. They shared staff’s assessment that GDP growth would decelerate this year but were more sanguine about growth prospects over the medium-term citing the continued improvement in fundamentals, which helped Hungary regain market trust, as evidenced by the historically low sovereign CDS spreads. Nevertheless, they concurred that despite recent improvement, vulnerabilities—particularly ones stemming from the elevated public debt level and associated large financing needs—remain high. The authorities viewed the risks to the outlook broadly balanced arguing that the sharp reduction in external vulnerabilities had reduced the likelihood of capital outflows as evidenced by the very limited impact of the recent bouts of global market volatility on Hungarian assets. Finally, they agreed that lower import prices could boost consumption and investment more than expected, and that deterioration in the external environment represented a downside risk to exports.