Staff expects growth to decelerate to 2¾ percent in 2015, on account of a smaller domestic-demand impetus due to less supportive fiscal stance and lower investment growth—given the projected decline in EU funds. Private consumption is expected to continue to grow, reflecting lower household indebtedness, accommodative monetary conditions, and higher employment. Over the medium term, output growth is set to stabilize at around 2 percent. Domestic demand is expected to recover only modestly, due to the ongoing deleveraging and tight credit conditions as time will be necessary for banks to strengthen their balance sheets. Improved terms-of-trade, thanks notably to lower oil prices, are forecast to lead to a higher current account surplus in the short run— which, coupled with continued cross-border bank deleveraging would further improve the IIP. Over the medium term, the current account surplus is expected to gradually decline, owing to a 1051101151201251302008Q12009Q22010Q32011Q42013Q12014Q2 Hungary Slovak Rep Czech Rep Share in EU's Exports (2008q1=100)Source: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics. 2014Q3 Page 8 slowdown in deleveraging and aging population dynamics. Headline inflation is projected to remain very low in the coming months on account of a still negative, albeit closing, output gap and lower import prices. Provided monetary policy anchors inflation expectations, inflation will gradually return to target. While there are upside risks to the baseline, the balance of risks—highlighted in the Risk Assessment Matrix—is somewhat tilted to the downside. An abrupt change in risk perception, e.g., from re-emergence of sovereign stress in Europe, further escalation of geopolitical tensions in the region, or financial stress in emerging markets, could lead to capital outflows with adverse effects on government financing and private balance sheets. A protracted period of weak external demand, notably from the euro area, would also weigh on exports. On the domestic front, continued state interference in the economy could have adverse confidence effects, further eroding competitiveness, and foster sharper cross-border deleveraging. On the upside, the Settlement Act and sustained lower oil prices could provide a higher-than-expected boost to purchasing power and investment, while the government’s commitment to improve the operating environment of banks could support a fast repair of financial intermediation and higher credit growth. The authorities broadly agreed on the near-term outlook and the balance of risks, but were more optimistic about Hungary’s medium-term growth prospects. They shared staff’s view that GDP growth would decelerate somewhat this year but were more upbeat about Hungary’s medium-term growth potential arguing that the economy’s sustained improvement in fundamentals has contributed to increased confidence—as evidenced by the historically low sovereign CDS spreads. Regarding the balance of risks, they agreed that recent banking legislation and lower import prices could boost consumption and investment more than expected, but concurred that deterioration in the external environment represented a key downside risk. Nevertheless, they argued that the risk of capital outflows is low given the increased share of institutional investors and the continued shift to domestic financing of the government, while the vulnerability of balance sheets to exchange rate risk declined significantly following the conversion of FX mortgages.