Hungary achieved a welcome reduction in vulnerabilities, but the economy remains susceptible to shocks. Since the 2008 global financial crisis, the country underwent sizeable fiscal consolidation, the current account turned into surplus, external debt declined, and inflation decelerated sharply. These improvements in fundamentals helped Hungary weather recent financial market volatility well and maintain market access. However, external and public debt levels are still among the highest in the region resulting in large financing needs and heavy reliance on nonresident funding. A shift in market sentiment could thus destabilize the economy, particularly given the high balance sheet exposure of the private and public sectors to exchange rate risk. Therefore, reducing the still-high vulnerabilities should be the focus of policies going forward. Growth performance continues to lag behind that of some regional peers that are also participants in the German-Central European supply chain. Hungary has endured a prolonged period of stagnation largely attributed to significant deleveraging, fiscal consolidation (to a lesser extent), and the government’s interventionist policies (Box 1). These have included frequent and unpredictable policy changes and placing the brunt of the adjustment on particular sectors, e.g., banking, energy, retail, and telecom, all of which appear to have weakened market confidence and undermined the business climate and private investment. As a result, growth performance remains weak and real GDP now stands at about 5 percent below its pre-crisis level. Moreover, Hungary faces subdued growth prospects. This calls for a strategy to comprehensively address obstacles to stronger growth. The ruling party’s convincing win in the April 2014 elections suggests no major change in the thrust of economic policies . Fidesz retained its two-third majority in parliament and full control over the legislative process. The party’s economic policy platform features a continuation of efforts to increase disposable income (including by adopting a debt relief scheme for FX mortgage holders), reducing utility prices, and maintaining the sizable public work programs. Fidesz has also vowed to ease the tax burden on labor, to boost the industrialization of the economy by signing strategic agreements with large multinational manufacturers, to increase domestic ownership in the banking sector, and to create a non-profit utility sector. 8590951001051101151202008 -Q12009 -Q12010 -Q12011 -Q12012 -Q12013 -Q1 Real GDP. Hungary and Peers (2008q1=100)Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. HUNCZESVK POL Page 6 Box 1. Response to Past Fund Policy Advice The authorities have actively engaged in a policy dialogue with the Fund, but policies deviated from previous IMF advice in a number of areas. Key recommendations Implemented policies Implement a more balanced and growth- Fiscal restraint continued and the 2013 fiscal deficit friendly fiscal adjustment to durably reduce over-performed the target, but the composition of the public debt-to-GDP ratio. the budget remained largely unchanged as additional ad-hoc revenue measures were taken. The public debt ratio declined only slightly. Improve the operating environment for banks—including by reducing the tax burden The Funding for Growth Scheme has improved credit conditions for small and medium enterprises and putting in place conditions to facilitate a (SMEs). However, the tax burden on banks has cleanup of balance sheets—to help repair increased further following the hike of the bank financial intermediation. transaction tax rate in June 2013. Pursue a broader structural reform agenda, Some tax incentives were introduced to boost labor including by promoting competition in the demand and supply, including the Job Protection product markets, and restructuring loss- Plan and an extension of the family tax allowance. making state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Implementation of structural reforms in other areas largely stalled.