The economy is growing at a strong pace, helped by accommodative policies and improved market sentiment. Driven by strong domestic demand, output expanded by 3½ percent in 2014. This reflects expansionary macroeconomic policies, higher investment on the back of increased utilization of EU funds, and a boost to consumption from utility price cuts. The contribution of net exports was largely driven by the rapid growth of imports. Nevertheless, improving terms of trade and strong export volume growth helped maintain a strong current account surplus. Contribution of external demand Contribution of the domestic demand Real GDP growth Real GDP Growth and Contribution to Growth (Percent) Sources: Haver and IMF staff's calculations. Czech Rep. Slovakia Real GDP: Hungary and Peers (2008q1=100) Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. Real GDP: Hungary and Peers (2008q1=100) Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. Page 6 Inflation continued its precipitous fall. In the face of a negative output gap, administered price cuts, and a drop in import prices, headline and core inflation decelerated sharply, to -1 and 1 percent, respectively, in February. Inflation expectations continued to drop to 2.2 percent, below the National Bank of Hungary’s (MNB) 3 percent inflation target. Unemployment declined sharply, but appreciable slack remains. The unemployment rate stood at 7.2 percent in 2014:Q4, reflecting the expansion of public works programs and job creation in the private sector. Nominal wage growth in the private sector moderated to about 3½ percent in 2014:Q4. Moreover, the labor participation rate increased by 2 percentage points, but, at 67 percent, it remains significantly below the EU average. The 2014 fiscal deficit came in below target and the public debt ratio is estimated to have declined moderately. Preliminary estimates suggest that the deficit reached 2.6 percent of GDP against the 2.9 percent target, as revenues were propelled by accelerating economic activity and tax administration improvements. However, this performance masks a strong pro-cyclical increase in spending, especially on wages, and goods and services, and the fiscal impulse is estimated at 1⅓ percent of GDP. The public debt-to-GDP ratio declined moderately to just below 77 percent. Monetary conditions remain accommodative. In the absence of inflationary pressures, and in the face of a negative output gap and improved risk premia, MNB kept its policy rate at a record low 2.1 percent since July 2014 and signaled its intent to maintain an accommodative monetary stance for an extended period. Meanwhile, forward rate agreements are pricing a 30 bps policy rate cut in the next 12 months. In October 2014, MNB also decided to double the allocation for the second phase of the Funding for Growth Scheme (FGS) to the equivalent of 3¼ percent of GDP and extended the program to end-2015. Pressure on banks continues and state intervention in the banking sector is increasing. Private sector credit keeps contracting and the loan- to-deposit ratio has dropped to 95 percent. A heavy tax burden, significant loan-loss provisioning, and the Settlement Act have kept the banking sector in the red. Moreover, the Fair Banking Act—although increasing the transparency of pricing—will weigh on future bank profitability. Against a non-performing loan (NPL) ratio of 16 percent and sluggish portfolio cleaning, MNB set up an Asset Management Company (MARK) that will buy up to the equivalent of 1.3 percent of GDP in distressed commercial real estate loans from banks. At the same time, the state is gradually increasing its role in the banking 2008Q12009Q12010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q1 Loan-to-deposit ratio (LHS) Credit growth (exchange rate adjusted) Credit Growth and Loan-to-Deposit Ratio Sources: MNB. Contribution of the budgetary institutions Contribution of the business sector Unemployment rate (RHS) Unemployment Rate and the Sectoral Contribution to Employment Growth (y-o-y) Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff's calculations. Page 7 system. Following the acquisition of MKB in 2014, it is about to finalize the purchase of Budapest Bank, and has announced the acquisition of a 15 percent stake in Erste’s subsidiary. Despite a reduction in vulnerabilities, external stability concerns remain. Large and persistent current account surpluses, reflecting in part elevated savings to accelerate deleveraging, together with sharp cross-border deleveraging have contributed to a significant decline in external debt to 116 percent of GDP in 2014. However, gross external financing needs of 21 percent of GDP in 2015, about 30 percent of GDP open FX position on private balance sheets, an international investment position of -76 percent of GDP, and heavy reliance on non-resident funding of public debt, raise external stability concerns. Going forward, the decision in November 2014 to convert the FX mortgage stock (25 percent of household loans, almost all denominated in Swiss francs) to local currency loans will result in a reduction in bank foreign liabilities and lower (but still adequate) official reserves (Appendix I). The real exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals, but non-price indicators suggest that Hungary faces competitiveness challenges. While the EBA methodology yields mixed results with a negative current account norm, the need to improve Hungary’s external balance sheet over time suggests the need for a stronger current account (Box 2). Other price indicators such as unit labor costs do not point to competitiveness problems. However, Hungary’s export market share has stagnated compared to its peers; the share of products in the top-quality quartile is low; while skill mismatches and a deteriorating foreign investment environment also weigh on export performance. Finally, Hungary’s ranking in the global competitiveness index has slipped, with the institutional framework, transparency of government policy making, and the business and regulatory environment reducing the country’s attractiveness for FDI.