Staff’s projections suggest that headline inflation will likely remain below target for an extended period . Inflation is projected to moderately pick up later in the year as the effect of last year’s administered price cuts wanes and the effect of oil price declines peters out. However, the still negative output gap would exert downward pressure on consumer prices, keeping inflation below target throughout 2016. Furthermore, the weakness in the external environment and the dynamics of oil prices pose downside risks to inflation, particularly if they continue to feed into inflation expectations. Further cautious monetary easing would help guard against persistent disinflationary pressures. Staff recognized that, with the policy rate at a record-low level and increased utilization of the FGS, monetary policy has been supportive, though, with inflation falling of late, the real policy rate has increased. In light of persistent disinflationary pressures, staff saw scope for further easing, particularly given the improved resilience of household balance sheets to exchange rate risk, and potential pressure for capital inflows from easing monetary conditions in the euro area. The recommended fiscal policy stance would provide further scope for monetary easing. Nevertheless, a sharp deterioration in risk perception and capital outflows (perhaps triggered by a sudden jump of the term premium on U.S. long-term interest rates) would require monetary tightening to preserve financial stability. Effective communication about the future trajectory of the policy rate would be critical to avoid adverse market reactions (see accompanying SIP). Reserves are projected to decline but remain within the Fund’s adequacy range. At about €34½ billion, Hungary’s level of reserves is estimated at slightly below the upper limit of the Fund’s adequacy range. Going forward, reserves are projected to fall gradually by 2017 as MNB would provide FX liquidity to help banks close the on- balance sheet open FX position that emerged from the conversion of FX mortgages and the Settlement Act. The envisaged decline in reserves will be accompanied with a reduction in short-term external debt, keeping reserves comfortably within the adequacy range. Nevertheless, on account of Policy rate Headline inflation Inflation expectations Policy rate in real terms* Policy Rate, Headline Inflation, and Inflation Expectations *Policy rate deflated by core inflation. Source: MNB , and IMF staff's calculations. Inflation target = 3 percent 50 100 150 200 Suggestedadequacy range Hungary: Reserve against risk weighted metric(Reserves as a percentage of metric, 2011-2020) Page 12 still elevated financial risks, staff underscored the importance of maintaining adequate reserves for safeguarding financial stability. The authorities stressed their intent to maintain accommodative monetary conditions for an extended period. Central bank officials acknowledged that inflation dynamics in recent months were weaker-than-expected, reflecting low imported inflation. They observed that the recent steps by the ECB and the FX mortgage conversion provided greater room for maneuver, and noted that further monetary easing would be considered if disinflationary pressures persist. In this regard, they added that the recent changes in the modalities of the FGS, in which the MNB assumes part of the credit risk are likely to increase its utilization. Finally, the authorities reiterated their commitment to maintain sufficient reserves as a buffer against shocks.