Fiscal policy is turning expansionary. Staff projects the 2016 headline deficit to meet the government’s target of 2 percent. The budget relies on sizeable one-off revenues from land sales Page 14 and also includes various tax reduction measures: a 1 percentage point reduction in the personal income tax (PIT) rate, a cut in the VAT rate on pork products and on new housing construction, higher tax allowances for families with two children, and a welcome reduction in the bank levy. Moreover, a new open-ended housing support scheme, and public works and career model programs will increase expenditure. On the other hand, significant savings will materialize in the interest bill. All in all, the envisaged fiscal stance implies a structural relaxation of about 1 percentage point of GDP. (Percent of GDP) Fiscal Stance of the General Government The authorities’ medium-term fiscal plans face a number of risks and would leave public debt elevated. The government targets a reduction in the deficit to 1.5 percent of GDP by 2019, underpinned by savings from the social benefits reform, containment of health and education costs, and discretionary spending freezes. However, besides the intention to further reduce the bank levy and reform public administration, specific fiscal reforms are yet to be elaborated. Moreover, the fiscal cost of the housing support scheme is subject to large uncertainty and constitutes a significant risk for the budget; and health and education spending have a long history of under-budgeting. Additionally, the state’s ambitious investment and asset acquisition plans would have to be balanced against rising pressures for further tax cuts. In staff’s baseline scenario, the structural deficit would hover at around 2 percent of GDP over the medium term. The public debt ratio would decline to just below 70 percent and be exposed to considerable risks, particularly from lower GDP growth, higher interest rates, and growing contingent liabilities (Annex V). 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Sources: Hungarian authorities and Fund staff estimates Structural overall deficit Proposed Adjustment Public debt (RHS) Overall balance Baseline Decisive fiscal action—encompassing moderate expenditure-based adjustment and a rebalancing of the budget—is needed to put public debt on a firmly downward path, help reduce fiscal risks, and provide more space for increased private-sector activity. Staff recommended a moderate average annual structural fiscal tightening of about ⅓ percent of GDP during 2016–21 complemented with growth-enhancing reforms consistent with gradually reducing public debt to below 60 percent of GDP by 2022. With the tax burden above the EU average and A grant of HUF10 million (about €32,000) is provided to families with (or committing to have) 3 or more children towards a new house purchase. An interest rate subsidy is also provided for a HUF10 million mortgage. In 2015, the stock of public guarantees increased by 1.7 percentage points of GDP to 9.5 percent of GDP. The stock could increase further, if additional state acquisitions materialize. The magnitude of the proposed adjustment is below the median sustained fiscal effort of historical fiscal consolidations; see: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fm/2013/01/fmindex.htm. Page 15 public spending of 50 percent of GDP, consolidation efforts should be focused on streamlining public expenditure while rationalizing the tax system in a growth-friendly manner. Specifically:  Staff welcomed the reduction in the bank levy, along with the commitment for further reductions, and ongoing efforts to improve tax administration. However, the continued shifting of items to the lower VAT rate complicates administration and introduces new distortions in a system that remains burdened by sectoral taxes. Staff thus recommended broadening the tax base by reducing exemptions and preferential regimes; and further cutting remaining sectoral taxes.  There is a need for lowering the tax wedge, which is among the highest in the region particularly for low-income earners. While the PIT rate cut this year aims at addressing this issue, more targeted instruments, such as progressive in-work tax credits could be more cost effective with a potentially higher impact on employment.  Staff reiterated its long-standing recommendations to eliminate generalized subsidies, improve the efficiency of SOEs, increase the efficiency of public spending in health and education, and rationalize the relatively-high and increasing wage bill. The authorities’ intention to downsize public administration is welcome but needs to be complemented by a public expenditure review clearly identifying government priorities regarding the provision of public services. Fiscal impact of potential measures, 2016-2021 average per year (in percent of GDP) Total Revenue Phasing out of sectoral taxes Streamlining VAT rates Elimination of excise duty refunds for fuel Expenditure Reduction in wage bill 1/ Rationalization of spending on non-EU-related goods and services 2/ Rationalisation of transport and fuel subcidies Sources: IMF staff estimates, based on data provided by the authorities. Reduce employment (rather than wages) through consolidation of institutions and responsibilities, attrition; and rationalization of local government employment. Savings largely associated with the proposed public sector consolidation and limiting discretionary spending of the central government.  Finally, staff recommended close monitoring of the housing support program to ensure it is appropriately targeted, time-bound, and eliminates loopholes for abuse. The authorities should stand ready to modify the eligibility criteria and the program’s parameters, if necessary. The authorities emphasized their strong commitment to reduce public debt and adhere to the national and European fiscal rules. They highlighted Hungary’s significant progress, compared with other EU countries, in reducing debt. While agreeing that the current high debt level Page 16 remains a source of vulnerability, they underscored the need for fiscal policy to strike the right balance between debt reduction and supporting growth. They reiterated their commitment to a gradual reduction in debt, in line with European fiscal rules, and added that remaining fiscal space should be mainly devoted to addressing infrastructure needs. There was agreement on the need for a growth-friendly rebalancing of the budget but differences in views arose on the most appropriate policy instruments. The authorities reiterated their preference to further reduce the PIT, if fiscal space allows. They highlighted the positive outcomes of the social security cuts on employment of vulnerable groups. Given limited fiscal space, they did not plan to reduce sectoral taxes (other than the bank levy) or streamline the multiple VAT rates in the near-term. They noted that the lower VAT rates for some items are considered a policy tool to support vulnerable groups who disproportionately consume such products, and could significantly improve tax compliance.