Under the baseline scenario, with the economic recovery gathering momentum, inflationary pressures are set to build up, but only gradually. At the current level of the policy rate, staff projects headline inflation to revert towards the MNB’s inflation target of 3 percent as the output gap narrows and one-off effects on prices wane. The pace of inflation acceleration, however, is likely to remain moderate because weak labor market conditions and the recent moderation of inflation expectations would help keep private sector wage growth contained, while the deceleration of import prices is projected to offset the impact of recent exchange rate depreciation. At the same time, there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the external environment . Hungary’s interest rate differentials have reached a record low, and further compression—also due to normalization of monetary policies in advanced economies—may reduce the attractiveness of Hungarian securities. This, together with possible re-pricing of emerging market risk in the wake of a slowdown in some large emerging markets and geopolitical tensions in the region, could potentially lead to a disorderly movement of capital flows. The recent steepening of the yield curve may point to increased uncertainty regarding the inflation outlook, and forward rate agreements are pricing a policy rate hike of 40 basis points by end-2014. With these considerations in mind, staff recommended keeping the policy rate on hold and adopting a monetary policy tightening bias. The proposed monetary policy stance strikes a balance between cyclical considerations and financial stability concerns. The former set of considerations would justify maintaining the current accommodative stance before commencing the tightening cycle later in the year. However, the economy is still susceptible to shocks and remains highly vulnerable to exchange rate risk given its large open FX position. Sharp and persistent 2009 -Jan2010 -Jan2011 -Jan2012 -Jan2013 -Jan2014 -Jan Term spread (RHS)* FRA9X12 Nominal policy rate The policy rate and the term structure Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. *The spread between the yields on 3-year and 3-month government bonds. Page 15 exchange rate depreciation could also endanger price stability. Staff, therefore, urged the authorities to keep the policy rate on hold, maintaining the present accommodative policy stance until there are signs that inflationary pressures are building up. In the event that external conditions deteriorate sharply, the MNB should also stand ready to tighten. Staff emphasized the importance of maintaining the confidence of market participants in the central bank’s inflation targeting framework and recommended a clear communication strategy to guide market expectations. Maintaining sufficient reserves is imperative for supporting financial stability. While Hungary’s reserve position is projected to remain within the Fund’s adequacy range over the medium term, large financial sector vulnerabilities, including from heavy reliance on FX swaps with nonresidents, and risk of market volatility are expected to remain elevated. Accordingly, staff underscored the need to maintain adequate reserve coverage to support financial stability and smooth exchange rate volatility if the FX market dries up. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed that changes in market sentiment continue to pose risks, but didn’t see a need for adopting a tightening bias. With inflation expectations moderating to around the MNB’s inflation target and the still-sizeable negative output gap, the authorities argued that inflationary pressures are likely to remain contained in the period ahead. In their projections, headline inflation is set to remain below 3 percent in 2014 and reach the inflation target in 2015. They concurred, however, that the increased volatility in the global financial markets requires enhanced vigilance, as risk perceptions can shift rapidly. In this connection, they reiterated the view of the Monetary Council to reassess the policy stance in light of market conditions. Finally, they considered the current level of reserves comfortable, and reaffirmed their commitment to maintain reserves within the adequacy range in the period ahead.