Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to fiscal consolidation, but noted that policies appeared insufficient to reduce the public debt ratio. The fiscal stance is projected to relax in 2014. With the deficit target increasing to 2.9 percent of GDP, mainly on the back of increases in expenditure on health, education and projects co- financed with the EU, the structural deficit is set to widen by about one percentage point of GDP, leaving public debt roughly unchanged at about 79 percent of GDP. Moreover, in staff’s assessment, the budget over-estimates potential revenue collection, which implies that the deficit target is likely to be met only if all budget reserves (0.7 percent of GDP) are saved. Over the medium term, staff projects the fiscal deficit to come down only modestly. In the updated convergence program, the government targets a reduction in the deficit to 1.9 percent of GDP by 2017. However, based on staff’s baseline macro scenario, current policies, and the authorities’ ambitious investment agenda, partly funded by EU transfers, the fiscal deficit would decline only slightly to 2¾ percent of GDP. This would imply a further easing of the fiscal stance as the output gap closes and revenues recover back to their potential. Public debt, at around 78 percent of GDP, would remain a significant vulnerability (Appendix I). There is a need for a clear and credible strategy to gradually but steadily reduce public deficits and debt over the medium term. Staff sees scope for a smooth fiscal consolidation path that would strike a balance between sustaining the economic recovery and putting the debt-to-GDP ratio decisively on a downward trajectory. To this end, staff recommended containing the fiscal impulse in 2014 to ½ percent of GDP, which would entail an adjustment of about ½ percent of GDP compared with the approved budget, followed up by a structural tightening of about ½ percent of GDP annually throughout 2015–19. Such a strategy—which would help build much-needed fiscal Page 12 buffers and strengthen confidence—would bring the structural deficit to about zero and reduce public debt to just below 70 percent of GDP by 2019. The adjustment strategy should rely on durable expenditure consolidation, enhanced composition of expenditure, and gradual elimination of distortionary taxes At over 50 percent of GDP, government spending is among the highest in the region, financed increasingly by distortionary sectoral taxes. A sustainable expenditure retrenchment would, therefore, create the needed fiscal space to rationalize the tax system. Staff sees room for: (i) better targeting of social benefits, employer tax breaks, and price subsidies; (ii) rationalizing remaining loss-making SOEs; (iii) containing discretionary spending on goods and services; and (iv) rationalizing the wage bill. The growth impact of expenditure can be enhanced by re-directing spending on public works to individualized employment services and training, and re-directing savings in family benefits towards the provision of child-care. On the tax front, there is a need to: (i) streamline the tax regime through a reduction of exemptions, special regimes, and elimination of distortionary sectoral taxes; (ii) reduce the high tax wedge for low-income workers; and (iii) decisively tackle VAT fraud, particularly in the basic food sector (See: Box 7, Country Report No. 13/85). Under the current GDP growth path, if the structural deficit were maintained at this level beyond 2019, public debt would decline to below 60 percent of GDP by 2022. Revenues from sectoral taxes were about 2.3 percent of GDP in 2013, of which 1.2 percent of GDP was collected from the banking system (bank transaction taxes and the special bank levy). There is a need to streamline employment at the municipal level, particularly since lower-level government functions have been transferred to the central government in 2012. Baseline Average consolidation of 0.4 percent of GDP per year over the medium-term Fiscal Stance of the General Government (In percent of GDP) Public debt (RHS)Structural overall deficitOverallbalance 1/ Sources: Hungarian authorities and IMF staff calculations. 1/ In 2011 excludes one-off revenues of 9.6 percent of GDP from the transfer of private pension assets tothe government. Page 13 Fiscal impact of potential measures (in percent of GDP) Total 1/ Nominal freeze of spending on non-EU-related goods and services Reduction in public sector employment 2/ Reduction in public transport tariff subsidies Elimination of operational subsidies to transport enterprises Streamlining of VAT rates from 3 to 2 Elimination of selected CIT exemptions (e.g., sports and entertainment) Elimination of excise exemptions for diesel fuel and tobacco Reduction of VAT fraud 3/ Sources: IMF staff estimates, based on data provided by the authorities, and FAD and LEG TA reports. 1/ The total reflects the needed adjustment to compensate for the elimination of sectoral taxes and the staff's recommended structural consolidation. The individual impacts do not add to the total due to rounding. 2/ Reduce employment (rather than wages) through attrition; rationalize local government employment further. 3/ Assumes measures to eliminate 75 percent of the estimated total fraud. Strong fiscal institutions are critical to boost policy credibility and investor confidence. Frequent changes in the fiscal targets and adoption of ad-hoc measures weaken policy predictability. The fiscal rules currently in place are broadly in line with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact, and are supplemented by a framework of domestic fiscal rules that exhibits a number of design flaws (see: Box 1, Country Report No. 12/13). Staff thus recommended simplifying the system and stressed the need to set the rules in structural terms to avoid pro- cyclicality. The authorities’ intention to adopt a binding multi-year budget framework, which would help anchor market expectations and contain spending pressures are welcome. Finally, staff called for providing the Fiscal Council adequate resources and greater operational independence to assess the sustainability of the fiscal stance and risks ahead. Authorities’ views The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to fiscal consolidation. While they acknowledged some risks to the 2014 budget, including due to the inclusion of substantive gains in tax collection through administrative improvements, they believe that saving only part of the budget reserves will be more than sufficient to meet their deficit target. Over the medium term, they expect the deficit to come down mainly by continuing their policies of partial freezes in government wages and in spending on goods and services; but also benefitting from past reforms to restrict eligibility and reduce the generosity of social transfers. Page 14 Regarding structural fiscal policies, differences in views centered on ways to boost demand and supply of labor and appropriate tax policies. The authorities felt strongly about the merits of the public works program and targeted reductions in employer contributions under the Job Protection Act. They were hesitant about potential intervention based on reported income, such as lowering the substantial tax-wedge for low income workers which has increased in recent years. The authorities pointed to progress in rationalizing loss-making SOEs and putting the pension system on a firmer footing. Regarding sectoral taxes, they stressed that they do not intend to phase them out in the near future given the lack of fiscal space. Furthermore, they disagreed with the mission’s characterization of the taxes as distortionary sectoral taxes arguing that taxes such as the financial transactions tax or the telecom levy are relatively broad-based consumption taxes.