There is an urgent need to restore financial intermediation. Despite the recent improvement in economic activity, credit is projected to contract further in 2014. Staff argued that long-lasting restoration of financial intermediation should rely primarily on a sustainable improvement in banks’ operating environment, including a reduction in the heavy tax burden on banks and higher policy predictability. Staff cautioned about the high level of restructured loans (about 18 percent of total loans) and argued that the high level of NPLs continues to hinder credit growth. The pass-through from exchange rate depreciation of 1 percent to prices is estimated at about 0.3 percent over a period of one year. GIR (in bill EUR) Adequacy Range 100 percent of ST Debt 20 percent of Broad Money 3 months of future imports Reserve Adequacy Source: IMF staff estimates Page 16 This underscores the need for a faster cleanup of banks’ asset portfolios, including by removing legal, regulatory, and tax impediments. To this end, staff welcomed MNB’s efforts to address such impediments, and stressed that a swift adoption and implementation of a personal insolvency framework in line with best international practice would be important. Staff also stressed that a possible new FX mortgage debt relief scheme should envisage appropriate burden sharing among all stakeholders. Lending under the FGS should be limited, targeted, and time-bound, with fiscal costs clearly recognized. The first phase of the FGS helped extend SME loan maturity, and reduce borrowing costs and exposure to exchange rate risk. Weak demand for the second phase, along with the broad market expectation that the overall amount is unlikely to be utilized, suggest a limited impact on economic growth. While supporting the authorities’ objective to reduce fragmentation and improve SME access to finance (Box 6), staff saw scope to alter some of the Scheme’s modalities to increase its impact on growth and better support the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission. More specifically, there is a need to link the lending rate to the policy rate, so as to remove the monetary policy easing bias embedded in the scheme, in a manner that adequately compensates banks for lending to more risky SMEs. Moreover, this Scheme should remain time- bound and limited to SMEs, while fiscal costs should be transparently reported. The ongoing integration of the co-operative credit institutions responds to the increasing need of improving their financial standing and operations. The integration process should help ensure adequate risk management practices, enhance their lending capacity, and ultimately increase their market share. As their overall role in the banking system is expected to increase substantially over time, it is important to put in place appropriate safeguards to ensure no state interference in their lending activity and strategic decisions. Staff welcomed recent improvements in the financial stability framework, which would help safeguard the Hungarian financial system against a wider range of risks. The adoption of the new MNB Act, which facilitated the integration of the Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority Impediments to the banks’ portfolio cleaning process include the lengthy and costly process of liquidation, and limited use of the out-of-court framework for debt resolution. Additionally, there are some tax disincentives given that debt cancelation is not recognized as expenditure for tax deductibility. 2004Q12006Q12008Q12010Q12012Q1 Credit-to GDP (LHS) Credit growth (yoy, exchange rate adjusted) Bank Credit Sources: MNB and IMF staff calculations. 2010 -Q12010 -Q42011 -Q32012 -Q22013 -Q12013 -Q4 Credit standards (net balance, LHS) Credit growth (yoy) Credit growth of SMEs and credit standards applied for small and micro firms Source: MNB. Net tightening Page 17 into the MNB and equipped it with micro-prudential instruments, also reinforced the MNB’s macro- prudential tool kit, and thus allowed the MNB to address financial gaps in a more efficient and effective manner. While noting that financial and price stability are interlinked, staff stressed the importance of establishing adequate checks and balances to ensure that financial stability concerns will not override the MNB’s objective of price stability. In this regard, the establishment of the Financial Stability Council, which is responsible for financial sector stability, and decides about macro-and micro-prudential supervisory and regulatory instruments, is a step in the right direction. While the authorities have yet to decide whether to join the European Banking Union, staff stressed the importance of not falling “behind the curve” and encouraged the authorities to strengthen the supervisory framework further, including by adopting a bank resolution framework. Authorities’ views The authorities emphasized the role of the FGS in repairing financial intermediation and didn’t share staff’s concerns about its modalities. They agreed that credit is likely to remain weak in the period ahead, reflecting both demand and supply-side factors. In this regard, they viewed the FGS as a useful monetary tool to boost bank lending to SMEs. The authorities considered the FGS’s modalities appropriate and were confident that demand would pick up later in the year. They agreed that the FGS involves costs, but considered them as relating to the MNB’s monetary operations that could be offset by balance sheet management. While agreeing that commercial bank profitability is likely to remain subdued in the period ahead, they considered the bank levy and the bank transaction tax necessary given the limited fiscal space. On NPLs, the authorities concurred that their high level impedes credit growth and expected the task force responsible for identifying measures to facilitate faster portfolio cleaning to submit its recommendations to the Financial Stability Council in the coming months. As for their efforts to strengthen the supervisory framework, the authorities are in the process of drafting a new law that will implement the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, with full implementation envisaged early next year.