economic recovery is expected to continue to be underpinned by private consumption (which has benefited from lower energy prices and higher real wages). Policy credibility has also strengthened, with continued fiscal consolidation and a tight monetary stance. With the revival of sentiment and picking up of industrial activity, an incipient recovery of private investment is expected to help broaden the recovery. Higher public infrastructure investment and government initiatives to unclog stalled investment projects and support the lending capacity of state-owned banks should also help crowd-in private investment (Box 4). Real GDP growth is forecast at 7.3 percent in FY2015/16, further accelerating to 7.5 percent in FY2016/17, supported Output gap 1/ Fiscal impulse (-) Real policy interest rate 2/ [RHS] Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Sources: Haver Analytics; Consensus Economics; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Negative output gap signifies below potential output. 2/ Repo rate minus 1-year ahead CPI inflation expectations (Consensus). 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 Cumulative fiscal impulse since FY2008/09 [RHS] Tighter policy setting G f See also G. Bahal, M. Raissi, and V. Tulin (2015), “Crowding Out or Crowding In? Public and Private Investment in India,” IMF WP 15/264. To improve the public private partnership (PPP) model of infrastructure investment, the November 2015 Kelkar Committee report made detailed recommendations on resolving legacy issues, and going forward, proper identification and allocation of risks among stakeholders, strengthening PPP-related policy and governance and institutional capacity, revitalizing contractual processes, and scaling up finance. Page 11 by recovery in domestic demand. Nonetheless, anemic exports as well as headwinds from weaknesses in India’s corporate financial positions and public bank balance sheets will weigh on the economy. In the presence of continued supply-side bottlenecks, and assuming no substantial legislative initiatives, medium-term growth is projected to remain at around 7¾ percent. Despite a sharp reduction in inflation over the past year, medium-term inflationary pressures and upside risks to inflation remain. Headline CPI inflation declined to 5.6 percent in December 2015, down from an average of 10 percent during 2009-13, reflecting economic slack, the RBI’s tight monetary policy stance, lower global commodity prices and government efforts to contain food inflation (through release of surplus grain buffer stocks and low minimum support price increases in agriculture) (see Box 5). Although the 6 percent inflation target for January 2016 is expected to be met, upside risks to inflation for FY2016/17 stem from an unfavorable monsoon and implementation of the pay review of government employees. Given food supply constraints and the ingrained nature of household inflation expectations (which remain near double-digits), inflation is expected to remain close to the upper limit of the RBI’s medium-term inflation target band (4 percent CPI inflation ± 2 percent). The current account deficit (CAD) has narrowed further, helped by sharply lower commodity import prices. From a high of 4.8 percent of GDP in FY2012/13, the CAD has compressed sharply to an average of 1.5 percent of GDP in the past two years. This narrowing was helped by a policy-induced fall in the volume of gold imports and, more recently, by lower commodity prices (see Box 6). Notwithstanding the recent export slowdown, continued low global oil prices should help contain the CAD. The CAD is expected to widen to 2½ percent of GDP over the medium term as domestic demand strengthens further and commodity prices gradually rebound. However, the sluggish global economic growth outlook and recent rupee appreciation in real effective terms pose headwinds to an export growth recovery for India (see Box 7). India's Corporate Sector Financing Sources, Net 1/ (In percent of GDP, 4-quarter moving average) Domestic bank credit to corporates Capital markets: debt 2/ Capital markets: listed equity 3/ FDI 4/ External commercial borrowing 5/ Bank credit growth remains anemic, reflecting demand and supply factors, including high corporate leverage and weak bank asset quality. Although private banks (one-quarter of banking system assets) are well capitalized, Sources: CEIC; Haver Analytics; Dealogic; World Federation of Exchanges (WEF); and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Non-internal sources of finance. Excludes credit by non-bank financial companies. 2/ Includes corporate bonds, commercial paper, syndicated loans. 3/ Money raised on the primary market (BSE and NSE) with offer of shares (WEF data). 4/ Equity investment by direct investor in direct investment enterprise, right scale. 5/ Net flow on the balance of payments basis. The decennial pay scale review of central government employees (Seventh Central Pay Commission) will increase the civil service wage bill from January 1, 2016. For additional details, see P. Cashin, K. Mohaddes and M. Raissi (2015), “Fair Weather or Foul? The Macroeconomic Effects of El Niño,“ IMF Working Paper 15/89. Staff projects gold imports at 920 metric tonnes (mt) in FY2015/16, up from 890 mt in FY2014/15. This compares with a decadal average of 940 mt for gold imports (2005/06 to 2014/15); see also Box 6 on gold macro-financial linkages. All macroeconomic projections in this report are based on oil-price assumptions contained in the January 2016 World Economic Outlook Update Page 12 profitable, and have low NPAs and limited exposure to troubled sectors, low profitability and further asset quality deterioration in public sector banks (PSBs) constrain the banking system’s capacity to expand credit. In addition, a thin investment pipeline, reflecting still low capacity utilization in core sectors and areas of high corporate leverage (and recourse of higher-quality borrowers to capital markets), have reduced the demand for bank credit. Further deterioration in asset quality could lower capital levels and thereby weigh on credit supply and the investment recovery. In addition, although capital markets have partly substituted for bank credit, their ability to provide adequate, stable financing for the growth recovery will hinge on investor sentiment, and on further policy measures to deepen capital market liquidity. While the balance of risks has clearly improved, economic risks remain tilted to the downside. On the external side, despite the reduction in imbalances and strengthening of buffers, the impact from intensified global financial market volatility could be disruptive, including from unexpected developments in the course of U.S. monetary policy normalization or China’s growth slowdown, particularly against the backdrop of recent large capital inflows. Absent disruptive global financial market volatility, slower growth in China would have only modest adverse spillovers to India, given weak trade linkages (see Box 8). Domestic risks include continued weaknesses in corporate financial positions and public bank asset quality, as well as setbacks in the reform process, which could weigh on growth, accelerate inflation and undermine sentiment. On the upside, further structural reforms could lead to stronger growth, as would a sustained period of low global energy prices (see Annex II: Risk Assessment Matrix). Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with the staff’s view on the outlook. They agreed that the Indian economy is in the early stage of recovery with some areas of weakness, and—in view of the recovering investment pipeline—project real growth for the current fiscal year at about 7½ percent, rising slightly in FY2016/17. They acknowledged that some indicators, such as the growth of indirect tax receipts, are consistent with economic growth in the 7½ percent range, but they also noted that other high-frequency data, including corporate profitability and capacity utilization, do not corroborate this rate. The RBI estimates the output gap at about -½ of one percent. global financial market volatility. The RBI has adequate reserves, including after adjustment for forward contracts, and there remains scope for monetary policy action. There was agreement with staff that exchange rate flexibility has served India well, and the authorities noted that corporate hedging ratios have risen over the past year. Finally, a part of the oil price decline windfall was Nevertheless, the authorities feel they are well prepared to weather any surge in See also P. Lindner and S. Jung (2014), “Corporate Vulnerabilities in India and Banks' Loan Performance,” IMF Working Paper 14/232. During early January 2016 episode of China-induced global financial market volatility, India largely resisted the spillover pressures. Stock markets only declined by about 3 percent, the rupee depreciated by about 1 percent against the U.S. dollar, and FII outflows were limited (about $100 million). See also Selected Issues Chapter IV for an analysis of the summer 2015 episode of global financial market volatility. Page 13 saved by the government in the form of higher petroleum product excise taxes, and this represents a potential buffer against a spike in global commodity prices.