(about 2½ percent of GDP) and reduced external vulnerabilities, though downside risks remain. After bottoming at 5.1 percent in FY2012/13, the economy has been on a gradual cyclical recovery, reaching 7.3 percent growth in FY2014/15 with a revival of sentiment. Since late 2014, a halving of global oil prices has boosted economic activity in India and underpinned a further improvement in its current account and fiscal positions, and engendered a sharp decline in inflation (Boxes 1 and 2). As a result of further-reduced external vulnerabilities, improved growth prospects, and continued monetary accommodation in advanced economies, India has experienced large FDI and portfolio capital inflows, a real appreciation of the rupee, and a robust rebound in foreign exchange reserves in FY2014/15. Nonetheless, despite better growth prospects, India faces the risk of capital flow reversals and should guard against the buildup of domestic vulnerabilities. Commodity Terms of Trade (CTOT) and Price Indices (Index number, 2010=100) CTOT [LHS] Gold [RHS] Oil [RHS] Source: Cavalcanti, Mohaddes, and Raissi (2014); and IMF, International Financial Statistics. b b From 25-Jun-14 to 15-Jun-15 From 15-Jun-15 to 06-Jan-16 Local Currency per US$ (Percent Change, + = local currency appreciation) China Philippines India South Korea Indonesia Malaysia South Africa Mexico Australia Japan New Zealand Turkey Brazil Source: Bloomberg. Important economic and structural reforms have been initiated, but further reforms are needed to boost India’s growth potential. Following its election victory in May 2014, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi has gradually introduced numerous economic reforms (see Annex I and Box 3), including subsidy reforms, steps to create more flexible labor and product markets, agricultural reforms (including the new crop insurance scheme), enhancing financial inclusion, relaxing FDI limits in several key sectors and improving the ease of doing business, raising Foreign Portfolio Investment limits in public debt securities, and increasing public infrastructure spending. Flexible inflation targeting was also adopted by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in February 2015. Nonetheless, in the last two sessions of Parliament the passage of key legislation, including the long-planned goods and services tax, was not secured given the lack of BJP control of the upper house of Parliament. In January 2015, India’s Ministry of Statistics released the new series of national accounts. Upward revisions of the GDP growth rate for 2012/13 and 2013/14 in part reflected methodological changes. Lack of back-casted historical GDP data based on the new methodology constrains a comparison of current growth with past growth. The output gap is currently estimated at about -0.5 percent. As the global commodity price boom unwinds, India’s terms of trade has improved significantly (jumping by 4 percent in 2014/15 and a further 7 percent in 2015/16), supporting output growth and raising real incomes. Page 10 Notwithstanding the cyclical pickup, medium-term growth continues to be Past Fund advice and the authorities’ macroeconomic policies have been broadly constrained by supply-side bottlenecks and weaknesses in the corporate and banking sectors. Past weak economic growth and delays in implementing infrastructure projects have placed pressure on banks’ asset quality (particularly at state-owned banks that lent heavily to infrastructure companies). Corporate vulnerability indicators remain elevated. Long-standing supply-side bottlenecks, especially in the energy, mining and power sectors, continue to weigh on India’s growth potential. aligned, but progress on structural reforms has been partial. There has been substantial fiscal consolidation in recent years (although it has paused in FY2015/16), and staff supports the improvement in quality of fiscal adjustment this year with its welcome emphasis on public investment. Excise duties on petrol and diesel have been raised, important kerosene and LPG subsidy allocation and distribution reforms have been pursued, and some progress has been made on reducing and rationalizing fertilizer subsidies, broadly in line with previous IMF advice. The stance of monetary policy was appropriately tight in 2014/15 to reduce inflation along the RBI’s “glide path”, consistent with Fund advice. The RBI has adopted a flexible inflation targeting regime, with headline CPI inflation the principal nominal anchor for monetary policy. Progress on land and labor market reforms has been limited, though some market reforms have been initiated by the center and a few states. Policy Stance and Output Gap (In percent) India’s growth outlook has improved, despite new headwinds . In the near term,