repo rate, tightened liquidity, and took steps to enhance monetary transmission. The repo rate was raised to combat inflation and maintain market stability, and has been kept on hold at 8 percent between January 2014 and January 2015, supported by open market operations to sterilize FX intervention. The RBI also took steps to enhance monetary transmission by lowering the cap on bank access to its overnight liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), shifting liquidity injection toward term repos, and paring back sector-specific liquidity facilities . More recently, the RBI reduced the policy repo rate by 25 basis points (January 2015), reflecting disinflationary impulses. Interest Rates (In percent) Interbank call money market closing rate MSF rate Reverse repo (LAF) Repo rate (LAF) Sources: Reserve Bank of India; and IMF staff calculations. CPI Inflation and Fiscal Balance, 2013 (In percent) d Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) CPI Inflation (yoy), latest z B k T d f h x h h C K Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook d Z w Monetary policy needs to remain tight to reduce inflation and inflation expectations on a durable basis. High inflation has been a key source of vulnerability, discouraging financial saving, eroding external competitiveness and exacerbating external imbalances, as well as spurring inequality The recalibration of the liquidity facilities, while primarily aimed at reducing banks’ passive dependence on the RBI for cash and treasury management to enhance monetary transmission, has resulted in an effective further slight tightening of the monetary stance by raising the average cost of central bank liquidity to above the repo rate. Page 10 Wheat: Prices and Central Pool Stocks Food Grains Stock in Central Pool (mln. tonnes, 12mma) [RHS] Minimum Support Price (y/y percent change) WPI: Wheat (y/y percent change) (see Box 3). While inflation has recently dipped due to favorable base effects and falling energy prices, one- year-ahead inflation expectations (as measured by the RBI’s survey) remain above the RBI’s January 2016 inflation objective. Furthermore, potential adverse supply shocks could give rise to large second-round effects on core inflation. In the absence of supply-side measures to raise potential output and constrain food price inflation, maintaining a tight monetary stance is needed to achieve the RBI’s 6 percent CPI inflation objective by 2016, particularly given the narrowing output gap and possible spikes in domestic food and fuel prices. The evolution of the monetary policy stance should continue to be data dependent, while recognizing uncertainties regarding the strength and lags associated with the monetary transmission mechanism. Nonetheless, the authorities should continue to stand ready to tighten the stance if inflationary pressures gather pace, particularly given the large upside risks to inflation. To lower CPI inflation over the medium term to 4 percent, if that is the objective ultimately adopted by the authorities, a tight monetary policy stance will need to be accompanied by further structural reforms, which will boost potential output and increase food production (see Selected Issues Chapter II). Sources: CEIC; Haver Analytics; Food Corporation of India; and IMF staff calculations. Rice: Prices and Central Pool Stocks Rice: Prices and Central Pool Stocks Sources: CEIC; Haver Analytics; Food Corporation of India; and IMF staff Sources: CEIC; Haver Analytics; Food Corporation of India; and IMF staff calculations. calculations. Food Grains Stock in Central Pool (mln. tonnes, 12mma) [RHS] Minimum Support Price (y/y percent change) WPI: Rice (y/y percent change) Continued progress is needed to further strengthen the monetary policy framework and move towards flexible inflation targeting. The RBI has shifted policy formulation to focus on containing inflation (with headline CPI inflation as a de-facto nominal anchor) and strengthened policy communication, including through publication of two-year-ahead inflation forecasts and associated confidence bands. Staff views the medium-term 4 percent inflation target set out by the Patel Committee report as broadly appropriate. However, in view of India’s large weight on food in its CPI basket and structurally-high food inflation, achieving this target will require ramping up food supply commensurate with strong consumption demand. The associated band (+/- 2 percent) is appropriate in light of India’s susceptibility to food supply and external shocks (see Selected Issues Chapter III). Staff supports further efforts to enhance the monetary framework along the lines set out in the Patel Low and stable inflation is the best way for monetary policy to support growth over the medium term—see K. Mohaddes and M. Raissi (2014), “Does Inflation Slow Long-Run Growth in India?,” IMF WP 14/222. IMF staff analysis indicates that food inflation propagates rapidly into non-food inflation in India—see IMF (2014), India: Selected Issues , IMF Country Report No. 14/58. Staff analyses are based on a Bayesian structural VAR and calculations using a Taylor rule (embedded in a structural forecasting and policy analysis model customized to India)—see R. Anand, D. Ding and V. Tulin (2014), “Food Inflation in India: Role for Monetary Policy,” IMF WP 14/148. Page 11 Committee Report including: increasing the operational autonomy of the RBI; institutionalization and setting the target zone for headline CPI inflation; and establishment of a Monetary Policy Committee and accountability framework (see Selected Issues Chapter IV). Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that monetary policy needs to strike a balance between the primary objective of reducing inflation and limiting the adverse impact on growth, while preserving financial stability . The RBI recognized the effectiveness of supply-side measures to help contain inflation, and noted that going forward, implementation of growth-friendly fiscal consolidation and additional supply-side measures would constitute pre-conditions for monetary easing. They also noted that upside risks to inflation remain, including from spikes in oil prices, price pressures from input costs, deficient rainfall, as well as from ongoing excess demand for protein-rich food items. The authorities emphasized that India has not yet adopted a flexible inflation targeting regime. They consider the current regime to be a transitional one, and noted that discussions are on-going between the RBI and the government on the final contours of the new monetary policy framework, as indicated by the Finance Minister in the Budget speech on the need for a stronger monetary policy framework. In the meantime, the RBI has indicated a CPI inflation “glide path” to the achievement of a medium-term target for CPI inflation of 4 percent (+/- 2 percentage points).