The Indian economy has recorded a strong growth in the recent past. After bottoming at 5.6 percent real GDP growth in FY2012/13, the economy has been on a gradual cyclical recovery, reaching 7.6 percent growth in FY2015/16. As a result of wide-ranging policies to correct imbalances and build buffers after the 2013 taper tantrum, which improved macroeconomic fundamentals, and spurred robust capital inflows, India’s external vulnerabilities are now in check. Since late 2014, a halving of global oil prices has boosted economic activity in India, further improved the current account and fiscal positions, and lowered inflation. Over the past two years, a systematic tackling of supply-side bottlenecks and structural reforms have also underpinned confidence and provided needed support to growth and macroeconomic stability. GDP Growth (In percent, Gross Domestic Product at Market Prices) Sources: Central Statistics Office, Haver Analytics. Growth has been led by consumption, while investment growth has been weak. Supported by a large and durable terms of trade gain, and more recently by a favorable agricultural crop outlook (supported by normal monsoon rainfall) and decennial civil servant wage revisions, private consumption remains the driving force of the Indian growth recovery. However, investment has contracted sharply in the first half of FY2016/17, reflecting excess capacity in key industrial sectors and strains in financial and corporate sector balance sheets. The post-November 8, 2016 cash shortages and payment disruptions caused by the currency exchange initiative (withdrawal of the legal tender of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes, which accounted for 86 percent of the value of currency in circulation, and introduction of new Rs 500 and Rs 2000 notes) have strained consumption and business activity, posing a new challenge to sustaining the growth Consumer Confidence Survey: Future Expectation (Index, Neutral=100) Consumption and Investment (y/y percent change, based on constant prices) Private Final Consumption Expenditure Gross Fixed Capital Formation Sources: Reserve Bank of India, Haver Analytics. India’s Central Statistical Office released a new series of national accounts in January 2015, with base year 2011/12. Methodological deficiencies of the revised national account statistics, as described in the 2016 Article IV Staff Report, and the lack of back-casted historical GDP data, constrain a comparison of current growth with past growth. India’s terms of trade has improved significantly (jumping by 2 ⅓ percent in 2013/14, by 3½ percent in 2014/15 and by a further 7 percent in 2015/16), supporting output growth and raising real incomes. Sources: Central Statistics Office, Haver Analytics. Page 10 momentum. External demand has weakened further, with the growth of import volumes of India’s trading partners decelerating to 2½ percent in 2015 from 4½ percent in the previous year. Progress on important economic and structural reforms over the past year has been impressive. Over the past year, big bang reforms, such as the legislation of a new bankruptcy code, formalization of inflation targeting framework, and a milestone constitutional amendment enabling implementation of the pan-India Goods and Services Tax (GST), have taken place alongside continued steps implementing the gradualist reform agenda of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi (see Annex I: Key Policy Actions). Notwithstanding its majority in the lower house of the national parliament, the BJP does not have control of the upper house, thus requiring consensus building for the passage of key legislation. As a result, securing passage of the GST constitutional amendment spanned several parliamentary sessions and entailed compromise with regional parties. Past Fund advice and the authorities’ macroeconomic policies have been broadly aligned. Consistent with Fund advice, fiscal consolidation at the Union government (central) level resumed in FY2016/17, and has been complemented by measures to enhance the quality of public spending. Excise duties on petrol and diesel have been raised further, and kerosene and fertilizer subsidy reforms have been pursued. The stance of monetary policy in 2015–16 has been maintained consistent with achieving the interim inflation targets along the RBI’s “glide path”, in line with previous IMF advice. The passage of the Bankruptcy Act, enhancements to corporate debt restructuring and bank governance, and measures to deepen domestic corporate bond markets were also broadly in line with past IMF recommendations. The RBI has adopted a flexible inflation targeting regime with a formal inflation target band (August 2016) and introduced a statutory Monetary Policy Committee (September 2016). Progress on land, labor and agricultural market reforms, however, has been limited. The currency exchange initiative and its associated cash shortages are weighing