heavily on activity and its impact on financial institutions should be monitored carefully. Given the dominance of cash in everyday transactions, the post-November 8, 2016 decreased availability of cash and associated payment disruptions caused by the currency exchange initiative have strained consumption and business activity and the operations of the financial system, posing a new challenge to sustaining the growth momentum (see Box 1). The supply of new banknotes in the first month following the initiative was insufficient, even as the authorities took multiple steps to ease the currency transition. The November PMI for both manufacturing and services declined sharply, reflecting a large drop in output and new orders components. While the financial system is expected to weather the currency exchange-induced temporary growth slowdown, the authorities should remain vigilant to risks—in view of the potential further build-up of NPAs, including among private banks and elevated corporate sector vulnerabilities—and ensure prudent support to the affected economic sectors. Page 11 The repercussions from India’s currency exchange initiative will likely persist through the first quarter of 2017. Real GDP growth is projected to slow to 6.6 percent in FY2016/17 and then rebound to 7.2 percent in FY2017/18, due to temporary disruptions (primarily to private consumption) caused by cash shortages accompanying the currency exchange initiative. These effects are expected to gradually dissipate by March 2017 as cash shortages ease and would be offset by tailwinds from a favorable monsoon and low oil prices, and continued progress in resolving supply-side bottlenecks. Consumer sentiment remains strong, which will support near-term growth recovery as cash shortages ease. The investment recovery is expected to remain modest and uneven across sectors as deleveraging takes place and industrial capacity utilization picks up. Headwinds from weaknesses in India’s bank balance sheets will also weigh on near-term credit growth in the economy. Confidence and policy credibility gains, including from continued fiscal consolidation and anti-inflationary monetary policy, continue to underpin macroeconomic stability. Weak external demand, however, is expected to dampen net exports. India: Policy Stance and Output Gap (In percent) India: Bank Credit Growth and Fixed Investment (Annual percent change) G f Tighter policy setting Cumulative fiscal impulse since FY2008/19 [RHS] Output gap 1/ Fiscal impulse (-) Real policy interest rate 2/ [RHS] Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Sources: Haver Analytics; Consensus Economics; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Negative output gap signifies below potential output. 2/ Repo rate minus 1-year ahead CPI inflation expectations (Consensus). Bank credit, CPI-deflated Real gross fixed capital formation Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. GST adoption and continued progress in reforms bode well for a marked improvement in medium-term prospects. In staff’s view, the consumption-led growth path can be sustained over the medium term, as real disposable incomes rise and India continues the process of economic catch-up (given its very low per capita incomes). Although some uncertainties remain around the design and pace of implementation of the GST, its adoption is poised to help raise India’s medium-term GDP growth to above 8 percent as it will create a single national market and enhance the efficiency of intra-Indian movement of goods and services. CPI inflation is expected to remain contained in the near term, but inflationary pressures are set to rise in the second half of 2017. With temporary demand disruptions and increased monsoon-driven food supplies, CPI inflation is expected at about 4¾ percent by early 2017—in line with the RBI inflation target of 5 percent by March 2017. However, inflationary pressures are likely to reappear in the second half of 2017, in part reflecting government pay All macroeconomic projections in this report are based on oil-price assumptions contained in the October 2016 World Economic Outlook Page 12 reviews and the waning effects of the oil price collapse. Upside risks to inflation stem from supply-side factors, such as volatility of agricultural prices, including due to possible smaller harvests as a result of cash shortages inhibiting purchases of agricultural inputs. The current account deficit (CAD) is expected to remain compressed, helped by continued low commodity-import prices. The CAD has declined sharply in recent years to an average of 1.4 percent of GDP during FY2013/14–FY2015/16, and is expected to be about 1.1 percent of GDP (about US$25 billion) in 2016/17. This narrowing was helped by a decline in commodity (oil and gold) prices. The CAD is expected to widen to about 2 percent of GDP over the medium term, as domestic demand strengthens further and commodity prices gradually rebound. Nonetheless, the weakening of trading partners’ external demand is expected to pose challenges for India. The import growth of Indian partners over the next five years is forecast to decline further, to an average of about 4 percent, primarily on account of weaker demand from Gulf Cooperation Council countries. The oil price collapse also had a lagged negative effect on Gulf-based remittances to India, with workers’ remittances falling by about US$5 billion in FY2015/16 over the previous year. Non-Oil Imports of India's Trading Partners Average growth 2001-2008: 8.3% 2016-2021: 3.9% (Annual percent change) average Oct. 2015 WEO Sources: World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff estimates. Oct. 2016 WEO WEO forecast The rupee weakened and capital inflows reversed after the announcement of the currency exchange initiative, but this may have also reflected the global capital flow retrenchment from emerging market assets. In the two weeks after the announcement of the currency exchange initiative on November 8, 2016, the rupee weakened by 2½ percent against the U.S. dollar, portfolio capital outflows totaled US$3.5 billion, and the SENSEX equity index fell by 6 percent. While the rupee subsequently rebounded by about 1 percent by mid-December, portfolio outflows continued (cumulative outflows of US$2.2 billion so far during FY2016/17, after inflows of US$6.8 billion prior to November 8). Bank credit growth remains moderate, reflecting demand and supply factors, including slow corporate deleveraging, sector-specific strains, and further weakening of bank asset quality . Even as the banking system’s ratio of stressed assets remained stable during FY2015/16, subsequent to the Asset Quality Review (AQR), the system-wide gross non-performing asset (NPA) ratio has risen from 5.1 percent in September 2015 to 7.6 percent in March 2016 and is expected to rise further by an additional one percentage point towards the end of FY2016/17. Aggregate credit growth remains modest, and is primarily led by private banks (one-quarter of Indian banking system assets) and better performing public sector banks (PSBs). However, the The decennial pay scale review of central government employees (Seventh Central Pay Commission) has increased the central government civil service wage bill beginning August 2016. The direct and indirect effects of oil price collapse accounted for 1¾ percentage points of the 3½ percentage point decline in the headline CPI between mid-2014 and late 2015. Page 13 banking system’s capacity to expand credit is constrained by the weakened capital, profitability and asset quality of many PSBs. The ability of the banking system to address its asset quality distress will hinge on the success of the AQR, the new bankruptcy code, and asset reconstruction mechanisms. Meanwhile, the investment plans of core industrial sectors remain thin, reflecting still-low capacity utilization and deleveraging pressures. Nonetheless, capital markets, nonbank financial institutions, and retained earnings will continue to support the commercial financing needs of the economy. Commercial Bank Credit Growth (In percent, year-on-year) SBI Group Other PSBs Foreign Banks Private Sector Banks Source: Reserve Bank of India, Quarterly Statistics on Deposits and Credit of Scheduled Commercial Banks India's Corporate Sector Financing Sources, Net 1/ (In percent of GDP, 4-quarter moving average) Capital markets: debt 2/ Capital markets: listed equity 3/ FDI 4/ Domestic bank credit External commercial borrowing 5/ Sources: CEIC; Haver Analytics; Dealogic; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Non-internal sources of finance. Excludes personal loans and credit by non-bank financial companies. 2/ Includes corporate bonds, commercial paper, syndicated loans. 3/ Money raised on the primary market (BSE and NSE) with offer of shares (WEF data). 4/ Equity investment by direct investor in direct investment enterprise. 5/ Net flow, right scale. Economic risks are tilted to the downside. On the external side, despite the reduced imbalances and strengthened reserve buffers, the impact from global financial market volatility could be disruptive, including from U.S. monetary policy normalization or weaker-than-expected global growth. In the absence of disruptive global financial volatility, slower growth in China, Europe and the United States would have only modest adverse spillovers to India, given weak trade linkages. A key domestic risk stems from the government’s currency exchange initiative, where the near-term adverse economic impact of accompanying cash shortages remains difficult to gauge, while it may have a positive economic impact in the medium term. Domestic risks also flow from a potential further deterioration of corporate and public bank balance sheets, as well as setbacks in the reform process, including in GST design and implementation, which could weigh on domestic demand-driven growth and undermine investor and consumer sentiment. On the upside, larger than expected gains from the GST and further structural reforms could lead to significantly stronger growth; while a sustained period of continued-low global energy prices would also be beneficial to India (see Annex II: Risk Assessment Matrix). Authorities’ Views The authorities were of the view that the near and medium-term outlook remains encouraging. They emphasized the wide ranging reforms that have been implemented by the country since the last Article IV consultations with IMF, which included promulgation of the Goods and Services Tax Act, Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act 2016, notification of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 and operationalization of National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) for the new corporate insolvency framework, formalization of the monetary policy committee, enhanced liberalization of the FDI regime and initiatives to improve infrastructure. These have Page 14 Risks to the outlook were seen as coming more importantly from abroad. In translated into stronger macroeconomic fundamentals and more resilient growth. The authorities also indicated the role played by Direct Benefit Transfer and JAM ( Jan Dhan Yojana bank accounts, Aadhaar identification, and mobile banking) trinity in complementing efforts of the government towards achievement of inclusive growth and fiscal consolidation. They expected agricultural output to improve following the return to a normal monsoon, industrial output to firm up, and services sector growth to remain stable. They agreed that while the replacement of specific banknotes could weigh on economic activity in cash sensitive sectors in the short run, this effect would not extend beyond two quarters, and would be outweighed by the positive medium- term impact from a more efficient payments system and greater formalization of business activities. Looking ahead, the authorities agreed with staff that the overall impact of the GST on growth would be positive. More generally, the continuation of structural reforms would strengthen growth outcomes in the medium term. particular, the authorities felt that though weak global growth and the potential of financial spillovers in a world characterized by highly accommodative monetary policies and negative interest rates in many advanced economies posed risks for India, the country was well prepared to navigate any accompanying turbulence. They also expressed concern about prospects for their exports, stemming from a possible upsurge in protectionism in advanced economy markets.