exchange rate flexibility is an essential tool in coping with volatile capital flows. The flexible rupee has been an important shock absorber and should continue to play that role. The RBI has ample reserves and, if needed, is able to provide foreign currency liquidity, through both swaps and spot intervention, to prevent disruptive movements in the exchange rate and check any self-fulfilling momentum that is divorced from exchange rate fundamentals. Based on a range of empirical methodologies, the FY 2013/14-average real effective exchange rate appears to be slightly over-valued (Annex V). As such, and given the sizable inflation differential with trading partners, some further modest nominal depreciation from current levels should not be a cause for concern. Recent policy measures have been targeted at improving the environment for capital inflows. India has shifted from a pre-Lehman Brothers era where FDI flows more-than-financed the CAD, to a situation where FDI covered only around one quarter of the deficit in 2012/13, with a corresponding increased reliance on debt flows. Over the past year the authorities have taken multiple steps to bolster capital inflows, including liberalizing the caps on FDI inflows; relaxing Sources: IMF, Information Notice System and IMF staff estimates. Based on the External Balance Assessment, the May 2013 External Sector Report concluded that India’s cyclically- adjusted current account and the value of the rupee are broadly in line with fundamentals, with the EBA current account regression approach indicating that the current account deficit was smaller than a level compatible with fundamentals and desired policies. Since the release of the External Sector Report, subsequent calculations by Fund staff suggest that the medium-term current account norm for India is a deficit which is centered around 2½ percent of GDP, a level slightly smaller than the forecasted medium-term current account (see Annex V). Page 13 restrictions on external commercial borrowing; offering FX swaps to banks to attract more NRI deposits and increase banks’ ability to borrow; and working with the IFC in its US$1 billion bond program directed at offshore investors. The authorities have also supported the currency by providing dollars directly to oil importers through FX swaps (see Annex IV for details of FX swaps to banks and oil importers and their impact). In addition, a swap line with the Ministry of Finance Japan has been increased from $15 billion to $50 billion, and the government is considering increasing imports of cheaper Iranian oil, which can be partly settled in rupees. Further opening up of the capital account should, however, be undertaken prudently. The opening to FDI and portfolio flows which occurred in 2013 will help finance the current account deficit. However, given the potential risks to corporate balance sheets, a further relaxation of external commercial borrowing (ECB) rules should be undertaken only incrementally and cautiously alongside a deeper domestic financial market. Options of issuing a maiden international sovereign bond, if market conditions permit, and of seeking entry into global bond indices, should be explored. The authorities could also look into increasing the availability of bilateral swap lines. The flexible rupee and recent movements in the currency have increased incentives to hedge FX exposures. As such, the relaxation of restrictions that reduce the depth of the onshore forwards and futures markets would be beneficial. If external pressures re-emerge, a well-communicated package of policy measures should be put in place to minimize disruptive movements in the currency and bolster confidence . Going forward, an improving export environment, an easing of supply bottlenecks to shrink import demand, and a smaller fiscal deficit should help reduce external vulnerabilities. Nevertheless, if capital account pressures were to resurface, continuing to allow the rupee to adjust flexibly to market conditions will be essential. In addition, a comprehensive plan should be announced to: Tighten monetary conditions through both an increase in the repo rate and a renewal of liquidity tightening measures to make it more costly to short the rupee. Such measures would help contain the inflationary impact of exchange rate depreciation and, temporarily, bolster the capital account position. However, liquidity tightening should be seen as a complement to, not an expedient substitute for, raising the repo rate. In following this approach, it will be essential to clearly communicate the central bank’s intentions and its motivations for using the range of tools it has in its monetary toolkit. The magnitude of the FX swaps is fully disclosed through the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) template on both the RBI and IMF websites. Key restrictions include: banks have been banned from proprietary trading in domestic currency futures and exchange traded options; margin requirements on domestic U.S. dollar-rupee forward trades were doubled to 100 percent; and FIIs and NRIs cannot trade currency futures in India. Page 14 Deploy India’s ample FX reserves, including by again taking oil marketing companies out of the spot market and offering them a short-term bilateral FX swap window priced at market rates. Recent experience indicates that this has been an effective strategy in changing market expectations and, as such, should be used again. Similarly, FX swaps for NRI deposits (at market-based rates and without the subsidy embedded in the recent NRI swaps) should again be offered if needed. A clear package of fiscal measures, in addition to those needed to achieve fiscal targets, would help support confidence and lessen the burden on the central bank in reacting to market pressures. These could include administrative action to raise diesel prices at a faster pace, and further limit the subsidized consumption of LPG. Measures to further restrict capital outflows should be avoided, not least because recent experience suggests that they could well be counterproductive, potentially catalyzing capital flight through different routes. The renunciation of such measures should be clearly communicated to bolster investor confidence. The mission noted that it would be important for the government to develop an agreed set of contingency plans—along the lines described above—so as to be ready to react to heightened market pressures. These plans should be fully coordinated across the relevant government agencies and would constitute a highly valuable preparatory exercise. Authorities’ Views The authorities argued that external vulnerabilities have been greatly reduced, owing in large part to strong policy actions taken. Gold imports have been sharply curtailed, and goods and services exports are starting to pick up even before the full impact of rupee depreciation is felt. FII debt inflows have been negative since May but equity investment flows have remained resilient. With only a relatively small amount of FII debt remaining, the mix of FII money now present on Indian markets has become more durable. The authorities noted the effectiveness of the FX-swap scheme for oil marketing companies in stabilizing the currency market and shifting market sentiment. They also pointed to the success of their efforts to mobilize durable capital inflows, particularly from NRIs and FDI. The authorities agreed that exchange rate flexibility would continue to be a key pillar of their response to external volatility . In their view, the broad thrust of the liquidity tightening and FX intervention policies employed during July-September had been correct. They argued that with the Reserve Bank of India moving towards improved communication of its views, the risk of volatility would be further reduced. Looking ahead, if faced with a similar round of capital flow volatility, they indicated that the thrust of their response would likely be similar, using a combination of exchange rate flexibility, some monetary tightening, and, if needed, limited use of foreign exchange reserves. Page 15 The authorities indicated that a new crisis management framework has been established under the management of the inter-regulatory Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) . The authorities argued that this group, which has met regularly over the past few months, should enhance India’s ability to respond to shocks threatening the Indian financial system. At the same time, they recognized this was a work-in-progress and agreed with staff’s suggestion to test the FSDC crisis management system, potentially in a “war game exercise” setting.