There is a firm commitment to meet the 2013/14 fiscal deficit target, but achieving this goal will be challenging. The authorities demonstrated their commitment to fiscal consolidation by meeting the Budget deficit target for 2012/13, despite a slowing economy (Figure 6). Politically difficult steps were taken to raise fuel and retail electricity prices, target direct cash transfers using the expanding Unique Identification (UID) program (Box 3), and restructure the debt of public electricity distribution companies. For 2013/14, the Budget deficit target of 4.8 percent of GDP appears achievable. However, weak revenue growth, higher global oil prices, rupee depreciation, and higher interest rates, mean that achieving this near-term goal will entail significant reductions in spending. For this fiscal year, in addition to the announced measures to rationalize non-plan expenditure, the target is expected to be met by requiring agencies to give up un-utilized spending allocations, and to not release further budgeted amounts to such agencies. In addition, cash-rich public sector enterprises are being asked to transfer higher dividends to the central government. Such efforts, however, will create a substantial additional drag on growth, particularly given that fiscal multipliers on such spending are relatively large in India. Additional fiscal reforms (including better-targeted subsidies, introduction of a GST and direct tax code) are unlikely to be introduced before the May 2014 general elections, although there is some discussion of raising diesel prices at a somewhat faster pace in the remainder of this fiscal year. The government’s goal of a 3 percent of GDP deficit target by 2016/17 represents a reasonable medium-term consolidation plan, but the policies to achieve that outcome have yet to be articulated. A better quality of fiscal adjustment could be achieved through a more balanced package of revenue measures and expenditure reductions. In particular, the staff would recommend the following package of fiscal reforms to meet the authorities’ medium-term fiscal target: Approving the goods and services tax . This represents the single most important revenue reform and will help boost growth by lessening distortions and creating a single Indian market for goods and services. This implies a deficit of 5.3 percent of GDP under the IMF’s definition, due to the differential treatment of disinvestment proceeds. See J. Tapsoba (2013), “Options and Strategies for Fiscal Consolidation in India,” IMF WP 13/127. Staff’s medium-term fiscal forecasts are calculated on the basis of current policies and, as such, show relatively little fiscal adjustment in the coming years. Page 16 Approving a new direct tax code with streamlined and smaller deductions, raising excise taxes back to pre-GFC levels, and improving tax administration Reforming untargeted subsidies on fuel and fertilizer . Continuing the ongoing move toward targeted transfers will have strong beneficial effects on growth and the distribution of income. This should be the central plank of expenditure rationalization and will allow spending to be redirected toward more socially- and economically-productive areas (including greater investment in health and education). An important step would be to raise diesel prices at a more accelerated pace, so as to ensure full cost recovery by mid-2014 (and thereafter link domestic fuel prices to movements in international prices). Targeting food subsidies . The recently-passed Food Security Act—which aims to provide subsidized rice, wheat and coarse cereals to 67 percent of the population—is expected to add significantly to the fiscal subsidy burden going forward (Box 4). Efforts should be made to convert these subsidies to a system of targeted, direct cash transfers as quickly as possible. In addition, governance and transparency in the allocation of subsidized food should be strengthened and the efficiency of the Public Distribution System enhanced. Adhering to the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act (2003) by the central government. This would imply that the central government commits and adheres to a credible path of fiscal consolidation, reaching a central government deficit of 3 percent of GDP by FY Minimizing additional pressures on the fiscal position from future bank recapitalization needs (including by increased bank provisioning) and the liabilities of electricity distribution companies (by continuing to raise tariffs to cost recovery levels). Focusing on the implementation of a more sustainable package of fiscal reforms, as described above, would build confidence, support monetary policy in fighting inflation, free resources for investment, lessen vulnerabilities and generate a positive dynamic of lower financing costs and improved economic and social prospects. Without such measures, the composition of fiscal adjustment will likely be met through a compression in needed capital spending or an underfunding of important social programs, which would undermine growth and the government’s laudable pro-poor and inclusive growth goals (see Selected Issues Chapter IV). sustainable trajectory, and is projected to stabilize at around 64 percent of GDP in 2017/18. The public debt sustainability analysis (DSA) using the Fund’s new DSA template suggests that India’s public debt burden remains manageable. While the baseline scenario already uses conservative real GDP growth assumptions, further negative growth shocks represent one of the major risks to the debt outlook, with shocks to real interest rates and contingent liabilities posing additional risks (see Annex VI). Even without medium-term fiscal adjustment, government debt remains on a Page 17 The authorities agreed that fiscal consolidation was needed over the medium term . In Authorities’ Views The government has reiterated the importance of meeting its FY13/14 Budget deficit target . The authorities stated that this was a “redline” with strong credibility implications if not met. As such, no slippage will be permitted. They argued that revenue performance this year is on track, and they emphasized that meeting the deficit target does not entail an expenditure cut, but only involves expenditure rationalization by recalling unspent balances with spending units and not releasing further budgeted amounts to them. Fiscal accounting in India is done on a cash, not accrual basis, so the authorities recognize the risk that some spending pressure from this year could spill into next year. However, they point to the fact that similar spillovers happen every year, and they argue that there is no evidence that the size of this carryover is growing from year to year. their eyes, the goal of reducing the central government deficit to 3 percent of GDP (authorities’ definition) by 2016/17 is achievable, but they did not believe there was a need to re-invigorate the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) process. The FRBM Act has recently been amended to adopt this target, therefore, revising the Act at this stage may not be needed. Revenue enhancement is key, particularly through better tax administration, and the authorities were hopeful that the goods and services tax (GST) and the direct tax code (DTC) bills will be passed by next year. The authorities are also optimistic that direct cash transfers—combined with the unique identification (Aadhaar) system—will generate significant fiscal savings through de-duplication of subsidy recipient rolls. The authorities do not see significant risks to fiscal consolidation from implementation of the Food Security Act, and underlined the importance of the Act in tackling poverty and hunger and ensuring improved social outcomes.