Nonperforming Loans & Loan Loss Provisions (In percent of Total Gross Loans) Provisions Nonperforming Loans Past weak growth and delayed infrastructure investment projects have placed pressure on bank asset quality . While the banking sector is generally sound, weak growth and supply-side bottlenecks have led to a deterioration in asset quality, particularly at public sector banks (PSBs). System-wide, gross non-performing assets (NPAs) have increased to 4.1 percent of total advances at end-fiscal year 2013/14, with PSBs’ NPAs reaching 4.7 percent, notwithstanding sales of NPAs to asset restructuring companies (ARCs, see Box 7). Also, restructured loans (as a share of total advances) increased slightly from 5.8 to 5.9 percent of total advances over the last fiscal year. Nonetheless, concerns over evergreening remain, as more than 90 percent of those sales of NPAs to ARCs were financed by banks via issuance of security receipts. Source: IMF, Financial Soundness Indicators. Indonesia India Brazil China South Africa Corporate vulnerability indicators show signs of stabilization but remain elevated Although the share of debt held by firms with an interest coverage ratio below one fell by To encourage foreign-currency-risk-free borrowings for corporates under the external commercial borrowing (ECB) facility, since September 2014 the RBI has permitted recognized non-resident ECB lenders to extend loans in Indian rupees, funded through swaps undertaken with an eligible bank in India. The RBI’s December 2014 Financial Stability Report shows an increase in gross NPAs across all scheduled commercial banks to 4.5 percent of gross advances, with stressed assets (the sum of gross NPAs and restructured assets) increasing by 0.7 percent to 10.7 percent between March and September 2014 for all scheduled commercial banks, and by 1 percent for PSBs, reaching 12.9 percent over the same period. Page 17 2.5 percent to 13.8 percent during 2013/14, the shares of loss-making companies and those with a leverage ratio above two have increased slightly to 22.9 and 31.4 percent, respectively (see Selected Issues Chapters VIII and IX). As noted in the RBI’s 2013/14 Annual Report , sectors subject to greater stress—infrastructure, textiles, engineering, metals and products, chemicals, and mining—make up 36 percent of NPAs as of March 2014. Also, as noted in a recent speech by the RBI’s Deputy Governor, based on the indicative data, the hedge ratio for external commercial borrowings and foreign currency convertible bonds (excluding natural hedges) declined sharply from about 34 percent of borrowings in 2013/14 to about 15 percent in July–August 2014. Weaknesses have been more pronounced in public sector banks, which represent three- quarters of banking system assets . These challenges include larger capital needs and weaker asset quality, which stem in part from large exposure to infrastructure in the last few years. The profitability of PSBs remains weak, due to lower operating efficiency. Nonetheless, new capital injections for India’s banks (to meet Basel III requirements and additional capital requirements due to restructured loans being reclassified as NPAs) are likely to be moderate (see Box 8). A multi-pronged approach is needed to remedy long-standing structural issues in the PSBs, including weak corporate governance. Such an approach should entail further disinvestment by the government, while improving corporate governance and human resource policies, consistent with key recommendations of the Nayak Committee report. Staff welcomes the government’s intention to reduce its shareholdings in PSBs down to 52 percent and thereby allow the public banks to strengthen their equity capital base. The RBI has made further progress in financial sector reforms since the 2014 Article IV consultation. Efforts have focused on strengthening regulation, including important progress on implementing Basel III, identifying Domestic Systemically Important Banks and imposing capital surcharges on them, improving the resolution of impaired assets, and expanding access to finance. The RBI has recently tightened prudential regulations, including requiring ARCs to provide at least 15 percent equity towards purchases of NPAs, while phasing out (by April 1, 2015) the ability for many types of loans to be categorized as rescheduled (and thereby face lower provisioning requirements). In addition, from July 2014, the RBI has allowed the move of infrastructure and coal sector loans into five-year term loans with the ability of rollover, which improves the asset-liability structure of banks. Going forward, the health of the Indian banking system would be best served by ending the forbearance provided by the current restructuring mechanism for all types of loans. See also P. Lindner and S. Jung (2014), “Corporate Vulnerabilities in India and Banks’ Loan Performance,” IMF WP The speech is available at http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=919. In April 2014, the RBI introduced incremental provisioning and capital requirements for banks’ exposures to entities with unhedged foreign exchange exposures. In order to improve governance, the government intends to separate the positions of CEO and chairman at PSBs (in line with the Nayak Committee’s recommendations), except for State Bank of India (SBI). The government also intends to revise the appointment process for membership of PSBs’ boards. Page 18 The RBI has taken steps to remove information asymmetries and enable banks to improve credit risk management through the establishment of a large borrower database (beginning May 2014). The RBI intends to subject RBI-regulated non-bank financial corporations (NBFCs) to more stringent regulatory norms (in line with those for banks), which will help strengthen the stability of this fast-growing part of the financial sector. Although NBFCs’ asset growth has significantly outpaced bank asset growth since 2011, their assets correspond to only about 13 percent of bank assets. NBFCs are generally well regulated, with the largest 480 NBFCs (representing around 90 percent of total NBFC assets) subject to RBI regulation and supervision. Over the past year, a number of measures were enacted which improved corporate governance, enhanced the securities market regulator’s (SEBI) enforcement powers, and increased transparency of participatory notes (P-Notes). Measures expanding the rights of minority investors helped improve India’s standing in the World Bank’s “Protecting Minority Investors rank” from about 30 th in 2013 to 7 th as at June 2014. A recent amendment to the SEBI Act equipped the regulator with powers of search and seizure; in cases crossing state lines, recourse is now available to a single court in Mumbai, rather than to civil courts in all involved states. Foreign investors’ ownership of P-Notes was streamlined by restricting the types of investors who can own such notes. Also, brokers which sell P-Notes now have to provide SEBI with the names of their beneficiaries. India is currently re-negotiating the double-taxation treaties with several countries, partly in order to rationalize such investments, and as a follow on to measures enacted in 2014 to ease the registration burden for foreign institutional investors (FIIs). Interagency discussions on expanding and improving the liquidity of the corporate bond market are continuing, while SEBI is also considering steps to encourage more debt-for-equity swaps. priority for the government. The RBI has issued guidelines to set up differentiated banks (such as payments Enhancing financial inclusion has been a key Bank Accounts Held at a Formal Financial Institution (In percent of population age 15 and over) Source: World Bank, Global Findex Database. This includes the largest NBFCs, deposits-taking NBFCs, or those involved in leasing, lending, or securities investments. The RBI decided to: (i) increase capital minimum requirements from Rs 2.5 million to Rs 20 million (by March 2017); (ii) require asset finance companies to receive ratings (by March 2016); (iii) require NBFCs with assets above Rs 5 billion, and all deposit-taking NBFCs to maintain a minimum Tier-1 capital ratio of 10 percent (by March 2017); and require systemically important and deposit-taking NBFCs to provision more (in line with banks). Most of the new requirements will be phased in over time. However, government-owned NBFCs are not subject to full RBI supervision. P-Notes are a type of derivative instrument which foreign investors can buy through an entity registered in a country with which India has a double taxation agreement (usually Mauritius, Cyprus, or Singapore), relieving them from the need to register with SEBI or pay Indian capital gains taxes, and have provided anonymity to such investors. Indian banks are subject to sectoral lending requirements (priority sectors include agriculture, SMEs), but these are undertaken primarily on a commercial basis, and lead to higher credit offtake and higher growth. Staff analysis finds that enhanced financial inclusion and access to finance leads to higher economic output and lower inequality (see Selected Issues Chapter X). Page 19 banks) which focus more narrowly on the provision of basic financial services, using new technologies, while investing only in relatively safe assets such as government securities. Two new banking licenses were allocated in April 2014, with the provision that at least 25 percent of new branches have to be in rural areas. The government has launched an ambitious scheme (Jan Dhan Yojana) to provide bank accounts for each poor Indian family. Each account would include a debit card, accident and life insurance coverage, and an overdraft facility (to motivate active use of the accounts). to growth, staff supports the following measures The RBI should further strengthen regulation for banks’ credit quality classification and require To maintain financial stability and enhance the ability of the financial sector to contribute increased provisioning (particularly for all types of restructured assets under the Corporate Debt Restructuring framework) to strengthen financial stability. Furthermore, bolstering capital buffers in public sector banks remains essential to ensure the banking sector’s ability to support the recovery, while allowing the PSBs to meet their Basel III obligations. Given the increased unhedged FX exposures of large corporates, strengthened monitoring of the extent of corporate vulnerabilities is warranted. Staff continues to endorse the 2012 FSAP’s recommendation to reduce group exposure limits in line with international norms. The RBI should continue its focus on improving debt recovery by banks, including by providing incentives to swiftly deal with delinquent borrowers (including through enhancing supervision) and promoters. Efforts are needed to improve the insolvency legal and institutional framework, particularly on the implementation side of the Companies Act 2013. This includes building a larger corps of specialized judges and a cadre of insolvency and workout experts in the private sector, to facilitate faster insolvency resolution Steps to update India’s regulatory architecture, drawing upon the recommendations by the Financial Sector Legislative Reform Commission (FSLRC) and those in consonance with global regulatory reform, should continue. The Statutory Liquidity Requirement should continue to be reduced as the fiscal deficit declines, which will free up resources for lending to the private sector. Measures to enhance the corporate bond market should be taken, by improving liquidity in the secondary market and developing a robust bond holder protection mechanism. The emphasis on financial inclusion could also be facilitated by new technologies (for example, Aadhaar-based KYC compliance and Aadhaar-supported direct benefit transfers), including by utilizing mobile phone payments technology. The RBI’s December 2014 Financial Stability Report finds that provisions would not be able to cover expected losses from credit risk under certain adverse macroeconomic conditions (based on an analysis of the 60 largest banks). To revamp financial sector laws, the government set up the FSLRC in March 2011. The Commission in its report has given wide-ranging recommendations, both legislative and nonlegislative, on the institutional, legal, and regulatory framework and operational changes in the Indian financial sector. The draft Indian Financial Code has been proposed and includes provisions that aim at replacing existing financial laws. Page 20 The authorities emphasized the strong actions taken over the past year to strengthen Authorities’ Views the regime for tackling stressed assets. They noted that they are balancing the need to instill greater payment discipline in borrowers against the challenges faced by banks and infrastructure firms that are over-leveraged, in some cases due to lack of government action to clear projects in a timely manner. The authorities have created a database of large borrowers and placed pressure on “willful defaulters.” At the same time, they recognized the challenges inherent in the ARC mechanism, and an effort is underway to reform the bankruptcy and insolvency framework. The authorities view the slowdown in private sector credit growth as primarily due to weak demand for bank loans, rather than impaired balance sheets of banks. In their view, the build-up of excess capacity in some sectors during the boom years means that the current recovery could continue with sluggish credit growth. In addition, they noted that oil marketing companies’ demand for bank credit has fallen in light of much-reduced oil prices. Furthermore, some corporates are shifting to non-bank financing sources, reflecting in part their lower funding costs. On the supply side, lenders are now more cautious than previously, given the RBI’s efforts to rein in bad lending practices, but banks—including the public sector banks—remain well capitalized and liquid.