Strains are building as corporate financial positions deteriorate and bank asset quality weakens (Figure 7). Slowing growth, the delayed authorization of permits for infrastructure projects, and rising costs of capital are placing pressure on corporate profitability. Average corporate leverage and debt payment capacity are not markedly worse than during the global financial crisis, but default probabilities of the most vulnerable 10 percent of firms are far greater than in 2009. This vulnerability is further aggravated by concentration risk: banking sector loans to India’s ten largest conglomerates account for almost 100 percent of banks’ net worth. The banking system is well capitalized (the capital adequacy ratio was 13.8 percent in March 2013), but nonperforming assets (4.2 percent of total advances) and restructured loans (an additional 5.7 percent of gross advances) are expected to continue to rise. The deterioration in credit quality has been worse among public banks where lending is concentrated in poorer-performing sectors such as infrastructure (especially power), aviation, agriculture, steel, and textiles. However, despite the sizeable recent depreciation in the exchange rate, there has, as yet, been little apparent additional strain on corporate balance sheets arising from currency mismatches (see Selected Issues Chapter V). In addition, new capital injections See Credit Suisse (2013), “House of Debt Revisited,” Credit Suisse Securities Research. Page 18 for India’s banks (to meet Basle III requirements and additional capital requirements due to restructured loans being reclassified as NPAs) are likely to be manageable (Box 5). Enhanced financial sector supervision and monitoring, and increased bank provisioning, are warranted. To tackle rising strains in the financial system, and improve the functioning of financial intermediation more broadly, the RBI has outlined its plans to further enhance the monitoring and supervision of banks’ credit quality and require banks to further increase provisioning. In particular, the RBI’s recently-introduced incremental provisioning and capital requirements for bank lending to corporates with foreign-currency exposures are steps in the right direction. As recommended in the FSAP, advances and commitments to interrelated companies should be appropriately measured and limited, and the existing ceilings fully enforced—this is a critical measure and should be undertaken prior to issuing new banking licenses (see Annex II). A further priority should be to gather information on, and analyze, the inter-linkages between corporate vulnerabilities and the health of the banking system, particularly on the extent of unhedged FX exposures of large firms with international operations. Strengthening prudential regulation for banks’ asset quality classification and concentration risks are needed. Implementation of the Mahapatra Committee’s recommendations (to more rigorously classify restructured advances) is a step in the right direction, but further measures in the areas of asset quality recognition and concentration risks are needed. The objective should be to fully recognize the true asset quality of banks’ portfolios, with restructured loans counted toward nonperforming assets immediately after a restructuring, and then moved to the performing bucket only after a period of satisfactory performance. This is of particular importance for the public sector banks. Moreover, all sectors of the economy (including infrastructure and real estate) should be subject to the same loan quality classification rules. Enhancing the institutional and legal framework for debt recovery is an important step This will require improvements in the legal and institutional insolvency framework, the regime for insolvency professionals, the functioning of the distressed asset market, and out-of-court settlement procedures. Initial steps by the FSLRC to explore updating India’s financial regulatory architecture should be intensified, to bring the institutional and legal framework in line with India’s fast-growing and complex financial system. Various financial sector reforms should increase credit availability and broaden access to financial services. Recently-announced plans to simplify bank branch licensing, create inclusiveness criteria for underserved areas, and enhance competition in the banking sector— including by accelerating the approval process for new private sector banks and opening the Indian market further to foreign banks—will expand access. The December 2013 introduction of CPI- indexed bonds (particularly those sold to retail clients) is a further positive step and will help reduce The banking sector is subject to a number of additional regulatory requirements, many of which are distortionary in nature. These issues have been covered in the 2012 Financial Sector Stability Assessment Update (IMF Country Report No. 13/8). Page 19 the demand for gold and divert savings to productive uses, intermediated by the domestic financial system. Other welcome reforms already underway include: introduction of a ten-year bond futures contract; improvement in the recovery mechanism for distressed debt; and establishing the central large borrowers’ database, which will improve the supervision of large exposures. In addition to these efforts, gradually reducing the Statutory Liquidity Requirement, concomitant with a decline in the fiscal deficit, will help free up resources for lending to the private sector rather than channeling savings into government securities. On the financial inclusion side, the Governor’s call for a feasibility study on mobile banking offers the possibility to integrate currently un-banked segments of India’s population into the financial system. Authorities’ Views The authorities recognize that corporate profitability has fallen, putting pressure on financial sector balance sheets . They agreed with staff that these pressures, while manageable at present, will need to be carefully monitored going forward, and noted that other major EMs are facing similar strains. The RBI is keen to find ways to incentivize the early recognition of problem assets by banks, and the authorities feel that the newly-adopted Companies Act should over time facilitate a clearer insolvency framework. The authorities also acknowledge that the foreign exchange exposure of Indian corporates is not fully clear, but they believe that most such borrowing has either a formal or natural hedge. The authorities emphasized the potential impact of a range of reforms to strengthen financial intermediation and advance financial inclusion. In particular, the RBI laid out the five pillars of its planned developmental measures to improve the Indian financial system. These include: (i) strengthening the monetary policy framework; (ii) enhancing banking structure (through new bank entry, branch expansion, encouraging new varieties of banks); (iii) broadening financial markets (by improving the liquidity and depth of government securities, money, derivatives, and corporate debt markets); (iv) expanding financial inclusion (involving better access to finance for SMEs, the underserved parts of the population, through technology (such as mobile banking) and business practices (for example, maintaining the requirement that banks open at least 25 percent of their branches in unbanked rural centers); and (v) improving the financial system’s ability to handle corporate and financial institution distress (by strengthening financial restructuring, procedures for rescue of viable businesses, and insolvency practices).