remain constrained by longstanding structural weaknesses. In the near term, growth is expected to rebound, helped by increased political certainty, several policy actions, lower commodity (oil and non-oil) import prices, improved business and consumer confidence, and reduced external vulnerabilities. There are encouraging indications that new investment project announcements have started to pick up, specifically in the power and transport sectors, which should help broaden the See R. Anand and V. Tulin (2014), “Disentangling India’s Investment Slowdown,” IMF WP 14/47. CTOT [LHS] Gold [RHS] Oil [RHS] Source: Cavalcanti, Mohaddes, and Raissi (2014); and IMF, International Financial Statistics. Page 7 ZAF TUR THA MEX PHL CHN IDN BRA G f B C h d m E Selected EMs: Current Account Balance recovery as projects are implemented. Real GDP growth (at factor cost) is forecast to rise to 5½ percent in 2014/15 (up from 4¾ percent achieved in 2013/14), further accelerating to 6¼ percent in 2015/16, as a result of the revival in industrial and investment activity. In the presence of supply-side bottlenecks and structural challenges, and assuming no substantial legislative changes, medium term growth is projected to remain at around 6¾ percent, considerably below the 8 percent average achieved during 2002–07 (see Box 1 on potential growth). Inflationary pressures remain, despite recent moderation in headline inflation . CPI inflation declined to 5 percent in December 2014, reflecting economic slack and favorable base effects, the tight monetary stance, lower global commodity prices, as well as government efforts to contain food inflation. Staff projects CPI inflation to move up to about 6¼ percent by end-2014/15 and hover slightly above 6 percent over the course of 2015/16 (close to the RBI’s inflation objective of 6 percent by January 2016), as growth picks up, slack dissipates, and favorable base effects unwind. The current account deficit (CAD) has narrowed considerably and is expected to remain contained and comfortably financed. Around half of the 3 percentage points of GDP decline in the CAD in 2013/14 was attributable to the fall in gold imports, owing to higher import duties and administrative measures, with weak domestic demand and revival in exports also contributing to the narrowing deficit. The CAD is expected to remain at around 1¾ percent of GDP in 2014/15 (helped by significantly lower oil import prices), widening to about 2½ percent of GDP over the medium term as domestic demand strengthens. Sustained lower global oil prices and the resulting large positive shock to India’s terms of trade should help contain the deficit. As domestic inflation has moderated and international gold prices have fallen, import demand for gold is not expected to return to 2013/14 levels, and should not lead to a large widening of the CAD even with the government’s recent withdrawal of various administrative measures. weakened public sector bank (PSB) balance sheets and lower corporate demand for bank credit, and is posing Credit growth is currently anemic, reflecting India's Corporate Sector Financing Sources, Net 1/ (In percent of GDP, 4-quarter moving average) Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook 1/ Change from 2012 - 2013. 2/ India: FY2012/13; Others: CY2012. Domestic bank credit Capital markets: debt 2/ Capital markets: listed equity External commercial borrowing Momentum in Gold Imports (In billions of USD per month) Government of India (GoI) imposes restriction on gold imports Current Account Balance (% of GDP, 2012) 2/ GoI eases restrictions on gold imports Source: Haver Analytics. Y Y Y Y Y Gold Imports FY Average Avg: 5.9bn Avg: 3.1bn Avg: 1.5bn RUS MYS IND Avg: 3.4bn Sources: CEIC; Haver Analytics, Dealogic; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Non-internal sources of finance. 2/ Includes corporate bonds, commercial paper, syndicated loans. All macroeconomic projections in this report are based on oil-price assumptions contained in the January 2015 World Economic Outlook Update Page 8 headwinds to growth. Private banks (holding about one-quarter of banking system assets) are well- capitalized, profitable, have low NPLs and limited exposure to troubled sectors, and thus will be able to continue to contribute to credit expansion. However, problems are concentrated in public banks, where asset quality and capital adequacy positions are at a lower level than in private sector banks. Given diminished profitability, in order to maintain current capital adequacy ratios (CAR), public banks will need to improve their capital base to extend sufficient credit to support growth. Any further deterioration in asset quality could thereby constrain banks’ credit supply. Nonetheless, reflecting buoyant investor sentiment, capital markets (corporate bonds and equities) should be able to help contribute to financing growth. Notwithstanding recent improvements, downside economic risks remain (Annex I). On the external side, despite the reduction in imbalances and strengthening of buffers, the spillover impact from global financial market volatility to India could be very disruptive, including from any unexpected developments in the course of U.S. monetary policy normalization, particularly against the backdrop of recent large capital inflows (see Selected Issues Chapter I). Risks also emanate from a prolonged period of weak global growth, which could dampen Indian exports. Domestic risks include a supply-driven spike in inflation (possibly leading to higher gold imports), increased weaknesses in corporate financial positions, including from significant unhedged foreign exchange exposures (see Box 2) and further deterioration of bank asset quality, as well as slower-than- expected progress in addressing supply-side bottlenecks, which could weigh on growth and stoke inflation. On the upside, expedited structural reforms and faster implementation of cleared investment projects could lead to stronger growth, as would sustained low global energy prices. There was broad alignment in the macroeconomic projections of staff and the Authorities’ Views authorities. The authorities project growth at about 5½ percent in the current fiscal year, given the better-than-expected monsoon and favorable services sector output, and at slightly over 6 percent in 2015/16, owing to a pickup in global demand, the recovery of mining, and stronger investment. CPI inflation is projected by the authorities to decline somewhat faster than the RBI’s glide path to attaining the 6 percent objective by January 2016, reflecting their implementation of comprehensive structural measures to tackle food inflation. They considered that India’s CAD should remain contained in the neighborhood of 2 percent of GDP, as gold imports are not expected to revert to previous highs, reflecting stronger fundamentals. The authorities believe they are well prepared for a reprise of global financial market volatility, should it materialize . Fundamentals are stronger, reserves are higher, and markets seem to be distinguishing India from other major EM economies. They recognize risks to the outlook, including lower global growth as well as higher oil prices stemming from geopolitical events. However, they also note that unhedged foreign exchange exposure of corporates—which have Staff analysis indicates that to finance credit growth in the range of 15–20 percent to support the recovery and maintain CAR at about 11 percent at public sector banks, capital injection of 0.1–0.2 percent of GDP will be required in the near term, in addition to the amount allocated in the 2014/15 Union Budget. Page 9 increased during 2014—may not be the major vulnerability some had feared. They perceived the external volatility of 2013 as having acted as a natural experiment, revealing greater resilience by corporate India than previously believed. They agreed with staff that rupee exchange rate flexibility is an important policy tool that helps contain external risks, and noted that they had enhanced the RBI’s stock of international reserves for precautionary purposes. POLICIES: NURTURING THE RECOVERY WHILE