market pressures, the RBI took a number of steps to tighten domestic liquidity and support the exchange rate (Annex IV). India’s monetary policy response relied on a tightening of money market liquidity engineered by: Policy and Call Market Interest Rates (In percent) Interbank Call Money market closing rate MSF rate Reverse repo (LAF) Repo rate (LAF) Jul-13 Aug-13 Sep-13 Oct-13 Limiting the provision of liquidity under the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) to 0.5 percent of bank’s own net demand and time deposit liabilities (NTDL). Increasing the Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) interest rate by 200 bps to 10.25 percent, thereby increasing the wedge between the interest rates on the LAF and the MSF from 100 to 300 basis points. Sources: RBI and IMF staff calculations. May-13 Nov-13 Dec-13 Jun-13 The RBI introduced two foreign exchange swap schemes in September 2013—one to encourage new foreign exchange deposits into India by non-resident Indians with a minimum term of three years; and one to encourage long-term overseas foreign exchange borrowing by banks. Under both swap schemes, the RBI agreed to sell to banks on a forward basis and until November 30, 2013, USD against rupees at concessional rates, which gives rise to multiple currency practices (MCP) relating solely to capital transactions. These MCPs are not subject to Fund approval because the Fund has declined to assert jurisdiction over MCPs relating solely to capital transactions (see BUFF/85/34). The initial recalibration of the LAF on July 15 specified an overall limit of 1 percent of NTDL of the banking system. LAF is a key element of the operating framework of the RBI. The MSF allows banks to borrow overnight at their discretion up to two percent of the respective NTDLs, at a margin above the repo rate, against collateral of government securities. Page 10 Tightening the averaging rules for the cash reserve ratio (CRR) by requiring banks to meet at least 99 percent of CRR on daily basis (up from 70 percent earlier). Undertaking open market sales of Government of India Securities by the RBI (of around INR 150 billion during July-August 2013). As a result, the interbank call money market rate was increased by some 300 basis points with the MSF rate becoming the effective policy rate, money market and three-month t-bill rates rose by about 300 basis points, and there were lesser increases in rates further out the yield curve. The preference for these liquidity-tightening measures to increase short-term interest rates (rather than increase the policy rate) was due to the fact they could be put in place quickly and be easily unwound as pressures eased. In addition, these measures were more targeted at supporting the rupee by significantly raising the short-term costs of shorting the currency. A comparable tightening (of 300 bps) undertaken through increases in the repo rate would have been unprecedented, likely had a larger impact on growth, and been politically difficult to achieve. As external pressures have abated, the RBI has moved to normalize monetary policy. Since September, the RBI has gradually unwound the liquidity measures by lowering both the MSF rate (by 150 bps) and daily CRR requirement (to 95 percent) and expanding access to term repos. At the same time, the repo rate was increased by 50 bps (to 7.75 percent), restoring the interest rate corridor to the 100 bps that existed prior to mid- July. As pressures on the currency have eased and markets have normalized, the RBI’s strategy to Sources: RBI and IMF staff calculations. restore the repo rate as its primary policy instrument has been fully appropriate. RBI's Daily Liquidity Operations (In billions of Rupees) Liquidity injection through MSF Liquidity injection through term repos Withdrawal through LAF (reverse repo) Liquidity injection through LAF (repo) 1% of banking system's NTDL 0.5% of banking system's NTDL May-13 Jun-13 Jul-13 Aug-13 Sept-13 Oct-13 Nov-13 Dec-13 However, inflation remains too high and the RBI will need to continue raising policy rates in the coming months. High and persistent inflation is a key vulnerability that has caused household inflation expectations to continuously exceed actual inflation and become embedded in behaviors. This, in turn, has driven a rising demand for gold and is adding to downward pressures on the rupee. The RBI’s resolve to pay greater attention to headline CPI in monetary policy formulation and to strengthen its anti-inflationary efforts are commendable. However, the ingrained nature of inflation and inflation expectations mean that reducing inflation—even over a protracted horizon— will require significant increases in policy rates, which will weigh on growth. Given uncertainties surrounding the strength and lags associated with the monetary transmission mechanism, an incremental approach to monetary tightening is warranted. However, it will be important to As an illustrative guide of the adjustment required, calculations using a Taylor rule (embedded in a structural forecasting and policy model customized to India’s specific circumstances) suggest that the repo rate would need to rise significantly over the next six months from its end-November level of 7.75 percent, in order to lower inflation expectations, tackle inflation inertia, and sustainably lower CPI inflation to around 7 percent by end-2015 (see Selected Issues Chapter III). Page 11 communicate the RBI’s policy reaction function and the shift in its tolerance for high CPI inflation through clear forward guidance on the direction and intent of policy. In addition, should high inflation expectations persist and inflation remain sticky, a more front-loaded path of interest rate increases may be needed (Figure 5). Sustainably lowering inflation will require a simpler monetary framework with clear objectives and operational autonomy for the RBI: The RBI should move towards adopting the containment of inflation as its primary objective, with headline CPI inflation providing the principal nominal anchor for monetary policy. The evolution of the CPI plays a key role in influencing both inflation expectations and wage formation. While the RBI should see through the impact of transitory shocks, the current evolution of food prices, rising at a rapid pace for several years, is not a transitory phenomenon and reflects both consumption demand and supply constraints. In addition, empirically, food price shocks propagate strongly and rapidly into non-food, non-fuel (core) prices. To further enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, the RBI should clearly communicate how it intends to meet its stated inflation objectives and, as part of that process, should publish rolling one-year-ahead projections of both the CPI and WPI. In terms of monetary operations, the overnight repo rate should remain the principal policy tool, deployed in the context of a fully flexible exchange rate. In the context of implementation of the Financial Sector Legislative Reform Commission’s (FSLRC) recommendations (Box 2), legislative changes should be made to underpin the RBI’s operational autonomy. The authorities agreed that inflation was too high, and that monetary policy would Authorities’ Views need to remain vigilant over the near term. At the same time, they noted that supply-driven, food inflation is a key driver of the headline number. With the good monsoon this year, they believed food inflation should fall and that, in any case, monetary policy has a limited role in tackling food inflation. The authorities agreed that the output gap remains significantly negative and should help lower inflation going forward. As a result, they consider that the growth – inflation tradeoff will need to be carefully managed and there was a significant risk of overtightening, particularly in light of the need to create jobs to absorb India’s growing labor force. The central bank noted that, given the The RBI has had both an immediate inflation objective (WPI inflation should lie within a range of 4–4½ percent) and a long-term inflation objective (WPI inflation at 3 percent). The weight attached to these objectives is unclear, since WPI inflation has exceeded the target range for the past three years and is projected by the RBI to remain at around 6½ percent in the near-term. A narrower focus, for example on core CPI, would not be appropriate. See R. Anand, D. Ding and V. Tulin (2013), “Assessing Second-Round Effects of Commodity-Price Shocks in India”, IMF WP (forthcoming) for a discussion. As such, at its December 2013 policy meeting, the RBI opted to leave rates on hold, providing time to examine incoming data on the trajectory for inflation. Page 12 risks of derailing the ongoing economic recovery and uncertainties surrounding monetary transmission, a gradualist approach was needed to disinflate the economy over an extended period. They were less persuaded of the need for a further, significant increase in policy rates to lower inflation and inflationary expectations. Instead, they believed it would be prudent to give some time for the effects of the recent interest rate increases to feed through before revising the policy stance. The authorities indicated they would take a view on possible changes to the monetary policy framework only after the Patel Committee issues its report (expected in early 2014). They emphasize that they have been working, through their communications strategy, to shift the dialog with markets toward the CPI, which they consider will enhance the RBI’s credibility on inflation issues over the medium term. They are not persuaded of the need to release rolling, year ahead forecasts of inflation, but they made it clear that significant internal and public conversations are still to be had before the authorities settle on any change in the basic monetary policy set-up. REER NEER [RHS] 10yr Average of REER Recent experience has shown that Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates (Index, 2005=100)