Fiscal consolidation has continued, in line with the government’s deficit reduction path The authorities have demonstrated their commitment to consolidation, in particular in light of the negative output gap, leading to pro-cyclical fiscal tightening to restore fiscal space. The 2013/14 fiscal deficit of 4.5 percent of GDP (authorities’ definition) over-performed relative to the government’s target of 4.7 percent of GDP, and the primary deficit has narrowed by 2 percentage points of GDP since 2010/11. However, this consolidation was achieved largely as a result of cuts in capital spending. The 2014/15 Budget targets a central government deficit of 4.1 percent of GDP (authorities’ definition, equivalent to about 4½ percent of GDP in IMF terms). Despite sluggish revenues and delayed disinvestment, this year’s deficit target is expected to be achieved in part due to further expenditure compression. Nonetheless, declining global oil prices, in conjunction with the recent diesel-price deregulation and capping of LPG subsidies, are expected to help lower the fuel subsidy bill. To help meet the 2014/15 deficit target, energy excise duties were increased and non- plan expenditure was restrained. Looking forward, medium-term fiscal targets appear to be challenging. The medium- term consolidation path aims for the central government deficit to narrow further to 3 percent of GDP by 2016/17, but detailed measures underpinning this path have not yet been articulated. Achieving the 3 percent target for 2016/17 will require a comprehensive set of measures. As a result, staff’s medium-term fiscal projections, which are on the basis of current policies and assume no major legislative changes, forecast less fiscal adjustment. Page 12 Overhauling the subsidy regime to contain leakages in food subsidies and further reducing petroleum and fertilizer subsidies is estimated to yield around ½ of one percent of GDP in fiscal savings. Given the narrowness of current Indian tax bases, further revenue gains can be achieved by instituting tax administration reforms, including by reorganizing tax administration along functional lines, by merging indirect and direct tax boards. Such measures on the revenue and expenditure side should be undertaken, in order to increase growth-enhancing capital spending, while continuing on an overall fiscal consolidation path. Tax reform. India’s revenue-to-GDP ratio is While the authorities’ commitment to fiscal consolidation is welcome, the quality of consolidation should be improved to be more growth enhancing. Significant tax reforms and further rationalization of subsidies will be required to create the fiscal space for higher growth- enhancing capital spending and social expenditures. Specifically, staff recommends the following measures: considerably below its peers. A well-designed goods and service tax (GST) should be implemented, with minimal exemptions and a moderate single rate, as it would create a single Indian market, enhance the efficiency of internal movement of goods and services, and thereby boost GDP growth (see Box 4). Progress towards a revised direct tax code, with smaller and streamlined deductions, would also help. Efforts to improve tax administration, including along the lines outlined in the Tax Administration Reform Commission (TARC) reports, should continue. General Government Taxes, 2013 (In percent of GDP) Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff calculations. Food Fertilizer Petroleum Total Government Subsidies (In percent of GDP) Subsidy reform. Overhauling the subsidy regime should entail further reducing fuel (LPG and kerosene) subsidies and tackling fertilizer subsidies. Untargeted food subsidies should also be pared back, including by rationalizing the list of eligible beneficiaries and reforming the inefficient Food Corporation of India. In addition, moving to direct cash transfers using India’s unique identification system (Aadhaar) will help reduce leakages and improve governance in the food distribution system. An approach based on three pillars, namely direct benefit transfers, increased financial inclusion, and use of the Aadhaar system to better target beneficiaries, should yield large savings. The forthcoming recommendations of the Expenditure Management Commission should also be helpful in identifying additional savings. The Food Security Act (2013)—which will provide subsidized rice, wheat and coarse cereals to 67 percent of the Indian population—is not expected to add significantly to the 2014/15 fiscal subsidy burden, as it has been implemented in only eleven of the Indian states and union territories thus far. Source: IMF staff data. j Page 13 Fiscal responsibility legislation. The government’s medium-term consolidation path should be underpinned by a strengthened Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act. In particular, the design of future fiscal responsibility legislation could be enhanced by using a rule that provides room for countercyclical fiscal policy—such as capping nominal expenditure growth in addition to a deficit rule with built-in flexibility (see Selected Issues Chapter V). Unless such comprehensive fiscal measures are instituted, fiscal adjustment will likely be met through expenditure compression (including lower capital spending) or an underfunding of important social programs, as has occurred in recent years, which will undermine efforts to enhance economic growth and inclusiveness. In contrast, success in achieving the authorities’ medium-term fiscal goals would support business confidence, reinforce the efforts of the RBI’s tight monetary stance in fighting inflation, lower public sector financing costs, and reduce overall fiscal vulnerabilities. India’s public debt is projected to decline over the medium term and remains on a sustainable path. India’s relatively high nominal GDP growth means that public debt (with a favorable maturity structure, currency composition as well as a captive domestic investor base) remains on a downward path and is sustainable (see debt sustainability analysis (DSA) of Annex II). Under the baseline, the public debt-to-GDP ratio is forecast to decline gradually to about 58½ percent over the medium term from its current level of 65½ percent. While the baseline scenario already uses conservative growth assumptions, large negative growth shocks represent one of the major risks to the declining debt trajectory. Authorities’ Views Staff and the authorities broadly share a common outlook on the path for fiscal consolidation, with the authorities noting that they are sticking with fiscal adjustment in the midst of an economic slowdown. Fiscal adjustment in 2014/15 is likely to be accomplished through expenditure compression, but the authorities do not expect a repeat of previous years’ sharp reduction in capital spending. Noting recent IMF research suggesting that infrastructure spending can be sufficiently growth-enhancing to offset some of the direct cost incurred, they emphasize that they are making a strong effort to preserve the investment budget, carving out fiscal space for it by reducing lower-priority capital spending items. The authorities pointed out that in August 2014 they liberalized the project appraisal and approval process in line Ministries, which should accelerate the pace of public investment approvals, and introduced zero-based budgetary principles to better prioritize planned spending. The authorities also noted that the Expenditure Management Commission is expected to propose a number of rationalization measures on the recurrent spending side, such as a transition to direct benefit transfers, including by linking them to the unique identification number (Aadhaar) system. Even if capital spending at the central government level, in the end, faces some reduction to meet the overall deficit target, the authorities are confident that capital spending at the state level will remain healthy, ensuring that—at the general government level—compression of capital spending would be kept to a minimum. The authorities concurred with staff that enhanced revenue mobilization is a priority over the medium term . Once implemented, they expect that the GST will gradually boost revenue indirectly not only by promoting faster economic growth, but also by helping move economic Page 14 activity to the formal sector, thereby expanding the tax base and improving compliance. The authorities noted staff’s proposal on enhancing fiscal responsibility, and considered that, perhaps in the context of discussions surrounding a renewed fiscal rule, some flexibility regarding the fiscal deficit target could be introduced. The authorities disagreed with staff on the desirability of merging direct and indirect tax boards, arguing that functional specialization remains necessary.