PSBs, pose headwinds for economic growth. With the corporate sector (non-household lending) accounting for over 80 percent of banks’ credit portfolios, banking sector soundness and its ability to finance investment and growth rest on the financial health of the domestic corporate sector. Corporate vulnerabilities remain elevated, reflecting implementation delays and cost overruns in infrastructure projects, and challenges to effective debt restructuring. The share of debt held by firms with weak debt repayment capacity (interest coverage ratio below one) remains close to a decade-long high, at about 11 percent as of end-March 2015 (see Selected Issues Chapter I). Corporate leverage—particularly among large firms and in a few key sectors—is one of the highest across EMs, reflecting increased reliance on bank funding to meet high capital investment requirements in the late 2000s. Industries subject to greater stress, particularly those with weakened debt servicing capacity— including infrastructure, textiles, iron and steel, and mining—account for nearly one third of banks’ total loans and more than half of banks’ stressed assets. The vulnerability of corporate balance sheets to a sharp rupee depreciation remains elevated (see Box 9), but it is partly mitigated by increased hedging against FX movements. Corporate Leverage, Selected EMs (Debt-to-Equity Ratio, top quartile) FY2013/14 Y ZAF HUN RUS VIE POL EGY IDN KOR PHL PER ROM KAZ ARG BRA CRO TUR IND NIG THA CHN MEX COL MYS CZE Source: IMF, Corporate Vulnerability Utility Public sector banks continue to face asset quality difficulties, contributing to a slowdown in credit expansion. The share of PSBs’ stressed assets—including gross non- performing assets (NPAs) and restructured assets—in total advances continued to increase to 14.1 percent at end-September 2015 (of which NPAs stand at 6.2 percent), from 12.9 percent a year earlier. Weaker credit quality, due in part to poor governance and lack of commercial incentives, has kept PSBs’ profitability depressed, with ROA of around 0.4 percent in the past two fiscal years, below the 0.8 percent average in the preceding three years, and well below the 1.7 India’s stocks of household debt (10 percent of GDP) and corporate debt (50 percent of GDP) are relatively small compared to other major emerging market economies. Indian corporates’ FX funding has continued to account for up to a fifth of total funding, as of end-March 2015. RBI data show that the hedge ratio for external commercial borrowings (ECB) and foreign currency convertible bonds (excluding natural hedges) increased to about 39 percent in FY2014/15 and about 41 percent in the first quarter of FY2015/16, from about 15 percent of borrowings in FY2013/14. However, a sharp increase in hedging costs could adversely affect corporates’ hedging ability. Based on data from RBI’s Financial Stability Report , December 2015 (Issue No.12). Past countercyclical measures were not fully effective in averting a deterioration in banks’ asset quality (see Selected Issues Chapter II). Page 14 percent ROA of private sector banks. While provisioning for stressed assets has increased gradually over time, there are still concerns about possible underprovisioning, with average NPA provisioning of about 40 percent. In addition, the need for capital preservation, given eroding asset quality, has accounted for a marked slowdown in credit growth at PSBs to 6.1 percent year- on-year as of end-June 2015 (alternatively 7.4 percent as of end-FY2014/15), down from 14.0 percent at end-FY2013/14. While PSBs’ credit growth is expected to remain muted, its impact on growth is lessened by the relatively low credit intensity of the Indian economy and the pick-up in nonbank financing. Bank Loss-Absorbing Buffers in Emerging Markets (Share of risk-weighted assets, percent) 2014 or latest Change since 2010 C R H f C k z x Sources: IMF Global Financial Stability Report, April 2015 Note: Loss-absorbing buffers = (Tier 1 capital + loan loss reserves – nonperforming loan)/(risk weighted assets). Data are for 2014 or latest available (2013 for China, Poland, and Thailand). Commercial Bank Credit Growth (In percent, year-on-year) SBI Group Other PSBs Foreign Banks Private Sector Banks Source: Reserve Bank of India. PSBs’ capital augmentation needs are expected to be manageable, but may require further fiscal outlays. Under a stress scenario assuming a transition of 15 percent of restructured loans to NPAs and an extra capital cushion of 2 percentage points, PSBs’ capital needs are estimated to account for 2.9 percent of FY2018/19 GDP (cumulatively over the next four years), with a government share of 1.9 percent of FY2018/19 GDP (see Box 9, Annex III, and Selected Issues Chapter I). Full recognition of risks on PSBs’ balance sheets, adequate capitalization, and further governance reforms are critical for strengthening the banking sector going forward. In this regard, staff recommends the following policy measures: Phasing out remaining forbearance. New regulations (as of April 1, 2015) curb considerably banks’ ability to resort to forbearance by requiring banks to classify new restructured loans as NPAs, and hence provision appropriately. However, there are still certain exemptions, Non-bank funding has seen a considerable uptick, with the stock of outstanding commercial paper (CP) up by about 80 percent in FY2014/15 (reflecting lower funding costs), and lending by non-bank financial corporations (NBFCs) up by 20 percent over the same period. This estimate includes a cumulative capital injection of 0.8 percent of FY2018/19 GDP over four years, related to the ongoing implementation of Basel III in India, expected to be finalized by March 2019. The estimate for the government’s share assumes no dilution of government ownership in PSBs, currently at about 61 percent. Implementation of the Basel III capital framework is progressing and is expected to be completed by end-March 2019. All banks currently meet the minimum 8 percent Tier-1 capital requirement under Basel III and its Indian equivalent of 9 percent. However, further Basel III capital requirements and potential risk weight changes would necessitate additional capital infusions (see Selected Issues Chapter I). Page 15 including on postponing reclassifications of restructured loans on projects with delayed implementation schedules (projects deemed to be viable but with temporary problems), and on extending amortization schedules of classes of loans (provided there is no change in present value terms). Bank recapitalization. To support PSBs' current lending capacity, the authorities should consider larger government capital injections in PSBs and some divestments of banks’ non- core assets. The government’s capital injections in PSBs per the Indradhanush plan (August 2015) are quite modest in scale (0.3 percent of FY2018/19 GDP cumulatively over the next four years), and largely leave recapitalizations up to the ability of affected PSBs to raise capital in the markets. Corporate debt restructuring. To boost corporate loan recovery, banks are now allowed (under the Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR) scheme) to convert corporate loans into equity if debtors cannot meet debt restructuring plans. Debt-to-equity conversions are only a partial solution, given high corporate leverage ratios and hence limits on debt recovery. The authorities should continue to place priority on improving corporate debt restructuring mechanisms, including the formal insolvency framework (passage of the new Insolvency and Bankruptcy Bill and the Company Law Tribunals) and out-of-court debt restructuring (introduction of robust mechanisms for both operational and financial restructuring). These initiatives would build upon the LEG-provided capacity building assistance in these areas. PSB governance reforms. The authorities should follow through on the Indradhanush plan’s commitment to structural reforms, including on enhancing PSBs’ corporate governance, risk management practices and accountability. The Indian government remains fully committed to enhancing financial inclusion. Its financial inclusion agenda has broadened over the past year (see Box 10). The government’s proposed introduction of gold monetization schemes is also, in part, meant to boost financial intermediation by channeling domestic gold holdings to gold savings accounts (see Selected Issues Chapter III). Continued emphasis on increasing transactional volumes on Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) accounts by expanding the range of provided financial services (including Aadhaar supported direct benefit transfers), and linking these to new technologies (e.g., via use of mobile solutions), and potentially provided by the newly-formed payments banks, would support financial inclusion. Additional measures would help maintain financial stability and enhance the contribution of the financial sector to growth. Staff supports the following measures: Facilitating further deepening of the domestic corporate bond market, including, among others, by developing robust bondholder protection mechanisms, improving liquidity in the secondary market, and rationalizing stamp duties on bond issuances. Easing investment restrictions on domestic institutional investor classes would be important to support the development of a broader investor base. India’s Unique Identification Authority began to issue biometric identification numbers to residents in September 2010. Identities are authenticated based on the holder’s fingerprints or iris scan. As of January 2016, the program had enrolled over 966 million people (https://portal.uidai.gov.in/uidwebportal/dashboard.do). Page 16 The authorities recognized the challenges of addressing corporate balance sheet Enacting a further gradual reduction of banks’ statutory liquidity requirement (SLR), as the government’s fiscal deficit declines, to facilitate more private sector lending. The Indian government has been gradually reducing the SLR rate (currently at 21.5 percent, down from 25 percent of deposit liabilities in mid-2008), and plans to reduce the ratio to 20.5 percent by January 2017. Authorities’ Views stress. They emphasized their efforts to strike a balance between creating room on bank balance sheets and instilling payment discipline. Several schemes have been introduced to promote debt restructuring, including the recent Ujwal Discom Assurance Yojana (UDAY) power sector scheme for electricity distribution companies (November 2015), while forbearance has been phased out, with any debt restructured under the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) window now requiring provisioning at the same level as NPAs. The emphasis on labeling loan nonpayers as “willful defaulters” has had some effect, and mergers and acquisitions activity is beginning to pick up. Finally, they were very optimistic that the new Bankruptcy Bill (introduced in parliament in December 2015) will close a loophole in the corporate finance architecture, and took note of staff views that the formal bankruptcy set-up needs to be complemented by an appropriate out-of- court settlement framework. inadequate demand. To some extent the commercial paper market and non-bank financial intermediaries have taken up some of the slack, but anemic investment and the slow recovery of private sector borrowing suggest that the investment cycle has yet to definitively turn. The authorities also agreed with staff’s view that the fiscal cost of recapitalizing PSBs will be modest. They noted that strong steps are being taken to improve corporate governance in PSBs, which should help to reduce the flow of new bad assets going forward. Finally, the authorities are looking forward to the upcoming 2016/17 FSAP for inputs on how to continue building a financial system that is efficient and inclusive. They also urged staff to carefully review the upcoming Financial Stability Board (FSB) Peer Review of India (due by September 2016), to avoid duplication of effort in the FSAP. There was, however, a general view that the cause of anemic credit growth is mainly The authorities also noted that, in the presence of elevated corporate and banking sector strains, they have taken extensive measures to safeguard financial stability . These include: the withdrawal of forbearance by requiring banks to classify and provision restructured Under India’s system of parallel bank liquidity requirements—including India’s own SLR and the Basel III liquidity coverage ratio (LCR)—banks face conservative liquidity requirements. Further reductions of the SLR are, thus, important in order to lessen the burden on domestic banks. Under UDAY, state electricity distribution companies will enter a tripartite agreement with the Ministry of Power and relevant State Governments, and 75 percent of their outstanding debt (as of September 2015) will be taken up by states in a staggered manner over the next two years. The scheme aims to enforce financial discipline, improve operational efficiency, and reduce power and interest costs. Page 17 loans as NPAs; monitoring closely likely NPAs via the Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC); and encouraging corporate debt restructuring and strategic debt restructuring. They underscored that extensions of loan amortization schedules under current regulations should not be construed as forbearance, given that these pertain to the refinancing of projects (in infrastructure and core industries) that do face any credit weakness. Overall, the authorities emphasized that the recent policy measures seek to induce a structural change in project financing, including a shift to long-term structured financing and a change in banks’ mindset to ensure that project financing is carried out per international best practices. B. Complement the New Monetary Policy Framework with Structural