by relatively weak growth and high and persistent inflation. Growth is projected at 4.6 percent this year and 5.4 percent in 2014/15 (at factor cost). No further policy changes are assumed in the baseline, but slightly stronger global growth, improving export competitiveness, a favorable monsoon, and a confidence boost from recent policy actions should deliver a modest growth rebound in the near term. However, fiscal restraint and higher interest rates will act as headwinds, slowing the recovery. India’s trend growth is currently estimated at around 5½ percent but is expected to rise to its medium-term growth potential of around 6¾ percent (under current policies) as unblocked investments are implemented and global growth improves. As a result of the weak economy the output gap has been widening, and is now estimated at about 1 percent of GDP. Sources: CEIC, Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. These correspond to 4.4 percent (2013) and 5.4 percent (2014) at market prices. Page 7 Despite the growing output gap, monthly CPI inflation (yoy) is expected to remain near double-digits well into next year . The high headline inflation is a result of a number of factors, including: food inflation feeding quickly into wages and core inflation; entrenched inflation expectations; cost-push shocks from binding sector-specific supply constraints (particularly in agriculture, energy, and transportation); the pass through from a weaker rupee; and ongoing energy price increases. WPI inflation is expected to rise to 7.4 percent by March 2014, remaining well above the RBI’s comfort zone and falling only slowly (to 6.3 percent by March 2015). The current account deficit is narrowing fast. The current account deficit reached a record 4.8 percent of GDP in 2012/13 due to sharply weaker exports, higher imports of oil and gold, and binding supply constraints (particularly in coal and iron ore). India’s external vulnerabilities have fallen significantly in recent months, helped by policy actions taken to shrink the current account and strengthen capital flows. In particular, the current account deficit has been on a marked downward trajectory as exports improved, remittance inflows remained solid, and higher import duties and quantitative restrictions discouraged gold imports. In addition, non-oil, non-gold imports have declined in line with weak domestic demand, and capital inflows have strengthened. Staff expect the current account deficit to fall to around US$61 billion (3.3 percent of GDP) in 2013/14. The current account deficit is expected to continue declining over the medium- term as domestic mining constraints ease, external demand improves, and the competitiveness- enhancing effects of depreciation are fully realized. This smaller deficit is expected to be financed by a combination of FDI and an increased reliance on debt, including inflows of deposits from non- resident Indians. There are, however, risks that the current account deficit could be higher depending on: (i) the ability to successfully lower CPI inflation (which will be essential to generate the sustained reduction in gold imports and increase in households financial savings that is assumed in the forecasts); (ii) the potential for higher oil prices; and (iii) the pace of recovery of external demand. India’s gross international reserves are comfortable (at US$296 billion at end-December 2013, or 145 percent of the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric) and are expected to rise steadily to US$314 billion by March 2015 (Figure 3). CPI Inflation and Fiscal Balance, 2012 (In percent) The principal risk facing India is the inward spillover from a tightening of global liquidity interacting with domestic vulnerabilities (Annex III). International reserves are ample, but recent experience highlights that, with U.S. monetary policy normalizing, the impact from global financial market volatility could be disruptive (Figure 4). With a still-significant external financing need, India is Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) CPI Inflation (yoy), latest z B x h C h d Z w d k T d f h However, the limits on gold imports should be viewed only as a stop-gap measure and have the potential to become less effective over time (including from increased smuggling). Durably lowering the demand for gold as a store of value will only be achieved through low inflation, raising real interest rates on deposits, and ensuring macroeconomic stability. K Page 8 exposed to higher global interest rates and a reversal of capital flows. Such pressures could tighten domestic financial conditions, weaken corporate and bank balance sheets, curtail credit growth, and force a further procyclical tightening of monetary and fiscal policy. This could further raise borrowing costs, trigger portfolio outflows, and create the potential for disorderly adjustments in exchange rate and asset prices. Potential upsides to the outlook would arise from healthier global growth or lower oil prices. On the domestic front, risks stem from slow progress in addressing infrastructure and supply-side constraints (particularly in the power and transportation sectors) . Unless binding supply constraints are decisively addressed, high inflation and slow growth will continue to undermine macroeconomic and financial stability, necessitating a tighter monetary policy stance (Box 1). Given the commitment to medium-term fiscal consolidation, fiscal policy will not be able to provide support to domestic demand, which will also weigh on growth. On the other hand, growth upsides could arise from further investor-confidence-boosting policy actions (for example, if diesel price increases were accelerated), a greater-than-expected response of exports to the weaker currency, or faster implementation of CCI-approved projects. Outward spillovers from an output shock in India would have modest global implications (given the scale of India’s trade and financial flows), but would affect some neighboring countries in South Asia through trade, remittances and FDI channels (see Selected Issues Chapter II). Authorities’ Views The authorities were more sanguine than staff about India’s near-term growth prospects . Citing green shoots in the data for power generation and exports, good agricultural performance and robust rural demand, they consider a growth projection of 5 percent to be reasonable for FY13/14, rising to 8 percent in 2–3 years. Order books are filling up, iron ore projects have been unlocked, and thus far in 2013 the CCI has cleared projects worth US$95 billion, which should translate into a pickup in activity in the final months of FY 2013/14. The authorities noted that final GDP data, using the broader-based Annual Survey of Industries, would be higher than the preliminary, industrial production-based quarterly GDP figures. They were also of the view that fiscal expenditure restraint would not have a material effect on near-term growth. The authorities agreed that a sharp adverse swing in market sentiment prompted by a scaling back of unconventional monetary policies (UMP) in advanced economies is the main risk currently facing India. They pointed to the need for greater clarity and communication by policy-makers in advanced economies in regard to the planned pace of UMP tapering. At the same time, they considered that India’s domestic fundamentals were strong (reflected in the oversubscription of the IFC’s first off-shore issuance of rupee-linked bonds), and that vulnerabilities had been addressed, particularly on the external side. The authorities stated that the recent decline in gold imports can be sustained, given the introduction of inflation-indexed bonds—offering households an alternative inflation hedge to gold—and further stabilization of the macroeconomic situation. They agreed with staff that exchange rate flexibility is an important policy feature that helps to contain external risks, and considered the RBI’s stock of international reserves to be broadly adequate to address any need to smooth short-term volatility. Page 9 The authorities noted that India has demonstrated its ability to respond to shocks and market concerns. While recognizing that more chronic problems—such as persistent inflation— have been allowed to linger, the authorities argued that vigorous policy responses had been forthcoming when actions were urgently needed. For example, when the fiscal deficit became a matter of concern in FY 2012/13, the Ministry of Finance delivered on restraining spending to meet the deficit target. Similarly, when markets feared the current account deficit was becoming excessive, the government put in place effective measures to rein it in and to mobilize over $34 billion in net capital inflows (largely through NRI deposits).