Growth has fallen sharply. Growth averaged 8½ percent before and for two years after the global financial crisis but has decelerated throughout 2011 and 2012 (Figure 1), reaching 4.6 percent in FY2013:H1. Initially a problem of stalled infrastructure and corporate investment, the slowdown has become generalized across sectors. India’s growth slowdown is unusual among emerging markets (EMs) both in its severity and the fact it has coincided with elevated inflation. Global factors have certainly hurt exports and weighed on investment. However, staff analysis indicates that about two-thirds of the slowdown can be explained by domestic factors, including supply bottlenecks, delayed project approval and implementation, and heightened policy uncertainty. Revision Date Sources: IMF; and Consensus Economics. IMF-2012/13 Consensus Median-2012/13 IMF-2013/14 [RHS] Consensus Median-2013/14 [RHS] India's Growth Forecast Revisions (In percent) Balance of payment pressures intensified during the summer of 2013 as external shocks interacted with domestic macroeconomic vulnerabilities. As global liquidity conditions tightened, India was faced with significant portfolio debt outflows, and pressures on currency, equity, and bond markets. Investor concerns were amplified by India’s persistently-high inflation, weakening growth prospects, large current account and fiscal deficits, and domestic political uncertainty (Figure 2). In response, liquidity conditions were tightened, limits on FDI and external borrowing were loosened, capital flow measures were introduced, and gold import duties were increased sharply (see Selected Issues Chapter I). Over the past four months, a combination of improving external conditions and domestic policy efforts have calmed markets . Externally, global financial markets improved as the U.S. Fed decided not to advance the reduction in its monthly asset purchases. Domestically, the central bank increased its headline policy rate and intervened in FX markets by offering USD swaps to oil companies and to banks, with the latter leading to sizeable nonresident Indian (NRI) deposit inflows. In addition, the parliament passed the land acquisition, pension and companies bills, and thus far in 2013 the Cabinet Committee on Investment (CCI) has approved previously-stalled projects worth around 5 percent of GDP. On the fiscal front, measures were implemented to continue to raise diesel prices, to shrink the financial losses of state electricity boards, and to contain central government spending. As external pressures eased, the government was able to unwind the earlier steps taken to tighten liquidity and partly reverse restrictions on capital outflows (Annex I). Against the background of parliamentary elections (expected by May 2014) and prospective global liquidity tightening, policy discussions centered on mitigating risks associated with the challenging domestic and external economic environment. Discussions focused on strengthening the macroeconomic position and containing vulnerabilities by narrowing fiscal and external imbalances to create space for countercyclical policies (see text chart), the Page 6 appropriate stance for monetary policy to decisively tackle high and persistent inflation, and the policy response to renewed global market volatility. Macroeconomic Policy Procyclicality (1960-2009) IND G R d x E m G C Procyclical Correlation(Short-Term Interest Rate, Real GDP) Past Fund advice and the authorities’ macroeconomic policies have been broadly aligned, but progress on structural reforms has been slow. Fiscal expenditure was lowered in 2012/13, consistent with Fund advice, and staff supports the authorities’ intentions regarding the pace of medium-term consolidation. The stance of monetary policy has been looser than staff recommended in 2012/13, but has been progressively tightened in 2013/14, consistent with Fund advice. Also, the central bank has allowed the currency to adjust flexibly to market conditions and intervened sparingly to counter excessive volatility in the exchange rate. Almost all key recommendations of the 2012 FSAP Update have been implemented (Annex II) and progress has been made in improving electricity pricing, and in achieving passage of the land acquisition, pension, and companies bills. Progress on product and labor market reforms has, however, been limited. Source: Vegh and Vuletin (June 2012). Notes: A positive (negative) Correlation (Government Expenditure, Real GDP) indicates pro- cyclical (counter-cyclical) fiscal policy. A positive (negative) Correlation (Short-Term Interest Rate, Real GDP) indicates counter-cyclical (pro-cyclical) monetary policy. Expectations: Current Expectations: 1 Year Ahead CPIIW: Food The near-term outlook is characterized Household Inflation Expectations and Food Inflation (In percent)