Gross Reserves vs. REER (Index, April 2013=100) India’s external position is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings, while reserves are assessed to be adequate (Box 5). International reserves have increased by about $30 billion over the last year to reach US$320 billion as at end-December 2014 (standing at 148 percent of the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric). In addition, the RBI has intervened in the forward market, which has resulted in a net long forward position of US$13.2 billion as of end- November 2014. The build-up of reserves since the second half of 2013/14 was driven by robust foreign institutional investor (FII) flows in conjunction with the sharp CAD correction (largely due to the contraction in gold imports), as well as inflows of about US$34 billion of non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits and overseas borrowings by banks, facilitated by a concessional foreign exchange (FX) swap facility offered by the RBI. Based on a range of methodologies, staff assesses the external position to be broadly in line with fundamentals (see Box 6 and Selected Issues Chapter VI). Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and IMF, International Financial Statistics. Gross Interational Reserves Index US$ (April 2013=100) BRA IND TUR IDN ZAF = Nov-14 Sep-13 Apr-13 x d R E E R Offshore-Onshore Forward Spreads (5-day moving average, in %) The foreign exchange intervention strategy of the RBI (in both spot and forward markets) is guided by the need to enhance growth, reduce inflation, limit volatility, and build buffers for precautionary purposes. The RBI’s forward FX purchases have helped it cover forward FX liabilities and maintain tight monetary conditions to contain inflation. Reflecting this forward intervention and the interest rate differential between India and the United States, forward premia increased, creating arbitrage opportunities, thereby generating financial market distortions. Given India’s increased and adequate reserve buffers, greater exchange rate flexibility would encourage private sector entities to limit excessive risk taking. Foreign exchange intervention should be limited to preventing disruptive movements in the exchange rate and checking any self-fulfilling momentum that is divorced from exchange rate fundamentals. The magnitude of the FX swaps is fully disclosed through the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) template on both the RBI and IMF websites. Offshore above Onshore 3m Offshore above Onshore 12m Source: Bloomberg. May-14 May-13 Sep-14 Sep-13 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-1 Page 15 NRI Deposits Flows (In billions of USD) If global financial market volatility resurfaces, a comprehensive and well-communicated set of policies will be needed. In this event, staff would recommend exchange rate flexibility (as a key shock absorber), allowing for an orderly depreciation of the rupee, with judicious FX intervention (both in the spot and forward markets, and via liquidity provision through swaps) to minimize disruptive movements in the currency. Also, to make it more costly to short the rupee, temporarily bolster the capital account position, and contain the inflationary impact of exchange rate depreciation, a tightening of the monetary stance could be considered. Greater liberalization of non-debt creating capital inflows would be warranted, while measures to limit capital outflows should be avoided as they could undermine investor confidence and intensify outflows. The measures used successfully by India during the post-May 2013 period—including offering FX swaps to banks to attract NRI deposits and providing dollar liquidity to oil-marketing companies to limit depreciation—could be used again in the event of the re-emergence of external pressures (see Selected Issues Chapter VII for an analysis of Indian and EM responses to recent bouts of global financial market volatility). The RBI should also further explore options to increase the availability of bilateral and multilateral swap lines. Foreign Currency Non Resident Accounts Non Resident External Rupee Accounts Non Resident Ordinary Rupee Accounts Exchange Rate (NC/USD) Source: CEIC. FDI Inflows, 2013 (In percent of GDP) The current account deficit financing mix could be improved by enhancing the environment for attracting stable, non-debt creating capital flows, particularly FDI. India’s financial account has traditionally been dominated by portfolio equity and FDI flows. However, the composition of CAD financing has recently shifted toward more debt flows, particularly in the form of NRI deposits and external commercial borrowing (including by highly-leveraged Indian corporates and those with unhedged FX exposures). Given that portfolio debt flows have been volatile in recent years and the exchange rate has been sensitive to these flows and changes in global risk aversion, attracting more stable sources of financing would reduce vulnerabilities. A conducive business environment is necessary to attract more FDI, along with further liberalization of FDI in specific sectors and simplification of procedures. The RBI introduced two foreign exchange swap schemes in September 2013—one to encourage new foreign exchange deposits into India by non-resident Indians (NRI) with a minimum term of three years; and one to encourage long-term overseas foreign exchange borrowing by banks. Under both swap schemes, the RBI agreed to sell to banks on a forward basis and until November 30, 2013, U.S. dollars against rupees at concessional rates, which gives rise to multiple currency practices (MCP) relating solely to capital transactions. These MCPs are not subject to Fund approval because the Fund has declined to assert jurisdiction over MCPs relating solely to capital transactions (see BUFF/85/34). India has a swap line with the Bank of Japan of US$50 billion, and the BRICS’ Contingency Reserve Arrangement will enable India to draw US$6 billion (and another US$12 billion with a Fund program). Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff calculations. Page 16 In addition to having permitted FDI in railways, infrastructure and defense sectors, going forward, higher FDI limits in sectors such as construction and insurance could lead to increased FDI flows. Nonetheless, further liberalization of external commercial borrowing should proceed cautiously and be carefully monitored by the RBI, given the potential risks to corporate balance sheets. The authorities noted that while India’s external vulnerabilities are reduced, they Authorities’ Views intend to further rebuild their external buffers . The authorities are somewhat concerned about the risks of disorderly monetary policy normalization in advanced countries, as well as loss of export competitiveness due to prolonged use of unconventional monetary policies by advanced countries. They welcomed IMF staff analysis showing that India and other EMs have been affected by unconventional monetary policies of advanced economies, and noted that despite building greater resilience to external shocks, they would likely be adversely affected by a disorderly reversal of such policies in the future. The authorities reiterated that they are not targeting any specific level of the rupee exchange rate, and attributed foreign exchange purchases over the past year to a desire to rebuild their external buffers. They acknowledge some tension between their foreign exchange intervention and the focus on reducing inflation, and regard the financial market distortions from their intervention policy as minimal. They noted that significant progress has been made in creating a conducive business environment to attract foreign direct investment flows.