The working relationship between the IMF and the World Bank in Indonesia is very strong, with joint working programs in a number of areas and close coordination through frequent meetings between resident offices and headquarters missions, including during the Article IV consultation. Key Areas with Joint Programs Budget Reforms The reform agenda for budget and treasury remains a high priority for both institutions. Currently, the World Bank’s support is being provided through the Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Project (GFMRAP) program, trust funds, and development policy loans (DPLs), with elements in support of (a) efficient treasury operations, including accounting reforms, improved in˗year budget disbursement, and regulatory reform; (b) improved linkages between planning and budget preparation through the implementation of a medium-term expenditure framework, performance budgeting, and the enhancement of budget flexibility at the service delivery level; and (c) improved capacity for budget oversight through systems and organizational reform. Indonesia’s Ministry of Finance launched SPAN in April 2015. SPAN, a financial management information system supported by GFMRAP, is designed to improve transparency, efficiency, and accountability of the government’s financial transactions. An updated Public Expenditure review and further analysis in 2017 are informing the efficiency and effectiveness of government budgets. An ongoing Development Policy Loan (DPL) on fiscal reforms also supports reforms to enhance the allocative efficiency and effectiveness of public spending. The IMF has complemented this work through recent technical assistance (TA) on subsidy reform and social safety nets aimed at ensuring longer-run fiscal sustainability. Taxation Issues Revenue (tax and nontax revenue) issues are a priority for the IMF and the World Bank, with broadening the revenue base and increasing revenues an important issue for both macro-fiscal stability and the investment climate. The Fund conducted a mission on tax policy and administration in September 2014 to identify key reform options in each of these areas. The Bank provides tax policy (including international tax) and administration support through trust funded TA to the Fiscal Policy Agency and DG Tax and an ongoing DPL on fiscal reforms. The Bank has also been providing analytical support on nontax revenue administration. Asset-Liability Management The World Bank and IMF have been leading an effort to improve asset-liability management, including at the Treasury and Debt Management Office of the Ministry of Finance and at Bank Indonesia, with continued collaboration envisaged, as needed. Page 68 Crisis Preparedness In recent years, the World Bank has focused on supporting the authorities in Indonesia to create a robust crisis prevention and management framework. Most recently, this support has included analysis of the financial sector stability framework through the 2010 FSAP and a series of crisis simulation exercises. Preparation is underway for the next FSAP. Between 2012 and 2015, the Bank’s Program for Economic Resilience, Investment and Social Assistance in Indonesia (PERISAI) DPL, now disbursed and closed, has also supported the authorities in this area. The IMF has supported work in this area through past TA on reviewing the legal framework underpinning Indonesia’s financial stability architecture and in its current surveillance dialogue with the authorities and exchange of views with the Bank. Financial Sector The World Bank has focused on broad monitoring of the financial sector. Through its Financial Sector and Investment Climate Reform and Modernization DPL, the Bank supported the implementation of reforms aimed at maintaining stability, increasing diversification, and enhancing financial sector inclusion in Indonesia. The IMF has concentrated on the banking system, with emphasis on regulation and supervision, with a resident advisor placed at the Financial Services Agency (OJK) in January 2015. It has also embarked on TA in financial deepening, focused initially on money and foreign exchange market development and more recently on monetary operations and the transmission mechanism. In addition, the Fund has provided recent TA on the macro prudential policy framework and bank stress testing. A joint World Bank-IMF FSAP was completed in 2010 and some recommendations have been followed through by the authorities. The Bank is to provide TA to implement select FSAP recommendations concerning the nonbank financial sector. Statistics The World Bank has a major program of capacity building with the statistics agency that was launched in 2011. The Statistical Capacity Building-Change and Reform for the Development of Statistics (STATCAP-CERDAS) program is designed to focus on improvements in key statistical series that should improve the ability to understand the Indonesian economy, executed through an institution-wide approach, which includes significant business, IT and HR/organizational reforms. The IMF has focused recent training and TA on government finance statistics, monetary and financial statistics, and sectoral balance sheets. Macroeconomics The IMF continues to take the lead in macroeconomic areas, with the Article IV mission and staff visits, focusing on fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies; macro-financial linkages, financial sector reforms, and crisis management, as well as the external position and spillover effects. The Fund also updates the Debt Sustainability Analysis at the time of the Article IV consultation, with inputs from the World Bank and other development partners. The Bank has also taken on a larger role, including on macroeconomic monitoring, public policy dialogue, and capacity Page 69 building, with ongoing coordination with the Fund. The Bank continues to assist the Ministry of Finance‘s Fiscal Policy Office to improve capacity for macroeconomic monitoring, forecasting, and evidence-based macroeconomic and fiscal policy analysis. These threads of work are expected to be continued by both institutions, with periodic meetings aimed at keeping each other informed about ongoing work and joint areas of interest. Issues being addressed by the IMF include domestic and external vulnerabilities, exchange rate management, medium term external and fiscal sustainability, and macrofinancial linkages and financial stability risks; and by the Bank the link between macrofiscal policy and real economic outcomes, including growth and poverty, resource-sector fiscal revenues, and longstanding problems in the implementation and effectiveness of government spending. Page 70 Indonesia: Joint Managerial Action Plan, 2015−16 Products Provisional Timing of Missions Expected Delivery Date (Tentative) A. Mutual Information on Relevant Work Programs Indonesia Economic Quarterly World Bank follow-up work related to WB/IMF Financial System Assessment Program missions (October 2009 and February‒March 2010) Energy DPL Fiscal reform DPL Macroeconomic surveillance 2015 Article IV consultation Launched in April 2012; the latest issue published in Board discussion took place in February 2016 2016 staff visit August 2016 Title Bank work IMF work 2016 Article IV consultation November 2016 Technical assistance Financial deepening and market development Tax policy and revenue administration Statistical policies Consolidated supervision (resident advisor) B. Request for Work Program Inputs Fund request to Bank Assessment of economic developments and structural policies Bank request to Fund Assessment of macroeconomic developments and policies Board discussion will take place in January 2017 Periodic visits C. Agreement on Joint Products and Missions Joint work program Coordination of a follow-up FSAP starting in 2016 Mid-2016 2016−2017 February 2017 Page 71