Since mid 2013, Indonesia has taken significant steps to strengthen policy and reserve buffers , in the face of strong headwinds confronting major commodity exporters and episodes of heightened market volatility in emerging market economies (EMEs). Aided by enhanced policy credibility and global push factors, external inflows to Indonesia have been supportive the past 18 months. Equity prices rebounded in the first half of the 2014, including relative to most EME peers. Government bond yields have stabilized, with the fixed-income market buoyed by strong foreign inflows, which has led to an increase in reserves and helped keep the rupiah relatively stable against the U.S. dollar (Box 1). However, the economy continues to be buffeted by a shift in the terms of trade against commodity exporters, with significant macro-financial implications (Figure 1). The commodity down-cycle has weakened the current account, dampened new investment, and resulted in a growth slowdown. As a consequence, corporate cash flows have been constrained, which has caused bank deposit growth to slow sharply and contributed to funding pressures. More recently, credit growth has decelerated, in part due to monetary and macro prudential policy measures, which have led to a moderate tightening in financial conditions (Figure 2). Household demand for credit has also slowed, affecting private consumption and property prices. At the same time, private external borrowing has risen, with firms taking advantage of lower borrowing costs abroad. Against this backdrop, the 2014 Article IV consultation focused on the challenge of charting a course to higher growth while preserving macro-financial stability and strengthening the external position . With a change in government in October 2014, the new administration appears keen to ease longstanding supply bottlenecks through a reform strategy that aims to raise potential growth. As a first step, it has taken decisive action to remove most fuel subsidies with a view to freeing up space in the government budget for more growth-critical spending. In keeping with this, the authorities have been steadfast in their commitment to macroeconomic and financial stability, as Indonesia transitions away from commodity-supported to more competitiveness-driven growth in a challenging global environment. Indonesia is a significant commodity producer and exporter. Coal, palm oils, natural gas, crude oil, and processed rubber are the top five commodity-related exports, with this category accounting for slightly more than half of total exports in 2014. See selected issues paper (SIP) on “The Impact of Major Commodities on the Corporate Sector and Banking System,” (2015). Page 7 Box 1. Indonesia: Managing Market Pressures Since the taper tantrum in mid 2013, Indonesia has deployed a set of policy actions and strengthened economic fundamentals to increase resilience to market shocks . Monetary and macro prudential policies have been tightened and exchange rate and bond yield flexibility has increased in response to market conditions. These actions have helped anchor inflation expectations, reduce external pressures, and facilitate a rebuilding of reserves. In addition, financial market deepening measures to improve the functionality of FX and money markets and to encourage prudent hedging by corporates (including state-owned enterprises) have been initiated. Furthermore, the fiscal deficit has been held in check through energy subsidy reforms and made more resilient to exchange rate shocks and financing pressures, including through a freeing up of fuel prices and well-timed external bond issuances. Due in part to these policy actions, Indonesia has weathered several bouts of market volatility in 2014 relatively well . Most notably, during the Argentine debt default episode of January 2014, Indonesia and India “…improved their current account and hardly witnessed a move in their currencies in January compared with the May-December [2013] period when they had depreciated substantially.” Throughout much of 2014, capital inflows to Indonesia have been highly supportive, although some outflows occurred in the last quarter of the 2014 with a general decline in risk appetite toward emerging markets (EMs). Nevertheless, Indonesia again fared better than most large EMs, with equity prices and bond yields remaining broadly stable. Meanwhile, the relatively large movements in the exchange rate helped absorb some of the pressure and limit reserve losses. Nevertheless, risks of further surges in global financial market volatility remain (see Appendix I). While fundamentals have improved, the current account deficit remains sizable, financial markets are still relatively shallow, and the large share of rupiah bonds held by nonresidents poses potential rollover risks. Nevertheless, following heightened volatility in the last quarter of 2014, bond yields have fallen moderately since the beginning of the year, broadly in line with other EMs, with global financial conditions still supportive, while equity prices have also rebounded on foreign buying. Looking ahead, capital inflows to Indonesia are expected to slow in 2015, but remain supportive Recent market performance suggests that spillovers from a strong U.S. dollar, lackluster EM growth, and continued oil market uncertainty remain manageable. Indonesia’s financial account could be subject to further bouts of market volatility, but the current policy framework is expected to continue unpinning positive sentiment. Meanwhile, FDI, which comes largely from Japan and other ASEAN countries, is expected to stay supportive. Policy settings in Indonesia are also consistent with those recommended to other large EMs facing potential balance of payments pressures—including Brazil, India, and Philippines— where IMF advice has emphasized monetary policy tightness and exchange rate flexibility. _____________________________ See Box 1 in Indonesia—Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation (IMF Country Report No. 13/362) for more details on policy measures taken in the aftermath of the mid 2013 taper tantrum. See R. Sahay, V. Arora, T. Arvanitis, H. Faruqee, P. N’Diaye, T. Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF Team, 2014, “Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from The Taper Tantrum,” IMF Staff Discussion Note No. 14/09. On January 9, 2015, the government of Indonesia issued US$4 billion in FX bonds (equally split between 10(cid:173) and 30-year bonds), which represents more than half of its targeted foreign currency issuance in 2015. Page 8 Box 1. Indonesia: Managing Market Pressures (Concluded) 1/ Indonesian equities were affected by the taper tantrum, but have weathered recent volatility well... …while the behavior of bond yields has mirrored equity prices. Indonesia lost significant reserves during the taper tantrum, but maintained them during recent volatility. CDS spreads have narrowed significantly since the taper tantrum... Bond yields have recently declined in line with global trends. … and exchange rate volatility has moderated as well. Taper tantrum: May 22 – September 30, 2013; Supportive inflows: October 1, 2013 –September 30, 2014; Renewed volatility: September 30, 2014 – December 31, 2014. Page 9