Macroeconomic performance . Growth in Indonesia moderated to 5.1 percent in 2014 from 5.7 percent in 2013—in line with staff’s expectations and to its slowest pace in five years (Table 1 and Figure 3). While the growth in domestic demand was broadly unchanged, the contribution from net exports was significantly weaker in 2014 owing to slowing EME growth, notably in China, and the raw mineral ore export ban. However, the current account deficit likely narrowed moderately in 2014, owing to the effects of the real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciation (about 7 percent since mid 2013) and of lower oil prices on imports. Headline inflation moved back above BI’s target band towards end 2014 following administered fuel price hikes in November. Vulnerability indicators improved modestly in 2014, except financial ones, which weakened slightly (Table 2). The near-term outlook will continue to be complicated by cross currents in the global economy affecting financial conditions and commodity prices. While growth is expected to be weighed down by commodity-related activities, prospects should improve as the domestic reform momentum gathers pace. The impact of the fall in oil prices should help dampen inflation pressures and buttress the current account through lower oil imports. Real GDP growth is projected to tick up to 5.2 percent in 2015, with the output gap effectively closed based on staff’s latest estimates of potential growth. Net exports are likely to remain constrained by weak external demand, notwithstanding one-off factors that are expected to boost oil and mineral exports. Private consumption growth is expected to slow due mainly to reduced commodity incomes. While total investment growth should rise moderately, the impulse is expected to come mainly from higher public infrastructure spending. Private investment growth will likely remain subdued because of funding constraints. Barring a pick up in public investment, real GDP growth could be lower in 2015. Funding pressures could also intensify if capital inflows are lower than envisaged and/or budgetary pressures affect system-wide liquidity, limiting space for new lending. A new GDP series, rebased to 2010, was issued in February 2015 (Box 2). It lowered real GDP growth rates by an average of 0.1 percentage points during 2009‒14, while recording a slowdown in growth to 5.0 percent in 2014 from 5.5 percent in 2013. The new series also raised nominal GDP, marginally affecting key macro indicators such as the current account and fiscal balances, as well as investment and saving ratios. The analysis and projections in this report are based on the old (2000 base) GDP series. The ban, approved in the Mining Law (2009), requires all raw mineral ores to be processed onshore to increase domestic value added. When implementation commenced in early 2014, export taxes of 20-25 percent were initially imposed on mining companies seeking a temporary waiver from the ban. The biggest impact was on copper concentrate. In mid 2014, interim arrangements were reached allowing the resumption of copper exports while granting tax concessions until new processing plants are built onshore. The main factors are new production from the Cepu oil field and the full year effect of resumed copper exports. Page 10 Box 2. Indonesia: Rebased Gross Domestic Product Statistics Indonesia (BPS) published a rebased GDP series in February 2015 . The base year was revised to 2010 from 2000 to reflect changes over the intervening decade in the country’s economic structure, particularly in IT transportation, and the emergence of new products. On the production side, the industrial classification was expanded to 17 sectors from 9 sectors. Under the newly rebased series, nominal GDP in 2010 increased by around Rp 400 trillion or 6.5 percent Meanwhile, real GDP growth rates were revised downward on average by around 0.1 percentage points during 2009‒14 owing to revised estimates derived from the expanded sectoral classifications. The increase in the nominal GDP reflects two factors: the implementation of the System of National Accounts 2008 and changes in volumes and prices. The increase appears modest compared to other countries that have rebased GDP upward recently, such as Singapore (by 1.3 percent), Malaysia (3.2 percent), Kenya (25.0 percent), and Nigeria (59.5 percent). Headline inflation is expected to decline in 2015, with reductions in retail gasoline and diesel prices under the new fuel price regime along with the passing through of the earlier price increase expected to bring inflation back within BI’s target band (4.0±1 percent) by year end, supported by maintenance of a relatively tight monetary stance. The current account deficit is projected to narrow slightly in 2015 (Table 3 and Figure 4), mainly due to a reduction in net oil imports, but adjustment is expected to be partially offset by lower nonfuel commodity prices and weak external demand. The balance of payments (BOP) recorded a sizeable surplus in 2014 on strong capital inflows, but a smaller surplus is expected in 2015 on shifts in global financial conditions. Reserves at end 2014 were US$111.9 billion, equivalent to 7 months of prospective imports of goods and services or 160 percent of the IMF’s reserve metric for a floating currency, which should be sufficient to deal with most shocks. Risks and contingencies . Downside risks emanate mainly from external sources, but they could exacerbate strains in the banking system and corporate sector (Appendix I: Risk Assessment Matrix). Spillovers are predominantly inward, with outward spillovers negligible. Among the most significant risks, a sharp slowdown in trading partner growth could dampen external demand and Page 11 commodity prices. Unexpected surges in global financial market volatility could increase BOP and bank funding pressures. Relatively high dependence on foreign investors in the rupiah government bonds market could heighten vulnerabilities. Persistent strength in the U.S. dollar could place further strain on corporations’ balance sheets, with their foreign currency-denominated debt reaching 22 percent of GDP at end September 2014. Distress at small or mid-sized banks and among corporates could be amplified by an incomplete crisis management framework and inadequate hedging of foreign currency debt. In the event of an adverse BOP shock, tighter aggregate demand management and continued exchange rate flexibility could help contain risks, with reserves used cautiously to smooth excessive volatility. Contingent financing totaling US$76 billion is currently available, inclusive of the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization and bilateral swap arrangements. Medium-term outlook . The medium-term baseline is in line with the authorities’ announced policy intentions. It assumes the use of expanded fiscal space and implementation of structural reforms aimed at closing infrastructure and skills gaps and raising private investment. Growth is projected to rise to 6 percent by 2018, factoring in positive reform momentum, which is also expected to raise growth potential through increases in factor productivity and capital stock (Table 4). The current account deficit would narrow to 2½ percent of GDP in the medium term, factoring in increased investment-related imports as well as a subdued outlook for commodity prices. Gross FDI would continue to grow while portfolio inflows would remain supportive, with reserves expected to remain above six months of imports. Risks to this outlook are moderately to the downside, given the possibility of less supportive global financial conditions, more muted growth in major trading partners, and slower and narrower reforms than envisaged in the current baseline. . The authorities generally agreed with staff on macroeconomic prospects for 2014, but were more optimistic on the growth outlook in 2015 on expectations of a faster rise in public investment. Views were broadly aligned on the inflation forecast and the external outlook. The authorities generally concurred on the assessment of major risks facing the economy and appropriate policy responses, noting that since the mid 2013 taper tantrum, the economy had weathered several mini-episodes of EME turbulence comparatively well. External position and debt sustainability . Indonesia’s external position is assessed as moderately weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies, in line with the 2014 Pilot ESR. Staff estimate the current account gap as 0‒2 percent of GDP weaker and the REER 0−10 percent overvalued for 2014 (Box 3 and Appendix II). The main conclusions from the Debt Sustainability Analysis (Appendix III) are broadly unchanged from the last Article IV consultation. External debt remains at a moderate level, notwithstanding a rise in recent years owing largely to private external borrowing and exchange rate depreciation. Debt and debt service ratios are projected to be somewhat higher in the near term, but increases in FDI and equity inflows should help reduce the share of debt financing over the medium term. Public debt also is relatively low, with both it and external debt sustainable over the medium term. Page 12 Box 3. Indonesia: External Sector Assessment Indonesia’s external position is found to be moderately weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies Staff assesses the current account (CA) gap to be 0 percent to (cid:173)2 percent of GDP, which is similar to EBA CA estimates (Appendix II). Policy actions since mid 2013 should continue to gradually improve the external position (Box 1). The latest EBA CA estimates imply a gap of (cid:173)1.9 percent of GDP, based on a cyclically adjusted CA balance of ‒2.3 percent of GDP and a norm of (cid:173)0.4 percent of GDP. However, taking uncertainties into account, staff believes a norm of ‒1.5 percent of GDP (±1 percent of GDP) more accurately reflects Indonesia’s significant investment needs. In contrast, EBA ES estimates suggest the CA is about 1 percent of GDP above the level needed to stabilize Indonesia’s net international investment position (NIIP) over the medium term. EBA REER estimates suggest an undervaluation at end 2014 of about 8 percent. However, staff assesses the REER to be overvalued by 0−10 percent, consistent with the recent erosion in Indonesia’s terms of trade and projected falls in oil and gas production over the long run. Indonesia’s CA deficit is projected to improve gradually . The 2014 deficit is expected to be about 3.0 percent of GDP (compared to 3.3 percent of GDP in 2013), as rising manufacturing exports and falling oil prices have compensated for declines in other commodity exports. Looking ahead, manufacturing is expected to continue to perform well, in line with increasing growth momentum in the United States and the lagged effect of exchange rate depreciation. For most of 2014, capital inflows, mainly in the form of FDI and investment in government bonds, were above trend, but slowed in the latter part of the year . Going forward, they could further dissipate with a large shock. Bank Indonesia built up reserves by US$13 billion in 2014 to US$112 billion at year end (160 percent of the IMF’s reserve metric for a floating currency and 7 months of imports), partly reflecting the government’s intake of dollar-based oil revenues and proceeds from sovereign issues. While the composite metric may not adequately account for commodity price volatility, the current level of reserves should be sufficient to absorb most shocks, with predetermined drains also manageable. The NIIP and external debt are at moderate levels and projected to remain stable . At end September 2014, Indonesia’s NIIP was about ­49 percent of GDP, compared to (cid:173)44 percent of GDP at end 2013. Gross external liabilities were about 76 percent of GDP, up from 67 percent of GDP at end 2013. Gross external debt is expected to be about 35 percent at end 2014, with short-term debt at around 6 percent of GDP. The debt sustainability analysis (Appendix III) indicates that external and public debt are sustainable over the medium term. Since mid 2013, Indonesia has shifted towards a more flexible exchange rate policy framework, with a floating regime better facilitating adjustments in exchange rates to market conditions Page 13