The financial system appears sound and the role of the non-banking sector has increased. Risks from exposure to real estate and construction, and from overly compressed corporate bond spreads, should be carefully monitored. In the past decade, Israel’s financial system has changed substantially (Figures 8–10 and Tables 9–12). The role of the non-bank financial sector has increased . The Bachar reform that began in mid-2005 forced banks to divest most noncommercial banking activities such as insurance, pension, and provident funds. Partly as a result, the nonbank financial sector has grown rapidly; its assets now comprise about half of all financial sector assets. An active market in corporate bonds has developed. The outstanding stock of corporate bonds grew from 5 percent of GDP in 2004 to 27 percent in 2013. Banks came through the crisis relatively well, but both the corporate bond market and non-bank financial institutions were hit hard . Corporate bond yields rose sharply, some long- terms saving products suffered significant losses; and mutual and provident funds faced large redemptions. This led to the establishment of the Hodak committee, which in 2010 presented a set of recommendations to the government to improve market transparency, conduct, and the governance of institutional investors. Page 20 Israeli banks are well capitalized and liquid. Since early 2015, all banks have met the new minimum core Tier 1 capital ratio of 9 percent. As the prescribed risk weighting is conservative, the leverage ratio (7 percent) is high compared with other advanced countries. Banks have limited exposure to the wholesale funding market, as reflected in loan-to-deposit ratios well below 100 percent. Guidelines for the gradual implementation of a liquidity coverage ratio have been enforced from the beginning of 2015. Banks also fared well in the BOI’s recent stress test. The stress scenario assumes a severe economic recession, with busts in housing, real estate, and construction sectors and a sharp increase in unemployment and Israel’s risk premium (as a result of heightened geopolitical tensions). Banks’ profitability (return on equity) would fall from around 7¼ percent to -4 percent, but all banks would be able to maintain capital ratios above 6 percent (down from 9½ percent). Bank concentration is relatively high . Five banking groups account for 95 percent of banking sector assets. However, a cross-country comparison of the Lerner index suggests that banking sector competition in Israel is broadly in line with the average of other advanced economies. Nevertheless, banks are not very efficient as their cost-to-income ratio is relatively high, although this can also be explained by high labor costs. Policy discussions Risks from exposure to real estate and construction should be carefully monitored Banks are not just exposed to mortgage loans (which account for 31 percent of bank credit) but also to the highly-leveraged real estate/construction sector (13 percent of bank credit, despite an By the beginning of 2017, the two largest bank will have to meet a core Tier ratio of 10 percent. FINSWEESPISRDEUCHEDNKFRABELIRLNORGBRUSAPRT Sources: Global Financial Development and Bankscope. 1/ The Lerner index measures market power in the banking sector. It compares output pricing and marginal costs. An increase in the index indicates a deterioration of the competitive conduct of financial intermediaries. Banking Sector Lerner Index, 2010 1/ IRLESPNORFINGBRUSADNKPRTBELSWEFRAISRDEUCHE Bank Cost-to-Income Ratio, 2010 1/ Source: Global Financial Development and Bankscope.1/ The ratio is calculated as operating expense as a share of the sum of net interest revenue and other operating income. Page 21 increasing reliance on the corporate bond market). Risk diagnoses should be done on an ongoing basis, taking into account macro-financial feedback loops and spillovers to other sectors, especially given the construction sector’s strong link to the rest of the economy. Non-bank financial institutions are exposed to a potential correction in the corporate bond market . Spreads on corporate bonds have declined sharply and may no longer reflect risk appropriately. Recent bond issuances have been from the real estate/construction sector—many of which have lower ratings and are backed by lower quality collateral. A correction that raises bond yields rapidly will hit mutual funds and institutional investors hard and, in turn, weaken household balance sheets. Progress with the 2012 FSAP recommendations lags in two areas. A formal Financial Stability Committee (FSC), which will coordinate and set macroprudential oversight, has yet to be established. Currently there are three supervisors (one for banks; one for the securities sector; and one for the insurance and pension sector). Coordinated oversight is important given that the system is highly inter-connected and financial activities are evolving across various segments of institutions and instruments. As discussed in the 2013 Article IV report, staff maintains the view that an independent FSC should be established with the BOI Governor taking the leading role in macroprudential policies in normal times. This should help coordinate macro-prudential policies across sectors and reduce the risk of regulatory arbitrage. The members of a future FSC have already started to meet regularly but informally. The ongoing legislative amendment to the Banking Ordinance to enhance the crisis resolution framework —aiming at strengthening the BOI’s toolkit for early intervention and resolution—should be completed by sending the draft legislation to the Knesset at the earliest possible time. The new government is concerned that high banking concentration has limited access to and raised the cost of credit for small and medium enterprises . The MoF noted that the banking sector is not efficient relative to peers in other advanced economies, possibly reflecting high concentration. The BOI acknowledged that there are gains to raising competition but is concerned about the potential impact on financial stability. In addition, they believed that the absence of a credit bureau could be contributing to small firms’ limited access to credit. A committee, with representatives from the central bank and the MoF, has been formed to propose measures to reduce credit costs for SMEs. Technical work for drafting an amended law has been complete with technical assistance from the Fund TA mssion. Page 22 The regulators agreed that financial sector vulnerabilities to a possible house price correction should be monitored closely. Acknowledging the rising exposure of banks to mortgages, the banking regulator introduced additional capital requirement amounting to 1 percent of outstanding housing loans last September. The authorities are equally concerned about nonbanks’ housing exposure—either via direct loans or potentially underpriced corporate bonds— but noted that this risk stems from a low interest environment (Israel’s sovereign bond spreads vis- à-vis the United States have turned negative). All supervisors are running stress tests and sensitivity analyses but concurred that these need to be enhanced. Differences continued to delay the formation of an FSC. There is now broad agreement that the committee should focus on macroprudential policies in normal times, with the BOI playing the leading role and its chairmanship assigned to the Governor, with a separate crisis management committee (headed by the MoF) to operate in exceptional circumstances. This is staff’s preferred option. However, new disagreements on the number of representatives each organization should have in the FSC have arisen, potentially delaying again its establishment.