Israel’s fiscal deficit is too high, but reducing it has been challenging, in part because deficit reduction plans have been deferred repeatedly. The new government, facing spending pressures and desiring to keep tax rates low, needs to avoid following past patterns. Israel has a high, structural, and persistent fiscal deficit. By international accounting standards, the central government fiscal deficit is almost 1 percentage point higher than the 2½–3 percent reported. The main difference between the general government and central government deficit is the treatment of interest payments on CPI-indexed bonds. In the general government deficit they are—consistent with international accounting—included above the line; in the central government deficit below the line. Local governments maintain close to balanced budgets. In Israel, the inflation compensation of indexed bonds is reported below the line, even though it adds to the debt. Page 12 Israel’s deficit is structural. The current deficit originates from tax cuts between 2003 and 2010 that were not offset by sufficient expenditure reductions. It does not reflect cyclical weakness; the output gap is near zero, and employment growth has been strong. Efforts to reduce the deficit have repeatedly been deferred. In theory , Israel has an expenditure rule and a deficit rule underpinned by a debt target, but they have been revised so often that in practice there is no effective fiscal anchor. The deficit ceiling has been revised twenty times since 1991; the expenditure ceiling has been revised 6 times since 2004. This pattern was set to repeat itself last year, but politics got in the way. Planned upward revisions of deficit targets for 2014–18 were interrupted by the fall of the government and early elections. As a result, despite an unpredicted large spending need for Operation Protective Edge (1 percent of GDP in total, of which 0.7 percent of GDP was covered in 2014), the central government deficit met the original target in 2014 (2.8 percent of GDP). The 2015 budget will only be adopted by parliament in November. Until then, monthly expenditure limits are governed by the “1/12-rule”—monthly spending cannot exceed one twelfth of the 2014 budget including debt service (plus inflation). As debt repayments are projected to be much lower this year, the ceiling is not very binding, and spending is expected to grow in line with GDP growth. Overall, the deficit is expected to stay around 2.8 percent of GDP this year, exceeding the target stipulated in the Deficit Reduction Law (2.5 percent of GDP) (Tables 4–5). Policy discussions The fiscal deficit needs to be reduced. Current levels leave few buffers to deal with shocks, such as a housing price correction, renewed conflicts, or a sharp recession. The debt ratio has practically stabilized after a period of decline and will begin to rise again if deficits are not reduced. The DSA shows that under the baseline, debt would increase gradually to 69 percent of GDP by 2020, while under a growth-shock or sharp housing correction scenario, it could rise well above 75 percent of GDP by then (Annex II). Reducing the deficit will be a challenge. Under the current law, the deficit should be reduced to 2 percent of GDP next year and 1½ percent of GDP in 2019 (on national standards). Achieving these targets would go a long way towards addressing the fiscal problem, with the debt ratio converging to 50 percent of GDP over the longer term. This will, however, require substantial efforts. Since 2007, the expenditure-to-potential GDP ratio has declined by 2½ percentage points—not enough to offset the decline in revenue-to-GDP ratio (5 percentage points). Israel -Central Government Deficit Target Adjustments (Percent of GDP) Sources : MoF, Brender (2013), IMF (2014), IMF (2015)Rules as decided by the Deficit Reduction law in: Page 13 Measures of around 1 percent of GDP will be needed to stick to the current expenditure ceiling. This is because planned initiatives in the coalition agreement and previous commitments would raise spending above the current ceiling. Moreover, even if the expenditure ceiling is met, it is not tight enough to bring about the desired deficit reduction. The real growth rate of the expenditure ceiling (around 2.6 percent) is barely below the growth rate of real GDP (3 percent), implying only a modest drop in the spending ratio. This challenge should be addressed upfront, and not put off to the future. Staff advocated for an explicit revenue and expenditure plan for the entire 2016–20 period, consistent with the deficit targets: Without a mechanism to ensure that multi-year spending commitments are in line with the expenditure ceiling, the expenditure ceiling will likely need to be revised up. Thus, commitment control of new multi-year projects needs to be strengthened through, inter alia , enhancing top- down budgeting, undertaking spending reviews, and improving cost estimates of multi-year projects. To achieve the desired deficit reduction, either the expenditure ceiling should be lowered sufficiently to attain the deficit target, or, alternatively, commensurate revenue increases should be explicitly planned. Policymakers need to decide how to reduce the deficit. Consolidation measures should have the minimum possible impact on growth—suggesting in general a preference for cutting current over capital spending and towards indirect rather than direct taxes—and reflect areas where revenues are low or spending is high relative to comparator norms (Figure 3). While civilian spending is low in Israel compared to other advanced economies, there is likely still scope for efficiency gains in both defense and non-defense spending (for example, through better targeting of social benefits). Tax expenditures are also relatively high. Thus, the authorities should consider a mix of revenue and expenditure measures to achieve the deficit targets. Next year’s budget should take an important first step in reducing the deficit. The 2015 budget will likely be passed only in November—too late to introduce new measures. As the fiscal deficit for this year is likely to exceed the deficit target in the current law (2¾ percent of GDP rather than 2½ percent), reflecting a boost in defense spending, the original target for 2016 (2 percent of GDP) may no longer be feasible. Nevertheless, the deficit in 2016 should be brought down by at least half a percent, equivalent to the reduction envisaged in the Deficit Reduction Law. The real expenditure growth target under the latest expenditure rule is calculated by the population growth rate in the preceding 3 years (about 1.8 percent) plus the ratio of 50 (reflecting the long-term debt-to-GDP ratio target) to the actual debt-to-GDP ratio in the previous year. Page 14 The authorities intend to reduce the deficit gradually, but not at the pace indicated in the Deficit Reduction Law. They emphasized that Israel’s fiscal position is significantly stronger than a decade ago, when debt was above 90 percent of GDP and the general government deficit around 7½ percent of GDP. They think that accommodating high-priority growth-enhancing spending (e.g., education, key infrastructure projects) is important and justifies amending the Deficit Reduction Law to slow the pace of fiscal consolidation. Views differed on the composition of fiscal adjustment . The Ministry of Finance (MoF) noted that while the level of civilian expenditures in Israel is relatively low compared to other OECD countries, economic “outcomes” associated with such spending are high, as evidenced by low mortality and high life expectancy. In addition, they argued that there remains further scope for improving government efficiency and reducing administrative spending without lowering social and welfare spending. Accordingly, the MoF indicated that fiscal adjustment should come mainly from expenditure cuts, but did not preclude revenue mobilization efforts including broadening the tax base by rationalizing tax exemptions and introducing new taxation (e.g., estate tax). By contrast, the BOI was more cautious about reducing the size of the civilian budget and emphasized the scope for revenue gains from rationalizing tax exemptions. The authorities plan to undertake steps to strengthening the medium-term fiscal framework. The MoF intends to prepare a fiscal policy statement prior to the publication of the upcoming budget, including the size of the consolidation needs in the medium term with possible measures to satisfy the need. In addition, they aim to initiate spending reviews in the coming year.