Israel is a small open economy, well- integrated in the world economy through trade and capital market channels. Israel’s exports account for one third of GDP, with the United States, Europe and emerging Asia its major trade partners. Israel has strong comparative advantages in the high-tech industry, which accounts for more than 40 percent of total manufacturing exports, but economy-wide labor productivity is low, and the poverty rate is among the highest in the OECD. Israel was less affected by the 2009 crisis than many other countries, in part due to the absence of pre-crisis asset and lending booms. It is the only advanced economy where growth has exceeded pre-crisis WEO projections (Figure 1). Unemployment has continued to decline to 5.3 percent in 2015Q1—a multi-decade low. Thus continues the Israeli employment miracle: in the past 25 years, employment has grown by 3½ percent annually By comparison, average annual employment growth in the US during 1990–2014 was 1.2 percent; for the Euro area 0.5 percent (1991–2014). NN Actual Forecast Real GDP Growth: Forecast vs. Actual , 2007–12 (Percent) Source: WEO database,October 2007 and October 2014. Employment Population Total hours Employment and Population Growth (five year annual average, percent) Sources: Total Economy Database; Central Bureauof Statistics; and HaverAnalytics. Employment GDP growth Population Israel: Employment, Population, and Growth (Percent; 4y moving averge) Sources: Central Bureau of Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. GDP per worker GDP per capita Israel: GDP per worker and GDP per capita (Percent; 4y moving average) Sources: Central Bureau of Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Page 9 Growth has slowed in recent years to around 3 percent. Both potential and actual growth have slowed—the latter held back by sluggish partner country growth, the strong shekel and—in 2014—the conflict in Gaza (Figure 2 and Table 1). In per capita terms, growth is about 1 percent. Policy makers are confronted with several problems: Despite relatively high growth post-crisis, Israel has one of the highest structural fiscal deficits in the OECD. Repeated upward revisions to fiscal targets have delayed progress in deficit reduction. Inflation is negative, but house prices keep soaring . Over the past 3 years, the BOI has cut the monetary policy rate from 3.25 to 0.10 percent. Low energy prices and an appreciating shekel have dampened inflation, although recent data showed an uptick in inflation and inflation expectations. Low interest rates have contributed to a housing price boom, with prices nearly doubling since the beginning of 2007. Labor productivity is low and the gap relative to the United States is widening. Productivity will come under further pressure from the rapidly rising share in the population of the Haredi and Israeli Arabs—groups with generally lower-than-average education levels. Income inequality is high . This reflects both high inequality of labor -income, with a high share of both high-paying and low-paying jobs relative to other countries; as well as less redistribution through the tax/transfer system than in other countries. Poverty is concentrated among the Israeli-Arab and Haredi populations, which have lower labor force participation rates, less education, and larger families, but even among the non-Haredi Jews, income inequality is higher than in almost all advanced economies. 4050607080901001101201960s1970s1980s1990s2000s2010–13 Israel Labor productivity (Real GDP per worker in US$ thousands; period average)Source: Total Economy Database. SS Structural Balance in 2014 (Percent of Potential GDP)Source: IMF's Fiscal Monitor Database, April 2015. Page 10 Traction of Fund policy advice. Many policy actions have been in line with Fund advice, including the BOI policy of keeping monetary policy accommodative while tightening macroprudential policy to contain a build-up of risk in the housing market and efforts to increase the labor force participation of the Haredi and Arab-Israeli populations. The record on fiscal policy advice has been weaker, with repeated adjustments of fiscal targets. In the area of financial sector policy, the establishment of a Financial Stability Committee (FSC) as recommended in previous Article IV consultations has yet to materialize.