To contain further housing price increases, supply needs to be boosted. Concerted efforts among relevant ministries and local governments are needed. To contain the increase in leverage, macro- prudential measures should be used. Both demand and supply factors have contributed to the housing price boom (Figure 7). Demand has been boosted by the decline in interest rates, the increasing population, and growing household incomes. While the real estate tax system in Israel is broadly in line with global standards, distortions from the tax system and an underregulated rental market also create a bias towards homeownership. Demand increased just when housing supply had dropped to a post-immigration boom low. Boosting supply has been hard: Israel’s supply elasticity to prices is low compared to other advanced economies—the result of a highly centralized approach to land development (the state owns 93 percent of Israel’s land), the long process of obtaining licenses and building permits, and lack of support from local governments for high density projects. See SIP on the Residential Real Estate Tax System in Israel. Total Private sector Public sector Israel: Completion of Residential Dwellings (Thousand) Sources: Central Bureau of Statistics; Haver Analytics. Page 18 Macroprudential measures taken by the BOI have contained the increase in household leverage. Since 2009, the BOI has introduced a wide range of macroprudential tools to address vulnerabilities and boost banks’ loss absorption capacity (Annex III). As a result, household credit to GDP has remained low compared to other advanced economies. Nevertheless, the exposure of banks to real estate and construction has increased (section D). Staff estimates suggest housing prices are currently some 30 percent overvalued. A housing price correction could depress consumption through its wealth effects, and would particularly affect those that have bought a house in recent years. Policy discussions To contain housing price increases, supply will need to be boosted. Planning procedures should be simplified. Planning procedures are cumbersome, and the time between initiating new building initiatives and finishing construction can range between 8 and 21 years. The zoning of available land and its release for development should be accelerated. This would allow the private sector to respond more effectively to rising demand. Moreover, the authorities could consider eliminating restrictions to building in big cities, adopted to discourage urbanization, and instead implementing incentives for greater investment in infrastructure, education, and job creation in the periphery. Local governments should be given the means to support the construction of high density residential buildings. Since property tax rates are lower for residential properties and for smaller units, local governments prefer commercial properties and luxury buildings over high density residential buildings. Thus, local authorities are reluctant to support large projects, further delaying construction. Higher intergovernmental transfers should be considered to help finance the cost of additional infrastructure and services required by new residential developments. Macroprudential policy should continue to be actively used to contain housing-related risks to financial stability . Options include further tightening limits on loan-to-value (LTV) and payment-to-income (PTI) ratios or accelerating the implementation of the recently-announced measure to gradually increase capital surcharges by 1 percent of outstanding mortgage lending. Duration of Construction Process in Israel (Years) 1/ Permit from the local committee. 2/ Tender publication and decisionregarding the winner.Source: Taub Center, State of the Nation Report 2014. Building time Building permits 1/ Marketing 2/Development plansDistrict committee license Feasibility study and plan preparation for district committee Page 19 The authorities’ views The authorities pointed to a variety of initiatives to boost housing supply. The central government has been signing agreements with local governments to facilitate central government financing of infrastructure needed for new development. A committee to identify land for development and expedite the planning process has been established. Power to approve building plans has been decentralized to local committees. The new government has also put several authorities involved in the process, such as the Israel Land Authority and the Planning Committee, under the command of the MoF to improve coordination and shorten the planning process. The authorities also noted that macroprudential measures have effectively reduced the riskiness of new mortgages. The average LTV and PTI ratios of new loans have declined significantly to low levels (52 and 26 percent, respectively). Analysis of mortgages initiated between 2010 and 2013 by income decile also suggests that most mortgages were taken out by high income households, who are typically more resilient to shocks.