While inflation is currently negative, this does not reflect domestic weakness. The tapering off of the energy price declines, the lagged impact of the shekel depreciation in the second half of 2014, and strengthening of the domestic economy will likely bring inflation back to the target band in 2016. The shekel is broadly in line with fundamentals. Inflation is currently negative —well outside the BOI’s target band of 1–3 percent (Figure 4–5) Low inflation is in large part imported, the result of low inflation in partner countries, the appreciation of the shekel (between the summer of 2012 and the summer of 2014, the shekel appreciated by 17 percent in nominal effective terms) and the drop in oil prices. See SIP on Low Inflation in Israel—Should We Worry About it? 2006Q12008Q12010Q12012Q12014Q1 Constant 1/ Others (domestic) Others (external) Oil Neer Output gap Israel: Contribution to CPI Inflation (Percentage points) Sources: Bank of Israel; Haver analytics; and IMF staff calculations.1/ The constant term includes the constants in the regression framework and any insignificant external factors. “Other domestic” are the residuals and base effects from the core and expectations equations, while “Other external” are the base effects and residuals from the non-core inflation equation. See SIP on Low Inflation in Israel -Should We Worry About It? Page 15 The BOI has reduced policy interest rates by 2.4 percentage points since mid-2012 to 0.1 percent in March 2015. Two interest rates cuts in August and September 2014 halted the appreciation of the shekel, and triggered a sharp depreciation against the US dollar. When the shekel rebounded in early 2015, the BOI reduced policy rates once more. The BOI has also intervened in the foreign exchange market aiming to smooth excess volatility. Policy discussions Even though inflation is currently outside the band, in staff’s view no further monetary easing is needed at this stage. Staff analysis suggests that inflation will likely return to within the target band next year. A Philips curve model confirms that the growth pick-up, the shekel depreciation since last summer, and tapering energy price declines will bring inflation back to within the band. Markets also expect the low CPI inflation to be temporary, as longer-term inflation expectations have remained well-anchored. Indeed, GDP inflation has already bounced back to 2¾ percent y/y in the first quarter; CPI inflation has not followed suit because of the strong terms of trade gains. The overall policy mix is already very accommodative, with near-zero interest rates, and broadly neutral fiscal policy. The output gap is small at best and unemployment has come down sharply in recent years. The BOI’s objectives are (1) to maintain price stability; (2) support growth, employment and the reduction of social gaps; (3) support the stability and proper functioning of the financial system. 2006Q12008Q12010Q12012Q12014Q1 Israel: GDP Deflator and NEER (Percent; Y/y change) GDP Deflator NEER (right axis; +=depreciation) Source: Haver Analytics. 2006Q12008Q12010Q12012Q12014Q1 TOT GDP deflator-CPISource: Haver Analytics. Israel: Terms of Trade and GDP Deflator-CPI Difference (Percent; Y/y change) 2006Q12008Q12010Q12012Q12014Q1 Israel: GDP Deflator and CPI (Percent; Y/y change) GDP Deflator CPISource: Haver Analytics. Page 16 In staff’s views, at current levels, the shekel is broadly in line with fundamentals. Evidence from exchange rate models is mixed, but the average of three existing estimates suggests the shekel is around its fundamental value: The IMF external balance assessment (EBA) macroeconomic balance approach suggests the shekel is undervalued in 2014, reflecting that the current account in 2014 (4.3 percent of GDP) was well above the EBA estimated norm (-0.2 percent of GDP). However, in staff’s view the EBA current account norm is too low, as it does not take into account some important structural shifts including the expansion of mandatory household pension saving in 2008. A modified EBA macroeconomic balance approach—adding a fixed effect dummy and pension contributions as share of GDP as additional variables— suggests a current account norm of 2 percent of GDP, suggesting that the shekel was undervalued by about 9 percent in May 2015. The EBA-like REER regression approach suggests that the shekel was 0.1 percent above its fundamental value in 2014, implying an overvaluation of 0.5 percent as of May 2015. Finally, a CGER REER panel regression type model suggests an overvaluation in the medium term of 6.8 percent. The BOI shared the view that low inflation was mostly imported, and agreed with staff that no additional monetary easing was required at this stage .The BOI forecasts that inflation will reach the lower end of the target band in 2016Q1. Inflation would be further strengthened by tightening in the domestic labor market which would lead to an increase in wage costs. Thus, the BOI sees less of a need for unconventional monetary policy measures, even as these tools remain part of the toolbox. Monetary policy committee members noted that interest rate decisions reflected difficult trade-offs . Rising housing prices suggested that higher interest rates were needed to See SIP on Exchange Rate Assessment. The EBA assessment, done in March 2015 when the 2014 current account surplus was estimated at 3 percent of GDP, suggested an undervaluation of 14 percent. More recently, the 2014 current account surplus was revised up to 4.3 percent of GDP. The modified EBA model takes the revisions to the current account balance into consideration. Goods Start-up services Other services Income Current account Israel's Current Account (Percent of GDP)Source: Haver Analytics. Page 17 contain associated financial risks, but—given its impact on growth and inflation—committee members could not ignore the impact of monetary tightening on the exchange rate. They also noted that to a considerable extent upward pressure on the exchange rate had not been the result of ‘fundamentals,’ but reflected spillovers from other countries’ loose monetary policies. In BOI’s view, the shekel is somewhat overvalued . This was most visible in sluggish exports, even after accounting for the impact of weak world trade. The current account surplus had increased in 2014 (to 4.3 percent of GDP), but this had been the result of a sudden drop in the repatriation of multinational firm profits and the decline in oil prices, not improved competitiveness. The current account surplus further reflected transfers from the US government (about 1 percent of GDP annually) and the replacement of imported energy with domestic gas production.