Staff expects growth of 3 percent in 2015, as rapid employment growth, falling import prices, and near-zero interest rates boost private consumption (Table 1). Weak partner country growth and strong demand for imports continue to weigh on net exports in the near term. The output gap is near zero, and inflation is projected to recover to around 0.7 percent at the end of the year. Beyond 2015, medium-term growth is projected at around 3–3¼ percent a year—in line with potential GDP growth. Risks to the outlook are balanced. External downside risks include disappointing growth in Israel’s trading partners, geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, and a renewed appreciation of the shekel resulting from a longer episode of loose monetary policy in large advanced economies. In this context, prospective US monetary tightening could actually help Israel, as it would likely diminish re-emerging appreciation pressures on the shekel, especially if it reflects stronger growth prospects in the United States. Contagion from Greece is likely to be limited, as there are few financial and trade links. Domestic risks include a housing price bust, which could affect growth and financial system stability. Upside risks include a faster- and stronger-than-expected recovery in the global economy and a further increase in natural gas investment (Annex I). Israel: Earnings Dispersion Sources:OECD; and IMF staff calculations. AUSAUTBELCANCZEDNK EST FINFRADEUGRCHUN ISL IRLISRITAJPNKOR LUX MEXNDLNZLNORPOLPRTSVKSVNESPSWECHEGBRUSA OECD tt Top 10 percent Earnings Dispersion, P9 and P1 (Index,median=100) Low Pay High Pay Incidenceof Low and High Pay (Percent of employment) Page 11 The authorities’ views on developments and risks were very similar to staff’s. They had become more optimistic in recent months on near-term growth and noted that it was increasingly domestically-driven, with strong private consumption growth and relatively weak exports and investment. They estimated potential GDP growth at around 3 percent and thought that the output gap was small. It was difficult to determine the NAIRU, but it had likely been trending down: in the past ten years there had been a sharp increase in participation and a drop in unemployment. They did not believe that global market turmoil would lead to capital outflows —past episodes had been associated with safe haven inflows. In this context, they noted Israel’s strong external position, with current account surpluses and large reserve buffers. In any event, with the financial sector largely domestically financed, they agreed that capital outflows would likely support growth through a weaker shekel. They agreed with the key policy challenges , which include strengthening the economy’s resilience to shocks, increasing medium-term growth, and integrating the Haredi and Israeli-Arab populations. They remained committed to reducing fiscal deficits but noted the need to increase investment on infrastructure and education to close the productivity gap with other advanced economies. They recognized the impact of low interest rates on housing prices and welcomed recent indication of easing downward pressures on inflation. On the housing market, they have initiated programs to ease supply constraints. They shared staff’s view that potential growth will come under pressure as the share of the Haredi and Israeli Arabs in the population rises rapidly in the near future.