THE PAST THREE YEARS Macroeconomic performance worsened markedly following the subsidy reform in late 2010 and the intensification of sanctions in 2012 The economy slowed down markedly following the subsidy reform launch in December . A large relative price change brought a significant deceleration in economic activity, particularly in the industrial sector. Real non-oil GDP growth decelerated from about 7½ percent in the quarter prior to the reform to about 2 percent a year later. From the demand side, the sources of growth also narrowed, with growth exclusively led by private consumption, as investment declined sharply (Table 1 and Figure 2). Growth and Inflation, 1980–2013 (In y-o-y percent change) Source: Iranian authorities. Real GDP Growth Twelve-month inflation doubled in 2011 . It accelerated from about 13 percent on the eve of the subsidy reform to about 22 percent by December 2011. This owed much to the pass- through from the adjustment in subsidized prices for food and energy, as producer price inflation rose from 12 percent to 39 percent (y/y) during the same period. This relative price change also took place against a backdrop of administrative measures, such as price monitoring and the use of strategic inventories of key staples, as well as some tightening of macroeconomic policies, which helped limit the pass-through. Page 8 Manufacturing and Automobile Production Since early 2012, international trade and financial sanctions brought renewed shockwaves and pushed the economy into a deep contraction . A series of sanctions restricting oil exports, the supply chain of some key sectors (like automobiles), and transactions of international and domestic banks, impaired Iran’s ability to conduct international current and capital transactions and brought a sharp decline in income (Box 1). Oil production fell to a 20-year low, oil-export proceeds declined by more than half (by about 15 percent of GDP), and the rial lost about 80 percent of its value in the bureau/parallel market. Key sectors, such as automobiles, experienced severe disruptions in production, including from administered-price policies. These shocks imparted significant contractionary effects on the economy, with real GDP declining by almost 6 percent in 2012/13. During the first half of 2013/14, real GDP is estimated to have declined by about 2½ percent, compared with the same period in the previous year. Sources: International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers (OICA); and Central Bank of Iran. Production of large manufacturing establishments (Index in y-o-y percent change, RHS) Automobiles (in millions) The authorities abandoned their managed exchange rate regime . Following a sharp depreciation in the bureau/parallel market in September 2012, the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) introduced a new Foreign Exchange center (FX center), mostly supplied with hydrocarbon export receipts. The CBI initially offered foreign exchange for most current transactions at an official rate of 2 percent below the rate offered in the bureau/parallel market, while maintaining the previous official exchange rate for basic necessities. With the bureau/parallel market rate continuing to depreciate, the 2 percent target was eventually abandoned, with three exchange rates (an official for basic necessities, one for other current transactions (FX center), and a bureau/parallel market rates) available for transactions. With the premium in the foreign exchange market (between the bureau/parallel and the FX center rates) still high, at around 50 percent, loose monetary conditions, and new sanctions being introduced in early 2013, the authorities eventually unified official exchange rates in June 2013. Market conditions have stabilized since the Presidential elections in mid-June, with the rial appreciating by about 20 percent in the bureau/parallel market and the premium declining to about 20 percent in recent months (Figure 3). Page 9 Throughout these shocks, monetary conditions were relatively accommodative and Jun-13 M1 M2 Private-sector credit Money and Credit Growth (In y-o-y percent change) inflation continued to accelerate . In the wake of the subsidy reform, the CBI tightened base money but did not succeed in reducing money growth significantly, as specialized and other banks continued to expand credit to the private sector at rates exceeding 30 percent in 2011. Domestic interest rates became increasingly negative, the exchange rate premium began to widen, and domestic asset prices continued to rise rapidly (Figure 4). In January 2012, the CBI decided to increase its rate for participation papers and for other short- term rates. But lending and deposit rates were subsequently kept fixed as part of the government and Money and Credit Council’s (MCC) credit policies. M2 growth accelerated toward 30 percent, with M1 declining markedly in real terms by end-2012/13. Twelve-month inflation rose to 45 percent due to loose monetary conditions and the unification of the official exchange rates, reflecting a trend visible during the last decade, when macroeconomic policies contributed to keep tradable and nontradable inflation at high levels. More recently, the CBI has kept a lid on base money growth thanks to tighter credit to the banking system and some fiscal consolidation, the exchange rate in the bureau/parallel market has appreciated, and 12-month inflation has declined to about 29 percent in January 2014 (Figure 3). Jun-11 Dec-11 Source: Iranian authorities. Dec-10 Dec-13 Dec-12 Jun-12 Inflation and the Exchange Rate (In percent) Inflation Exchange rate (in thousands of Rial/USD; RHS) CPI Inflation (In y-o-y percent change) Goods (tradables) Services (nontradables) Source: Iranian authorities. Source: Iranian authorities. In early 2012, the MCC allowed banks to determine deposit rates. But this failed to translate into greater flexibility and link with inflation, as lending rates for transactional contracts remained subject to officially-mandated caps. In March 2013, the CPI basket was updated to reflect 2011 household spending patterns and entailed a 4½ percentage point higher weight for services (housing, health, and communications) relative to goods (food, clothing, and furniture). Page 10 Box 1. A Chronology of Significant Economic and Political Events, 2011–13 A series of significant external and domestic events took place since the last Article IV Consultation in 2011. These events have shaped the course of economic policy making. November 2011 December 2011 January 2012 January 2012 March 2012 May 2012 June 2012 July 2012 August 2012 September 2012 October 2012 November 2012 February 2013 February 2013 June 2013 July 2013 July 2013 August 2013 September 2013 November 2013 U.S. identifies Iran as a jurisdiction of primary money laundering concern and determines that Iran’s financial system, including the central bank, constitutes a threat to governments or financial institutions that do business with these banks. Britain and Canada stopped doing business with Iranian financial institutions as well as the central bank. The U.S. adopts legislation to sanction foreign banks that deal with Iran’s central bank unless the parent country of the bank significantly reduces its oil purchases from Iran, which is to be reviewed every six months. The new sanctions start to apply to non-oil transactions with the central bank by end February 2012 and to oil related transactions by end June 2012. The EU decides to freeze new contracts to purchase Iranian oil and to wind down existing contracts by July 1, 2012. Also, the EU decision bans insurance for shipping oil or petrochemical products, stops all trade with Iran in petrochemicals and precious metals and stones and freezes the assets of the central bank. The parallel market exchange rate depreciates by 25 percent. In response, the central bank depreciates the official exchange rate by 8.5 percent and increases profit rates for deposits by 5 percentage points. Society of Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) cuts off sanctioned Iranian banks from its network. A new U.S. Executive Order gives the U.S. Treasury Department the ability to identify and sanction foreign persons who help Iran evade U.S. and other multilateral sanctions. U.S. regulators fine a large financial institution in violations of the sanctions regime. The EU oil embargo and accompanying insurance ban on shipping of oil or petrochemical products, and the U.S. legislation requiring reductions in oil imports from Iran and banning purchase of Iranian petrochemical products take effect. U.S. regulators fine another large financial institution in violations of the sanctions regime. Parallel market exchange rate depreciates by about 30 percent and the central bank introduces a Foreign Exchange Center for foreign exchange transactions. The rial depreciates sharply in the parallel market. The EU bans transactions between European and all Iranian banks unless specifically authorized, prohibits provision of short term export credits, guarantees, and insurance to Iran and forbids provision of flagging and classification services for Iranian tankers and cargo vessels. The U.S. Treasury Department announces that financial transactions with National Iranian Oil Company would be sanctioned. New U.S. measures take effect preventing Iran from bringing its hard currency back to Iran and barring transfer of those proceeds to a third country for payments, thereby compelling Iran to buy the products of the oil importing country. U.S. legislation also bans supplying or transferring precious metals, in particular gold, to Iran. The EU General Court rules that the EU should lift the sanctions imposed on one of Iran's largest banks. Presidential elections take place in Iran. The parallel exchange rate appreciates by about 10 percent. The U.S. adopts new measures sanctioning companies that supply goods or services to Iran’s automotive sector or finance transactions with this sector. Also, the U.S. measures banning provision of underwriting, insurance and reinsurance services for broad range of activities in Iran including shipping of oil and shipbuilding take effect. Central Bank of Iran unifies its two official exchange rates at the more depreciated official rate. President Rouhani’s government takes office. The parallel market exchange rate appreciates by an additional 10 percent after the Presidential elections. The EU General Court rules that measures against Iran’s largest shipping company should be lifted. Iran reaches an interim agreement with P5+1 over its nuclear program. Iran: FX Rates, June 2011–December 2013 (In rials per dollar) Official Rate Parallel Rate FX Center Official Rate 18 19 Jun-11 Nov-11 Apr-12 Sep-12 Feb-13 Jul-13 Dec-13 Source: Central Bank of Iran. Page 11 The fiscal position deteriorated significantly . Facing about 10 percentage point of GDP decline in total revenues since 2010/11, the authorities cut spending by close to 6 percentage points of GDP (with capital spending comprising about two-thirds of the cut). As a result, the overall fiscal balance shifted from a surplus of 3 percent of GDP in 2010/11 to an estimated deficit of 1 percent of GDP in 2013/14 (Tables 3 and 4). The cash deficit of the Targeted Subsidies Organization (TSO) remained high, at an estimated 1–2 percent of GDP in the same period, bringing the expanded overall deficit to about 2¼ percent of GDP in 2013/14 (Figure 2). The financial system was also adversely affected . Banks’ asset quality and profitability have been significantly affected by the combination of sanctions and rigid government credit policies (Tables 5, 6, and 7). Reported nonperforming loans (NPLs) peaked at 17 percent of total loans in 2012/13 (almost 10 percent of non-oil GDP), largely mirroring external trade and cash flow problems in the corporate sector, particularly state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Credit to the private sector grew by 21 percent (year-on-year) in December 2013, implying a decline of about 6 percent in real terms. Lending activity of state-owned banks was the most sluggish, as these banks were heavily exposed to weak corporate borrowers. Despite these challenges, private- sector deposit growth (year-on-year) outpaced credit growth by 6 percentage points as of December 2013. The balance of payments remained in surplus, but external arrears emerged as international sanctions impaired access to foreign exchange . Iran’s current account surplus declined to 6½ percent of GDP in 2012/13, almost halving from the year before (Table 2). The sharp fall in oil exports was the main factor, partly offset by import compression. The deficit of the capital account remained contained, leaving the overall balance of payments in a surplus of 3½ percent of GDP in 2012/13. Gross foreign assets of the CBI rose to about $104 billion by end-2012/13. The liquidity of official reserve assets remained tight, and some external creditors have reported rising public and private external arrears, mostly related to lack of access to hard currencies for repayment. There was a limited and temporary easing of economic sanctions in November 2013 . Under the interim agreement with the P5+1 in November 2013, Iran’s crude oil sales would be allowed to stabilize at the level of around 1 million bpd and Iran could access US$4.2 billion of its own funds held abroad in the six months, following the agreement taking effect on January 20, 2014. Sanctions on Iran’s petrochemical exports, the automobile industry, and on the trading of gold and precious metals, were also waived temporarily, potentially providing US$1.5 billion in revenue. The United States and the European Union have also committed to establish a financial channel to facilitate humanitarian trade with Iran, including for civil aviation needs and to enable payment of tuition fees for Iranian students abroad. All in all, Iran would be able to dispense about US$6–7 billion (2 percent of GDP) during the six months following its implementation on January 20, 2014. The interim agreement maintained the sanctions against the Central Bank of Iran and other domestic financial institutions. NPLs could be underreported given past supervisory forbearance and weak loan classification standards. Page 12