Private sector development is hampered by limited access to finance and connectedness to the global economy (Figure 8, SIP Chapter 5). World Bank business climate indicators show Iran performing poorly in access to credit, protecting minority investors, governance, trading across borders, and resolving insolvency. Global Competitiveness indicators shows shortfalls in financial market development, labor market efficiency, and technological readiness. These constraints, combined with the large role of the state, result in a low employment elasticity of non- oil growth (just 0.2). The labor market is unable to absorb new entrants—which average half a million annually over the next five years—with youth and women facing the greatest challenges. The unemployment rate exceeds 12 percent, with female and youth unemployment at 21 and almost 30 percent, respectively. Nearly one-fifth of university graduates are unemployed and one-third of the youth are neither economically active nor in education. Structural reforms can spur private sector growth, mitigate the effects of fiscal adjustment, and provide opportunities to improve living standards durably . In particular: Refocusing the role and resources of the state would facilitate private sector development. Higher infrastructure investment, reducing the large role of the state in the economy, the removal of government-imposed constraints such as excessive red tape, administered prices, and greater commercial orientation of state-owned firms would help level the playing field for new and smaller firms to enter markets, grow and create jobs. Regulatory reforms can attract foreign investors to ease financing constraints as the banking reform proceeds while bringing technical know-how and innovation. A registry of corporate beneficial ownership would complement AML/CFT reforms, addressing concerns that have made some investors and correspondent banks hesitant to enter or deal with Iran. Establishing an independent anti-corruption agency, actively pursuing cases, and enhancing the system of declaration of assets of high-level public officials in line with international standards would bolster accountability, transparency, and improve the business climate. Higher female participation and employment can boost growth (Box 3). Female labor force participation has improved slightly and over 4 million women work outside the home. Over half of university students are female where they comprise over 70 percent of science, and over half Page 29 Figure 8. Islamic Republic of Iran: Structural Reforms Figure 8. Islamic Republic of Iran: Structural Reforms, 2011/12–2016/17 Growth in the non-oil sector is still largely driven by the oil sector. And non-oil growthhas not generated sufficient jobs. mm Employment Elasticities, Non-oil GDP 1/ 1/ Elasticities are estimated using linear regression. Non-negativity constraints are imposed on elasticity coefficients. Unemployment and participation are rising, stressing the need for higher growth and job creation... especially for females and university graduates. proj. Participation rate (right axis) Unemployment rate (left axis) Unemployment and Participation Rate (Percent) Access to financingInflation Inefficient governmentbureaucracy Policy instabilityCorruption Inadequate supply ofinfrastructure Iran BRICS GCC+Algeria The Most Problematic Factors for Doing Business (Lower score is better) 1/ 1/ From a list of 16 factors, respondents were asked to select the five most problematic for doing business in their country and to rank them between 1 (most problematic) and 5. The score corresponds to the responses weighted according to their rankings. Addressing institutional and market inefficiencies would help private sector development. Structural reforms, includingin the labor market,can also improve the allocation of resources to more productive uses. DZAAZE BHRIRNKAZ KWT OMNQATSAUAREECUGABIDNMYS MEX NGA NORRUS TTOVEN = Labor market flexibility (7 = highest) Labor Market Efficiency, 2016 MENAOilExporters Participation rateUnemployment rate Youth unemployment Total Female Male Graduates Labor Market Performance, 2016 (Percent) Sources: Iran authorities; Global Competitiveness,and IMFstaff calculations. Oil Exports and Non-Oil Activity (Percent) Moving Average of Growth Rate of Real Oil Exports perCapita - Left Growth Rate of Real Non-Oil GDP per Capita - Right Page 30 Box 3. Unlocking Growth and Improving Female Labor Market Outcomes Iran is working on improving women’s labor market outcomes… Despite significant improvements in educational attainment and gender parity in education, Iran has not achieved commensurate improvements in women’s labor market outcomes. In a context of evolving social norms and greater need for two-earner households, the government has sought to better understand women’s participation by measuring the value of domestic work in the national accounts and fostering economic diversification and job creation in sectors where women work. The Vice-Presidency for Women’s Affairs has taken action to increase employment opportunities, in part through a review of gender quotas; ready women for promotion in the public sector via training; enforce non-discrimination in hiring; and promote more affordable child-care near or at work. As they address NPLs, they have provided a longer grace period on loans owed by women. Higher economic growth is correlated with greater female labor force participation (FLFP)… By enlarging talents available to employers, better female labor market outcomes enhance growth. Recent studies estimate that bringing the female employment rate to male levels could raise GDP in Japan by 9 percent, the United Arab Emirates by 12 percent, and Egypt by 34 percent. Under similar assumptions, we estimate the GDP boost in Iran would be around 40 percent. But often to realize this potential measures targeted at women are needed…. Even as Ireland’s economic development accelerated in the 1970s, FLFP remained around 30 percent. Only the evolution of social norms and the removal of institutional barriers to women’s participation— such as restrictions on married women’s employment, night work and pay discrimination—eventually enabled firms to employ more workers, especially in traditionally female sectors such as textiles, thereby supporting Ireland’s export-led growth strategy. A recent World Bank report on Women, Business and the Law shows 65 economies made 94 reforms to improve gender parity during 2013–15, and identified 23 gender-based legal restrictions in Iran. Fiscal policy can be designed to avoid work disincentives for women for example by shifting from family to individual income taxation; tax credits or other benefits for low-wage earners (e.g., Belgium, Finland); family allowances that help parents reconcile work and family care; or pension reforms that address retirement age gaps. Broader regulatory reforms that support flexible work, improve the quality and quantity of child and elderly care, and ensure safe transport, can help. ij H iji q K V W pp dd Page 31 of the medical student populations. The government can enhance women’s opportunities and boost growth by hiring more women and ensuring non-discrimination in all job advertisements, hiring, and pay. Active labor market policies that offer business skills, management and entrepreneurship training, and affordable child-care can aid greater female participation. Active labor market policies to tackle youth unemployment. Better coordination with the private sector would better align the education and training system to the skills needs of employers. Revisions to the labor code can address the rigidities in regulations—such as high job protection and benefits to those who are employed for more than a year—that deter job creation and longer-term work contracts. Consideration could be given to offering firms a temporary tax credit (or reduction in payroll taxes) for new hires funded by new budgetary resources or savings, pending a pension reform that tackles high social security contribution rates. Job creation is at the heart of the authorities’ growth strategy . The NDP bill in parliament anticipates concrete steps—e.g., permitting the public sector companies to procure services from the private sector—to improve the regulatory environment for private firms. The authorities noted that discussions have started on the broad reform of the labor code anticipated under the NDP to remove constraints to hiring and firing for permanent contracts. To improve the match between labor supply and demand, they are seeking to improve the quality and relevance of education and training through greater private sector involvement and the introduction of entrepreneurship courses in the education curriculum. As in many countries in the region, social norms and legal barriers have hampered female participation but economic necessity means that more women are working.