The banking system is fragile . A legacy of government payment arrears, directed and connected lending, and poor risk management practices have left banks’ balance sheets badly impaired and capital positions weak (Figure 4). The authorities’ provisional estimates suggest that a large share of bank assets are frozen in NPLs or non-earning real estate or public enterprise assets. The fact that NPLs can only be written-off after 10 years and when they are 100 percent provisioned encourages banks to rollover loans and helps explain the rapid pace of headline credit growth despite high real interest rates and problems in access to finance (Section D). Page 18 Figure 4. Islamic Republic of Iran: Financial Sector Indicators, 2009/10–2016/17 Banks are in urgent need of restructuring and recapitalization tosafeguard financial stability. The capital shortage is more acute for state-owned banks. Uncertainty persists about the actual level of NPLs and the ultimate recapitalization need of the system. Distressed banks aggressively compete for funds, putting pressure on interbank and deposit rates, whichin turn,... Sources: Central Bank of Iran; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Public commercialbanks are fully owned by the government. Specialized banks are also state-owned supporting specific economic sectors (i.e. housing, agriculture, industry and mining, export promotion). Partly privatized banks are formerly state-owned banks. While the government is committed to reduce its ownership to 20 percent over time, the share of the government in these banks remains high at about 40 percent and the government maintains control over management. Private banks have no direct government involvement. ...keepslending rates elevated and......increases banks' reliance on CBI funding. 2009/102011/122013/142015-March Non-performing Loans/Gross Loans 1/ (Percent) Public commercial Public specialized Partly private Private Total 2011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Sep-16 Nominal Real Interbank Rate (Percent) 2011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Sep-16 Nominal Real Lending Rate (Percent, weighted averages) 50May-13Mar-14Jan-15Nov-15Sep-16 Central Bank Claims on Banks (YoY, Percent) 2009/102011/122013/142015-March Capital Adequacy Ratio, Banking System 1/ (Percent) 2009/102011/122013/142015-March Public commercial Public specialized Partly private Private Capital Adequacy Ratio, by Bank Type 1/ (Percent) Page 19 Banks’ reliance on CBI funding is growing . So far the banking system has been shielded from systemic risks because of the banks’ funding model that is virtually independent from external finance. State-owned, commercial and specialized banks, and partially privatized banks largely rely on central bank funding to implement government credit directives. Private banks raise funds largely from deposits or special purpose vehicles, and more recently from the new interbank market. Faced with increased balance-sheet pressures, some banks have begun to compete aggressively for deposits, pushing interest rates up for all banks despite caps, and keeping real interest rates high. Interbank market rates remain elevated. Some banks are now reliant on uncollateralized overnight liquidity support from the CBI. In this context, it is becoming increasingly difficult for the CBI to contain overall liquidity growth to sustain low inflation. The mission recommended urgent action to restructure and recapitalize banks to safeguard financial stability and bring down high real interest rates. In particular Putting distressed banks under administration or intensified supervision. This would prevent them from competing excessively for deposits in the short-term while allowing an assessment of their viability and determining an appropriate restructuring or resolution strategy. An Asset Quality Review (AQR) of all banks and a forward-looking analysis of capital needs . This would support the authorities’ efforts to push for realistic, time-bound recapitalization of viable banks, and underpin the identification of nonviable institutions to be resolved. Recapitalization of state-owned banks linked to measures to improve their long-term commercial viability and orientation. Ultimately this would require the phasing out of government credit directives and interest subsidies on specialized bank credit facilities to be financed by the budget. Stronger supervisory powers . The draft Banking and CBI bills grant the CBI the power to supervise all deposit-taking institutions. The draft Resolution bill would enable the resolution of nonviable banks and provides the Deposit Guarantee Fund the ability to repay insured deposits in a timely manner. These draft laws significantly enhance the CBI’s supervisory powers and could be further strengthened by stronger powers to intervene problem banks early and a broader range of resolution options. A new corporate insolvency framework would allow insolvent corporates to close and sell their assets. Quick passage of these bills, along with additional resources for financial supervision, would allow the restructuring strategy to proceed. It would also enable a transition to Basel capital standards, enhancing financial soundness and transparency. Continued securitization of government arrears. A rigorous audit of arrears is proceeding. The budget provided rials 480 trillion in new marketable government securities to settle arrears, which has aided the nascent domestic debt market. With a further rials 3,500 trillion in government liabilities to be cleared, the implications of new debt issuance for market interest rates, as well as for the maturity profile of public debt and the government’s interest bill need to be factored into the budget and coordinated with monetary policy. Steps to develop the Page 20 government bond market need to be expedited, including identifying state assets for the regular issuance of Sharia compliant government securities. A stronger AML/CFT framework is essential to facilitate banks’ re-connection to the global financial system and expand CBRs . It also enables better detection of proceeds from tax crimes and corruption. Since 2015/16, the authorities have adopted a high level action plan with the FATF and gained affiliation to the Eurasian AML/CFT group as an observer. Dedicated AML/CFT units have been created in all banks. Cash courier and remittance laws, and the by-laws for the CFT law have been drafted. Staff stresses the importance of fully implementing the FATF action plan, enhancing the effectiveness of the framework by improving understanding of ML/TF risks, improving identification of beneficial owners of accounts and legal entities, enhancing measures to identify politically exposed persons, and moving to risk-based AML/CFT supervision. The authorities agreed on the need for swift action . They are working on a detailed road map to implement banking reform, and have requested IMF technical assistance. The Banking and CBI Bills should be approved by parliament by mid-2017. They underscored the need for broad political consensus to tackle problem banks and alleviate banks from the burden of fiscal activities. The authorities attach high priority to sustainably reducing high real interest rates, which have risen as inflation moderated, through banking reform. They reiterated their strong commitment to strengthen the AML/CFT framework which they see as essential for transparency and access to the international financial system. Nonetheless, they stressed that their continued problems in establishing CBRs with larger banks requires greater attention and international support.