Fiscal policy has to adapt to the spending pressures arising from balance sheet repair while finding space to support growth . Interest payments are set to rise from 0.9 percent of GDP in 2016/17 to about 3 percent over the medium-term reflecting securitization of government arrears. However, the bonds required for bank recapitalization—the amount and terms of which will only be determined once an AQR is conducted—will add further pressure to the debt burden and interest bill. Additional budgetary investment spending of about 1½ percent of GDP a year would help upgrade infrastructure and support growth. Pressure on the social security system is also rising Page 23 despite the young population. At the same time, the overall level of the fiscal deficit and the fiscal stance needs to be prudent to support low inflation and rebuild buffers. A medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) that targets a gradual adjustment in the non- oil fiscal deficit by creating space, primarily via domestic revenue mobilization, balances these needs (SIP, chapter 3). Although public debt is set to rise above 40 percent of GDP as new debt is issued to clear government liabilities, it remains sustainable and robust to shocks (Appendix II). With ample, long-lasting oil resources, Iran has some space to target a gradual adjustment in the non-oil fiscal deficit to the Permanent Income Hypothesis (PIH) norm of 5.6 percent of non-oil GDP over the long-term (Figure 6). This balances the need to support growth and keeps debt manageable and in-line with the capacity of the nascent domestic debt market (Iran lacks access to international debt markets). However, given the additional spending pressures discussed above, including arrears clearance and potential costs of bank recapitalization, additional measures of about 7¼ percent of non-oil GDP should be identified over the next five years to contain the non-oil deficit in the range of 12 percent of non-oil GDP to support low inflation and underpin the credibility of the monetary policy framework. After 2021/22 further measures would be needed to reduce the non-oil deficit to the PIH norm to create savings for future generations. A comprehensive financing plan and improved cash management would avoid arrears and recourse to CBI’s and banks’ balance sheets to implement off-budget fiscal initiatives. The government should revisit its oil revenue management strategy, with the view of funding banking sector reform and creating buffers . Currently, 65 percent of oil revenue goes to the central government’s budget while one-fifth goes the National Development Fund of Iran (NDFI) that on-lends these funds to banks to fund private sector investment. Directing a greater proportion of oil revenues to the budget could help fund the prospective additional interest burden arising from bank recapitalization. Using a portion of NDFI assets (10 percent of GDP) to replenish the Oil Stabilization Fund (OSF) would provide the budget a buffer to safeguard spending levels in the event of a shock. The remainder is kept by the NIOC for exploration and operating costs. H K pp H ……… ……… ……… ……… ……… ……… Page 24 Figure 6. Islamic Republic of Iran: Fiscal Developments and Prospects Sources:Iran authorities, and IMF staff estimates and projections. NDFI oil revenue (percent of GDP, right axis) Budget oil revenue (percent of GDP, right axis) Oil prices (US$, left axis) Parameters Affecting Budget Share in Oil Revenue Public investment NDFI support to private investment Investment and Oil Revenue (Percent of GDP unless otherwise indicated) Interest payments (left axis) Inflation (right axis) Interest payments and Inflation (Percent of GDP, and percent, respectively) The expected rebound in oil revenue aided by favorable oil prices... ...create space for a gradual increase in growth- enhancing investment spending. Fiscal consolidation is needed to create room for higher debt payments and to support low inflation.With the recognition of government arrears, debt has increased substantially in 2015/16. Gross debt Net debt Public Debt (Percent of GDP) ... together with ample oil resources warrant a gradual adjustment in the non-oil deficit towards the PIH norm. PIH norm on non-oil deficit Overall non-oil deficit Primary non-oil deficit Fiscal Deficit Trend to Adjust to the PIH Norm (Percent of non-oil GDP) Gradualconsolidationcreates room for higher interest payments Measures of 7.2 percent of GDP over the next five years would... PIH (horizon: infinite) Current policy PIH +/- 1 St. Dev. Non-Oil Primary Balance (Percent of non-oil GDP) Page 25 Expanding domestic revenues and improving the composition and efficiency of spending would ensure the adjustment is growth-friendly and protects the poor (Figure 7). The government aims to increase tax revenue from 7 to 10 percent of GDP. This will require a broader tax base (Box 2) and improved administration. Raising the VAT rate—which is less distortive to investment and savings than personal or corporate income taxes—can compensate for the revenue lost from the corporate tax incentives and the cut in personal income tax rates approved in 2016/17. Generous tax incentives and exemptions can be rationalized and steps taken to revised the income tax code to safeguard against the risk of base erosion (SIP, Chapter 4). Re-organizing the Iran National Tax Authority by taxpayer groups and creating within it a risk management unit would bolster taxpayer compliance. Better targeting of cash transfers would create space for growth-supporting investment spending and improve equity Fuel subsidies have been eliminated on gasoline owing to recent domestic price adjustments and favorable movements in international prices. Adopting an automatic adjustment mechanism would prevent their re-emergence and allow the diesel subsidy to be phased-out. Better targeting of cash transfers by removing the richest 20 percent of households from the beneficiary list would save 0.6 percent of GDP. This could be used to raise the cash transfer to the poorest households—which has halved in real terms since 2011 and contributed to higher poverty—and halve the poverty rate (measured at $5.5 per day, PPP adjusted) and improve equity. The authorities emphasized their commitment to prudent fiscal policy . Their ultimate aim is to ensure that current government spending is fully funded by non-oil revenue and that oil resources are used for investment or saved. Although they have not reinstated the OSF, in the wake of low oil prices they have reduced the share of oil receipts going to the NDFI to allow the budget’s share to rise. If the oil price were to rise above the budgeted amount of $55 per bbl., the additional revenues would be saved. While the authorities have yet to formulate a MTFF, they aim to mobilize domestic revenue through improved tax administration. Administrative difficulties in identifying rich households has prevented their quick removal from the cash transfer system. Multiplier estimates suggest higher investment spending of 1.5 percent of GDP per year would offset the negative growth impact of the authorities’ plan to increase tax collections to 10 percent of GDP. PPP PPP oo H W W W oo Page 26 Figure 7. Islamic Republic of Iran: Options for Fiscal Measures Tax revenue Expense Tax revenue to expense ratio (right axis) Expenditure and Tax Revenue (Percent of GDP unless otherwise indicated) Tax revenue measures (right axis) Primary current spending measure (right axis) Subsdiy reform (right axis) Overall fiscal balance (left axis) Overall Budget (Percent of non-oil GDP, fiscal balance in percent of GDP ) Mobilizing domestic revenue would create space for higher investment. Further adjustments in domestic fuel prices would reduce distortions and create fiscal space.Fiscalmeasures will support a reduction of the non-oil deficit while bringing the general government deficit to balance. 2530IranEMDCsAdvancedEconomies CIT PIT VAT Total tax revenue Tax Revenue Collection (percent of non-oil GDP for Iran, and GDP for others) IranEMDCsAdvancedEconomies CIT PIT VAT Statutory Tax Rates (Percent) More streamlined exemptions, higher tax rates, and on-going improvements in tax administration would raise revenue. Statutory tax rates and tax collection are below comparable international benchmarks. Domestic price Reference price Fuel Prices (US$ per liter) Gasoline (regular) Diesel Sources:countries authorities, IEA, World Bank, and IMF staff estimates and projections. Removing the top quintile of the TSO beneficiary list and redistributing these resources to the bottom 40 percent, would reduce poverty which has been rising since 2012. H Poverty Rate, 2008-14 in Iran (2011 PPPs) 4 US$ 5.5 US$ 8 US$ 10 US$ Page 27 Box 2. Improving Revenue Mobilization in Iran With the introduction of VAT in 2008, the development of a modern tax system is underway Indirect taxes are growing but direct taxes still account for almost half of total tax revenues, with corporate income taxes (CIT) accounting for 36 percent. A number of changes can bring the tax system in-line with international practice and mobilize revenue: Gradually raise VAT rates and rationalize the system . The VAT rate remains low despite its increase from 3 to 9 percent. The integrity of the VAT can be strengthened by (i) removing the large number of exemptions (e.g. immovable property); (ii) re-introducing a VAT threshold that excludes small businesses who yield little revenue and capture them under a simple turnover tax; and (iii) bringing agriculture—which comprises for one-tenth of GDP but is outside all tax nets—under the VAT by introducing a sector-specific threshold. This would help capture sales by larger agribusinesses. Separate the top VAT rates into an excise and VAT component and apply the VAT to excise-inclusive prices . At present, the 9 percent VAT rate is supplemented by higher rates on cigarettes and tobacco (12 percent) and vehicle fuels (20 percent). The latter mimics excises for consumers but when these goods are used as a production input their prices do not include these taxes because they are refunded under the VAT, leading to significant revenue loss. Increase and broaden excises . Excise rates are low by international standards. There is scope to raise rates, shift to easier-to-administer specific rates, and introduce new excises, e.g., on beverages and telecommunications. Introducing ad-valorem excises on motor vehicles would address environmental goals, supplement revenue, and enhance tax progressivity. Shift investment incentives from profit to cost-based measures . Profit-based investment tax incentives—income exemptions, reduced rates, tax holidays—have proliferated under the CIT and are often open-ended. Specific investment allowances—accelerated depreciation schemes and investment tax deductions or credits—would lower the cost of capital for more investments, encouraging greater investment with less revenue loss. Continue moving closer to a global income tax system . The rationalization of personal income tax rates for public and private sector wage income in 2015/16 was an important step forward. Nonetheless, income taxes are mostly “schedular” with different income—wages, self-employed income, rents—taxed under separate schedules. Moving closer to a global income tax system that combines taxpayers’ incomes from all sources, and applying a single, progressive rate schedule would increase equity and limit incentives for tax planning. Tax-to-GDP Ratio, by Type of Tax Total taxes Trade taxes Taxes on goods and services Income taxes Taxes, not elsewhere classifiedSource: IMF, World EconomicOutlook and IMF staff calculations. V q pp Page 28