Over the past two decades, Iran had achieved considerable progress in raising per capita income and living standards . This progress was largely underpinned by investment, rising employment-to-population and productivity since the early 1990s, and by high terms of trade since the early 2000s (Figure 1). To a large extent, Iran has continued to benefit from its vast hydrocarbon wealth, as well as from being a relatively diversified resource-intensive economy. Social indicators show declining poverty and income inequality, supporting a relatively high level of human development. Notwithstanding this progress, per capita income and living standards were still below other resource-intensive economies. Such progress stalled during the past several years . Large shocks and weak macroeconomic management have had a significant impact on macroeconomic stability and growth. With a long history of high inflation and facing large relative price changes, macroeconomic policies leading to and following the subsidy reform in 2010, remained accommodative to ease corporate adjustment and support household transfers, while also exhibiting high volatility and some procyclical trends. At the same time, the implementation of certain ambitious social programs, such as for housing, significantly compounded these problems. The intensification of international trade and financial sanctions since 2012 brought renewed shockwaves to the economy, further undermining macroeconomic conditions significantly. The policy response to these shocks prioritized output over inflation stabilization, and exposed the limitations of and the need to rethink the policy framework . The large relative price change associated with the subsidy reform led to a significant increase in inflation and a deceleration in non-oil growth in 2011, which were exacerbated by the deterioration in the external environment in 2012. The policy response aimed to prioritize output over inflation stabilization by continuing to accommodate the financing demands of the corporate and government sectors. Following the intensification of economic sanctions, greater exchange rate flexibility helped to buffer output to some extent but, as monetary policy remained accommodative, such flexibility resulted in a sharp rise in inflation. All in all, macroeconomic policies contributed to a significant rise in the level and volatility of inflation and output since the mid-2000s, and corporate and financial sector vulnerabilities have now emerged, with unemployment at high levels. And while it would have been difficult for the authorities to have fully buffered the economy from the recent shocks, the policy framework did not provide sufficient resilience and the policy response did not appear sufficiently timely, well-implemented, and coordinated. Iran now stands at a crossroad . The external environment remains uncertain and delaying domestic reforms raise the risk of entrenching the economy in a low-growth and high-inflation scenario, underscoring the need to address long-standing weaknesses in the policy framework and the economy. The new administration that took office in August 2013 earned a strong mandate and has already made significant progress in improving the external environment and confidence in the outlook. The administration’s 100-day report confirmed how well aware the authorities are of the Page 7 economic challenges ahead and many of the reforms needed. But the task of advancing reforms ahead will be difficult, not least due to a highly complex institutional set-up and a difficult socio- political context. This will require broad political commitment, supported by strong coordination and cooperation among key policymakers. The 2014 Article IV Consultation provided a timely opportunity to discuss and assess these issues.