OUTLOOK The near-term outlook remains highly uncertain, with the distribution of risks becoming more balanced but still tilted to the downside . Facing continued constrained prospects for oil revenues and to conduct international trade and financial transactions, staff expects the economy to continue to contract in 2013/14, with real GDP estimated to decline by 1¾ percent. With some positive tailwinds from the external side and some incipient signs that the pace of contraction in domestic demand is slowing, it is projected that economic activity would begin to stabilize in 2014/15, with real GDP projected to increase by 1–2 percent. The real exchange rate depreciation has continued to provide impetus to sectors such as agriculture, parts of manufacturing, and non-oil exports, and prospects for hydrocarbons and manufacturing have also improved. But the current outlook remains highly uncertain and subject to several downside risks, most notably from a difficult external environment and from failure to address high unemployment (Appendix I). In the meantime, the authorities are taking steps to make the regulatory framework for foreign investment in the oil sector more attractive, while the interim agreement with the P5+1 brings upside risks. Nonetheless, were this progress to derail, the economy could be subject to new adverse shocks. In any event, staff’s baseline scenario—which is based on sustained constraints for oil revenues and to conduct international transactions—shows that growth would remain below potential and inflation would remain high (Table 8). Even with a sustained improvement in the external environment, medium-term prospects hinge on strengthening the overall policy framework and on boosting overall investment and productivity (Alternative scenario in Appendix II). Comprehensive structural reforms would be required to improve the business environment, enforce budget constraints and restructure the corporate sector (to reduce its dependence on subsidies and energy intensity in production), promote private sector investment, allow the financial sector to better allocate savings and handle risks, and address high unemployment. At the same time, the hydrocarbon sector faces large investment needs at a time when the call on OPEC is on a downward path. Being an already well-diversified economy with a large domestic market provides a good starting point to advance reforms. Nonetheless, the overall institutional policy and regulatory frameworks for product and labor markets lag in global competitiveness. Reforms are needed to improve the business environment to attract investment to boost productivity, and help restore sustainable growth and employment. Page 13