The policy discussions focused on how to restore macroeconomic stability and address long-standing challenges in the policy framework and the structure of the economy to achieve sustainable growth . The Fund’s past policy advice and technical assistance has had some important impact on fiscal policy and statistics. The authorities made progress in implementing a VAT, enhancing tax administration, adopting the Government Financial Statistics Manual (GFSM, 2001), and becoming a Global Data Dissemination Standard (GDDS) member. Nonetheless, many of the past recommendations—on monetary, interest and exchange rates policies and on the policies to support the subsidy reform have been difficult to implement and remain relevant, especially in light of the constraints posed by the external environment. Against this backdrop, the discussions focused on: Dealing with Stagflation: A Three-Pronged Strategy Centered on Tighter Monetary Policy, Some Fiscal Consolidation, and Supply-Side Reforms M2 Base Money Money and Credit Growth (In y-o-y percent change) The authorities emphasized that focusing on disinflation was the best means to address stagflation . CBI senior officials stressed that they have taken important steps to reduce inflation. A tight control of base money over the past seven months has been underpinned by a government-supported agreement to remove the financing of the Mehr Housing Program from the CBI’s balance sheet. The authorities saw this agreement as a significant achievement and signal to the economy of the commitment to reduce inflation (Box 2). The tight control of base money, along with the appreciation of the currency and a decline in global prices for some key staples helped to bring down inflation quickly. Looking ahead, CBI authorities remained confident that inflation prospects would continue to improve, as they saw the amendments to the 2013/14 budget and the new 2014/15 budget as critical in helping to strengthen the overall consistency of macroeconomic policies. CBI senior officials also stressed their commitment to contain money growth by placing participation papers at higher profit (interest) rates. It was agreed that a gradual tightening of monetary policy would have limited output costs, help anchor expectations and entrench disinflation, and also help contain the second-round impact from the planned increase in domestic energy prices. There are two types of lending contracts: transactional and participatory. Transactional contracts involve the financing of working capital, and the CBI fixes their interest rates by industry. Participatory ones involve the financing of some longer-term investment activity. The bank, and the depositor financing the loan, is entitled to a share of the profit from these investments. As the amount of profits is not known at the time when banks collect the deposit and make the loan, they indicate provisional profit rates. Economically, these profit rates are similar to interest rates. Source: Fund staff estimates based on data from Iranian authorities. Dec-09 Dec-11 Dec-12 Dec-10 Dec-13 Page 14 Box 2. The Mehr Housing Project and Its Macroeconomic Implications Iran started an ambitious affordable housing project in 2007 to bring some two million homes to the housing market over a five year period. The Mehr Housing Project targeted low-income families and was triggered by growing demand for new housing by Iran’s young population, with 0.8 million additional housing units needed every year on top of a deficit of 1.5 million housing unit estimated in 2006. Under the scheme, the authorities provide land to private developers free of charge and new homeowners get a 99-year lease on the publicly owned land. The housing bank (Bank Maskan ) extends, among other facilities, subsidized mortgage loans to new homeowners to finance their home purchases. The financing of this project was placed upon the Central Bank of Iran (CBI), significantly complicating the conduct of monetary policy. Bank Maskan relied on credit lines and other financing facilities from the CBI. In fact, CBI financing to Bank Maskan tripled in 2010, in the run up to the subsidy reform, and doubled during the implementation of the first phase of the reform. By end-2011, CBI financing to Bank Maskan represented about 40 percent of base money. This trend undermined the CBI’s efforts to ensure that second round effects from the change in domestic energy prices were minimized, while also forcing the CBI to tighten credit to the rest of the economy, with adverse implications for economic activity. The government has stopped the CBI financing of the Mehr Housing Project but its future financing remains uncertain . Outstanding commitments under the project and the rise in the demand for affordable housing would require a permanent solution. To avoid any future pressure on the CBI for further financing and increase transparency of the fiscal accounts, the authorities should consider including the project in the annual budget and finance it through budgetary resources. CBI Facilities to Maskan Bank (In trillions of Rials) Contributors to Base Money Growth (In percent of base money growth) CBI Facilities to Maskan Bank Other contributors Growth in base money Source: Central Bank of Iran. Sources: Central Bank of Iran; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 The authorities and staff agreed that the 2014/15 budget provided a good balance between disinflation and supporting the economy . The authorities emphasized that the approved budget continued with their task of advancing fiscal consolidation initiated with the amendment to the 2013/14 budget in late 2013. The new budget advances important tax and expenditure reforms while also maintaining a tight lid on current spending. Several ministries will participate in a pilot performance budgeting next year that will be extended to all in 2015/16 and better entrench savings on current spending. While capital spending has been prioritized and is envisaged to rebound, it would still remain well below pre-2012/13 levels. While the specifics on how to proceed with increasing domestic energy prices were still being discussed, the authorities indicated that such plans would help bring the deficit of the TSO from 1 ⅓ percent of GDP in 2013/14 to balance in 2014/15. These measures, along with several others on the revenue side, would help keep the overall deficit at around 2½ percent of GDP in 2014/15. The authorities have also begun to broaden the revenue base away from oil . They explained their intention to broaden the base for non-oil tax revenues from 6 percent of GDP to 10 percent of GDP over the next several years. This would increasingly allow the financing of current spending through the tax system rather than oil revenues, which would be mostly allocated to capital spending. Several reforms were being implemented to strengthen tax administration : (i) the implementation of an integrated tax system; (ii) a new framework to limit and reform tax incentives for certain activities (exports, properties, and employment taxes) and for large nontaxpayers (such as in manufacturing and large statutory bodies), and through a new structure (accelerated depreciations); and (iii) the completion of the implementation of the VAT—to reduce exemptions and strengthen the link of its collection information with direct taxation. The authorities also explained that the scheduled increase in the VAT rate was brought forward by one year . They noted that the VAT rate could be gradually raised to around 10 percent once the trial implementation period of the VAT law expired in the next two years. They agreed that this would help bring the VAT rate more in line with other resource-intensive country levels. Share of Tax Revenues in Current Expenditures (In percent of total current expenditures) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Source: Iranian authorities. VAT Rates across Resource-Intensive Countries, 2013 (In percent) Current standard rate G w P w B h k z K R z K B z V h m k T T d d d T R h C m Z j z w k z U Source: International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, IBFD, www.ibfd.org (2013). Introduction data from earlier TP publications. The VAT was introduced in 2008 and its current rate of 6 percent will be increased to 8 percent in 2014/15 instead of 2015/16. A recent FAD TA mission has continued to support reforms related to compliance and risk-management. The authorities have requested TA on the possible design and implementation of a capital gains tax. Page 16 PIH Benchmarks in the Baseline Scenario— Primary Expenditures (Percent of non-oil GDP) Baseline PIH annuity PIH perpetuity Source: IMF staff calculations. PIH Benchmarks in the Alternative Scenario— Primary Expenditures (Percent of non-oil GDP) Alternative PIH annuity PIH perpetuity Source: IMF staff calculations. The authorities underscored ongoing efforts to strengthen tax compliance . These included large taxpayers and other indirect taxes (such as on professions), and they agreed on the potential to tax activities that have experienced large gains in recent years, such as on capital gains on equity investment and real estate. It was agreed that these efforts should help limit deficits and risks, improve the quality of the envisaged fiscal adjustment, and help lay the ground for a more sustainable fiscal policy ahead. Staff noted that these efforts were critical to entrench fiscal consolidation, as the results from the PIH on the illustrative medium-term scenarios confirmed the need for further fiscal adjustment of about 1–4 percent of non-oil GDP. CBI Credit to Specialized Banks and the FX Market With the economy vulnerable at this juncture, staff stressed that the timing for advancing the subsidy reform had to be carefully considered . The subsidy reform aimed to be budget-neutral and to align domestic energy prices gradually to international ones, by shifting large implicit subsidies to explicit cash transfers to households. While its design was particularly innovative—especially for a hydrocarbon-intensive economy, its implementation was not as effective and transparent as originally planned (Box 3). CBI credit to specialized banks (in trillions of Rials, RHS) Parallel market exchange rate (Rials per U.S. Dollar) CBI exchange rate (Rials per U.S. Dollar) O O Source: Central Bank of Iran. The PIH calculates the net-present value of fiscal oil revenue from 2012/13 to 2050 for baseline and alternative scenarios. For the period post 2019, both scenarios assume that oil revenues stabilize at the 2019 level, and gas revenue grows by 3 percent per year. Given forecasts of non-oil revenue, the PIH calculates a level of public spending that is consistent with the net-present value of oil wealth. The PIH annuity assumes that oil wealth is spent up to 2050, while the PIH perpetuity assumes that expenditures are at a level that leaves the real value of wealth unchanged. The subsidy reform law stipulated the preparation by the TSO and the Supreme Audit Court of semi-annual reports to Parliament on the status and assessment of its implementation. These reports have not been made public. A Selected Issues paper reviews the macroeconomic impact of the first phase of the reform and draws lessons for its future implementation. Page 17 The authorities and staff agreed that increasing domestic energy prices was an important step to reduce energy consumption, pollution, improve the efficiency of the economy, and bring domestic prices toward international levels. The authorities acknowledged staff concerns on placing the economy through another large adverse supply shock at the current juncture and explained that the contemplated price increases were needed to address serious imbalances. Therefore, the price increases would be significantly lower than during the first phase of the reform and done gradually to minimize the impact on the economy and inflation. They agreed that such a gradual increase should be underpinned by a medium-term plan (about five years) to anchor the price increases and by an automatic price adjustment mechanism. Staff emphasized that the experience of the first phase of the subsidy reform showed that shocks could significantly undermine the stability of the exchange rate and the envisaged relative price adjustment. Consistent macroeconomic policies and reforms to tighten budget constraints in the corporate sector are crucial to make this reform sustainable. The authorities agreed that reforms to boost the supply-side and productivity would also help in dealing with stagflation . While the difficult external environment limited the scope for reforms and potential benefits, they stressed that restoring policy credibility and advancing reforms to entrench disinflation were essential. First and foremost, the authorities emphasized promoting macroeconomic stability, deepening domestic capital markets to further promote long-term financing, and easing the administrative burden on the private sector. Addressing cash-flow constraints and arrears in the corporate and banking sectors were also seen as important. Senior CBI officials noted that the cash-flow constraints and interlinkages in the corporate, government, and banking sectors were complex and difficult to solve immediately. They viewed sustained disinflation and higher profit rates as means for banks to better support credit needs of the economy. Strengthening the Policy Framework for Macroeconomic Stability Fiscal Policy: Improving Macroeconomic Coordination and Enhancing Resilience and Efficiency Fiscal Policy Indicators, 1995–2010 (Annual growth rates, in percent) Staff suggested that reforms to the fiscal policy framework would strengthen the scope for countercyclical fiscal policy, limit fiscal risks, and better support macro-stability While Iran’s fiscal framework has helped save part of the oil-price boom, the conduct of fiscal policy has exhibited some pro-cyclicality and excessive volatility. In particular, growth in public spending in real terms has tended to exceed potential non-oil GDP growth and the structural fiscal balance has been relatively volatile, especially when compared to other resource-intensive economies with fiscal rules (text table). The authorities could consider advancing several reforms that would facilitate the formulation and anchoring of fiscal policy on a rule, such as on the structural balance: Potential non-oil real GDP growth (1990-2018) Annual average real spending growth Average real non-oil GDP growth Sources: Iranian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 18 Box 3. A Brief Look at the Implementation of the Subsidy Reform and the Next Steps The Targeted Subsidies Reform (TSR) is one of the most courageous moves to reform subsidies in an energy exporting country, but has yet to fulfill its potential . Despite initial successful roll out of the TSR, its implementation did not go as planned. Both domestic policies and external factors played a role in undermining the reform. Relatively accommodative macroeconomic policies, deficits in the household cash transfer program, failure to impose tight budget constraints on enterprises, and a lack of open communications and coordination problems within the government during the implementation adversely affected the implementation of the TSR. Subsequently, the intensification of sanctions and the large depreciation led to a reversal of the gains achieved and eventual postponement of the reform. The initial success of the reform in driving down the consumption of subsidized products and improving income distribution waned with the sharp increase in inflation After a steep reduction following the launch of the TSR, domestic energy consumption picked up later with the real decline in energy prices as inflation and nominal incomes rose. Improvements in income distribution, with the poverty rate declining by about 5 percentage points in the first three months of the TSR and Gini coefficient by 0.04 points for the whole year, were partially reversed by the rapid increase in inflation and decline in real value of wages and cash transfers. Developments in Oil and Natural Gas Consumption, 2000–12 (In thousand barrels per day) Natural gas Subsidy reform starts 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Oil Source: BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2013. Quota Above quota Gasoline Prices (In percent of international prices) The TSR implementation faced several macro and microeconomic problems . First, the authorities did not put in place a supportive and coherent macroeconomic policy package after the reform was launched to support macroeconomic stability. The central bank continued to finance the government’s large housing program when there were already signs that the monetary financing was putting pressure in the foreign exchange and asset markets, and endangering macroeconomic stability. Also, administrative price controls put further strain on monetary policy as enterprises, facing administered-price measures and rising input costs, continued to rely on subsidized credit. Furthermore, the TSR budget became a source of fiscal deficit in the order of an estimated 1½ percent of GDP, adding to macroeconomic pressures. Second, despite being one key premise of the TSR, there was no progress in reforming the production structure of enterprises and their energy efficiency. In the event, the reform was also challenged by the lack of hard budget constraints at the corporate level, which thwarted price- stabilization attempts. Sources: Iranian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Prices converted to cents per liter using the parallel market exchange rate, then taken as a share of Singapore retail gasoline prices. Page 19 Rethink the framework that allocates oil-wealth/savings among the goals of macroeconomic stability, intergenerational equity, and development . In recent years, the Oil Stabilization Fund (OSF) has been “de facto” not operational, while the National Development Fund (NDFI) is not allowed to finance the budget. With NDFI receiving a fixed and increasing share of oil and gas export proceeds and no ability to finance government deficits, recent large adverse shocks have forced large public spending cuts and resort to inflationary budgetary financing. The mechanism for allocating oil revenues seems too rigid and detached from changing macroeconomic conditions. OSF resources need to be replenished to support countercyclical fiscal policy. Also, the decisions on how to distribute hydrocarbon revenues among budget financing, lending to the non-oil economy through NDFI, needs to be better coordinated to assess the fiscal impulse, limit procyclicality and enhance macroeconomic stability. A Comparison of Fiscal Policy (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted) 2012 Std. Dev. Structural Balance Iran (non-oil) Chile Norway (mainland GDP) Saudi Arabia -23.2 -18.1 -21.2 -16.1 -19.1 -17.6 -10.4 Source: Fund staff estimates; structural balance defined as per national authorities. Take steps toward annual multi-year expenditure and budget planning . Iran has in place a one-year budgeting framework, with limited requirements for formulating a fiscal policy consistent with a longer horizon. Within the annual budget bill, the authorities are not required under the law to submit a medium-term projection. A medium-term approach should help insulate the economy from oil-revenue shocks, strengthen expenditure planning, and thus reduce the volatility of expenditure. The OSF was established in 2000 to insulate the budget from fluctuations in oil prices (revenues) and to generate savings to be used when prices fell, as well as to support development of the private sector. However, in 2010, the NDFI was established as a nongovernment public entity to promote development and savings, while forbidden from lending to the government. Page 20 Broaden the coverage of fiscal accounts, their transparency and accountability . In recent years, the authorities have shifted part of their public sector accounts presentation to the Government Financial Statistics Manual 2001. However, the coverage remains limited to mostly the central government and excludes other parts of the general government such as provinces and SOEs. Also, their supervisory framework remains unclear, especially for ex-post performance and pre-emptive corrective actions Review quasi-fiscal activities (QFAs) . NDFI senior officials emphasized that with the Inflows Disbursements (including earmarked amounts) National Development Fund (In billions of U.S. Dollars) establishment of the NDFI, important steps have been taken in only three years to strengthen the management of oil wealth. A framework for saving a significant part of oil-revenues is now well established, which ensures its independence from the government and also strengthened its transparency. They noted that the financing of private non-oil projects is now done through the agency of domestic banks, which limits credit risks and reassures the quality of these domestic investments. In response to staff concerns, they explained that their financial statements and balance sheets were in the process of being finalized with the assistance of a local private firm, while the criteria for selecting commercial banks were now placing more emphasis on economic and risk management factors. In addition, based on the past experience with the OSF, they had recently finished reviewing contracts and projected cash flows and returns on loans with commercial banks. They agreed with staff that there was significant scope to enhance NDFI’s investment targets, risk- management policy, transparency, and accountability along the lines of the Santiago principles and the vast international experience. Staff noted that other QFAs (such as the Mehr Housing Program) and their respective interest rate subsidies should be made more transparent and gradually incorporated into the central government budget. Source: National Development Fund. 1/ As of December 2013. 2013 /1 As of the third-quarter of 2013, the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute’s Linaburg-Maduell transparency rating for the NDFI was 5 (out of 10), similar to those of China, Russia, and Qatar, and below the minimum rating of 8 recommended to claim adequate transparency. A Selected Issues paper discusses the framework supporting the NDFI and potential reforms to improve its effectiveness in light of international best practice. Page 21 The Next Steps of the Subsidy Reform: A Robust Supporting Framework The authorities agreed that it was essential to ensure an adequate framework for advancing the subsidy reform . It was agreed that the current deficit associated with the subsidy reform stemmed from shortcomings in its implementation, mostly related to the failure to impose budget discipline on high-energy users, as well as a higher number of households receiving cash transfers than originally planned. Specifically: The authorities noted that future energy price increases would have to better balance competing social needs rather than increasing cash transfers to all households . The authorities explained that while they intended to maintain the framework associated with the first phase of the reform, the political support to maintain the same design going forward had waned. As a result, efforts had been mostly focused on identifying and means testing recipients with a view to only including in future phases those households deemed most vulnerable to higher domestic energy prices. But the identification of high- and middle-income groups has proved difficult and the authorities continued to work on establishing a comprehensive and reliable database of potential recipients. In the meantime, they were considering a proposal that would be implemented based on criteria using a broad range of indicators (such as the number of trips abroad per year, of luxury cars owned, professional occupation, or even re-registering beneficiaries) to exclude less vulnerable groups. The proceeds from higher energy prices would be used to support household spending on health insurance (as two-thirds of health care costs are out-of-pocket), several high-energy intensive sectors, and also increase cash transfers only to some of the most vulnerable households. The authorities saw the reforms to tighten budget constraints at the corporate level as one of the most difficult challenges . They agreed that the experience with the first phase of the subsidy reform underscored the need to ensure that energy-intensive corporations were able to optimize their energy use and adopt new technologies, as domestic prices were gradually aligned with international ones. In this regard, they explained that diesel prices would be adjusted more gradually than other fuels to facilitate such a process, while several options were being considered to support such an adjustment and proper incentives, including the options to link financial support to concrete energy savings. The authorities also indicated their desire to announce future price increases within a medium-term horizon to increase the transparency for investors. While supporting the need to advance with the reform, staff highlighted several risks The criteria for identifying and excluding less vulnerable groups had to be simple, transparent, and perceived as fair. In addition, the distribution of resources for supporting energy-intensive sectors should effectively foster the adoption of new technologies and tighter budget constraints. The extent of the difficulties facing energy-intensive sectors likely exceeds the contemplated resources, making the criteria for accessing such support critical. In subsequent stages of the reform, staff noted the scope to make direct cash transfers more conditional on social goals and also tilted toward savings for the broader population. Consideration could also be given to phasing out the cash transfers to the population and potentially replacing them with a consolidated public Page 22 framework that distributes oil wealth or with a scheme to promote private savings. The authorities could also make the lessons from the first phase of the reform well known to the public, to muster support to future phases of the reform and to assist other countries in their reform efforts. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate: Reforms to Strengthen Price Stability The authorities and staff agreed that the monetary policy framework needs to be strengthened . Staff noted that the shocks and policy response in recent years showed that the CBI had to deal with competing demands without a mandate focused on price stability. In addition, staff stressed that the CBI’s operational effectiveness had been undermined by the institutional decision- making process. The Money and Credit Council (MCC) remains responsible for most decisions and is dominated by government and private-sector representatives, with competing and oftentimes contradictory goals. As a result of these constraints, the exchange rate—the traditional nominal anchor—has been a key instrument of adjustment to shocks, and with fixed profit (interest) rates, real profit (interest) rates have declined sharply. This response has compounded difficulties in stabilizing inflation expectations and constrained the use of some of the traditional sterilization instruments. Private Sector Credit (In percent of non-oil GDP) Total Specialized banks (RHS) 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 Sources: Iranian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. CBI Asset Growth (In y-o-y percent change) Lending to government Lending to banks Lending to NFPEs (RHS) Dec-09 Jun-10 Dec-10 Jun-11 Dec-11 Jun-12 Dec-12 Jun-13 Source: Iranian authorities. The authorities and staff agreed that several measures would help to reduce and stabilize inflation at low levels Interest rates will need to be more reflective of inflation, with more scope for being market-determined . CBI senior officials explained that bringing profit (interest) rates for government-mandated credit and participation papers more in line with inflation would help address some difficulties in credit markets and enable the CBI to better manage liquidity. At the same time, the CBI would also signal its commitment to lower inflation, bolster the demand for the rial, and thus help better anchor the needed exchange rate flexibility and money. While they acknowledged difficulties in gradually increasing interest rates at this juncture, given the state of the economy and concerns on renewed shocks, CBI senior officials saw limited output costs from higher profit (interest) rates and a need to contain money growth to support disinflation. To do Page 23 so, they were determined to issue participation papers with higher profit (interest) rates than before. Strengthen the mandate and operational effectiveness of the CBI . With less scope to use foreign exchange reserves for sterilization purposes and risks from large and persistent fiscal deficits, staff emphasized that reforms were needed to ensure that monetary policy can stabilize inflation successfully. The authorities noted that there was growing consensus at the MCC to strengthen the CBI’s mandate on price stability and its operational effectiveness. These reforms would help entrench the benefits for disinflation stemming from the landmark decision on the Mehr Housing Program. It was agreed that simplifying the CBI’s mandate and strengthening its operational autonomy would significantly enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, in line with the experience of other chronic inflation countries that have successfully achieved price stability. The authorities stressed their commitment to return to a unified exchange rate regime They recognized that the current external environment imposed several constraints on their ability to unify the official and bureau/parallel exchange rates, and also underscored the significant preparatory work that a unification would entail. Nonetheless, they were committed to unify both markets by mid-2015. They also recognized that arrears on external payments by public- and private-sector entities had emerged, but attributed these to technical difficulties in accessing foreign exchange. CBI senior officials explained that they were prepared to clear public-sector arrears with foreign assets held abroad and to eliminate foreign exchange restrictions and any arrears arising from these restrictions. They also agreed with staff on the need to preserve some exchange rate flexibility, given the relatively rapid exchange rate appreciation in real terms in recent months and the lingering risks to the outlook. They also noted that the 2014/15 budget contemplated steps to depreciate the official rate and bring it closer to the bureau/parallel rate. The official exchange rate appears somewhat overvalued, but uncertainties over Iran’s external environment cloud its assessment . The authorities noted that the bureau/parallel exchange rate—which is 15–20 percent more depreciated than the official rate—seemed to be more in line with fundamentals. They stressed that the exchange rate has regained stability and that Iran’s external buffers were comfortable, although they recognized some difficulties with accessibility. Based on conventional CGER-methodologies, the official exchange rate seems moderately overvalued (see Appendix III). However, these approaches are based on staff’s baseline macroeconomic scenario, which shows Iran’s oil exports well below historical averages. Were Iran’s external environment to improve, oil exports could revert back to about 2½ million barrels per day (roughly the average of the years 2007–11), and the exchange rate would appear to be more in line with fundamentals. A Selected Issues Paper explores the tradeoff between inflation and output stabilization in Iran and the scope for reforms to the monetary policy framework, in line with international experiences. Page 24 The current exchange rate regime gives rise to exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices . The authorities explained that a significant part of current account transactions were conducted at the official exchange rate. However, they recognized that several import categories were being prioritized (basic necessities over other categories of authorized imports) and that, given some delays in the process of granting of foreign exchange some importers were effectively conducting their transactions through the bureau market. They emphasized that the effective premium was in fact small due to the high transaction costs in the official market. They emphasized the many difficulties in accessing foreign exchange, in transferring assets from countries where they had trade surpluses to those with deficits, and in finding correspondent banks. In addition, they explained that limits of US$300 and US$15,000 were effectively in place for travel and for studies abroad, respectively, and that amounts in excess of these limits were accessed through the bureau/parallel market at a more depreciated rate. These foreign exchange limitations, including as a result of import priority categories, give rise to exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a). Furthermore, the establishment of an official exchange rate for use in all exchange transactions which in practice differs by more than 2 percent from the rate used by licensed foreign exchange bureaus gives rise to a multiple currency practice and an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and (3). The authorities also confirmed that no changes had been made regarding the transferability of profits under the Foreign Investment Promotion and Protection Act and to the making of other investment-related current payments under this act, but noted that they intend to examine possible modifications to the regulations to remove the restriction. In addition, the authorities confirmed that the letters of credit opened before March 21, 2002 that benefited from subsidies were still outstanding. The Business Environment and Financial Stability: Reforms to Promote Jobs and Growth The authorities viewed as critical the need to advance reforms to improve the business environment and address high unemployment . Staff noted that comprehensive steps would be needed to enhance the efficiency of product, financial, and labor markets, as well as to strengthen the institutional framework and effectiveness of the government (Figure 5). Discussions with a broad group of representatives from different economic sectors highlighted the need to enhance the enforcement of the rule of law and property rights, maintain policy and macroeconomic stability, and enhance the transparency of policy making. In particular: The authorities recognized that the corporate sector was facing difficult conditions . The authorities explained that several reforms to simplify administrative procedures under the Law for Continued Improvement of the Business Environment were now being implemented. They also explained that past privatizations failed to effectively transfer ownership to the private sector and tighten budget constraints, and therefore, have taken steps to improve the privatization process. In addition, senior government officials stressed the administration’s commitment to The multiple currency practice arising from foreign exchange subsidies in connection with the payment of certain letters of credit, opened before 2002, is temporary as it relates to a limited number of letters of credit expected to expire by 2016. Please refer to the Informational Annex for further details. Page 25 promote foreign and private sector investment, which they saw as beneficial not only for Iran but also the region. The authorities recognized that efforts to improve the business environment would require significant coordination with other state-agencies and the private sector. These efforts would help improve the standards of corporate governance and support the deepening of domestic capital markets, which they viewed as critical to entrench macroeconomic stability and higher productivity. The authorities noted that the tight liquidity conditions reigning in some sectors of the economy and their linkages, was a complex and difficult issue to solve in the near term. There was broad recognition that dealing with high unemployment will require reforms to the labor market . The administration has placed unemployment (at 24 percent for youth and 20 percent for women by December 2013, respectively) as the most pressing problem. In addition, the extent of underemployment is high. Labor force participation remains high (mainly for men) but has been declining and prospective new entrants bring considerable risks to social conditions over the medium term. As highlighted in several development plans, staff noted that labor regulations should be reviewed to ease the rigidity of contracts (in terms of hiring, firing, and special employment conditions such as study leave and force majeure) and lower costs of labor (severance payments, social security contributions, and labor insurance) which have led to high redundancy costs and low flexibility in employment and wage determination (Box 5). Labor Market Indicators, 2000/01 – 2013/14 1/ (In percent of labor force) Unemployment Youth unemployment Urban Rural Male Female Labor force participation Urban Rural Male Female Source: Statistical Center of Iran. 2/ Corresponds to September 23 – December 21, 2013. Official employment statistics consider all persons aged 10 or over working one hour per week as effectively employed, consistent with ILO standards. The rate of underemployment is about 9 percent of the employed population (roughly equivalent to 80 percent of those unemployed). Page 26 Box 4. Labor Market Issues and Unemployment in Iran Iran’s labor market has faced difficult conditions over the past two decades . Participation rates have been declining, employment between genders and age groups differ markedly, and unemployment rates have been persistently high, averaging more than 12 percent since 2000. Moreover, unemployment rates for urban workers and the youth have been even higher, at 13.8 percent and 24.5 percent, respectively, in 2012. The new administration recognizes high unemployment as a major challenge . An unprecedented number of students— 4.5 million—that are currently inactive are expected to enter the labor market in the years ahead. In the current environment of slow economic growth, such a development could have significant implications for socio-economic conditions. To better understand the relationship between growth and employment in Iran, staff used a template created by MCD staff to calculate the elasticity of employment to GDP, based on the following equation: log(E t ) = α + ρ log(E t-1 ) + β log(non-oil GDP t ) where E is the number of people employed at time t, and β is the long-term elasticity, estimated at 0.35 for Iran. This elasticity is relatively low compared with the MENA region, and may reflect the impact of the regulatory framework on employment conditions. Several scenarios help to assess the implications of macroeconomic policies and structural reforms on the labor market and project different paths for the unemployment rate over the medium term. In particular Islamic Republic Of Iran: Medium Term Outlook for Unemployment 2012–2018 Labor Force (millions) Unemployment Rate (percent) Unemployed (millions) Employed (millions) Labor Force (millions) 2013 - 2018 New Entrants to the labor force (millions) Total number of currently unemployed and new entrants Employment elasticity Scenario 1: Change in employment required to achieve 12.2% unemployment target (percent) Scenario 1: Annual employment growth required to achieve 12.2 % unemployment target (percent Scenario 1: Required annual real GDP growth rate for 2013 - 2018 (percent) Under current conditions, unemployment is envisaged to continue rising . Were the non-oil economy to grow at an average annual rate of 2½ percent and the labor force by 2 percent per year, and with the current estimated elasticity, the unemployment rate would likely rise toward 20 percent by 2018. Non-oil GDP growth rates close to 6 percent per year would Unemployment Rate Projections 1/ (In percent of total labor force) Scenario 1: growth = 2.5%; ε = 0.35; LF = 2% Scenario 2: growth = 6%; ε = 0.35; LF = 2% Scenario 3: growth = 2.5%; ε = 0.6; LF = 2% Scenario 4: growth = 6%; ε = 0.6; LF = 3% help reduce unemployment somewhat . This would entail a significant change in current economic conditions facing Iran, either a comprehensive change in the external environment and/or structural reforms to increase investment and productivity. These reforms could, for example, increase the elasticity of employment to growth and allow for lower growth rates to reduce unemployment under adverse external conditions. Reforms are essential but need the support from higher non-oil growth. A combination of reforms and higher non-oil growth seems essential to minimize risks from new entrants and also reduce current high unemployment rates . For example, were all 4½ million students to enter the market—the combination of high growth and more elastic demand for labor could reduce unemployment to around 9 percent. 1/ Chami et.al., 2012, “A Template for Analyzing Projecting Labor Market Indicators,” IMF Technical Notes and Manual 12/01. 2/ Crivelli, E., D. Furceri and J. Toujas-Bernate, 2012, “Can Policies Affect Employment Intensity of Growth? A Cross-country Analysis,” IMF Working Paper No. 12/218 Page 27 The authorities underscored the need to improve the consistency of financial sector policies . They explained that the banking system had faced a difficult environment over the past several years. A combination of government directives, including through government-mandated credit policies, had weakened risk management, particularly in state-owned banks, and incentives for supervision. As a result, regulatory forbearance on prudential limits had become more widespread and difficult to solve, due to the severity of past shocks and to the lack of proper enforcement capacity and supervisory powers by the CBI, including bank supervisors not enjoying full legal immunity. Banks’ loan classification procedures have been reportedly weak, resulting in under provisioning and overstated capital adequacy ratios, particularly for state-owned banks. While market participants expressed overall satisfaction with the direction the CBI was imparting to financial sector policies, the authorities stressed that advancing many of the needed reforms would require continued efforts to muster political support. In particular: The authorities were considering different options to resolve NPLs and recapitalize banks They stressed and staff agreed that their main goal was to strengthen risk management and compliance with prudential limits. Senior management at state-owned banks had already been replaced and consideration was being given to make those banks subject to better accounting and provisioning standards, so as to make them more robust financially, including through recapitalization and consolidation. The authorities were broadly satisfied with private banks, which had already begun to recapitalize themselves. The authorities saw a good opportunity to gradually dismantle government-mandated credit policies, to promote competition and better risk management . They noted that there were major differences between private and state-owned bank practices, with many banks having increasingly moved away from government-mandated credit policies. Staff encouraged the authorities to begin reviewing and dismantling directed-lending policies promptly. This step could also involve closing the gap between domestic and international best practices in risk management, internal controls, and governance. In addition, staff saw merit in the view of some market participants that privatizing state-owned banks and managing them on a more commercial basis would help level the field of competition in the system. The authorities saw a need to enhance supervision . While there has been increased coordination between off-site risk assessments and on-site supervision, the authorities acknowledged that enforcing supervision was still difficult. They explained that off-site supervision remained constrained in swiftly penalizing banks that fail to abide by regulatory standards, including the dissemination of prudential information to the CBI. Steps were being taken for on-site inspections to be more risk-based, prioritizing weakest banks. Despite enforcement challenges, the authorities were drawing up remedial action plans for banks that fail to meet regulatory standards. Staff noted the urgent need to strengthen the CBI’s supervisory powers and enforcement capacity. There is a need to strengthen the crisis preparedness framework . Staff noted that risk-based supervision should be supported by frequent stress testing of the banking sector, which would also provide a useful warning signal and cross-check to on-site reviews. The authorities also Page 28 explained that the bank resolution framework needed improvement, particularly regarding the recently implemented deposit guarantee fund, which remained too comprehensive and onerous to banks. Some steps should be taken toward expanding the supervision of bank-affiliates, business conglomerates, and nonbank credit institutions . With many of the private banks part of large business conglomerates, staff noted that it would be important to improve the information coverage to better map individual bank exposures into a system-wide network to assess linkages and risks. Nonbank credit institutions, primarily credit unions and microfinance charities, can collect deposits that are exempt from some elements of the regulatory framework. The banking supervision department has encouraged consolidation among nonbank institutions and asked the larger merged entities to apply for a banking license. Staff noted that the recent progress on the external environment provided a good chance to advance on the AML/CFT legislation . Some progress has been made in strengthening the AML regulatory framework, most notably the adoption by the AML High Council of fourteen new AML instructions, the establishment of an economic crime prosecutor office, and a defined roadmap for improving the AML system. The authorities noted that all financial institutions have been subjected to an AML supervisory inspection over the past two years. However, while a bill on countering the financing of terrorism (CFT) had been prepared and approved by Parliament in 2012, the authorities reported that it is currently pending before the judiciary for an opinion. Staff noted that there was scope to move towards risk-based AML/CFT supervision and encouraged the authorities to adopt a CFT law that is improved regarding the criminalization of terrorism financing and related activities, the freezing and confiscation of assets, the reporting and analysis of suspicious transactions, and international cooperation.