Growth is projected to stabilize at 4½ percent over the medium-term as the recovery broadens . Real GDP growth is projected to reach 6.6 percent in 2016/17 reflecting the rebound in oil production and exports (up 25 and 75 percent, respectively), and to ease to 3½ percent in 2017/18 as oil production remains at the OPEC target. Thereafter, higher FDI and a gradual improvement in domestic credit conditions as financial reforms proceed drives investment, which combined with improved economic efficiency from updated production capacity, lifts non-oil sector growth. The current account is forecast to remain in surplus as higher exports offset the pick-up in imports related to investment and pent-up domestic demand. Inflation is expected to temporarily rise to 11.9 percent by end-2017/18 reflecting recent liquidity growth and pass-through from exchange rate depreciation, but returns to single digits with prudent fiscal and monetary policies. The pace of job creation lags that needed to absorb the large number of new entrants and unemployment remains high. Risks are to the downside (see Risk Assessment Matrix). The renewed uncertainty surrounding the JCPOA, and especially relations with the U.S., could deter investment and trade with Iran and short-circuit the anticipated recovery. If the agreement is derailed, the economy could risk recession. Likewise, any challenges in implementing the FATF action plan could hamper CBRs, especially if counter-measures were re-imposed. Lower oil prices could increase pressure on export and budget revenues, reducing fiscal space. Domestically, failure to garner support for the ambitious reform program, especially banking sector reform, would see inflation rise, banking stress intensify, and growth slow. The complex, intertwined, reform agenda also demands careful coordination and sequencing. nd nd nd nd ud nd Page 16 Risk Assessment Matrix Source of RisksRelative LikelihoodTime HorizonPotential ImpactPolicy Response HighMeasures that derail Iran's reintegration into the global trade and financial system could risk a recession.HighRegional conflicts could weigh negatively on Iran's trade development and regional integration. MediumIran already faces difficulties in reconnecting to the global financial system. MediumNegative impact on oil revenue, thus reducing scope for increasing growth-enhancing spending.MediumChina has become one of Iran's key trade partners in the recent past. High Continued banking system stress would see liquidity growth and inflation accelerate, real interest rates remain high, and growth slow. Build broad-based consensus on a comprehensive restructuring and recapitalization strategy and how it is to be financed. MediumWithout fiscal and monetary policy reform there is a risk of continued procyclical policies, persistent inflation, real exchange rate appreciation, and eroding competitiveness.HighDifficulties in advancing reforms could hamper growth and job prospects, especially for the youth and women.HighGrowth would be negatively affected by the re-imposition of sanctions or counter-measures that would lower direct investment and capital inflows, and disconnect Iran from the global financial system. HighFinancial strains from inadequate progress on banking sector recapitalization and restructuring. Spillover Risks Domestic Risks Rise in populism and nationalism in large economies affecting international trade liberalization; financial, and labor flows; weighing on global growth and exacerbating financial market volatility.HighContinue domestic reforms that enhance resilience to shocks and negotiate new trade agreements to improve trade prospects. Low/MediumSignificant China slowdown. Persistently lower energy prices, triggered by supply factors reversing more gradually than expected. Short to Medium Term Short to Medium Term Continued efforts to diversify Iran's trade and to attract foreign investors. Improve fiscal planning by articulating fiscal priorities within a medium-term framework, and developing fiscal buffers. Continue to reduce oil dependency by increasing domestic tax revenue. Low/MediumMedium Term The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Short to Medium TermShort to Medium TermMedium TermReduce non-oil fiscal deficit to support disinflation, while mobilizing tax revenue to create space for growth-enhancing spending. Develop buffers to protect the economy against the consequences of adverse shocks. Develop a medium-term fiscal framework to anchor annual budgets.Uncertainties related to the implementation of the nuclear-deal and the FATF action plan with related risks of AML/CFT.MediumLimited progress in strengthening the monetary and fiscal policy frameworks.High Lack of broad-based support for reforms.MediumImprove transparency and outreach to the civil society, to build support for reforms. Strengthen administrative capacity through technical assistance.Continue reforms to strengthen domestic productive capacity, and improve the AML/CFT framework. Source: IMF staff. Short TermContinue efforts to focus on domestic reforms to increase Iran's attractiveness to foreign investors. Further loss of correspondent banking services significantly curtails cross-border payments, trade finance, and remittances in emerging and developing economies.HighShort to Medium TermContinued improvements in Iran's AML/CFT framework and the health of its banking system remain essential to facilitate fuller reintegration into the global financial system.Heightened risk of fragmentation/security dislocation in part of the Middle East.High Page 17 The authorities concurred with staff’s assessment but stressed that with the envisaged reforms growth could be much stronger . The reforms anticipated under the Sixth NDP are expected to lift growth to 8 percent. The recent improvement in oil prices and unexploited potential in hydrocarbons—Iran’s proven gas and oil reserves rank second and fourth in the world which alongside the revised oil contract model isattracting new investors—will continue to spur growth beyond 2017/18. The relatively diversified manufacturing and services sectors provide a good spring-board to expand the non-oil sector. As FDI is critical to their growth strategy, the authorities expressed concern that the inability to secure CBRs with large European banks is creating obstacles to investment and renewed uncertainty could deter investment.