Framework Iran’s monetary policy framework does not provide the CBI adequate tools to keep inflation low and stable . In the presence of underdeveloped financial markets, weak transmission mechanisms and ‘quasi-fiscal’ credit directives, it is difficult for the CBI to align liquidity growth with the production potential of the economy. Injection and withdrawal of liquidity is controlled by rationing. The CBI balance sheet is primarily driven by its loans to banks given the policy of credit support to specific sectors, the government’s overdraft facility, and liquidity support to distressed banks (Figure 5). In the near term, the government should sharply reduce its directed credit schemes and adjust regulated prices to curb liquidity pressures and contain the risk of pass-through from recent exchange rate deprecation. This would also free-up credit available for more productive firms. Access to beneficial ownership information would allow correspondent banks to lower their compliance costs in ensuring they do not conduct business with Iranian entities or persons on the sanctions list. Page 21 Figure 5. Islamic Republic of Iran: Monetary Indicators, 2011/12–2016/17 Credit growth picked up in 2016 as a result of rolling over ofexisting loans and...CBI's decision to reduce deposit rates improved the spread of the banks to some extent. Banks' reliance on CBI fundingincreased as a result of directed credits and funding of distressed banks...looser fiscal and monetary policies in response to the slowdown in non-oil activity. The rise in liquidity as a result ofthese policies risks reinvigorating inflationary pressures. CBI's injection of liquidity through the interbank market has increased with a view to reduce interbank rates. Jul-14Mar-15Nov-15Jul-16Mar-17 proj. Money Growth and Inflation (YoY, percent) M1 CPI - rhs Source: Iranian authorities; and IMFstaff calculations. Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14Dec-15Dec-16172023 Interbank Market Volume (Trillion rial), Rate (Percent) Volume Rate (right) Nominal Interest Rates (Percent) Lending rates, weighted average Short-term deposit rate Jul-12Aug-13Sep-14Oct-15Nov-16 Banking system - LTD ratio Claims of the Central Bank- rhs Loan-to-Deposit Ratio and Central Bank Claims on Banks Jul-13May-14Mar-15Jan-16Nov-16 Banks' claims on public sector central bank claims on banks central bank claims on public sector Banking System & Central Bank Credit Growth (YoY, Percent) 40Jul-12May-13Mar-14Jan-15Nov-15Sep-16 Private-sector Credit Growth contributions (YoY, percent) Private banks Specialized banks Commercial banks Banking system Page 22 The CBI requires greater independence and market-based instruments to sustain low and stable inflation . The draft Central Bank Bill overhauls the monetary policy framework, making low and stable inflation the CBI’s main objective. However, to bolster CBI independence to achieve its new mandate, the bill should eliminate the positions for government representatives and nonexperts on the central bank’s governing committees. A lender of last resort framework also needs to be clearly defined—with the CBI’s liquidity facilities collateralized to minimize risks to its balance sheet—and targeted to solvent banks. A target inflation range—the authorities’ objective is to keep inflation below 10 percent—tools to manage liquidity such as central bank participation or government paper, and a clear communication plan will all have to be developed to build the CBI’s credibility to manage interest rates and control inflation (SIP, chapter 2). The mission recommends an early move to unify the exchange rate and shift to a managed float given the need for flexibility to manage external shocks . Staff analysis suggests the market rate is better aligned with fundamentals (Appendix I). The official rate subsidizes select imports and does little to insulate inflation given pass-through from the depreciation in the market rate. Unification would increase the value of oil proceeds in domestic currency terms and improve the budget balance. It would also eliminate the economic distortions and potential rent-seeking that arise under the dual rate system, promote competitiveness and non-oil exports, and afford the CBI somewhat greater space to smooth pressures on the market rate. Stronger monetary and fiscal policies would underpin credibility and support a stable exchange rate under the new regime. The exact timing of unification has to be cognizant of FX market conditions and the extent of access to international reserves. The authorities see the new central bank bill as key to sustaining low inflation especially as they move to a unified exchange rate regime . Parliamentary committees are working to build political consensus for greater operational independence for the CBI. They noted that the success of the new system hinges on prudent fiscal policy. The securitization of government arrears offered an opportunity to create monetary policy instruments. The authorities saw the market rate as having overshot somewhat in the wake of seasonal factors and increased uncertainty. They remain committed to the unification of the exchange rate. They continue to shift goods to the bureau market, albeit at a slower pace due to recent FX volatility, and are encouraging FX transactions to move to banks through tighter regulation of FX bureaus. However, because CBRs constrain access to reserves, the CBI’s ability to intervene in the foreign exchange market is curtailed. Against this backdrop, the authorities express their commitment to unify the exchange rate by end- February 2018 as access to reserves improves.