Higher oil production and exports, following the removal of nuclear sanctions in January 2016, is supporting a strong rebound in growth . The prudent monetary and fiscal policies implemented in recent years paved the way for inflation to fall to single digits and stabilized the foreign exchange market. Progress was made in addressing Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) deficiencies, including passage of a CFT law. Foreign investors are planning sizeable investments in the hydrocarbon and manufacturing sectors. Still Iran faces considerable challenges in realizing its full potential . The fall in oil prices since their 2014 peak further reduced fiscal space and buffers already eroded under sanctions. Limited access to correspondent banking relations (CBR) has constrained trade, investment inflows and access to international reserves (Box 1). More recently, renewed uncertainty regarding sanctions is dampening sentiment. Domestically, the banking system is fragile and unable to support the recovery. Unemployment remains high and private sector job creation is slow. With per capita incomes unchanged from a decade ago and poverty on the rise, pressure to realize rapid gains is high. Presidential elections are scheduled for May 2017. The authorities are putting in place the elements of an ambitious reform plan to address these challenges, consistent with past IMF advice . They remain committed to prudent monetary and fiscal policies to underpin hard won economic stability. Under their Financial Sector Reform Plan, draft Central Bank and Banking bills aim to modernize the monetary policy framework and strengthen supervisory powers. The government has begun to clear its payment arrears, provided seed funds to recapitalize some banks, and plans to expand tax collections. The Sixth National Development Plan (NDP) aims to develop the private sector and reduce oil dependency. The challenge will be to prioritize and coordinate these complex reforms to definitively address structural weaknesses, sustain economic and financial stability, and secure higher, more inclusive growth. Box 1. Impediments to Correspondent Banking with Iran Despite the lifting of nuclear sanctions by the JCPOA—a multilateral agreement reached between Iran and the P5+1 which was ratified by the UN—on January 16, 2016, non-U.S. global banks are reluctant to re-engage Iranian banks because of remaining sanctions as well as AML/CFT concerns, including opacity of ownership of legal entities, and health of local banks. Sanctions relief so far … The JCPOA resulted in important relief. The oil embargo was lifted. E.U. and other countries’ sanctions that targeted Iran’s nuclear program ended. SWIFT reconnected Iranian banks to its payments system. Iranian banks have entered into CBRs with small and medium non-U.S. banks (around 238, but half 2006 levels) reducing financial transaction costs and improving the ease of cross-border trade. Access to foreign exchange reserves improved with some US$30 billion in blocked or frozen assets and oil receipts released. But other sanctions remain in place... U.S. primary sanctions remain in place and apply to U.S. financial institutions and companies, including non-U.S. branches (but not subsidiaries). U.S. dollar clearing restrictions have not been lifted and pose a significant challenge for larger non-U.S. global banks to re-establish CBRs. This in turn restricts access to corporate trade finance and limits access to reserves, foreign assets, and export earnings particularly from dollar-dominated oil sales. On December 15, 2016, the Iran Sanctions (10 years) extension Act became law. Other non-nuclear sanctions, including SDN list restrictions, which were broadened to cover new individuals and companies in February 2017, remain in place (see SIP, Chapter 1). Page 10 Status of Staff Recommendations from the 2015 Article IV Consultation