VULNERABILITIES A remarkable growth performance is supported by favorable external conditions The Irish economy has performed beyond expectations (Figure 1). Real GDP posted 7.8 percent growth in 2015 on the back of strong domestic demand and solid export growth. Gross fixed capital formation was mainly driven by investment in intellectual property by multinationals (MNEs) (Box 1), and a rise in machinery and construction investment. Private consumption Multinationals account for 57 percent of the business sector’s gross value added and 20 percent of employment. Financial linkages with domestic banks are limited. Page 16 expanded strongly as consumer sentiment surged, the drag from deleveraging moderated, wages and employment improved, and low inflation supported real incomes. Double-digit export growth benefited from favorable external conditions: a real effective depreciation of the euro reflecting continued monetary easing by the ECB and strong trading-partner demand. Yet the contribution of net exports to growth was only marginal as imports rebounded together with exports and investment. The recovery has been broad based, though the information and communications technology (ICT) and manufacturing (including pharmaceuticals) sectors have been particularly buoyant. High-frequency indicators suggest that the growth momentum has continued in 2016. Contributions to Real GDP Growth (Percent y/y) Net exports Investment GDP growth 1/ Inventories Consumption Sources: Central Statistics Office; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ GDP growth accounts for statistical discrepancy as well. Trade in Goods and Services (Percent change y/y, real terms) Trading partners imports of goods & services Exports of goods & services Imports of goods & services 2000Q1 2003Q1 2006Q1 2009Q1 2012Q1 2015Q1 Sources: Central Statistics Office; and IMF staff calculations. When aircraft purchases by leasing companies and intangibles are excluded from both investment and imports, the core demand expansion is more subdued and net exports contribute positively to GDP growth (Box 1). Page 17 Box 1. Onshoring of Intangible Assets to Ireland Partly in response to increasing multilateral efforts to combat aggressive tax planning and avoidance, including the OECD’s Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) Action Plan, some MNEs have chosen to restructure their businesses and relocate their intangible assets, such as patents and copyrights, to countries with supportive business environment. Consequently, Ireland, which maintains a competitive taxation environment, including for intellectual property- related activities (Knowledge Box), experienced a sharp increase in intangibles investment to 9½ percent of GDP in 2015 from about 5 percent of GDP in 2014. To the extent that investment in intangibles is related to patent onshoring, it is matched by imports, and thus is GDP neutral during the year of the transaction. Nevertheless, this investment adds to Ireland’s capital stock, and in the future, ceteris paribus, will contribute positively to net export growth (mainly due to lower royalty payments abroad). Contributions to Fixed Investment Growth (Percentage points y/y) Other investment 1/ Intangible investment (R&D) Aircraft Total investment 2005Q1 2007Q1 2009Q1 2011Q1 2013Q1 2015Q1 Source: Central Statistics Office. 1/ Includes machinery & equipment, construction & other residential investment. Contributions to GDP Growth (Percentage points y/y) Statistical discrepancy Net exports 1/ "Core" domestic demand 1/ 2003Q1 2005Q1 2007Q1 2009Q1 2011Q1 2013Q1 2015Q1 Sources: Central Statistics Office; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Excludes aircraft and intangibles. Labor markets continued to improve without inflationary pressures . The solid employment growth in 2015 helped reduce the unemployment rate to 7.8 percent in May 2016, and was reflected in a moderate increase in private sector’s real wages, though labor force participation has not recovered so far. Inflation hovered around zero owing to lower commodity and food prices, which more than offset the rising cost of services, particularly housing rents. Employment and Unemployment Rate (Thousands of persons) (Percent) Contribution to Annual HICP Inflation (Percentage points) Employment Unemployment (rhs) 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Source: Central Statistics Office. 2016Q1 May-12 Core inflation Energy and unprocessed food HICP Core inflation ex rents May-13 May-14 May-15 Sources: Central Statistics Office; Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. May-16 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 18 (Percent of GDP) Fiscal Performance Public finances delivered a sizeable outperformance in 2015. Revenues significantly exceeded the initial budget profile, largely reflecting strong corporate income tax (CIT) receipts. Expenditures rose more moderately over the budget profile (but slightly below the supplementary budget envelope), as a lower-than-planned interest bill partly offset higher current primary spending. The general government deficit fell to 2.3 percent of GDP—well below the initial budget target of 2.7 percent of GDP and the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) 3 percent of GDP threshold. As a result, Ireland exited the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). The overperformance would have been even more sizeable (yielding an underlying deficit of 1.3 percent of GDP), if conversion of government’s remaining AIB preference shares to ordinary shares (equivalent to 1 percent of GDP), had been excluded from capital transfers. Sources: Department of Finance; Eurostat; and IMF staff calulcations. 1/ In 2015, it includes the increase in capital transfers due to the conversion of the remaining AIB preference shares to ordinary shares (Eurostat decision). Revenue Taxes Social contributions Other revenue Net lending/borrowing 1/ Net lending/borrowing (exl. one-offs) Current primary Interest payment Capital expenditure Expenditure Residential Housing Market (Index, 2010=100) Rising demand, partially fueled by global search for yield, and supply-side bottlenecks have stimulated property prices (Figure 2). Residential real estate (RRE) prices and rents continued to increase. Nevertheless, following the abolishment of tax exemptions on capital gains in December 2014 and the introduction of new macroprudential loan-to-value (LTV) and loan-to-income (LTI) limits in February 2015 (see 2015 Article IV Staff Report), the market somewhat cooled off: RRE price growth decelerated in late 2015 and the number of mortgage approvals temporarily declined (Figure 3). House prices level House prices growth (rhs) Rents growth (rhs) Sources: Daft.ie; OECD; and IMF staff calculations. (Percent change y/y) 2006Q1 2014Q1 2008Q1 2010Q1 2012Q1 Commercial real estate (CRE) prices rose even more rapidly. Total returns of the Irish CRE sector outstripped those of other European countries, reflecting the confluence of strong equity Yet only one half of the 2015 CIT overperformance can be explained by corporate profitability (Central Bank of Ireland’s Quarterly Bulletin ), and BEPS-related changes could have incentivized corporate restructuring in Ireland with a favorable impact on CIT revenues. Page 19 investment largely financed by foreigners in search for high yield, and still limited new construction. Commercial Real Estate Market (Index, 2010=100) (Percent change y/y) Commercial Real Estate Total Returns (Percent) Price level Price growth (rhs) Retail rent growth (rhs) Office rent growth (rhs) 2006Q1 2008Q1 2010Q1 2012Q1 2014Q1 EA World GBR USA IRL Sources: CBRE (Ireland); CSO; MSCI (IPD); and IMF staff calculations. Source: MSCI/Invetsment Property Databank. Financial conditions have been broadly supportive. As elsewhere, the UK vote to leave the EU has led to stock market losses but the sovereign bond market has been well behaved The ECB’s quantitative easing (QE), together with Ireland’s favorable growth prospects, have kept the 10- year Irish sovereign yields very low, even if the spreads slightly widened temporarily following the UK vote to leave the EU. In line with other European countries, the Irish equity market partly reversed its last year’s gains and declined by about 17 percent in 2016H1. Reflecting the strong GDP growth, improved balance sheets and prudent fiscal policy, Moody’s upgraded Ireland’s sovereign rating to A3 (May 2016), following Fitch’s and S&P’s upgrades to A (February 2016) and A+ (June 2015), respectively. The recent issuance of a 100-year sovereign bond is an additional sign of market confidence. Ten-Year Sovereign Bond Yields (Basis points) Portugal Spain Italy Germany Ireland Jan-14 Jul-14 Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 Jul-16 Source: Bloomberg. Yet the recovery is still incomplete Stock Markets (Index, Jan-2014=100) Portugal Spain Italy Germany Ireland Jan-14 Jul-14 Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 Jul-16 Source: Bloomberg. Domestic demand and employment have yet to return to their pre-crisis levels. Private consumption, albeit recovering, is held back by the ongoing deleveraging process and the prevalence of households with low or negative equity. Disposable income is still some 5 percent below its peak, partly due to the higher tax burden. Investment in residential properties is lagging INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 20 behind demand. With a still elevated jobless rate and sluggish labor participation, labor market slack persists and employment growth has been uneven across regions. Real GDP Components and Employment (Billions of euros, 2-quarter average, seasonally adjusted) (Millions) Employment (rhs) "Core" domestic demand 1/ Total domestic demand Real GDP 2002Q1 Sources: Central Statistics Office; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Excluding aircraft and intangibles. 2004Q1 2008Q1 2006Q1 2010Q1 2012Q1 2014Q1 Regional Employment Growth, 2012Q1-2016Q1 (Percentage points) (Percentage change y/y) Contribution to growth Growth rate (rhs) State's cumulative growth (rhs) West Mid-East Mid- West Midland South- West Border South- East Dublin Sources: Central Statistics Office; and IMF staff calculations. High public and private debt burdens leave the economy vulnerable to shocks. Public debt has declined to about 94 percent of GDP at end-2015 from a peak of 120 percent of GDP in 2013, but remains well above the pre-crisis levels. Despite falling debt, many households are susceptible to a drop in income or an interest rate increase. Nonfinancial corporates’ (NFC) profitability has improved significantly and deleveraging has continued in recent years. Nevertheless, many small firms are financially weak and vulnerable to shocks. Gross Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Y X Source: IMF World Economic Outlook. Household Debt Burden 1/ (Percent of gross disposable income) Sources: Central Bank of Ireland; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Total household loans in percent of 4 quarter gross disposable income. Debt of Nonfinancial Corporations 1/ (Percent) Debt-to-GDP (s.a.) Debt-to-equity (rhs) 2002Q1 2004Q1 2006Q1 2008Q1 2010Q1 2012Q1 2014Q1 Sources: Central Bank of Ireland; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Debt is equal to securities other than shares, loans, and financial derivatives and employee stock options. Page 21 Non-Performing Loans (Percent of total loans, domestic banks) The banking system repair continues, but challenges remain. The recent Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) observed that liquidity indicators have improved as banks reduced their wholesale funding. Capitalization is also stronger, though deferred tax assets add substantially to the total. The banking sector as a whole returned to profitability in 2014-15 reflecting higher net interest income, better asset quality, and a reduction in operating cost, but also provisioning reversals as collateral values increased and loan restructuring continued. Yet, the underlying bank profitability remains subdued, bank balance sheets are still contracting despite a gradual pick up in new lending, and the high share of impaired loans poses fragilities, particularly given the increasing portion of mortgages in deep arrears (above 720 days) in the total stock of mortgage arrears (Figure 4). Provision coverage ratio remained broadly stable, and stood at about 52 percent of total nonperforming loans (NPLs) at end-2015. Investment and development Consumer Business and SMEs Mortgages Source: Central Bank of Ireland. Dec-14 Dec-11 Dec-15 Dec-12 Dec-13 Dec-10 The outlook is positive but risks are skewed to the downside Real GDP Growth Projections (Percent change y/y) The positive economic performance is expected to continue, despite the fallout from the UK referendum result. GDP growth is projected just below 5 percent in 2016 on account of less vigorous domestic demand, mainly due to investment. Private consumption is expected to keep growing at a dynamic pace reflecting higher employment, lower household indebtedness, and positive wealth effect from rising property prices. Over the medium term, the Irish economy is likely to be affected by the consequences of the UK vote to leave the EU. The severity of the impact is however difficult to gauge at this stage. It will crucially depend on the future relationship between the UK and the EU, especially regarding trade, financial flows, and movement of labor. Taking into account some ensuing negative spillovers consistent with model-based calculations in the “limited” scenario outlined in the UK 2016 Article IV report and the accompanying Selected Issues paper, Ireland’s real GDP growth has been revised downward in 2017-18. Over the medium term, growth is projected to decelerate and converge to its estimated potential (about 3 percent a year) on the back of more moderate export Sources: Bloomberg; CBI, ESRI; EC; MoF; and IMF staff estimates. 80 percent range (private sector forecasts) Median private sector forecasts (June 2016) IMF baseline forecast ESRI (June 2016) DoF (June 2016) CBI (April 2016) EC (May 2016) The Economic and Social Research Institute estimates that a 1 percent reduction in UK GDP translates into a 0.3 percent decline of Ireland’s GDP over the medium term. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 22 growth and investment activity. As a result, the output gap is expected to virtually close and the current account surplus to moderate by the end of the forecasting period. Ireland: Macroeconomic Projections, 2015–21 (Percentage change unless indicated otherwise) Projections Real GDP Final domestic demand Private consumption Public consumption Fixed investment Change in stocks (contribution to growth) Net exports (contribution to growth) Exports Imports Current account (percent of GDP) Unemployment rate (percent) Output gap 1/ Consumer Prices (HICP) Source: Central Statistics Office; and IMF staff projections. 1/ Excluding multinational enterprises, see 2015 Article IV Selected Issues Paper. Risks are tilted to the downside (Annex II): External risks have worsened since the UK referendum result and now prevail . The recent UK vote to leave the EU, if accompanied by prolonged uncertainty over UK’s new relationship with the EU, larger-than-expected slowdown in the UK and in the rest of Europe, and higher financial market volatility, would have a significant adverse effect on Ireland. In these circumstances, a countercyclical fiscal policy together with the central banks’ commitment to provide additional liquidity, would help lessen the impact. Over the medium term, a possible relocation of EU-oriented firms from the UK to Ireland could partly mitigate some of these effects (Annex III). On the upside, the ongoing restructuring of operations by multinationals could reinforce Ireland’s attractiveness as a destination for FDI and increase the capital stock. A surge in financial market volatility in response to other shocks and disruptive re-allocation of assets as investors reassess global growth prospects or as geopolitical tensions intensify could further undermine confidence, with possible adverse effects on investment. At the same time, the ECB’s QE, the government’s limited financing needs, and sizeable cash buffers (3½ percent of GDP as of end-June 2016) would mitigate the impact on sovereign spreads. An extended period of low euro area growth could also hurt confidence, investment, and FDI. Finally, while Ireland benefitted from net immigration of highly–skilled European workers in the past, inflows of refugees are expected to be small, with a limited fiscal impact. Domestic risks seem moderate. Rising incomes and lower deleveraging could lift private consumption and investment growth above the baseline, but continued rapid property price growth could generate new vulnerabilities. Reform fatigue combined with strong growth are Page 23 fueling expectations of a recovery dividend among the Irish public, which together with political fragmentation could lead to some policy reversals. The impaired credit channel remains a medium-term risk if future demand for bank lending is not met with adequate supply. Ireland: Balance of Risks Ireland’s external position is broadly in line with fundamentals and the economy remains competitive (Figure 5). The External Balance Assessment (EBA) methodologies suggest that the external position is broadly in line with fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Annex IV). The EBA Current Account approach indicates a slight undervaluation of the currency, but the current account gap can be—to a large extent—explained by undistributed profits of foreign companies that established their headquarters in Ireland. The External Sustainability and the Real Effective Exchange Rate approaches suggest minor overvaluation. Competitiveness continues to be strong in the services sector, and goods exports have also resumed robust growth, particularly in the pharmaceutical sector that appears to be less cyclical than global trade. In addition, Ireland’s traditional exports have performed strongly, benefiting from the depreciation of the euro. However, some trade losses could be expected following a depreciation of sterling and a reduction of UK demand (Annex III). INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 24 Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment regarding Ireland’s economic outlook and risks. They saw prospects for robust real GDP growth, while somewhat decelerating over the medium term. Continuous progress in resolution of financial crisis legacies alongside increased market confidence should continue to support domestic demand, thus further reducing the unemployment rate. They concurred with the external sector assessment and predominant downside external risks reflecting the high degree of openness of the Irish economy. These include a significant slowdown in major trading partners and the ensuing adverse changes in the terms of trade, and heightened uncertainty regarding the prospects for many emerging market economies. However, this is mitigated somewhat by the fact that its exports are concentrated in sectors, such as pharmaceuticals, which are more resilient to external demand swings. Domestic factors, including tight housing markets and its adverse effect on labor mobility and competitiveness, as well as potential sectoral wage pressures could also pose downside risks. In addition, increased political fragmentation could complicate policy making. However, better-than-expected domestic demand and additional patent on-shoring represent potential upside. The UK vote to leave the EU has added further uncertainty to the outlook and will adversely affect growth. The authorities’ initial estimate, based on the assessment in the government’s Summer Economic Statement (SES), is that growth in 2017 will be about ½ percent lower than previously expected, though the fiscal space for next year is largely fixed at this stage. The authorities will prepare a full macroeconomic projection in advance of Budget 2017 in October, and this will include updated estimates of economic growth, the public finances and the fiscal space, taking account of actual and prospective developments up to that time, including the estimated economic impact of the UK vote. The authorities have already published their contingency plans to deal with financial market volatility, potential effects on export industries, and FDI flows.