Strong revenues reduced the fiscal deficit to about 4 percent of GDP in 2014 despite significant primary spending overruns . At 3.9 percent of GDP, the estimated deficit is 0.9 percentage points below the budget target. An upward revision to GDP from the transition to ESA 2010 contributed 0.3 percentage points to this outperformance. The remaining 0.6 percentage points reflect revenue gains (1.3 percent of GDP) and interest savings (0.4 percent of GDP) sufficient to outweigh higher expenditure (0.9 percent of GDP). All major taxes were ahead of projections (0.8 percent of GDP), reflecting stronger labor market conditions and higher corporate profits and consumer spending, while a range of factors boosted other revenues. However, current primary spending overruns were 0.5 percent of GDP, with healthcare accounting for three-quarters of overruns, but social protection and education also contributed. Capital spending exceeded budget owing to the extra cost of setting up Irish Water and a frontloading of some spending from 2015. Budget 2015 entails modest structural adjustment and firm expenditure control will be critical . Budget 2015 targets an overall deficit of 2.7 percent of GDP, below the EDP ceiling of 3 percent of GDP, a major milestone in Ireland’s fiscal consolidation efforts, which staff estimates have totaled 13 percent of GDP in structural primary adjustment from 2008 to 2015. Staff projects a decline in the overall deficit of 1.2 percentage point of GDP in 2015, aided by strong growth (0.4 percent of GDP), interest bill reductions (0.4 percent of GDP), and one-off revenues (0.1 percent of GDP), leaving 0.3 percent of GDP in primary structural adjustment. A firmer adjustment would have been preferable given high debt and strong near-term growth prospects. Avoiding a repetition of 2014 overruns, especially in healthcare, is needed to achieve this modest adjustment in 2015. In particular, revenue overperformance or a lower interest bill in 2015 should be used to reduce the deficit, rather than covering higher primary spending. The proceeds from disposals of stakes in the banks should be dedicated to debt reduction. In case Eurostat were to classify Irish Water as part of the government—with a deficit impact of 0.3 percent of GDP—any offsetting measures taken by the authorities should be high quality and durable. BudgetOutturn (€ bn)(€ bn)(€ bn) (% of GDP) Revenue55.357.7 Tax revenue40.041.3 Social contributions11.611.8 Other3.74.6 Expenditure64.965.9 Current primary52.353.2 Capital4.55.2 Interest8.27.5 Exchequer balance-9.6-8.2 General government balance, est.-8.2-7.2 1/ Deficit neutral lending to the social insurance fund and a transfer of motor taxreceipts to local government fund are excluded from revenue and expenditureoutturns.Source: Exchequer report (Dec, 2014). Fiscal Performance in 2014 1/ Difference Page 15 Framework for Fiscal Adjustment after EDP Exit As Ireland exits the EDP, it should establish a medium-term fiscal goal of balancing the budget over the cycle . Fiscal balance will ensure that growth progressively erodes Ireland’s high public debt burden over time, underpinning confidence to invest and create jobs. Declining debt will also rebuild the fiscal space needed to allow Ireland to cushion future shocks to growth. Moreover, maintaining a balanced budget over the cycle will reduce the risk of the fiscal stance amplifying economic fluctuations, as was historically common in Ireland. To protect recovery, the pace of fiscal adjustment after 2015 should be phased and steady . On staff estimates, GDP is still expected to be about 1½ percent below potential in 2015—although output gaps estimates are subject to significant uncertainty. Hence the deficit in structural terms is estimated at 2¼ percent of GDP in 2015. With the interest bill projected to decline by 0.3 percentage points of GDP in the medium term, primary adjustment totaling about 1.9 percent of GDP is needed to reach overall balance in structural terms. Phasing that remaining adjustment over a three year period would limit average structural primary adjustment to some 0.6 percent of GDP annually, with a modest drag on growth. Pacing this adjustment evenly, at no less than ½ percent of GDP per annum, would enhance economic stability and steady the limited room available for budgetary initiatives from year to year, making adjustment more manageab le. The rules of the SGP’s preventative arm will in principle support such an approach to fiscal adjustment . The Expenditure Benchmark and the Structural Adjustment rules provide intermediate targets consistent with a steady fiscal adjustment toward the Medium-Term Objective of budget balance in structural terms. Importantly, stronger than budgeted revenues will no longer permit supplementary spending in the same year, as the Expenditure Benchmark will put a firm lid on spending while still allowing the automatic stabilizers to operate fully. Yet, Irish-specific technical issues in applying these fiscal rules should be addressed As discussed in Chapter 1 of the Selected Issues Paper, in Ireland’s case, the current EU methodology understates cyclical swings in unemployment, with implications for estimates of output gaps and potential growth. Staff therefore welcomes ongoing work by the Irish authorities to refine some aspects of the EC methodology. Assessments of compliance with the rules by the EC and IFAC will also need to take into account Ireland’s large MNE sector, which has activity swings with a sizable impact on GDP, but notably less impact on revenues and fiscal balances than other GDP shocks. Staff is therefore basing its estimates of the output gap used to calculate structural balances on a measure of GDP excluding the sectors dominated by MNEs. The authorities recognized that a clear fiscal framework for the period after Ireland’s forthcoming exit from the EDP is important. They agreed that balancing the budget in structural terms is a sound fiscal goal for Ireland in the medium term. They found the discussions on the pace of transition to balance helpful in developing their perspective on this issue, where they are firmly committed to a structural adjustment of at least ½ percent of GDP annually from 2016 onwards. In that respect, they are working closely with the EC to refine the potential GDP methodology for Ireland to support sound and reasonable implementation of the fiscal rules. Page 16 Policies to Underpin Fiscal Adjustment The policy mix to achieve steady fiscal adjustment should protect Ireland’s growth potential . Under the authorities’ current projections, further fiscal adjustment is primarily driven by expenditure restraint, as set out in the Comprehensive Expenditure Report 2015–17. Capital spending remains low in the medium term, at just under 1½ percent of GDP. Staff sees scope for both the expenditure and revenue sides to support adjustment: revenue measures would help create room to rebuild capital spending over time and they could also be needed in response to evolving international tax standards such as the BEPS project. Expenditure reforms are needed to deliver core public services at manageable cost in the face of demographic pressures . Demographic pressures—from both young and old age groups—on education, health, and pension spending total about ¼ percent of GDP per annum over the medium term. A range of efforts are needed deliver the additional services required within a manageable overall spending envelope: Public wage bill . The expiry of the Haddington Road Agreement in 2016 will lead to pressures for some reversal of past savings that were key to Ireland’s consolidation to date. There are risks that these pressures impede progress to fiscal balance: any developments on future public sector wage arrangements must recognize the very tight fiscal constraints in coming years. Further cost reductions and service delivery improvements through implementation of the Public Service Reform Plan 2014–16 should also be sought. Social protection . An expansion in social protection spending was essential in the crisis and it is important that this spending declines steadily as the economy recovers. There is also scope to generate savings while protecting those on low incomes through means-testing of benefits and taxation of universal benefits. For instance, the distribution of medical cards to persons aged over 70 could be made conditional on income and the universal component of child benefits could be progressively reduced by treating it as a taxable income. Healthcare . Despite its relatively young population, Ireland’s health spending (on a real per capita PPP-adjusted basis) exceeded the OECD average by 12 percent in 2012 while life expectancy is little above the OECD average. Cost efficiency in healthcare should be further improved by building on existing initiatives: high use of costly acute care should be reduced through expanded primary care and further pharmaceutical savings should be sought. Education . Ireland had the third greatest annual expenditure per student in OECD countries by public educational institutions in 2011, some 14 percent above the OECD average on a PPP-adjusted basis. Higher education funding reforms are needed to control growth in public spending while protecting low income students, by better targeting college fee subsidies. The amount and quality of capital spending should be reviewed carefully in order to ensure adequate maintenance and avoid growth bottlenecks A gradual rise in public investment may be required once the fiscal position is closer to balance, while ensuring the Page 17 quality of investments through rigorous project assessment. Structural reforms that boost growth can benefit the fiscal position over time, yet may have up-front costs including investment needs. It would be appropriate to explore the scope for well specified structural reforms with credible timelines and growth benefits to qualify for the flexibility available within the EU fiscal rules. Revenue efforts should build on the base-broadening reforms achieved in recent years . Ireland’s vulnerability to a crisis was exacerbated by its formerly high reliance on a narrow tax base, especially real estate transactions. The substantial progress since made in broadening the tax base needs to be protected going forward. Reforms to broaden the VAT base could significantly bolster revenues without raising the main VAT rate—even closing one-quarter of the “policy gap” could generate 1 percent of GDP in additional revenue (see Table 10 of the October 2013 Fiscal Monitor). Moreover, maintaining up to date housing valuations will protect the property tax base and help lean against housing market cycles. The large drop in oil prices creates an opportunity to generate revenues by raising environmentally friendly taxes. The recent report on tax expenditures should guide a review over time of the remaining tax expenditures. Regarding the composition of adjustment toward fiscal balance, the authorities noted that there could be a role for further broadening of the tax base, but they also considered it important to address high marginal income tax rates. They agreed on the need to protect the gains from previous revenue and spending measures and to implement a policy mix which continues to be supportive of growth and employment. On the spending side, they noted that demographic pressures had been accounted for in developing expenditure projections, and they fully recognized the need for ongoing reforms and continued discipline across spending areas. A review of capital expenditure was in progress. The authorities are actively engaged in the BEPS project and are closely monitoring the evolution of international tax standards with a view to ensuring compliance with best international practice.