Strong and sustainable economic growth is needed to reduce vulnerabilities. Staff project potential GDP growth to gradually stabilize at nearly 3 percent over the medium term, mainly due to the partly-cyclical rise in labor participation and capital accumulation largely driven by the multinationals’ activity. Total factor productivity (TFP) growth, however, is projected to remain modest just around one percent under current policies, falling short of the robust increases observed in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Growth Accounting (Average cumulative percentage change) TFP Net capital Average hours worked Employment GDP Sources: Central Statistics Office; Eurostat; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Addressing impediments to TFP growth would boost Ireland’s economic potential . Many advanced economies experienced TFP moderation, possibly due to spillovers from the US productivity slowdown and a resource shift toward lower-productivity sectors. Staff analysis of Ireland (see Selected Issues on Firm-Level Productivity and its Determinants: The Irish Case) indicates that, in recent years, TFP growth of SMEs has lagged behind that of large firms, and that medium and large-sized foreign-owned firms outperformed their domestic peers. Moreover, the analysis suggests that domestic firm-level factors, including limited access to finance, weak financial soundness and low research and development (R&D) activity, may have also contributed to the slowdown in TFP growth Staff encouraged the authorities to alleviate these potential impediments by broadening financing options for SMEs and advancing NPL resolution. As gross domestic expenditure on R&D is mainly financed by large enterprises and is below the OECD average, staff also stressed the need to encourage higher innovation activities among domestic SMEs, including Chapter 3, 2015 April WEO. Page 37 through greater direct public sector’s support and by enhancing the partnerships of SMEs with education institutions. TFP by Firm Size and Ownership, 2014 (Median, 2007=100) Small Medium Large Expenditures on Research & Development, 2014 (Percent of GDP) Gross domestic expenditures on R&D Business enterprises expenditures on R&D Average of gross domestic expenditures on R&D = 2.0 Source: OECD. X Z W J Sources: BvD; and IMF staff calculations. Job-rich growth would foster inclusion. Despite the robust recovery, some parts of the population have yet to feel its benefits. While the labor force is well educated, skill mismatches are relatively high in some segments, and youth and long-term unemployment rates remain elevated, the latter particularly among adults with lower educational attainment. Furthermore, female labor force participation is among the lowest in the EU. Staff therefore advocated strengthening incentives for women to enter the labor market, such as providing more affordable and high-quality child care and reducing the high marginal income tax rates for second earners. To increase the overall labor supply and boost youth employment, staff suggested upgrading labor skills and reducing skill mismatches by strengthening labor activation policies and expanding technical and vocational programs (see also Selected Issues on Public Expenditure Efficiency in Ireland). Authorities’ view The authorities agreed with the need to enhance productivity and job creation in order to support sustainable and inclusive growth. They noted the recently-introduced policy initiatives to alleviate difficulties in SMEs’ access to finance, including the establishment of the Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland in 2015, which provides low cost funding for SMEs. Furthermore, the expected implementation of the CCR would reduce firms’ informational asymmetry and hence the risk premia charged by banks. They acknowledged that higher public spending on R&D would enhance the business sector’s competitiveness and innovation capacity. They remain committed to increase Ireland’s R&D intensity, improve SMEs’ access to finance for innovation, develop research collaboration between enterprises and the public sector, and tailor support to meet enterprise The share of budget funding in gross domestic expenditures on R&D declined to 26 percent in 2014 from about 34 percent in 2008, while government’s R&D expenditures per capita fell by 26 percent in nominal terms at the same time. Public support for Irish firms’ R&D is mainly through tax credits, but young firms lacking upfront funds to start innovative projects may not benefit from it. The OECD survey 2015 Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) suggests that, despite improvements in recent years, adults in Ireland have lower skills than other OECD countries, especially regarding numeracy and literacy. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 38 needs, as outlined in the recently published Innovation 2020 strategy report. The authorities stressed their intent to foster reforms to improve the affordability and quality of child care. As outlined in their Action Plan for Jobs for 2016, efforts are being made to step up the skill supply by helping qualified workers to come to Ireland, and by establishing regional skills fora as a mechanism for enterprises and providers of education and training to work together in building the supply of skills for their regions. Ireland: Labor Market Conditions Female Labor Force Participation, 2014 (Percent, age 15-64 years) Z X Source: OECD. Long-term Unemployment, 2014 (Percent) W As percent of total unemployed persons As percent of labor force (rhs) W X Z Sources: OECD; and IMF staff calculations. Numeracy Skills, 2013 (Adjusted mean score) Z W J Source: OECD (Skills Outlook 2013). Youth Unemployment, 2014 (Percent of youth labor force, age 15-24 years) Source: OECD. Z X W