Mauritania’s external position has weakened, exposing risks to external stability under current policies . Despite structural reforms envisaged to promote FDI and economic diversification, the trade balance deficit is expected to remain above 10 percent of GDP and future capital inflows remain highly uncertain. Reserves will remain under pressure over the medium term and fall below the authorities’ target level of three-month import coverage (excluding extractive imports) in 2020– 21. High external financing requirements and external debt compound risks to external stability. Staff and the authorities agreed on the need to accelerate export growth—especially in non- extractive sectors—to sustain external stability. Exchange rate policy needs to address the significant overvaluation of the ouguiya Tackling the current overvaluation will be critical to support external sustainability and a prerequisite for economic diversification. The real appreciation of the past two years, the negative terms-of-trade shock to economic fundamentals and the weak investment climate have led to an overvaluation of the ouguiya. According to the EBA-lite methodology, the current account deficit is larger than the norm, the level considered sustainable given economic fundamentals, estimated at a deficit between 3½ and 7 percent of GDP (Annex V). While estimates of exchange rate overvaluation are subject to significant uncertainty, they are consistent with a persistently elevated non-extractive current account deficit and limited non-extractive exports. The overvaluation of the REER limits the scope for domestic demand adjustment to support external stability. Staff called for a combination of measures to bring the exchange rate in line with its medium-term equilibrium value including continuing exchange rate adjustment and FX market reforms to increase exchange rate flexibility, fiscal consolidation efforts to reduce aggregate demand and structural reforms to promote economic diversification. The authorities felt that staff’s estimates overstated the degree of overvaluation and believed that the medium-term current account deficits would be appropriate on account of stronger export and FDI prospects. More exchange rate flexibility would be desirable, though views differed on the pace and the timing of reforms in the foreign exchange market . The BCM and staff agreed that greater exchange rate flexibility is desirable to enhance the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber, allowing the economy to adjust more smoothly to changes in fundamentals and to reduce reliance on reserves to buffer external shocks. While the authorities viewed their current exchange rate policy as adequate in allowing them to adapt to varying conditions, staff favored greater exchange rate flexibility to reflect economic fundamentals, supported by rapid implementation of The degree of overvaluation of the ouguiya in real effective terms for 2015 is estimated between 16 and 78 percent (Annex V). This range is subject to significant uncertainty associated with the poor fit of the estimates underpinned by the methodological approaches, assumed trade elasticities and the future path of commodity prices. Estimates of real exchange rate overvaluation should not be interpreted as the needed nominal exchange rate adjustment. Page 15 reforms in the foreign currency market to support current account sustainability in the context of a persistent terms-of-trade shock. FX market reforms would change the auction mechanism, allow for all bids to sell into the market and eliminate direct sales to the private sector, allowing for an exchange rate that reflects market forces more closely and for a more predictable private sector access to FX (Box 1). The authorities were receptive to the reform proposals and would like to define an action plan that also addresses advancing on strengthening the monetary framework. Staff recognizes the importance of a well-functioning foreign exchange market and the need for a steady adjustment that allows economic agents to adjust smoothly their balance sheets. Given the moderate exchange rate pass-through and the benign price environment, staff considers that these reforms can be implemented now, coupled with a prudent monetary stance so as to limit adverse effects on inflation expectations. Staff supports the authorities’ approach to enhance oversight of banks’ FX transactions and compliance of daily limits on banks’ FX position and suggested to manage liquidity proactively to limit risks to exchange rate overshooting and excessive volatility while preserving reserves. While the authorities prepare for reforms in the foreign exchange market, greater exchange rate flexibility could be introduced . As a first step, greater flexibility could be gained by widening the bands in the current regime. The central bank could also assess whether consideration should be given to adopting a currency basket as an intermediate anchor toward a more flexible exchange rate arrangement. A basket reflecting trade composition could reinforce the exchange rate as a nominal anchor and help prevent further appreciation in real effective terms if the US dollar strengthens further. In this regard, the authorities remain open to revisiting the adequacy of the exchange rate regime to facilitate the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber over the medium term. Adopting a more flexible exchange rate regime requires strengthening the monetary policy framework. The and staff agreed that the current environment of subdued inflation facilitated formalizing a monetary policy framework by defining quantitative targets and developing forecasting methods and instruments to manage liquidity more actively. While the current liquidity level is seen as broadly adequate, staff discussed plans to adapt liquidity management to an environment of reduced liquidity in the banking system, including by introducing new instruments such as standing deposit and lending facilities and using proactively reserve requirements. A prudent monetary policy will be needed to accompany FX market reforms. In parallel, staff agreed with the on the need to develop tools for assessing and forecasting short-term liquidity, which may require reorganizing the and closely coordinating with the Treasury. In addition, staff recommended the recapitalization of the central bank to provide greater operational autonomy. Ultimately, the will need to define a new monetary policy anchor. The central bank requested a technical assistance mission, which is scheduled at end-May 2016. Page 16 Box 1. Mauritania’s Foreign Exchange Market and Proposals for Reform Recent Developments Foreign exchange flows in Mauritania have markedly changed in composition since end-2013. Mining receipts have declined by 53 percent in 2013–15, putting pressures on reserves and on the authorities’ efforts to broaden FX sources. The decline from mining has been only partially offset by grants and higher fishing proceeds from stricter enforcement of repatriation requirements and the renewed EU agreement. In 2015, in light of reducing external buffers, the BCM reduced FX supply via direct sales. Auction Framework Cash Flows Mining repatriation Oil fund transfers (inflows) Inflows Fishing inflows (X+Licences) Other inflows (debt, grants, ...) Outflows Sources: BCM; and IMF staff calculations Auctions take place during fixing sessions from Monday to Thursday. The auction is a retail auction—banks introduce individual customers’ orders—and it is a single-price auction—all successful bidders pay/receive the same price. All FX operations above US$100,000 must be submitted to the auction. The exchange rate is determined from the supply side. Determination of the final fixing rate follows a multiple-stage process, as follows: The BCM has the discretionary power to reject offers to sell considered abusive. The BCM determines a provisional fixing rate—the most depreciated exchange rate in the supply for which demand exists. Then, the BCM decides whether to intervene or not and at which exchange rate—either at the provisional rate or at a different rate. The final fixing is then determined. All offers to purchase above UM6 from the final fixing are excluded. Qualified or effective demand is then sorted from the most to the least depreciated. Offers to sell are excluded if banks do not comply with the requirement to hold 100 percent of their bids in ouguiya as excess reserves in their BCM account. The BCM allocates FX to banks’ clients first, in the order in which they were submitted, and then to banks on their own account. Unsatisfied or partially-fulfilled orders are cancelled by the end of the session. FX applies asymmetric commissions of 0.25 percent for purchases and 0.75 percent for sales. The auction allows the central bank to control prices and quantities but gives rise to an exchange rate restriction, as demand (associated with current account operations) is not fully satisfied. There is no FX interbank market and the central bank operates as the main FX supplier. All fishing receipts from the public- owned fishing company transit by the central bank and SNIM repatriates through its account at the BCM. Page 17 Box 1. Mauritania’s Foreign Exchange Market and Proposals for Reform (concluded) Unmet demand is a permanent feature in the market, which leads to resubmission of purchases. Therefore, demand in the market reflects not only the need for foreign exchange, but the duration required to get it. Unsatisfied demand (considering demand within the 6-ouguiya limit) increased to 84 percent at end-2015 from 65 percent in 2014; doubling the time needed to acquire foreign exchange (from 3 days in 2013 to 6 days in 2015). This exerted pressures on the exchange rate and the parallel market premium tripled— though still moderate (at around 5 percent). The high share of unsatisfied demand may not be fully reflected in the parallel market premium due to the fact that many purchase orders are resubmitted until they get satisfied. Recently, the BCM resisted depreciation pressures by rejecting more frequently depreciated offers (considered abusive) and intervening at a different (more appreciated) rate than the fixing. The imbalances tend to increase when the central bank reduces its intervention while allowing little adjustment in the exchange rate to equilibrate the market. In addition, the BCM provides FX through direct sales to the public sector and to the private sector. The final fixing is the exchange rate applied in these sales. Proposed FX Market Reform Based on FSAP recommendations, staff recommends reforms to enhance price discovery, increase transparency and competition, and improve governance. They will help transitioning to greater exchange rate flexibility, reducing imbalances in the market and developing an FX interbank market. The proposed measures are interdependent and complimentary. Mauritania: Foreign Exchange Market Indicators A- Demand Of which effective demand 1/ (in percent) B- Total sales Fixing session Of which BCM intervention (in percent) Direct Sales C- Satisfied demand In percent of total demand Fixing only Fixing and direct sales In percent of effective demand Fixing only Fixing and direct sales Sources: BCM; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Purchase bids lower than provisional fixing plus 6 MRO Introducing a multiple price auction (MPA) The MPA is a more competitive allocation system that allows prices to be determined by both supply and demand and imposes some discipline on demand, as participants will pay the offered price, limiting speculative bids. Still, the central bank could influence the exchange rate both through FX intervention and liquidity management. Eliminating the direct sales to the private sector . To support the deepening of the FX market and a level playing field for the private sector to access FX, all central bank intervention should be channeled through the market. Such approach is likely to enhance competition especially among importers. Increasing non- supply . In addition to measures already taken by the BCM to enforce FX repatriation rules, the central bank should accept all offers to sell and ensure strict compliance with FX position limits, including by strengthening sanctions. In establishing a multiple price auction, a mechanism to prevent giving rise to multiple currency practices will need to be in place to prevent the deviation between the winning bids from exceeding 2 percent. Page 18