The authorities agreed that rising risks to financial stability call for more vigilance and a careful calibration of the policy adjustment. Under current trends, liquidity and asset quality may reduce banks’ ability to address shocks, extend credit and support economic activity. Liquidity pressures for some banks may constrain their access to FX market, leading to deposit losses. Banks may come under strain, whether because of weakening liquidity or asset quality, or because of exposure to vulnerable sectors (commerce, construction and public works); some banks might require liquidity support or recapitalization (Annex III). High NPLs could erode capital and limits banks’ ability to lend. In turn, policy adjustment to the external shock could result in subdued non- extractive growth in the short term; which could weaken balance sheets and generate confidence shocks. This could place challenging trade-offs on the need for economic rebalancing and could require heightened coordination with the Ministry of Finance, especially on short-term liquidity management. The central bank is stepping up financial sector supervision and efforts to strengthen prudential and crisis resolution frameworks, in line with FSAP recommendations (Table 8). In terms of enhancing supervision, the central bank is finalizing IT data transmission; enhancing data quality; and reinforcing the credit registry for banks’ real-time access. International audits of all banks should complement those commendable efforts. In parallel, the central bank is strengthening human resources at the General Directorate for Banking Supervision. Additional important measures include bringing the CDD under financial supervision and devising a clear restructuring plan for microfinance institutions. Adopting a new banking law and the statute of the central bank in 2016 will represent a fundamental step in transitioning toward a risk-based supervision, including by modernizing the banking resolution framework, strengthening licensing requirements and enhancing the independence of the central bank and the protection of supervisors. Further progress with FSAP recommendations is also necessary to enhance financial stability including (i) implementing, without delays, the regulation in place; (ii) publishing banks’ financial statements; (iii) establishing clear qualification system for auditors; and (iv) increasing banks’ contribution to the deposit guarantee fund. Rising risks call also for stricter enforcement of banking regulation and enhanced supervision, especially on liquidity, FX position, concentration and related-party lending risks In particular, the central bank should consider reviewing penalties and sanctions to align incentives Page 23 to compliance. In the face of the specific risks associated to concentration and related-party exposures, staff calls for strengthening the micro- and macro-prudential frameworks, recapitalizing some banks and reducing the planned three-year timeframe to comply with related-party exposures (Annex III). The should also consider activating, if needed, the emergency liquidity assistance to support illiquid but solvent banks. In the current context, staff also recommends more effective coordination with the MEF to manage short-term liquidity, a temporary freeze to licensing new banks and a review of risk classification and weights for public enterprises.