The global economic landscape has deteriorated since the 2014 Article IV Consultation Global demand remains subdued because of a modest recovery in advanced economies and a protracted decline in growth in emerging and developing economies. Iron ore prices declined further, by 70 percent to end-2015, eroding FDI and putting Mauritania’s mining expansion on hold. As an oil importer, Mauritania has benefited from lower oil prices but this has not prevented a decline in the terms of trade, which is expected to be long-lasting. More recently, heightened uncertainty about the global outlook has resulted in higher volatility in commodity prices. Since end-2015, iron ore prices have recovered by 30 percent, to about $60 in early March, while oil prices have recovered by 6 percent. International Commodity Prices (In U.S. dollars) Jan-14 Apr-14 Jul-14 Oct-14 Jan-15 Apr-15 Average oil price (per barrel) Jul-15 Oct-15 Jan-16 Iro ore (per metric ton) Source: Bloomberg. The authorities have started adjusting to the external shock, after an initial response geared to supporting economic activity. In 2014, the authorities responded with countercyclical policies using fiscal and external buffers built during the boom years for metal prices. As the terms- of-trade shock became increasingly perceived as long-lasting, the authorities have relied more heavily on debt financing and allowed for a nominal depreciation of the ouguiya vis-à-vis the US dollar since September-2014. The authorities also adopted fiscal consolidation measures in the revised 2015 budget law and in the initial 2016 budget law. Implementation of past Fund policy advice has been mixed . Several of the 2014 Article IV consultation recommendations were implemented (Annex I), with significant policy traction in banking supervision. The authorities are also advancing with key recommendations from the 2014 FSAP, which are crucial given heightened risks to the financial sector resulting from weaker economic prospects. However, recommendations to address debt sustainability concerns through fiscal consolidation and to strengthen the monetary policy framework have yet to be implemented. Since the 2014 Article IV Consultation, Fund’s advice has focused on addressing the impact of the terms-of-trade shock in the economy.