The strengthening of the financial regulatory framework needs to be accompanied by its enforcement, to support financial stability . The CBM has adopted regulation on risk classification, provisioning, and bank governance, and is developing risk-based supervision procedures and on-site inspection methodology. Supervisory capacity has also been strengthened with new personnel for inspections and IT systems to support real-time data transmission. However, enforcement is weak because of the lack of legal protection for the supervisory authorities. In addition, strengthened procedures for licensing and consolidated supervision, for risk concentration and capital requirements, higher reporting standards and transparency on the financial situation of credit institutions as well as expanding CBM supervision to the Deposit and Development Fund (CDD) and the insurance sector will help support financial stability. Staff welcomed the authorities’ interest in anchoring the medium-term financial reform agenda in the accompanying FSAP (Appendix III). The MCPs arise from (i) the mandatory commissions and penalties on transactions at the fixing session (auctions); (ii) the mandatory use of the official rate for direct FX transactions with the CBM and the lack of a mechanism to prevent the deviation by more than 2 percent of the official rate from the fixing rate used in the fixing session and from the exchange rate used in other transactions in the market; and (iii) the segmentation of the market in the absence of a mechanism to ensure that the exchange rates in the fixing sessions and bank-to-client bilateral transactions do not deviate from each other by more than 2 percent. The exchange restrictions arise from (i) the insufficient foreign exchange availability at the fixing sessions organized by the CBM for those transactions that are required to be submitted to the fixing sessions, and (ii) the limitation on the availability of foreign exchange for multiple transactions below US$50,000. Page 20 The CBM’s role in times of stress needs to be strengthened . The CBM agreed with staff’s recommendations on the need to revise the existing banking resolution framework for addressing troubled financial institutions. Following the FSSA recommendations, the authorities agreed to expedite a revised banking law that provides independence and legal protection to the authorities in exercising their competencies, while introducing early-warning solvency and liquidity indicators. The authorities also agreed on the need to reinforce the deposit guarantee fund, which remains insufficient. Promoting financial inclusion requires reducing economic informality . The financial system remains small, underdeveloped, and constrained by dependence on short-term funding. The small number of depositors reflects the still-large informal economy. According to the World Bank, only 17 percent of the population has accounts in a formal financial institution, lower than the Middle East and North Africa regional average (36 percent). As a result of the short maturity of funding sources, credit to the private sector is essentially short-term. Loans to small and medium- sized enterprises (SMEs) are constrained by collateral requirements. In addition, the banks’ ability to play a decisive role in supporting private sector development is limited by nonperforming loans. At the same time, financial services are difficult to access because of physical and geographic isolation, insufficient infrastructure, and a lack of financial knowledge—reflected in high banking fees. Promoting long-term credit by using the CDD as a primary bank could be considered. Staff also welcomed efforts to promote financial inclusion by easing access to financial services (next section) and promoting microcredit (currently done by one institution) and Islamic banking activities (five banks), but urged the authorities to develop a specific regulatory framework. Authorities’ efforts to set standards for corporations’ financial statements and regular updates in the credit registry are also welcome.