Governance The 2016 initial budget law aims at a strong fiscal consolidation, which may prove challenging. The overall deficit excluding grants is projected at 2.5 percent of NEGDP in 2016, with public spending contracting by 4 percentage points of NEGDP—equivalent to a 10-percent decline in real terms—making economic growth vulnerable to lower aggregate demand. The authorities are committed to the ambitious target envisaged in the initial budget law, with any additional revenues devoted to building buffers. Staff believes, however, that tax revenue mobilization, beyond those related to petroleum products, would be limited by subdued non-extractive growth and low mining revenues. Staff also believes that the envisaged reduction in current spending (1.7 percent of NEGDP) would prove challenging as fiscal outcomes have fallen short of initially-envisaged consolidation efforts since 2013, largely as a result of higher foreign-financed investment and lower revenues. Given past budget performance, staff projects less fiscal adjustment, with the overall deficit (excluding grants) at 3.2 percent of NEGDP and some reduction in current spending (0.7 percent of GDP). Medium-term fiscal projections under the baseline envisage a gradual fiscal adjustment that will lower public debt only marginally. Staff envisages the overall balance (excluding grants) to hover around an average deficit of 3.8 percent of NEGDP in 2017–21, consistent with authorities’ investment plans under current policies. This baseline takes into account: Additional tax revenues are expected to result from measures introduced in 2015 on petroleum products and on VAT, as well as from the new measures introduced by the 2016 initial budget law reinforcing custom revenues and introducing new exports duties on fish products. The authorities also reiterated their engagement in increasing non-extractive revenues by expanding the tax base; reinforcing fiscal controls (better risk management practices and improved coverage rates); limiting the erosion of the tax base by eliminating revenue losses related to transfer pricing of foreign mining companies; and improving fiscal information and tax and custom administration. Staff welcomes these efforts; highlights the difficulty in evaluating the impact of tax administration measures, and calls for implementing them in a way that promotes a more equitable taxation. Non-tax revenues from the lack of adjustment in domestic energy prices in the face of falling international oil prices will remain substantial during the projection period (averaging 2½ percent of NEGDP per year). Given the uncertainty regarding global oil prices, staff recommended that any larger-than-envisaged revenues would be used to eliminate domestic public arrears and accumulating fiscal buffers. According to recent TA, the 2016 tax revenue targets are ambitious and will require renewed efforts on broadening the tax base and a more equitable distribution of fiscal pressures. Page 19 Additional fiscal adjustment is needed to support debt sustainability over the medium term. While the authorities recognized the importance of decreasing public debt levels, their current plans to streamline spending and raise revenues to create fiscal space for social spending and investment are not sufficient to prevent further increases in public debt. Given the high risk of debt distress, staff argued for re-orienting fiscal policy toward a medium-term public debt target of 70 percent of GDP as a fiscal anchor and a gradual fiscal consolidation that supports growth dynamics (Box 2). Achieving primary balances consistent with this debt reduction path will require higher non-extractive revenue mobilization, rationalization of current spending and a realistic investment program that goes beyond current plans under the baseline. Such efforts assume additional fiscal consolidation amounting to 2.2 and 2.5 percent of NEGDP in 2016 and 2017, respectively. To achieve this adjustment, staff recommended the following: Additional revenue mobilization should result from broadening the tax base and renewed tax administration efforts to promote fair taxation and, ultimately, economic activity. Staff also called for a gradual elimination of tax exemptions (estimated at about 3 percent of GDP) and emphasized that, ultimately, a durable and sustainable expansion of the tax base also depends on advancing economic diversification and reducing economic informality. Control on current spending needs to focus on streamlining the wage bill, subsidies, and transfers to public institutions. The authorities’ strategy aims at maintaining social spending to protect the most vulnerable with better targeted transfers. A comprehensive public service reform, including implementing the integrated management of state personnel (EPMIS), and further rationalizing spending on goods and services could yield savings of 2.6 percent of NEGDP over 2016–18. Public investment spending needs to be streamlined and prioritized to ensure consistency with fiscal targets and fiscal adjustment efforts. In this context, the authorities are committed to review the effectiveness of public investment to maximize potential growth effects, while ensuring consistency with poverty-reduction priorities and absorption capacity. However, reaching fiscal and debt targets will require reducing external debt disbursements by 30 percent. Preliminary estimates suggest that, other things equal, such adjustment scenario would reduce the foreign-financed public investment envelope by 2.2 percent of NEGDP per year over 2016–21. The impact on public investment could be dampened with additional fiscal consolidations efforts. Financing of public investment should be limited to concessional borrowing. Page 20 Box 2. Anchoring Mauritania’s Fiscal Policies to Reduce Public Debt over the Medium Term With a high public debt level, a high risk of debt distress driven by lack of diversification and weak capacity, and an outlook clouded by the global uncertainty, fiscal policies should aim at bringing the public debt on a firm downward trend toward a medium-term debt target of 70 percent of GDP. ECF 2010 Art. IV 2016 Art. IV 2012 Art. IV 2014 Public Debt Trajectories, 2008–15 1/ (In percent of GDP) Public debt trends . Mauritania’s public debt level has steadily increased in recent years, in particular in 2014–15 when the public debt increased by 25 percentage points to 93 percent of GDP, driven by central government’s infrastructure financing and central bank’s borrowing to support reserves under longer-than- envisaged ToT shock. While Mauritania’s debt ranks high compared to other HIPC countries, this also reflects the limited debt relief granted by non-Paris club creditors at the time of the HIPC debt relief initiative. The DSA points to high debt vulnerabilities, with debt indicators breaching all but one threshold. The recent pace of debt accumulation risks weighing down on economic growth as higher taxation may ultimately be needed to service debt in the future and distort economic activity. In addition, an analysis of the debt structure shows significant exposure to exchange rate risks, a bunching of upcoming maturities, and a concentration of oil exporters in the creditor base. A more rapid depreciation of the ouguiya than the one envisaged under current policies will impact external debt levels and call for additional fiscal adjustment. Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Differences in historical debt figures are driven by national accounts revisions,(2008 and 2011). Baseline ( p PV of External PPG Debt (In percent of GDP) Anchoring fiscal sustainability . Anchoring fiscal sustainability will require targeting both the public external debt over the medium term and associated primary balances; this follows from the fact that part of public investment is being executed outside of the central government. Fiscal consolidation efforts will be supported by anchoring public external debt toward a medium-term target of 70 percent of GDP. If such target were reached by 2021, external PPG debt would be at 45 percent of GDP in NPV terms by 2021 and below 30 percent by 2027. Other things equal, staff estimates that such effort represents a 31 percent reduction of the cumulative external disbursements envisaged over 2016–21 (equivalent to 14.5 percent of GDP). This public debt path will require that priority investment for development be maintained within a realistic envelope and through additional fiscal consolidation. The authorities could also seek opportunities to involve the private sector in infrastructure investment. Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Public debt target (70 percent by 2021) ) Control of operations executed outside the central government. Given that the current coverage of fiscal statistics is limited to the central government, controls of debt-financed public investment executed outside the central government will be needed to reach the debt target objective. Going forward, broadening the coverage of fiscal statistics towards the general government in line with GFSM 2001 and passing the organic budget law will help anchor fiscal policy to support debt sustainability. Policy recommendations . Bringing down firmly the public debt over the medium term will help contain the risk of debt distress and lay the foundation for future growth. Given the weight of foreign debt in particular, strengthening the export base through economic diversification to help the economy cope better with external shocks and expand the base for foreign exchange resources is equally urgent. Public investment objectives should be realistic and should be tailored to provide basic infrastructure and promote private sector participation where possible. Such reduction will result, on average, in lower foreign-financed investment by 2½ percent of NEGDP per year if all the adjustment burden efforts would fall on investment and on the central government. Page 21 Staff welcomed the authorities’ plan to advance with significant fiscal structural reforms, including of public entities . In 2016, the authorities intend to submit to Parliament a code of tax procedures, the new customs code, and the Organic Law of Finance (LOF). The adoption of the LOF will help anchor fiscal consolidation towards debt reduction. Moreover, the launch of the new public institutions restructuring program will strengthen supervision of state enterprises and other public institutions. A study funded by the World Bank, expected by end-2016, will clarify their financial situation and their relationship with the central government. Revamping financial information flows and harmonizing administrative and financial management of public institutions will start with the five most important EPAs. In terms of cash management, a second-generation single Treasury account will be effective by December 2016 and improved cash management practices will include public procurement plans and a monthly central engagement plan at the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Central government (TOFE) Change in external PPG debt Net External Disbursements (In millions of US dollar) Limiting deteriorating debt dynamics will involve fiscal consolidation and close monitoring of borrowing outside the central government . Enhanced debt management practices require strong institutional coordination, better coverage of public sector activity and strengthened governance. A consolidated investment strategy under the newly created Ministry of Economy and Finance will facilitate priority setting and identification of funding sources. Staff welcomed efforts to strengthen procedures for borrowing and public guarantees, improve investment execution and monitoring, and expand public finance statistics beyond the central government in line with GFSM2001. Staff also supports the authorities’ objectives to establish a centralized registry for public debt and government guarantees, including those extended to public enterprises, within the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Finally, an assessment of fiscal risks and contingent liabilities, including those that could arise from SNIM, could help identify fiscal vulnerabilities and support the restructuring of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to address inefficiencies and financial sustainability. In this vein, priorities include improving their financial reporting; curtailing direct and indirect subsidies; enhancing governance, transparency and accountability; streamlining corporate structures to core activities; setting utility tariffs to cost-recovery levels; strengthening the legal framework for SOE operations; and developing appropriate investment plans. Source: Mauritanian authorities. Addressing fiscal dependence on extractive resources will improve fiscal policy formulation . The budgetary framework should include a fiscal rule, an explicit fiscal anchor, and a fiscal stabilization fund that take price volatility into account, while incorporating intergenerational equity considerations through a resource wealth fund. Strengthening fiscal policy formulation will help better safeguard the budget against boom-and-bust cycles in nonrenewable resources, reduce Page 22 pro-cyclicality, and provide predictability to fiscal policy. Accompanying robust institutions will enhance the management of mining wealth. The authorities agreed in principle with this approach but felt that such reforms were premature. Staff supported the authorities’ intention to continue pursuing reforms in public financial management, including a multiyear fiscal framework and the approval of the LOF, considered prerequisites for introducing the fiscal rule.