Economic growth in 2013–14 remained elevated in the context of contained inflation. Based on the new national accounts, real GDP growth is estimated at 5.7 percent in 2013, from 6.0 percent in 2012. Reduced activity in fishing and agricultural sectors was only partly offset by better mining and services activity. Preliminary economic indicators for the first part of 2014 point to weaker than expected oil, manufacturing, and agricultural output, partly offset by stronger fishing and construction activity and higher iron production. Average headline inflation declined from 4½ percent at end-2013 to 3 percent in mid-2014, owing to declining international prices. A spike in domestic food prices, together with a gas price increase, accelerated average inflation to 4.1 percent (year-on-year) in October 2014. The current account deficit remained wide during 2013–14 because of large capital imports associated with the extractive sector and, lately, to worsening terms of trade. The current account deficit reached 25 percent of GDP in 2013, reflecting large imports to expand capacity in extractive industries—mostly financed by FDI. Reserve levels remained stable See Box in Appendix IV for details. Administered gas prices increased by 11.3 percent during 2014. Page 6 (6½ months of prospective imports excluding those related to the extractive industries). But an improvement in the terms of trade during 2013 (at 34 percent) reversed during 2014 (at minus 18 percent). During the first half of 2014, the current account deteriorated to an annualized 32 percent from 18 percent of GDP compared to a year earlier, on account of a deteriorating trade balance. The deterioration of the terms of trade has been absorbed by lower foreign exchange reserves. The nominal exchange rate against the U.S. dollar slightly depreciated (by 2 percent) since end-2012; but appreciated in real terms owing to the inflation differential between Mauritania and its trading partners. In 2014, the ouguiya continued its gradual depreciation with respect to the U.S. dollar, with an appreciation of 7 percent vis-à-vis the euro, given the U.S. dollar’s appreciation relative to the euro. Because the euro is a major trading partner currency, the real effective exchange rate appreciated cumulatively by about 12 percent since 2013. The Central Bank of Mauritania (CBM) stepped up its volume of foreign exchange sales in both fixing sessions and direct sales from US$1.2 billion in 2012 to US$1.5 billion in 2013, and kept a similar trend during 2014 with sales totaling US$1.5 billion. Weaker foreign exchange repatriation from mining companies to Mauritania and no EU fishing compensation have decreased gross reserves to US$639 million in December 2014 from US$996 million at end-2013, to close to five months of prospective imports excluding those related to extractive industries. Fiscal policy has aimed at maintaining consolidation efforts . In 2013, the overall balance, excluding grants, posted a deficit of 2.2 percent of non-extractive GDP, down from 3 percent in Budget execution up to the third quarter of 2014 showed an overall deficit (excluding grants) of 3 percent because of high capital spending execution compared to the annual envelope. Within tax revenues, lower domestic VAT revenues were more than offset by higher corporate income taxes, customs revenues, and taxes on wages and salaries. For nontax revenues, higher revenues from fishing licenses partially mitigated the slight decline in dividends and royalties from public enterprises. Despite progress in revenue mobilization (Box 1), fiscal consolidation did not result in improved non-extractive fiscal balances and external debt maintained an upward trend and— despite the upward revision in national income accounts—remains elevated at 73½ percent of GDP at end-2014. The risk of debt distress is assessed to be high because of the lagged effects of the deterioration of the institutional environment in 2009 on debt thresholds (Annex I) The debt sustainability analysis reports the breach of one of the debt thresholds in the baseline scenario, leading to a deterioration of the assessed risk of debt distress. This is associated with lower debt thresholds, driven by the lagged effects of the worsened institutional capacity as measured by the World Bank’s CPIA rating in 2009, even though this rating has improved continuously since 2010. On a cash basis. Fiscal outcomes do not fully capture the transfers to SOMELEC, the electricity public company, to cover for operational losses, nor oil revenues from the decline in international oil prices. The public debt-to-GDP ratio has declined from the previously reported level (98 percent of GDP in June 2013) due to higher GDP figures in the new national accounts. Page 7 The projected increase in new debt disbursements for infrastructure projects has also contributed to this reclassification. Box 1. Tax Revenue Performance in Mauritania Mauritania has experienced a rapid and significant increase in tax revenue collection over the past years . The tax effort is especially worth noting, given the crisis in neighboring Mali and elections in the past year. The ratio of tax revenues (excluding those from natural resources) to GDP improved by more than 50 percent since 2010, reaching an estimated 22 percent of GDP in 2013. Corporate Income Tax (CIT) doubled, to 4.0 percent. Payroll tax and VAT increased by about 60 percent, to 3 percent and 8 percent respectively. This increase does not consider revenues associated with extractive industries. The amount of tax revenues generated by mining activities reached 5.0 percent of GDP in 2013. Mauritania seems to have so far avoided the resource curse regarding taxation; domestic revenue mobilization improved during the recent boom in commodity prices. This can be attributed to the low share of foreign exchange earnings that re-enter the country. Non-extractive tax revenues performed strongly as the VAT regime in the mining supported formalizing the economy. For any developing country, the VAT self-enforcing property dominates its neutrality: (1) the cascading effect of a general sales tax—the alternative to a neutral VAT—is limited by the low number of production stages in Mauritania; (2) economic agents in the formal sector—especially exporters—who can claim VAT credit have an incentive to acquire their purchases from formal suppliers that provide proper VAT invoices. Mining firms, taxed at a zero rate because they are exporters, can be reimbursed if and only if they can prove that their domestic purchases are taxed under local VAT. These transactions provide useful information that can be used to broaden the tax base. However, Mauritania could benefit further on this front, as local purchases in Mauritania remain comparatively low: the World Gold Council estimated that local purchases represented 38½ percent of total expenditure in 2012—compared with 89 percent for Mali, 91 percent for Ghana, and 67 percent for Burkina Faso. In addition, the Mauritanian government engaged in several important and complementary reforms in revenue administration and tax policy. By eliminating the global income tax in 2012, Mauritania switched to a dual tax system, where progressivity of the tax system is kept only on wages. Mauritania implemented reforms to protect its tax base against aggressive tax optimization by multinational companies. In 2013, a withholding tax of 15 percent on any payment to nonresidents limits profit-shifting to foreign countries. The authorities are working on a thin-cap rule and taxation on capital gains from indirect transfer of mining titles. Mauritania-specific factors can also explain the increase in revenue collection. For example, the rise of CIT can be explained by the end of the CIT exemption in 2012 and by the end of the minimum tax revenue (2.5 percent on turnover) collected by customs. CIT revenues rose by 1.3 percent of GDP to 3.7 percent in 2012, while minimum tax revenue increased from 0.8 percent to 1.4 percent of GDP. The latter tax is similar to a royalty at 2.5 percent; however, it is creditable against the CIT and collected by customs. This point is important because it reinforces the coordination between the ministries of finance and mining, and improves the quality of valuation of exported minerals. / Based on a note by Salvatore Dell’Erba and Gregoire Rota-Graziosi (Fiscal Affairs Department, IMF (2014)). Page 8 Monetary indicators suggest a moderate increase in credit and excess liquidity (FSSA report) . Between October 2013 and 2014, as short-term deposits fueled broad money growth from 9.8 percent to 11.4 percent, banks’ credit growth slowed from 13.3 percent to 12.1 percent. Despite the CBM’s increased FX sales, which helped stabilize excess liquidity in the past, liquidity in the banking system has started to increase since mid-2014, on account of limited investment opportunities. Free reserves increased in October 2014 on an annual basis. The banking sector is well capitalized and liquid, but remains fragile to shocks. High credit concentration (including credit to the public sector), foreign-exchange risk exposures, and low profitability due to a constrained business model and higher competition exacerbate banking vulnerabilities. Although the banking system appears well-capitalized overall, some banks are not meeting the minimum capital requirement and are under-provisioned. Asset quality remains weak: nonperforming loans (NPLs) represented 20 percent of loans in the second quarter of 2014. On December 31, 2014 the CBM removed the licenses of Maurisbank, an undercapitalized bank, and of FCI, a financial institution with negative capital and little credit activity. The cases are likely to be contested in courts and deposits be covered by the existing deposit insurance. Advances in social indicators remain stalled. Poverty and unemployment remain elevated and progress toward achieving the MDGs is uneven. About 26 percent of households were estimated to be food-insecure in June 2014, in part because of higher rural migration to Nouakchott. Progress toward building the foundation for inclusive growth, as set at the time of 2012 Article IV, has been mixed (Appendix I).