Mining, financial, and real cycles in Mauritania Performance of Extractive Industries (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) The economic and financial effects of the terms- of-trade shock have become significant . Since 2014, Mauritania has faced a continued decline in the terms of trade, although less pronounced in 2015 due to lower prices of oil and food. The contribution of the extractive sector to the economy, exports and fiscal revenues has markedly Extractive GDP Extractive exports Extractive revenues (in percent of total revenues) Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 10 declined during 2014–15. Lower mining activity and receipts led to lower fiscal revenues, slower non-extractive economic activity and domestic demand, and reduced banking sector liquidity. Real GDP growth slowed in 2015, and inflation eased. Real GDP growth weakened to about 2 percent, from 6.6 percent in 2014, due to lower iron ore production and slower activity in construction and fishing—both sectors depicting some slowdown due to base effects. Prices declined by 2.8 percent year-on-year at end-2015 due to lower food prices and real exchange rate appreciation. The external deficit remained elevated, FX repatriation eroded and net international reserves declined. Lower oil and capital imports and higher transfers from abroad helped compensate for lower mining exports, narrowing the current deficit to 19 percent of GDP. The financial account deteriorated on lower FX repatriation from SNIM (the main state-owned mining company) and subdued FDI, to 11 percent of GDP (from 20 percent in 2013). Gross reserves, however, increased from 5.3 to 7.7 months of non-extractive imports by end-2015, because the Central Bank of Mauritania (BCM) contracted a bilateral loan to support the external position. Net international reserves covered 5 months of non-extractive imports at end-2015. The average REER appreciated 5 percent in 2015, moving counter to the terms-of-trade shock. Since September 2014, the central bank moved toward a de facto “crawl-like” exchange rate arrangement and the ouguiya depreciated nominally by 9 percent year-on-year vis-à-vis the US dollar as of January 2016. The nominal depreciation did not prevent an average appreciation in real effective terms of 5 percent during 2015 due to the strengthening of the US dollar, hampering external competitiveness and maintaining pressures on reserves. The 2015 fiscal deficit (excluding grants) deteriorated despite higher revenues generated mainly from a lack of adjustment in domestic energy prices in the face of falling international oil prices and some restrain in current spending . The fiscal deficit (excluding grants), at 5.6 percent of non-extractive GDP (NEGDP), increased by 1.5 percent of NEGDP in 2015, while revenues associated with the extractive sector declined to 2.9 percent from 8.3 percent of NEGDP in 2014. To offset these revenue losses, the authorities took a number of measures: On the revenue side, the 2015 Revised Budget Law incorporated a 2-percentage point increase in VAT and changes in domestic gasoline taxes to lock-in part of the domestic oil revenues. In addition, the gain in non-tax revenues related to a lack of adjustment in domestic petroleum products accounted for 3 percent of NEGDP. To promote the consumption of local rice, the EU fishing license, budget support grants and transfers related to the telecom license renewal amounted to 3.4 percent of GDP in 2015. The differential between domestic and international oil prices generates additional oil revenues to the central government recorded as non-tax revenues, which are traditionally deposited at the Fonds d'Assistance et d'Intervention pour le Développement (FAID). In August 2015, the revised budget law introduced three major changes in the customs tax structure of petroleum products: (i) increase in VAT to 20 percent (against 18 percent); (ii) increase the rates of consumption tax to UM35.5 from UM5.5 per unit; and (iii) raised import duties from UM7 per unit to 20 percent of the imported value; locking into permanent revenue about 70 percent of the revenues. Page 11 import tax on rice was raised to 35 percent. In addition to these measures, increased tax controls enabled to achieve higher revenues. On spending, while current expenditures were reduced by 0.4 percentage points of NEGDP through savings on subsidies, goods and services and transfers, there was an overrun on foreign-financed investment, which increased by 1.3 percent of NEGDP. Regarding financing, the authorities mobilized budget-support grants and external borrowing. Public debt increased to 93 percent of GDP at end-2015 (Annex II), and the risk of debt distress remains high. The cyclical downturn, compounded with structural weaknesses, has increased risks to financial stability (Annex III). Structural weaknesses include fragmentation and low profitability, weak asset quality and high concentration of deposits and loans portfolios. The establishment of new banks has increased competition, but the narrow formal sector, limited financial services and similar business models among banks have resulted in a fragmented banking system. Despite this fragmentation, the credit and deposit portfolios remain highly concentrated in a number of banks. Five banks represent nearly 60 percent of credit and 70 percent of deposits, and banks have highly concentrated deposits and loans portfolios, including vis-à-vis related entities. Asset quality has deteriorated, banks’ risk management practices are weak and profitability is low. With the economic slowdown, deposit stagnated and net domestic credit growth decelerated in The banking system remains broadly liquid, but liquidity ratios and buffers have declined. Liquidity ratios in two banks, representing 14 percent of total banking assets, reached levels below the prudential 20-percent norm. Asset quality deteriorated, as NPL ratios reached 27.6 percent in December 2015 (from 20 percent at end-2013) in part because of stricter risk classification introduced in mid-2014. Based on reported CAR, banks appear to be well- capitalized, but data are biased by non-compliance with regulation pertaining to related-party exposures. Banks’ operational costs are reportedly increasing due to higher information compliance requirements on foreign exchange (FX) transactions with international banks. While Mauritanian See accompanying Debt Sustainability Analysis for details. The debt level includes passive debt with KIA, estimated at 21.5 percent of GDP. Fragmentation in the banking system refers to the large number of small banks, hampering the efficiency of the system as a whole. Some large banks dominate the system, while the rest are relatively small in size and have limited capacity to grow. Net domestic credit includes credit to private sector and net credit to central government. The NPL ratio is expected to decline to 20.3 percent when accounting for the transfer of NPLs out of banks’ balance sheets. In addition, in the reported RWA, loans to the public sector, including public enterprises, are considered with zero risk and the part of exposures to related parties above the regulatory limit of 25 percent is not deduced. Page 12 banks have not been affected directly by de-risking and have maintained their correspondent banks, they have created compliance units to fulfill higher demand for information. The microfinance sector remains highly fragmented, its viability is weak and capital adequacy ratios remain below regulatory standards. The authorities are developing a strategy to strengthen the sector and decrease its reliance on public sector support.