The economic outlook has become more uncertain and volatile on account of trends in international commodity prices and financial sector developments. Under persistent subdued iron ore prices, the authorities’ current policies are projected to result in continued reserve pressures and elevated debt over the medium term. The economy will remain vulnerable to external shocks. In 2016, growth is projected to rebound to 4.1 percent on increased iron ore production from the Guelb II mine. NEGDP is projected to remain subdued as a result of lower activity in manufacturing and services. Inflation is projected at 3.8 percent by end-2016 due to planned tax increases and base effects. Real GDP Growth Projections (In percent) 2014 Article IV Current The current account deficit is estimated to improve to '15 '16 '17 '18 '19 '20 '15 '16 '17 '18 '19 '20 '15 '16 '17 '18 '19 '20 Overall GDP Extractive GDP Non-extractive GDP 13.6 percent of GDP due to lower oil prices and capital imports. The financial account is expected to continue to deteriorate as a result of low FDI, putting pressures on reserves. Gross (net) international reserves are projected to decline to 5.9 (3.5) months of non-extractive imports. Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Over the medium term, staff projects the current account deficit to remain above 10 percent of GDP despite improved non-extractive exports associated with economic diversification efforts, which will also result in higher FDI. External debt is projected to peak at 82 percent of GDP by 2018 as the authorities sustain investment spending; public debt is projected at nearly 77 percent by 2021 (assuming debt relief for KIA’s passive debt, which is estimated at 21.5 percent of GDP, at end-2016). Under current policies, pressures on reserves will remain and gross international reserves are projected to fall below the authorities’ target of three months of non-extractive imports in 2020–21. Credit to the private sector is projected to slow in 2016–17 as reduced liquidity and a deteriorated economic outlook for the non-extractive sector increase risk aversion and result in some credit retrenchment. The new mine was inaugurated in November 2015 with production potential of 4 million tons per year by 2018. Page 13 The outlook for the financial sector is expected to remain challenging over the medium term due to reduced liquidity position and subdued economic growth. Reduced liquidity could potentially constrain access to the FX market for some banks and affect their client base. Subdued growth could further deteriorate asset quality, hindering profitability and the capacity of the financial sector to support the private sector and economic growth through credit. Although network risk is limited due to underdeveloped interbank markets, systemic risk could increase as a result of high concentration in credit and deposit portfolios and banks’ linkages to economic groups. A weaker financial sector will be less able to support economic diversification. Risks to the outlook are predominantly on the downside (Annex IV). In the short term, the economy is most vulnerable to an increase in oil prices and further strength of the US dollar. Higher oil prices will put further pressure on external stability and reduce non-tax revenues, as will lower-than-envisaged iron ore prices. Delays in policy implementation could stall economic diversification, widen imbalances and set back progress, hindering private sector growth and job creation, and increasing inequality. In the absence of sustained policy adjustment, macro stability risks would rise over the medium term, with negative implications for longer-term growth. Lastly, Mauritania remains vulnerable to a deterioration of the security situation in the region. On the upside, a rebound in iron ore prices, an expansion in gold mining capacity and accelerated exploration associated with Kosmos ’ gas discovery would boost economic prospects. The authorities considered the risks to be somewhat overstated, pointing to the progress already made in implementing adjustment measures and relatively stable economic conditions. They were also confident that their policies would reduce vulnerabilities and the impact of shocks.