The near-term outlook remains favorable despite slower economic activity and lower iron ore prices. Slower economic activity in 2015. After recovering to 6.4 percent in 2014 (to the effect of the strong rebound in fishing, which drives non-extractive GDP growth to 7.1 percent), real GDP growth is projected at 5.5 percent in 2015 because of lower growth in mining activity, and lower public investment and consumption from the demand side. Terms of trade are projected to deteriorate by 4.5 percent as lower iron ore prices (24 percent) are partially compensated by the decline in oil prices (40 percent). The current account deficit in 2015 (at 7.7 percent of GDP) narrows significantly due to higher transfers associated with the telecom licensing. The overall fiscal deficit is projected at 4.7 percent of non-extractive GDP (compared to 3 percent of non- Banks are requested to hold 100 percent of the total bank’s bid in the exchange rate fixing sessions as excess reserves in ouguiya as of the previous day’s close. Page 9 extractive GDP under the revised 2014 budget law) on account of lower-than-expected SNIM’s contribution and VAT receipts and similar capital execution with respect to the original budget. Inflation is expected to accelerate somewhat but remain below 5 percent, favored by the decline in international food prices and lower non-extractive GDP growth. Continued appreciation in real terms could result in higher private sector demand given the high share of imported goods and services in the consumption basket. Downside risks to the outlook are dominated by global developments (see Risk Assessment Matrix). The authorities acknowledged the downside risks to the external outlook. Spillovers from weakening external demand for commodities could further reduce iron ore prices and mining export revenues (Box 2). Advanced economies will eventually exit from the supportive monetary policies implemented in recent years—which could lead to lower demand. China’s economy is expected to rebalance away from an investment-based growth model toward a more consumption-based model. Both these factors will likely have significant spillovers globally and affect commodity markets. Larger-than-envisaged declines in main export prices would further reduce exports and FDI, and cast doubts on mining expansion plans, dimming growth prospects and worsening fiscal balances. External shocks could expose vulnerabilities in the banking system, exacerbating a negative shock to growth and financial stability. Spillovers from global oil and food prices—other important channels for inward transmission— could work favorably for Mauritania as a net importer in the context of subdued global growth. However, a worsening of geopolitical risks in Ukraine/Russia or the Middle East that could reverse oil price dynamics would negatively affect trade flows. At the domestic level, the Mauritanian economy remains exposed to drought, which could require additional budget support to assist the affected population. At the regional level, although Mauritania is not affected by the Ebola outbreak, the effects of health risks in West Africa could dampen Mauritania’s economy through its trade ties with neighboring countries. Dividends from SNIM—the state-owned mining company—are estimated to account for 2.1 percent of non- extractive GDP, against the originally budgeted 3.8 percent of non-extractive GDP. Page 10 Box 2. External Spillovers to Mauritania’s Economy This box explores a scenario in which iron ore prices decline further than envisaged, the planned mining expansion comes to a halt, and SNIM’s dividend contribution to the budget stops. The medium-run implications of such a scenario would require adequate policy response from the authorities, including a depreciation of the ouguiya to reflect weaker fundamentals and the use of buffers. Global spillovers from iron ore markets. Iron ore represents about half of Mauritania’s exports. Global iron ore demand has been highly dependent on China, which imports about two-thirds of the global volume. With record high prices in recent years, iron ore supply surged, in anticipation of China’s increasing steel production. However, analysts have now identified signs of oversupply and predict that the largest world suppliers, Australia and Brazil, are taking the opportunity to reduce competition. Iron ore futures, at about US$64–66 in 2015–16, suggest a further 20 percent decline in prices below the projections embedded in the baseline. If these prices materialize, they would pose risks to Mauritania’s budgetary revenues because of SNIM’s lower dividend contribution, balance of payment dynamics through lower FX receipts, and, ultimately, lower potential economic growth if the planned mining capacity expansion does not take place; project feasibility depends on how far prices are from projects’ reservation prices. Downside scenario. Under an alternative (somewhat extreme) scenario with no mining expansion beyond the almost-complete Gelb II project and no SNIM dividend contribution to the budget during 2015–20, economic growth would be lower by more than 3 percentage points for 2018–19 relative to the baseline and the fiscal position would substantially deteriorate over the medium term—with an additional fiscal deficit, ranging from 1.6 percent to 2.5 percent of non-extractive GDP. Although private transfers and other capital inflows in 2015–17 will support reserve levels, starting in 2018 the cancellation of additional mines will lower mining exports and widen the external financing gap for 2018–20. To dampen first-round effects, the authorities will need to respond using all policy tools at their disposal. Weaker fundamentals will result in a more depreciated ouguiya. The government would likely have to prioritize its public investment plan to achieve maximum possible fiscal savings without sacrificing the most pressing investment projects. At the same time, the country would have to accelerate its plans to diversify the economy away from mining so as to maintain potential without the mining expansion. The government would seek the appropriate policy mix to mitigate the revenue shortfall by adjusting spending, raising revenues, and seeking additional budget support from donors. Downside Scenario: Key Variables, 2015–20 Real output growth (%) Difference vs baseline Overall fiscal balance excl. grants (% of non extractive GDP) Difference vs baseline External financing (% of GDP) Source: IMF Staff estimates. Page 11 S P B Mauritania: Risk Assessment Matrix Y Sources of RisksRelative LikelihoodExpected Effect A. Global Shocks HighMedium/HighHighHighLowHigh 3. Geopolitical fragmentation that frays globalization: MediumMedium/High MediumHighMediumMedium ↑In the short-term, external and fiscal buffers and higher exchange rate flexibility would provide room for a gradual adjustment. Sound macroeconomic management, a well-aligned exchange rate and reforms to increase the resilience of the economy to external shocks will require diversifying the economy and exports away from natural resources. A fiscal framework that includes a fiscal rule and an stabilization fund will support sound policy management. In the short-term, external and fiscal buffers and higher exchange rate flexibility would provide room for a gradual adjustment. Higher oil prices will put pressure on the external account and fuel inflation. Sound macroeconomic management will require increasing the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism to anchor inflation expectations. The authorities could use a portion of the fiscal buffers to compensate the poor temporarily. Displacement and inefficiency associated with increased geopolitical surrounding Russia/Ukraine , affecting global financial, trade, and commodity markets.Heightened risk of state failures in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise to oil prices and negative confidence spillovers to the global economy. While direct trade links are limited, tension between Russia and Ukraine could result in higher oil prices with the potential of worsening the trade and fiscal balances, and fueling inflation. Disruptions to cereal markets could worsen the trade balance and fuel inflation, given Mauritania's dependence on food imports. Policy ResponseChannel Mechanism In advanced economies, lower-than-anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation due to a failutre to fully address legacies of the financial crisis leads to secular stagnation.In emerging markets, maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms lead to prolonged slower growth 1. Protacted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies Further slowdown in growth in the Euro Area (second trading partner) would negatively affect the balance of payments, through lower demand. The impact could be beneficiary for Mauritania if oil prices decline. A slowdown in emerging markets, including China (main trading partner), will result in lower trade flows due to lower demand. A decline in mining prices (especially iron ore) will the balance of payments and the fiscal position could deteriorate substantially. A slowdown in China's economy will worsen the external and fiscal positions, due to lower demand for commodities and, likely, lower commodity prices. 2. Growth slowdown in China: Significant growth slowdown in 2014-15 absent offsetting stimulus. As above. 4. Sustained decline in energy prices, triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming on-stream of excess capacity Lower oil and gas prices would improve the current account and the fiscal balance. Additional policy space could help buildup additional buffers to increase the resilience of the economy to external shocks. Page 12 Mauritania: Risk Assessment Matrix (concluded) Y S P B Sources of RisksRelative LikelihoodExpected Effect B. Mauritania-specific Shocks 1. Delays in increasing mining capacity LowHigh 2. Climate change shock LowMedium 3. Political and/or social unrest LowHigh 4. Ebola (regional risk) LowLow Policy ResponseChannel Mechanism Mauritania borders on countries where the Ebola virus has been identified and the authorities are actively monitoring the situation to prevent cases of Ebola fever in the country.Authorities' announced a strengthening of borders controls with Mali after the announcement of the first case of Ebola in the city of Kayes located in western Mali, which is a commercial hub between the two countries.Prioritize and sequence reforms to promote more inclusiveness in economic growth. Mauritania is prone to droughts and climate change disasters, which affects agriculture (the sector with the highest level of employment) and more intensively the poor. Climate change events could result in worsening trade and fiscal balances.Build long-term food security and climate resilience, in addition to targeted social safety nets that builds in risk management and adaptation to climate change.Establish a fiscal framework that takes into account non-renewable resources, with an embeded stabilization fund that facilitates gradual fiscal adjustments.Lack of improved living standards for the population in general could put pressure for further additional current spending, and may slow down the pace of reforms hampering long-term growth prospects. Lower-than-expected mining production could result in worsening trade and fiscal balances. Page 13 Medium-term prospects remain promising . With iron ore prices stabilizing at US$72 per ton under the baseline, Mauritania’s large resource endowment provides ample opportunities for development. Iron production is projected to more than double over the medium term, with real GDP growth averaging 6.5 percent per year during 2015–20. SNIM, the public mining company, is projected to ramp up production to MT22.75 per year by 2020 and by MT49.5 by 2030. The start of the Tazadit underground mine in 2015 (peak production is expected after 2017 with MT2.5 per year) and the Askaf mine in 2017 (with peak production of MT22.5 per year by 2023) are projected to keep the growth of extractive GDP at 11 percent per year, on average, during 2015–20. Moving forward with the Banda Gas project (with the potential of up to BTU65 billion per day over 20 years) will provide Mauritania and the sub-region affordable and cleaner power, resulting in an additional upside for growth in Mauritania. The authorities expressed confidence in the continued strong growth and a strengthening of the BOP over the medium term, while acknowledging the downside risks to the external outlook The authorities pointed to their recent achievements despite the external shocks, including continued elevated economic growth and contained inflation in 2014. They emphasized that risks to macroeconomic stability could materialize in the context of a double shock (with declining mining prices and rising oil prices, as in 2008), and noted upside risks to the outlook, given that their development strategy was focused on scaled-up public investment that was to be sustained by rising export earnings and fiscal revenues over the medium term. The authorities emphasized steps to address the 2014–16 terms of trade deterioration. The budget in 2015 aims at absorbing this external shock (¶16), and further adjustment or use of buffers is envisaged if additional revenue shortfalls materialize. The CBM discussed the scope to further accumulate reserves in the context of reduced FX demand for imports and additional receipts from telecomm licensing, while envisaging higher exchange rate flexibility (¶21). Scaled- up investment and progress in the business environment would support private sector development and economic diversification, especially in agriculture, fishing, and services (¶26). On that basis, the authorities did not consider additional adjustments necessary at this time. Page 14