Inclusive Growth The authorities indicated that the external shock increased the urgency for economic diversification and more inclusive growth . Staff agreed that the structural reform agenda should focus on promoting a competitive private sector to generate and sustain inclusive growth (Box 3). To this end, it is necessary to continue to reduce the infrastructure gap, improve the business environment and facilitate access to finance, including FX. It is also important to reform the education system and strengthen the social protection system. These reforms will be crucial to support economic diversification and inclusive growth during the adjustment period and medium- term sustainable growth. The authorities plan to continue improving the business environment, but renewed efforts are needed. Mauritania, ranked at 168 th , was one of the top 10 reformers worldwide in the 2016 Doing Business ranking. Mauritania eliminated the minimum capital requirement for SMEs; reduced the time for documentary and border compliance for imports; and expanded borrower coverage in the credit registry. A new action plan, with the support of the World Bank and African Development Bank, will focus on simplifying administrative procedures and taxation; clarifying property rights; modernizing the judicial system and investors’ protection; and re-launching public private dialogue. Robust use of AML/CFT tools can support efforts to reduce corruption; which is perceived as an important obstacle to doing business. Staff welcomed the authorities’ plans on these fronts, and call for enhancing implementation capacity. The authorities have identified comparative sectoral advantages (in agriculture, livestock, and fishing), with plans to increase value-added in production and to diversify the export base which is now narrowly concentrated in unprocessed fishing and mining. Staff emphasized the importance of private sector contribution to developing these sectors through FDI and investment. Staff also noted the risks these sectors could face from climate change shocks. The country ranks poorly in corruption indices (133 th out of 140 in the Global Competitiveness Report and 112 th out of 168 in the Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index). The AML/CFT regime is planned to be assessed under the revised FATF by end-2016. Page 24 Measures to enhance financial inclusion will help mobilize domestic savings for economic growth. In this vein, staff supported authorities’ plans to enhance governance of financial institutions and to diversify financial services through Islamic Finance, and called for promoting competition, reducing information asymmetry, and developing a sound private-led microfinance sector. To promote investment, a framework for PPP needs to be developed, taking into account the need for valuations of fiscal risks. The authorities’ post-2015 development strategy should support private sector development and competitiveness. Promoting access to finance, private sector investment and FDI is the cornerstone to development. The overvaluation of the ouguiya and high costs of banking services are not supportive of SMEs development and job creation. Access to finance requires also promoting accessibility through a modern payments system. These measures should also be accompanied by more predictable private sector’s access to foreign exchange. Protecting the most vulnerable should remain a priority under the challenging economic environment. High economic growth in the past supported poverty reduction and advances in social indicators despite remaining challenges. Access to education has improved, notably among girls who now enjoy parity in primary school enrollment. Health indicators have also improved but important geographical and gender inequalities remain. The authorities are committed to the introduction of a well-targeted cash transfer scheme, whose implementation will start this year in some regions. The authorities should be ready to increase targeted social transfers further to protect the poor from the impact of policy adjustment. Efforts continue to improve statistics. Data provision is broadly adequate for surveillance and commendable progress has been made in national accounts and price statistics, but data gaps remain in balance of payments, fiscal and financial statistics. Social indicators benefited from recent surveys, but shortcomings remain. See accompanying Informational Annex for details. Page 25 Box 3. Growth Diagnostic and Constraints to Growth Public Investment GDP Public Consumption Private Investment Private Consumption Net Exports Contributions to Real GDP Growth (In percent) Mauritania’s growth performance was strong during the last decade. Growth has been driven by services and construction, and, more recently, increased mining production. On average, real GDP grew by 6 percent during 2004–09 and by 5 percent during 2010–15. On the demand side, public investment has played an important role, and the external sector contributed negatively to growth. The deterioration of terms of trade, expected to last until 2018, will prove challenging for macroeconomic performance. Staff envisaged growth to average 3.5 percent in 2016–21, provided that the current account position becomes fully financed. However, growth has not been inclusive enough. The spur in growth during the commodity price boom was driven mostly by capital-intensive sectors. Staff analysis suggests that the most binding constraints to growth and job creation in Mauritania are macroeconomic risks, microeconomic risks, low productivity and access to finance, poor external competitiveness, and exposure to shocks. Macroeconomic risks are reflected in fiscal and external vulnerabilities which affect confidence and Source: IMF staff estimates. investment. Microeconomic constraints stem from high electricity tariffs, monopoly market structures, weak governance, perceived high levels of corruption, and constraints to doing business. Only 18 percent of population has access to electricity (versus 32 percent in sub-Saharan African countries); less than 2 percent in rural areas. Mauritania still lacks initiatives and policies on actively promoting competition, curbing unfair business practices and reducing the size of the informal sector. Poor enforcement of contracts and inefficient administrative and judicial system are major impediments to doing business. Growth remained constrained by the insufficient quality of employed labor and lackluster gains in productivity , with total factor productivity declining by around 2 percent per year since 2006. To increase labor productivity, Mauritania will need better- functioning labor markets, a workforce equipped with more relevant skills, and more effective active labor market programs. Total Factor Productivity AFR Non-Oil Commodity Exporting MENA Oil-Importing Mauritania Low access to finance also limits growth performance. Low bank deposit-to-GDP ratio (25 percent) and private credit-to-GDP ratio (30 percent) result in the bulk of the population and most small and medium size enterprises lacking access to banking services. Loans are mostly short-term and concentrated on a limited number of clients. Sources: Penn World Tables; and IMF staff estimates The negative contribution of the external sector to growth reflects poor overall competitiveness . Non- extractive merchandise exports (including fishing) were only about 7 percent of GDP in 2010–15. Limited external linkages, real exchange rate appreciation, and the weak business environment have been obstacles. Page 26 Box 3. Growth Diagnostic and Constraints to Growth (concluded) Notwithstanding past achievements, the overarching challenge is to foster economic diversification through sustainable private sector-led growth . Mauritania needs to reduce its dependence on the mining and public sectors for growth dynamics. Economic diversification is a priority given the downside risks relative to iron ore prices and global demand, as it will also increase the resilience to shocks. The government is aiming to establish a broad-based growth strategy, which would also help sustain the decline in poverty and inequality. The authorities’ strategy to sustain economic diversification includes closing the infrastructure gap; supporting development in labor-intensive sectors such as agriculture, livestock production, and fishing; and moving toward renewable energy sources such as solar and wind. Risks to economic diversification remain important, including from climate change . The continued large role the state plays in the economy as well as delays in reform implementation—owing partly to the limited public capacity—may jeopardize plans for to enhance diversification. In addition, climate change is expected, over time, to have significant adverse effects on Mauritania’s economy. The Climate Change Exposure index, evaluating the vulnerability to extreme climate related events and changes in major climate conditions over the next 30 years, ranks Mauritania as the 12 th most exposed countries to climate change. Mauritania is the 4 th country most prone to drought worldwide. As a result, the authorities would need to prepare to address negative climate effects on sectors where comparative advantages have been identified, mainly agriculture and livestock production. Exposure to Climate Change - 20 Top Exposed Countries (Score: Extreme >[0.0-2.5], High >[2.5-5.0], Medium >[5.0-7.5], and Low >[7.5-10.0]) Source: Maplecroft (2016) G h h D p h p p G m Y h H p h P