Growth Further action is required to improve the business climate and boost competition in the non-tradable sector. In addition, it will be important to enhance the participation of rapidly growing Haredi and Israeli-Arab populations in economic activity to bolster the economy’s long-term potential and to reduce poverty and inequality. There is room to improve Israel’s business environment To secure strong, balanced and sustainable growth, further action will be required to improve the business environment. In particular, it would be important to tackle the weaknesses identified by the World Bank’s Doing Business Survey, including in the areas of “property registration,” “construction permits,” and “contract enforcement.” Efforts should also continue to address infrastructure gaps, notably pertaining to railroad, port, and air transport facilities. Alongside, as the Committee on Increasing Competitiveness recommended in 2012, competition in the non-tradable sectors should be enhanced. Another cause of concern is high poverty among rapidly growing groups Despite rapid growth, the poverty rate in Israel (near 20 percent) remains among the highest in OECD countries. Much of this high poverty incidence is accounted for by Haredi and Arab-Israeli communities. Going forward, given Israel’s demographic profile—in 20 years, the population of these two groups is projected to exceed 40 percent of the total population—their integration into the labor force will be essential not only to improve their welfare, but also to boost labor productivity and the long- run growth potential of the Israeli economy as a whole. The recent analysis by BoI staff suggests that unless demographic and educational problems are appropriately addressed, Israel’s long-term growth potential would be reduced by about 1–1½ percentage points of GDP. 020406080100120140160Protecting InvestorsTrading Across BordersGetting CreditStarting a Business Resolving Insolvency Paying TaxesEnforcing Contracts Getting Electricity Dealing with Construction PermitsRegistering Property World Bank Doing Business Index. 2014 (Ranking out of 189 economies) Source: World Bank's Doing Business Database. Advanced Israel Emerging Labor Productivity (Real national currency, Index 2002=100)Sources: OECD and IMF staff calculations. Page 18 These are structural problems. Many Arab-Israeli communities live in underdeveloped rural and remote areas (thus raising the costs of supplying labor). In addition, many of Haredi and Arab- Israeli children follow different education systems with fewer years of formal schooling (thus lowering human capital acquisition) and do not participate in military or civic services (thus isolating them from the social networks that facilitate employment opportunities). To address these problems, a number of initiatives are under way, including the expansion of Haredi units in the defense forces and the opening of public employment centers in Arab-Israeli towns. In response, preliminary evidence suggests that participation of these populations in the labor force is rising, albeit slowly. To achieve inclusive growth, more forceful and concerted action by all stakeholders is needed, especially in the areas of education (including access to higher education and enforcement of core curriculum), rural infrastructure and transportation, enforcement of labor laws, and national service arrangements. Private initiatives should also include enhancing the efficient use of talents across all different populations to fully reap Israel’s productivity potential.