Monetary conditions are accommodative, although developments with the shekel and retail interest rates imply some tightening. The BOI has held the policy rate at 0.1 percent since February 2015 owing to inflation being below the 1–3 percent target range, and it has stated that monetary policy in Israel will remain accommodative for a considerable time. Yet the shekel appreciated 5 percent in nominal effective terms in 2016, extending the appreciation trend of recent years, while the average mortgage interest rate (unindexed mortgages) has risen 80 basis points since early 2015 to 3.1 percent (see paragraph 26). Monetary policy should remain accommodative pending a durable rise in inflation and inflation expectations. Core CPI inflation remains below the 1–3 percent target range, even after excluding the impact of energy price falls and government measures to lower living costs. A rise in inflation seems likely given domestic and international developments, yet the timing of this increase remains uncertain, especially in relation to the pass-through from rising domestic wage growth and an easing in the drag from low foreign inflation and shekel appreciation. While longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored to the target, there has been a significant decline in short- and medium-term expectations. In these circumstances, there is a need to avoid a premature monetary tightening before inflation is clearly heading back to target. Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15 Jan-16 Jan-17 Sources: Bank of Israel; and IMF staff calculations. Inflation Expectations (Monthly average, percent) 1 year 1 to 2 year 3 to 5 year 5 to 7 year Page 15 A significant deviation of the shekel from fundamentals is not evident (Appendix I). Israel’s real exchange rate appreciation in recent years has lifted it to about 7 percent above its historical average on a CPI basis, and 17 percent higher on a unit labor cost (ULC) basis. The current account surplus of 3.6 percent of GDP in 2016 is above its norm of balance, but high household saving due to mandatory pension contributions and high official and private transfers, could warrant a higher norm. With estimates of undervaluation ranging from 3 to 9.6 percent on approaches favored by staff, it is not clear that the shekel deviates significantly from its fundamental value. Current account inflows are reflected in a combination of portfolio and other investment outflows led by pension funds, partly offset by net FDI inflows into Israel’s vibrant high-tech sector. FX intervention declined in 2016. The BOI purchased the equivalent of $6 billion in 2016, down from $8.8 billion in 2015. About one-third of 2016 purchases were under the pre-announced program to offset lower imports owing to natural gas production, with the remainder aimed at moderating shekel overvaluation. Such purchases enable the BOI to make monetary conditions more supportive while avoiding stoking the property market through interest rate cuts. At the same time, the amounts purchased have not prevented the significant shekel appreciation in recent years. Israel’s foreign reserves are comfortable. Foreign reserves ($102 billion at end-February 2017) have remained broadly stable as share of GDP since 2009. Although Israel’s reserves exceed standard metrics relative to imports, short-term debt, and broad money, they do not appear excessive by international standards, especially considering Israel’s geopolitical risk exposure and its limited export diversification. The BOI held broadly similar views on monetary policy yet it considers that the shekel is mildly overvalued. The BOI forecasts inflation to return to within the target range in 2017Q4, and it sees some upside as well as downside uncertainty around this inflation outlook. Nonetheless, it considers that tightening too early would likely be more costly than having to tighten more rapidly at a later stage. However, the BOI’s analysis, based on a range of in-house and external analytical tools, concludes that the shekel is mildly overvalued, driven by spillovers from the very accommodative global monetary policy. The resulting decline in competitiveness was reflected in sluggish goods exports, particularly in the European market. According to the BOI’s analysis, the estimated range for adequate reserves is $70–$110 billion. Reserves are currently within that range. Page 16