Strong revenue performance contained the fiscal deficit in 2016 and the debt ratio declined to 62 percent of GDP. The central government deficit came in at 2.1 percent of GDP in 2016, well below the 2.9 percent target, with revenue over performance of 0.7 percentage points of GDP reflecting higher-than-expected growth and exceptionally high vehicle sales. The cyclically-adjusted general government deficit was unchanged at 2½ percent of GDP in 2016. A two-year budget adopted for 2017–18 allows for higher fiscal deficits. The central government deficit targets for both 2017 and 2018 were revised to 2.9 percent of GDP, up from 2½ and 2¼ percent of GDP respectively. The higher deficit target primarily reflects a marked increase in current expenditures of 0.6 percent of GDP, reflecting expanded allowances for the elderly and disabled, education, and healthcare. A small increase in investment, of 0.1 percent of GDP, aims to enhance mass transport, build roads to minority communities, and raise housing supply. The net cost of tax measures is estimated to be around 0.1 percent of GDP from 2018. In practice, staff estimates the deficit will be about 2¾ percent of GDP in 2017–18 given the prudent macroeconomic framework underpinning revenue projections. Israel should be protecting its fiscal buffers in this relatively favorable economic environment. After bringing public debt down to the advanced economy median in recent years, the 2017–18 budget allows a gradual increase in the debt ratio of 1½ percentage points over the next five years, to be significantly above the gradually declining median by 2022. Israel has some fiscal space if it were to be needed, with government debt projected to remain below the 85 percent threshold for advanced economies and gross financing needs at manageable levels of around 10 percent of GDP (Appendix II). However, Israel faces wider uncertainties than most advanced economies, making the government’s medium-term debt target of 60 percent of GDP a more robust benchmark for assuring that large scale fiscal support can be deployed if the need arises. Page 22 A fiscal deficit of around 2 percent of GDP over the cycle is therefore appropriate, with temporary flexibility to facilitate structural reforms. Bringing the central government deficit down to 2 percent of GDP would generate a gradual debt decline in normal times. Such a deficit— equivalent to 3 percent of GDP for general government on a GFS basis—would rebuild buffers after a rise in deficits and debt owing to a recession. Nonetheless, if structural reforms with clear benefits for potential growth are adopted, a deficit that is somewhat higher could be appropriate temporarily if needed to accommodate upfront reform costs. The current favorable macroeconomic conditions support undertaking this modest adjustment in the coming years. Indeed, if the deficit is below target in 2017, the authorities should seek to lock in that overperformance by not further cutting taxes or raising spending without offsetting measures. Although progress is being made on making the structure of fiscal policy more favorable for inclusive growth, needs remain, especially in education and infrastructure. It is welcome that the 2017–18 budget includes a sizable rise in healthcare spending to support reforms that should reduce queues for public services. But there are also other spending priorities, as well: Education and training. Israel’s education outcomes are below OECD average in terms of PISA scores. Reforms of education and training, supported by additional resources, could narrow the wide gaps in achievement across social groups, bolster the skills of those already in work, and help Haredi men and Arab women enter the workforce. Transport infrastructure. Prospects for rapidly rising road congestion threaten productivity and would reinforce demand for property in favorable locations. Timely completion of the public transportation projects underway is needed. The government intends to enhance road and other transport infrastructure through extrabudgetary projects (e.g., public-private partnerships), but these are often subject to extensive delays. Additional budgetary resources would enable a more rapid expansion of efficient public projects while expediting extrabudgetary projects. This deficit target assumes nominal GDP growth averaging 5 percent and an annual stock-flow adjustment of around ½ percent of GDP. Fiscal targets may in future need to be adjusted for gas-related revenues of around 0.4 to 0.8 percent of GDP, part of which are to be placed in a Sovereign Wealth Fund. Page 23 Funding these essential public investments in human and physical capital while protecting Israel’s fiscal buffers will require a balanced approach. Defense spending is high (6 percent of GDP), making it important during peacetime to adhere to the multi-year defense budget (Annex V) to contain this spending in a durable manner. Other savings can be achieved by raising the efficiency of central government administration and by further improving public procurement procedures. In addition to implementing planned steps to enhance tax administration, revenues can be significantly enhanced in a growth-friendly manner by scaling back tax benefits, which total 5 percent of GDP. The government should assess whether such benefits are well-targeted and used as intended (e.g., those related to capital investments and education funds). It could also replace blanket VAT exemptions on fruit and vegetables with targeted transfers. Levies Total Sources: Israeli Ministry of Finance; WEO; and IMF staff calculations. Pension Law for the encouragement of capital investments Education funds Exemption from betterment tax on apartments Credit to parents for children Exemption for the National Insurance allowances Others Projected Foregone Revenue from Tax Benefits (Percent of GDP) Direct taxes Indirect taxes VAT Customs and purchase tax Important improvements in the medium-term fiscal framework have been made, but greater political commitment will be key to its effectiveness in practice. Following the recommendations from IMF Technical Assistance in 2015, the government has implemented a number of welcome measures to strengthen the medium-term fiscal framework (Annex V). In particular, strengthening commitment controls will improve prospects for containing spending trends, as will the agreement on a multi-year defense budget, combined with enhanced transparency in the implementation of that budget. However, long experience demonstrates that the medium-term budget framework remains susceptible to deviations from the fiscal rules. Including concrete measures to close such deviations in the budget document would enhance the credibility of fiscal rules. The government should also set clear criteria that limit changes in the spending and deficit ceilings to exceptional cases such as natural disasters. To enhance budget transparency, the Land Authority should be converted to a budgetary entity, while U.S. grants and related defense spending of ¾ percent of GDP annually should be reported on budget. Following recommendations in March 2013, the authorities undertook procurement reforms to streamline and standardize tender procedures, introduce centralized e-procurement, and encourage staff professionalization given the job’s growing complexity. However, only 10–15 percent of total public procurement at the central government level is processed in accordance with the program (OECD). Page 24 The authorities expected better fiscal outturns but had differing views on tax cuts. The MOF highlighted that the deficit had been below target in both 2015 and 2016, with some potential for this pattern to recur. At the same time, if revenues are strong, it considers it important to cut tax rates such as VAT to further reduce the cost of living. In contrast, the BOI did not support tax cuts at this time, as one-off factors make it difficult to assess revenue trends and civilian spending is low. The MOF was cautious about setting out criteria for adjusting fiscal targets, including in relation to potential upfront costs of structural reforms, fearing they could be a slippery slope.