The Israeli economy has weathered the global crisis remarkably well Israel has been exposed to a series of shocks, including the global crisis and heightened geopolitical tensions in the Middle East. Nevertheless, GDP growth has averaged 4 percent over the past 5 years, compared with 0.7 percent on average for OECD countries (Figures 1, 2 and Table 1). The overall living standards continue to improve gradually, with per capita real GDP growing more rapidly than in other OECD countries. The economy’s resilience has been underpinned by solid economic fundamentals, including large foreign reserves, a dynamic high- tech export sector, and the absence of economy- wide deleveraging pressures. Over the past year, stock market indices have gradually risen, while credit spreads of Israeli sovereign and banks remain stable (Figure 3). The economy, however, faces significant challenges Growth momentum is slowing. Exports, at 40 percent of GDP and comprising largely of high- technology products, such as electronics, pharmaceuticals, and communications, have been under pressure, reflecting weakness in the global economy and a sharp appreciation of the shekel. A rapid increase in house prices, notably in the context of a cooling economy, poses risks of a boom-bust cycle in the housing market, while notwithstanding notable progress, public debt remains high. Alongside, there is concern that unless large employment and productivity gaps, particularly between the general Jewish and the Israeli- Arab and Ultra-Orthodox Jewish (Haredi) populations, are addressed, growth potential would slow significantly in the long-run. Traction of Fund policy advice Economic policy has been broadly in line with past Fund advice. Consistent with Fund recommendations in the 2012 Article IV consultations, the BoI has continued to maintain an accommodative monetary policy stance to support growth, while tightening macroprudential policy to contain house price inflation. Progress has been made in following through most of the 2012 Israel OECD average Source: IMF World Economic Outlook. Per Capita Real GDP Growth (Index, 2002=100; in local currency units) Israel's real GDP Israel's real GDP excluding gas Trading partners' real GDP Proj. Source: IMF World Economic Outlook. Israel: Real GDP and Global Demand (Y/Y percent change) Page 6 FSAP Update recommendations, while steps have also been taken to address long-standing structural problems, notably pertaining to the low participation of Haredi and Arab-Israeli populations in the labor force. The main deviations from Fund advice have centered on the fiscal policy stance and issues pertaining to the financial sector architecture. In particular, the budget outturn underperformed in 2012, reflecting both revenue shortfalls and expenditure overruns, while the establishment of a Financial Stability Committee (FSC), a key FSAP recommendation, is yet to materialize.