Housing affordability has deteriorated substantially. The average cost of a home has risen to more than seven times the average household’s annual income, up from a ratio of about five in 2002–07, with affordability significantly worse than in a range of other countries. The situation is especially severe in Tel Aviv, where the price-to-income ratio is almost twice the national average. Elevated housing costs have disproportionate impacts on young and low-income households (Figure 6). Lower-income families can increasingly no longer afford the down payment, resulting in rising rents in the past decade. Increases in rental expenditure as a share of consumption are largest among low-income households, while high-income households seeking investment returns increasingly own more than one dwelling. Recent housing market reforms include useful measures, but some initiatives are costly and may not have lasting benefits: Fiscal measures : Several tax measures aim to discourage investor demand: (i) higher transaction taxes on second or subsequent homes until end 2020; (ii) the introduction of a recurrent property tax on owners of three or more houses; and (iii) partial exemptions from capital gains Page 17 tax on sales of residential properties until end 2017, with full exemptions on investing proceeds of sales in the capital markets. These tax changes may dampen price rises in the near term owing to investor sales, but focusing a recurrent property tax on investors could over time raise rental costs for low-income households, and the ceiling on monthly tax payments is regressive. The Buyer’s Price program helps households purchase a first house, yet it benefits the relatively few households that win a lottery, provides housing supply mostly in the periphery, and comes at an off-budget fiscal cost peaking at 0.2 percent of GDP in 2017–18 (Annex III). Administrative steps : The government is also seeking to reduce the exceptionally long time to complete construction from the start of planning, previously estimated to average 13 years. In 2014 the government established the Housing Cabinet to handle all planning stages and to coordinate between the numerous parties involved in the process and it then consolidated the Land Authority and the Planning Administration under the Finance Ministry in 2015. Estimates are that the planning process has been expedited by 2–6 years, but further gains may be possible by simplifying rules and decentralizing the approval of smaller projects. Further reforms are needed to durably expand supply and improve affordability: Addressing municipal disincentives. Local governments are reluctant to approve residential projects because residential property taxes are well below those on commercial properties even as they require additional infrastructure and public services. The authorities rely on “blanket agreements” with municipalities to overcome these hurdles for major projects. But correcting the incentives would make the supply of housing more responsive to demand on a lasting basis. Ensuring adequate land supply for housing. The majority of the land in Israel is state owned. Accelerating land privatization, focusing on areas of high demand, would help mitigate housing price pressures. Recent efforts to reduce impediments to urban renewal are welcome, and this should be expanded dramatically as urban density in Tel Aviv is relatively low. At the same time, improved public transportation would help relieve demand in major centers. In addition, municipalities could charge taxes on undeveloped privately held land to promote its use. Reducing construction times and costs. The government recently approved six foreign companies to construct residential buildings in Israel to help raise productivity in the sector. This welcome initiative should be expanded over time to allow broader entry of companies, which could also help relieve shortages of skilled labor. Construction costs and the time to build should also be reduced by streamlining building regulations. A more developed rental market would also aid housing affordability. The rental market is primarily small-scale landlords, partly because rental income is taxable for companies but not for individuals. Recent amendments to the laws and regulations for investment in Real Estate Investment Trusts (REIT) are welcome steps to attract professional investment and management into the rental sector, which could in time expand the supply of rental property and moderate rents. Although over a quarter of the population lives in rental dwellings, protection for tenants is among the lowest in OECD countries. Reforms in this area could also aid rental market development. Page 18 Macroprudential policies are appropriately tight, yet the BOI should continue to monitor developments closely. The BOI has proactively implemented a battery of macroprudential measures in the housing area, both quantitative limits and measures affecting banks’ cost of funding mortgages (Annex IV). As a result, household debt-to- income ratios remain low in Israel and mortgages with LTVs exceeding 75 percent have been almost eliminated. In particular, the requirement for banks to increase capital by 1 percent of outstanding mortgage lending by January 1, 2017 helps account for the rise in mortgage interest rates during 2016. With a view to avoiding an impediment to housing supply— which would have undermined macrofinancial stability—the BOI allowed banks to raise credit supply to the construction sector by recognizing their transfer of credit risk to secondary insurers abroad. This broad perspective on managing macrofinancial risks is welcome and the BOI should continue to monitor property market and debt developments closely. The authorities considered that housing market reforms struck a reasonable balance between measures with near- and longer-term effects and noted that macroprudential policy would remain vigilant. The MOF fully agreed that housing supply is the key issue, noting the progress already made by the administrative reforms of planning. The Housing Cabinet had also been effective in addressing impediments to urban renewal and construction financing, and one of its current priorities is addressing skilled labor shortages. Regarding municipal incentives, political obstacles to changing taxes were insurmountable, so they would need to consider other approaches. Construction sector regulation would be reviewed as part of a broader government initiative. At the same time, the full benefits of these supply-side measures would only be realized in the long term. The Buyer’s Price program would provide younger households with affordable housing more quickly and its contribution to supply would become significant in the medium term. As part of the upward pressure on housing prices reflected investor purchases in the context of the current low-yield environment, the MOF considered the combination of tax measures appropriate, noting that some are temporary. Given the high level of housing prices, there are some downside risks in coming years, but recent BOI analysis shows that high risk loans are well controlled. The BOI added that bank capital buffers have increased recently as past measures came into effect, and following their rise, mortgage rates better incorporate the risk associated with mortgage lending, but it would remain vigilant and ready to take actions if needed to protect financial stability. Page 19