Israel has achieved strong growth especially in employment, despite the global financial crisis. Growth averaged 3.9 percent (2 percent per capita) in the decade to 2015, well above the 1.7 percent (1.1 percent per capita) mean for advanced economies. Employment surged 36 percent in this period, aided by a 5 percentage point rise in labor force participation following sharp welfare cuts adopted after the dot-com bust in the early 2000s. Labor productivity growth is lower than might be expected, averaging 0.8 percent, in part because the large rise in labor participation weighed on average skill levels. Yet differences among Israel’s diverse religious and ethnic groups contribute to relatively high poverty. Of the population of 8½ million, some 20 percent are Arab Israelis, 10 percent Haredi (ultra-orthodox Jews), and 65 percent other Jews. Haredi and Arab household incomes are reduced by the low participation of Haredi men and Arab women and by the lower average skills and wages of these groups, such that Israel has high poverty rates for disposable income. The low equivalized incomes of Haredi households partly mirror their high number of children and the focus of Haredi secondary schools for males on religious studies rather than math, science, etc. The coalition government faces pressures to lower the high cost of living. The government is currently comprised of six parties with 66 seats in the 120-member Knesset, which has a term of four years, but no Israeli administration has completed a full term since 1988. Since mass protests in 2011 opposing the continued rise in the cost of living, especially the cost of apartments for young families, governments have taken a range of measures aimed at reducing living costs, including cuts in the price of various services and in the VAT rate. Traction of Fund advice is generally good. A number of Fund recommendations have been implemented from the 2012 Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA), the 2015 Article IV consultation, and 2015 Fund technical assistance on enhancing medium-term fiscal management (Annex I). The Bank of Israel (BOI) is in the process of following up on recommendations from the 2016 technical assistance on banking supervision. See A. Thegeya “Income Inequality in Israel” in Israel: Selected Issues 2015 (IMF Country Report No. 15/262). Page 10