Bold fiscal consolidation measures embedded in the 2013–14 Budget are welcome, but further adjustment will be required for 2015 and beyond to anchor sustainability, along with a strengthening of fiscal institutions. Israel is back on a fiscal consolidation path Fiscal consolidation stalled in 2012, with the deficit expanding to 4 percent of GDP, well above the initial target of 2 percent (Tables 4 and 5). In mid-2012, recognizing the risk of a further widening of the deficit, the government announced some fiscal consolidation measures (such as 345Jan-06Dec-06Nov-07Oct-08Sep-09Aug-10Jul-11Jun-12May-13 Interest rate differential (percent, left scale) NIS per US$ (right scale, inversed) Israel-US Interest Rate Differentials and Foreign Exchange Rates Sources: IMF' Information Notice System; and IMF staff calcualations. 810Jan-08Feb-09Mar-10Apr-11May-12Jun-13 BoI purchases-others (billions of USD, left scale) BoI purchases-programmed to offset the impact of gas (billions of USD, left scale) NIS/USD (right scale) Sources: Bank of Israel; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Exchange Rate and Foreign Exchange Intervention Page 11 raising the VAT rate from 16 to 17 percent) but could not agree on a budget for 2013. As a result, elections were brought forward to early 2013. Following the election, the new government announced an ambitious fiscal consolidation program. The 2013–14 budget included large discretionary consolidation measures totaling 2¾ percent of GDP, with the aim of reducing the deficit to 3 percent of GDP in 2014, which is both broadly appropriate and realistic and lays the ground for further consolidation over the medium- term. Revenue measures include: (i) raising the VAT rate from 17 percent to 18 percent; (ii) increasing the excise tax on tobacco and beer; (iii) introducing environmental taxes; (iv) increasing personal income (a measure that was subsequently rolled back) and corporate taxes (including a 2 percent surtax on the wealthiest); and (v) one-time corporate tax amnesty for companies subject to tax exemptions under an investment law (“trapped profits” collections). On the expenditure side, measures include: (i) freezing previously planned public sector wage hikes; (ii) cutting the defense budget; (iii) reducing child allowances and education expenditure (including for religious study); and (iv) postponing infrastructure projects. Budget implementation in 2013 has been better than expected. Revenues have been higher than forecast due largely to one-off measures and a rebound in the stock market. Expenditures have been lower-than-expected due to tight spending controls. Overall, the deficit outturn for 2013 is expected to be 3.5 percent of GDP, about ¾ percentage point below the target. Without these measures, the deficit was projected to further widen to 5¾ percent of GDP in 2014. As currently projected, the fiscal adjustment would amount to a cumulative of 1¼ percentage points of GDP over 2013–14. Assuming a multiplier in the range of 0.5–0.8 (based on BoI estimates), the adverse impact on growth would be around ¾–1 percentage points of GDP. – 14 Budget Expenditure Measures Billions of NISPercent of GDP Billions of NISPercent of GDP Wage bill freeze0.50.01.00.1Defense budget……3.00.3Child allowances……2.70.2Postponing agreed wage hike……1.00.1 Education……2.00.2Postponing infrastructure projects……2.00.2Yeshiva (religious study)……0.50.0Reducing other specific items……2.50.2Flat cuts across all ministries……1.40.1Others……3.20.3 Total 0.50.019.21.7Source: Israeli Authorities. 2013–14 Budget Revenue Measures Billions of NISPercent of GDP Billions of NISPercent of GDP Announced prior to 2013 VAT from 16 to 17 percent 3.50.3…… Income taxes Customs, excises and wealth Others Total 2013-2014 Budget VAT to 18% Excise Luxury tax Income tax ……3.90.3 Company tax ……1.00.1 Others Total Source: Israeli Authorities. Page 12 Risks to the fiscal outlook for 2014 are tilted to the downside. Revenue could be lower than expected, especially if there is a correction in the housing market or planned measures are not fully implemented. After the 2013–14 Budget was approved, the projection for interest expense was lowered due to lower-than-assumed interest rates, and in response the government rolled-back the planned increase in personal income tax for 2014. The two changes are intended to be deficit neutral, but will lead to a structural revenue loss. Moreover, spending pressures could arise, a concern mostly pertaining to defense spending. In this context, strict adherence to the expenditure ceiling and announced tax revenue measures is imperative to ensure the credibility of the fiscal framework. Nevertheless, if growth underperforms, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully, and the deficit target relaxed. For 2015 and beyond, additional consolidation efforts will be necessary Public debt has declined from over 95 percent of GDP a decade ago to a still high 68 percent in 2012. The projected fiscal deficit of 3.5 percent in 2013 is also high, especially given that the output gap is close to zero and that revenues have benefited from large one-off measures. The authorities are committed to gradually reducing the deficit target from 3 percent in 2014 to 1.5 percent of GDP in 2019, a path that would help reduce debt to about 60 percent of GDP. Delivering this path of deficit and debt reduction is important for ensuring long-term fiscal sustainability, although an even more ambitious path of deficit reduction is warranted to provide a greater buffer against shocks, including a sharp correction in the housing market. To achieve the deficit targets, additional adjustment will be needed from 2015 onwards. This will require both reducing expenditure growth by modifying the expenditure rule and introducing additional revenue measures. Importantly, given the low levels of non-interest civilian expenditures in Israel, relying solely on reducing expenditure growth would compromise long-term growth and sustainability. Expenditure on priority items that boost the economy’s productive capacity and reduce the social gap—such as on education, job training, employment services, and infrastructure—should be protected. Large unfunded expenditure commitments should be avoided, while annual budgets should provide sufficient contingent reserves in anticipation of shocks. Most recently, the government has submitted to the Cabinet a revised expenditure rule, aimed at reducing expenditure growth. Consistent with staff recommendations, it is intended that lower expenditure growth will be complemented by revenue measures to meet the deficit and debt targets. Also see debt sustainability analysis in Annex IV. Gross debt Net debt General Government Debt (Percent of GDP)Source: Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. Page 13 On the revenue side, additional measures should be less distortionary and aim at: (i) broadening the tax base, including by eliminating tax exemptions (e.g. for advanced study funds and the VAT exemptions on fruit and vegetables, on tourist services, and in the resort town of Eilat); (ii) further increasing indirect taxes (e.g. VAT); and (iii) introducing new taxes that reduce externalities (such as a congestion or a pollution tax) or inequality (such as raising the property tax). And a comprehensive review of budgetary and fiscal institutions is imperative Given the history of repeated and significant slippages in meeting fiscal deficit targets, a comprehensive review of current fiscal institutions is needed. Importantly, the current fiscal rules should be developed to have a more clearly defined debt objective, a better link between this objective and the deficit and expenditure targets, and to allow for more flexibility to deal with shocks. In addition, the fiscal rules should be embedded within a fully-fleshed out medium-term fiscal and expenditure framework—including a multi-year overall expenditure ceiling and expenditure allocations to line ministries—multi-year revenue and fiscal forecasts, and an analysis of the risks to the fiscal outlook. This would enhance the credibility of the framework and promote fiscal discipline, transparency, and accountability. Finally, building on the role currently played by the BoI and following the development of a medium-term fiscal framework, consideration should be given to establishing an independent and stand-alone fiscal council, both as a disciplining mechanism and to evaluate the consistency of overall fiscal policies with the fiscal rules.