Israel’s banking system is sound but there are concerns about competition and efficiency . Indicators for capitalization, loan quality, and profitability point a healthy banking system. The leverage ratio of 6.6 percent exceeds most advanced economies and loan-to-deposit ratios below 100 percent show limited exposure to funding pressures. However, the system is highly concentrated, with five locally-owned banking groups accounting for 95 percent of banking sector assets, and the two largest groups for over 60 percent of assets (Table 6). Moreover, there have been no new entrants in almost half a century and its cost efficiency is low relative to other OECD countries partly due to high human resource expenses. Table. Banking System Soundness Indicators, 2011–2016 (End-period, in percent) 2015 2016 Q3 Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets 1/ Regulatory Tier I capital to risk-weighted assets 1/ NPL to total gross loans NPL net of loan-loss provisions to capital Return on average assets (before tax) Return on average equity (before tax) Liquid assets as percent of short-term liabilities Customer deposits as a percent of total (non-interbank) loans Source: IMF Financial Soundness Indicators Database. 1/ The calculation of capital base follows rules under Basel II. The authorities are therefore taking a range of steps to promote the efficiency of the financial sector: Information and electronic banking : To help customers compare the costs of bank services, the BOI has introduced a bank “identification card,” which is an easy-to-read annual report from banks on a customer’s financial assets, liabilities, loan and deposit rates, and various fees. A National Credit Register is in the process of being established, which could broaden access to credit while also reducing the competitive advantage of the major banks. The BOI is establishing policies to facilitate electronic banking, which would ease account mobility between banks. Restructuring : Following the recommendations of the Strum Committee, the authorities have enacted legislation to separate the credit card companies from the two largest banks while protecting them from their previous owners. The Committee also recommended expanding access to the clearing and settlement infrastructures by regulating these in accordance with the EU Payment Services Directive, along with an increased role for nonbanks in credit provision. Page 20 Cost cutting : The BOI has promoted a reduction in bank’s operating costs by requesting the banks to provide five-year streamlining programs. These programs are expected to reduce branch numbers by 20 percent and staffing by 10 percent, with the resulting savings to be used to support technological improvements and reduced fees in addition to raising profits. The associated upfront costs are accommodated by some temporary relief in capital requirements. The separation of credit card companies should be closely supervised . Ahead of the adoption of legislation for this separation in December, the BOI has already taken appropriate steps to avoid conflicts of interest between the banks and the credit card companies. Given the importance of these two credit card companies for the payments system, it is appropriate that their regulation remain with the Banking Supervision Department (BSD) of the BOI. The viability of their post-separation business models and the stability of their funding structures are of particular importance. Enacting legislation for securitization is important to facilitate the funding of credit card companies, especially considering that credit card interest rates are relatively low in Israel. Further strengthening the financial stability framework is needed to fully realize the benefits of greater competition. A more contestible banking market increases the need for deposit insurance with appropriate coverage limits, together with enhanced bank resolution tools, to protect stability and contain potential costs. Hence, both of these instruments should be established before significantly reducing the NIS 100 million minimum capital requirement for bank entry. More broadly, in the wake of major decisions on financial sector reform, it is important to safeguard the operational independence of each financial regulator from political pressures, including to ensure potential new entrants are not deterred by uncertainty about future regulatory arrangements. Regulatory arrangements are being enhanced and the establishment a Financial Stability Committee (FSC) should be completed. In 2016, an independent Capital Markets, Insurance, and Savings Authority (CMISA) was established by separating the respective division from the MOF. It is important to operationalize the Solvency II framework for the insurance sector to ensure its resilience to shocks. Following up on technical assistance recommendations, the BSD is in the process of adopting a more risk-focused approach to supervision in order to lower compliance costs while maintaining high standards. Steps include limiting prior approval requirements to high-risk initiatives and increasing engagement with banks’ boards and senior management. To facilitate collaboration and coordination among the various financial regulators, the 2012 FSAP Update recommended to establish an FSC. The authorities have agreed that the FSC will be chaired by the Governor of the BOI, and it is now important to enact the respective legislation to enable the sharing of information needed to make the FSC operational. The authorities generally shared staff’s assessment and would continue working on these issues. They agreed that strong supervision is key to maintaining sound financial sector in Israel, as reflected in the recent creation of an independent CMISA, and they expected the FSC legislation to be tabled at the Knesset by April. The BOI and MOF have established a working group on deposit insurance and bank resolution issues, with a view to ensuring stability is protected while facilitating new bank entry. The regulatory authorities fully supported the need to safeguard their operational independence from political pressures. Page 21