Policies With headwinds to growth emanating from an appreciation of the shekel and fiscal tightening, monetary policy should be on hold for now, lest the overall macroeconomic policy stance becomes overly tight. Macroprudential policy measures should be further tightened to minimize the risk of a boom-bust cycle in the housing market. Israel was relatively resilient to the market turmoil in mid-2013. While non-resident portfolio investment flows in Israel turned negative, this was more than offset by large FDI inflows, notably in the high-tech sector, leading to currency appreciation pressures (see Annex 1). Real Rate 1/ Policy Rate Small Open Economy Taylor Rate 2/ Monetary Policy Stance (2005–13)Sources: Bank of Israel; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Policy Rate -Market based expected inflation rate 2/ As defined in the BOI Annual Report 2012 (Chapter 3). Page 9 Monetary policy has been accommodative. Since October 2011, the BoI has lowered in several steps the policy rate to 1 percent. At the same time, the BoI has introduced, since 2009, various types of macroprudential measures to address the risks emanating from rapid house price increases. This includes “indirect” measures, such as capital surcharges and additional provisioning, aimed at reducing banks’ incentives to extend mortgage loans. These measures have contributed to strengthening the resilience of the financial system, but have not been particularly successful in containing house price inflation. In response, the BoI has more recently put in place “direct” measures, such as loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-service-to-income (DTI) limits. While it is too early to assess the effectiveness of such measures, they appear to have reduced speculative behavior and the volume of housing transactions. If given sufficient time to play out, these measures are expected to curtail house price inflation. Monetary policy faces a delicate balance in the current context On the one hand, the absence of inflationary pressures and the uncertain external outlook would suggest maintaining the current accommodative monetary policy stance. On the other hand, however, house price increases have been rampant and may suggest the need for policy tightening (Figure 5). There is also a concern that fiscal slippages, which have been a common occurrence in Israel, could contribute to overly accommodative macroeconomic policies and lead to higher inflation down the road. Monetary policy should, on balance, remain on hold in the near-term, but the BoI should respond nimbly to changes in the economic environment Given the drag on growth from an appreciation of the shekel and planned fiscal tightening (see section B), as well as the still uncertain external environment, monetary policy should be on hold for now. The strong appreciation of the shekel, in particular, has hurt competitiveness, causing sluggish export growth and a protracted decline in manufacturing production. If house prices continue to rise, “direct” macroprudential measures should be further tightened (e.g. by making the limits on LTVs and DTI more stringent). At the same time, consideration should also be given to a tightening of property taxation, notably by raising temporarily the property purchase tax for non- primary residences. Most importantly, concerted efforts should be made toward alleviating supply- side constraints, including by expediting the implementation of the Housing Committee’s recommendations. If global growth prospects improve sharply or domestic demand strengthens appreciably, including because the fiscal stance turns out to be more expansionary than expected, or if appreciation pressures on the shekel ease, including because of policy tightening in major advanced economies, the monetary policy stance should be gradually normalized. See Annex III and Selected Issues Chapter 1. Staff analysis suggests that house prices in Israel are about 25 percent above their long-term fundamental value. The committee’s key recommendation include: reforming the planning process to expedite the supply of planned land and the issuance of building permits, and introducing a compensation scheme to accelerate the evacuation of land currently used for agricultural purposes. Page 10 The exchange rate and the current account appear to be broadly consistent with macroeconomic fundamentals The shekel has appreciated sharply over the past year, despite a narrowing of the interest rate differential. This can be attributed to promising prospects of large-scale natural gas production and strong FDI inflows, including from foreign purchases of Israeli start-ups in the high-tech sector. At the same time, depreciation pressures that would typically arise from capital outflows, owing to investment abroad by Israeli pension and insurance companies, have been limited because of active hedging operations by these firms. Various model estimates (CGER-type and EBA) suggest no obvious sign of exchange rate misalignment, but the appreciation of the shekel has adversely affected the tradable sector (Annex I). The mix of tight fiscal and accommodative monetary policy, combined with structural reforms to boost productivity, should help reduce appreciation pressures on the exchange rate and improve competitiveness associated with a stronger shekel. In this context, a new foreign currency purchase program that the BoI introduced in May 2013 to offset the impact of natural gas production on the foreign exchange market should help mitigate the risk of a Dutch disease, until the proposed Sovereign Wealth Fund is set up (expected in 2018). In the interest of transparency, however, the programmed intervention should be pre-announced and well- communicated. Finally, in the event of disorderly movements in the exchange rate (for instance, from euphoria pertaining to natural gas discovery, as witnessed in June 2013), exchange rate policy should be attuned to mitigating the risk of an exchange rate overshoot.