Israel’s growth picked up in 2016, supported by strong domestic demand and a rebound in exports. In 2015, growth was 2½ percent, held back by weak exports, which partly reflected company-specific factors. Real GDP grew by a preliminary 4 percent in 2016 as domestic demand surged and exports rebounded. Demand benefitted from strong labor market conditions and low interest rates. One-off factors also played a role, including Intel’s fabrication plant upgrade and a spike in vehicle purchases ahead of a tax hike on highly-polluting models, also seen in higher imports and taxes. Labor market conditions have continued to improve and wage growth is rising from low levels. Employment rose by a solid 2.6 percent y/y in 2016, reflecting continued growth in the working age population and a decline in the unemployment rate of 1 percentage point, while the labor force participation rate remained broadly stable. At 4.4 percent in Q4 2016, the unemployment rate is at an historic low while job vacancy rates are high. Owing to this labor market tightening, nominal wage growth in the business sector picked up to almost 3 percent y/y in the second half of 2016, from below 2 percent in 2014, and real wage gains were about 3½ percent as a result of the decline in the headline CPI. Increases in the monthly minimum wage, of 8.6 percent in 2015 and 13.6 percent in January 2016, may have also contributed to stronger aggregate wage growth. Labor Market 1/ (Percent) Unemployment rate Participation rate (RHS) 1996 1998 2001 2003 2006 2008 2011 2013 2016 Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calcluations. 1/ Data cover population aged 15 and above. Wages and Labor Market Slack Monthly wages in business sector (percent change, y/y in 6-month average) Unemployment/vacancy ratio Dec-11 Dec-12 Dec-13 Dec-14 Dec-15 Dec-16 Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. A few major companies like Teva (pharmaceuticals), Israel Chemicals, and Intel play a large role in Israeli exports. Exports of potash and bromine fell owing to a strike at Israel Chemicals in the first half of 2015. Intel’s exports declined due to slowdown in production related to the fabrication plant upgrade. Page 11 Government measures to reduce the cost of living and declines in tradables prices have weighed on inflation. Headline CPI inflation remained modestly negative since the second half of 2014, yet turned slightly positive in January 2017. Contributing factors include declines in energy prices, low trading partner inflation, appreciation of the shekel especially against the euro, and various government measures. Yet, even excluding energy, fruit and vegetables, and the estimated effect of government measures, CPI inflation was low at 0.2 percent in 2016. Narrowing margins, perhaps due to competition from internet purchases, may also be keeping inflation down. Housing prices rose further in 2016, even after nearly doubling in real terms since 2007, yet some softening in market conditions emerged recently. Dwelling prices rose at an average pace of 7½ percent y/y in 2016, with housing loans growing at a similar pace, bringing household debt to a still modest 74 percent of disposable income (Figure 8). Residential investment has risen in response to higher prices, but completions remain below estimated household formation. Nonetheless, mortgage volumes and housing sales slowed during the year and price declines were recorded in late 2016, which may reflect a rise in mortgage interest rates driven by earlier macroprudential measures together with recent tax policy changes on real estate. Government measures to lower living costs include cuts in VAT, electricity, gas and water prices, public transport costs, public nursery prices, diary food prices, taxes on alcoholic beverages and cigarettes, and the television levy, etc. Page 12 Although housing prices are clearly high, the extent to which the housing market may be misaligned is uncertain. As discussed in section B, Israeli housing prices are very high, especially in Tel Aviv, with implications for poverty and inequality. Nonetheless, a cross-country econometric analysis suggests the uptrend in real housing prices in Israel is mainly driven by growing incomes, the rising number of households relative to housing supply, and low interest rates, with only a modest estimated overvaluation of 9 percent as of Q3 2016. Yet uncertainty around such estimates is wide, as housing market developments are complicated by purchases for investment purposes by high-income households. Output growth is expected to settle around 3 percent and inflation is likely to rise gradually. Domestic demand growth is expected to dip in 2017 given the high base in 2016, but a firming in exports reflecting stronger trading partner activity and ongoing investments in the sector will support overall growth in 2017. With unemployment remaining low, and the output and employment gaps broadly closed, a further rise in wage growth along with a rise in international inflation rates makes a rise in CPI inflation likely, although significant uncertainty remains around the timing of such an increase. An eventual rise in interest rates would help moderate domestic demand growth in the medium term, keeping overall growth near potential, estimated at some 3 percent. Macroeconomic Indicators (Percent change y/y, unless noted) Real GDP Total domestic demand Exports Imports Trading partner GDP Employment Unemployment rate (percent) CPI (percent change, end of period) CPI (percent change, average) Credit to households Page 13 In the longer term, however, changes in the composition of the population could significantly lower Israel’s growth potential and raise poverty. The share of Haredi in the working age population will rise given their higher fertility, as will the share of the Israeli-Arab population though to a notably smaller extent. To illustrate the broad scale of the economic impact, if the labor participation rate of each group remains unchanged from its 2015 level, the total labor force participation rate is projected to decline by almost 3 percentage points in a decade. The lower average productivity of these groups would further lower potential growth. Moreover, a growing share of the population with low wages, or out of the workforce, would exacerbate the already relatively high levels of poverty and inequality. Population Composition: Official Projections (Percent) Jews and others Haredi Arabs 2014 2019 2024 2029 2034 2039 2044 2049 2054 2059 Sources: Central Bureau of Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Labor Force Participation Scenarios 1/ (Percent) No Change in Cohort Participation Rates 2/ Convergence in Cohort Participation Rates 3/ 2005 2010 2015 2019 2024 2029 2034 2039 2044 2049 2054 2059 Sources: Central Bureau of Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Based on Central Bureau of Statistics population projections. 2/ Participation rates of each cohort remain at 2015 levels. 3/ Participation rates of Haredi men and Arab women rise to level of Haredi women by 2059, participation rates of other cohorts remain at 2015 levels. Risks are wide ranging, with significant downsides requiring strong buffers (Annex II): Domestic/regional : Regional tensions have in the past hit tourism hard and more adverse developments could damage confidence and investment. Housing prices could weaken in coming years, impacting construction and dragging on domestic demand. Yet financial stability would be cushioned by relatively low household debt and the health of banks. External : Weak growth in Israel’s main trading partners would weigh on Israeli exports and growth. Impacts could exceed historical experience with exports being less diverse than those of most advanced economies and with reduced space for monetary policy to cushion shocks. Potential growth/inequality : Limited progress on closing the gaps in participation and productivity of the Haredi and Arab populations may undermine stability by slowing growth and raising inequality. Yet, participation gaps have narrowed and this progress may continue. The Israeli authorities shared a similar macroeconomic outlook. They assessed that the high growth in 2016 reflected broad-based strength in domestic demand and exports, underpinned by supportive macroeconomic policy and improvements in the terms of trade which bolstered real disposable income. They also viewed that the labor market was close to full employment and expected GDP to grow at around 3 percent in the coming years. While noting the resilience that the Israeli economy had shown in the face of a range of shocks, they fully recognized the economic and social challenges posed by the evolving composition of the Israeli population. Page 14