Italian firms and banks have been severely affected by the protracted downturn. A backbone of the Italian economy, SMEs rely predominantly on bank credit. In turn, Italian banks have a strong focus on traditional lending activities, with the bulk of bank credit going to the corporate sector. As a result, the transmission of the shock in the real economy to Italy’s banks has been particularly strong. For a large number of firms, profits have sharply fallen and debt burden has increased since 2008 (Box 3). As a result, nonperforming loans (NPL) in the banking system have reached systemic levels, more than tripling to 17.7 percent of credit outstanding in 2014:Q4, with the largest increase in “bad debt,” loans to insolvent borrowers ( sofferenze ) (Box 4). The continued rise in NPLs has weighed heavily on banks’ profits, pushing up lending rates, and reducing banks’ willingness to broadly extend credit (Figure 5). The decline in credit supply has further exacerbated the downturn in the real economy. 120ItalyGermanySpainFrance SMEs: Bank Borrowings as Share of Total Borrowings (2012 median of indebted SMEs) Sources: BACH database and CERVED. Supply Demand Credit to the Nonfinancial Corporate Sector (2006Q4=0, cumulative change) Sources: Bank of Italy; and IMF staff estimates.Notes: Based on Bank Lending Survey, Questions 1 and 6 Overall (Changes in Bank Lending Standards, Changes in Demand for Loans). Page 23 Box 3. The Health of Italy’s Corporate Sector Through the Downturn Italy’s nonfinancial corporate sector was hit hard by the protracted economic downturn. Analysis of roughly 200,000 surviving Italian companies over 2006–13 reveals three key stylized facts: (i) the profitability of Italian firms has fallen dramatically; (ii) the process of deleveraging has been quite slow; and (iii) debt overhang has increased. As a result of the fall in profits and slow reduction in debt, firms’ ability to service their obligations has declined: the interest coverage ratio (ICR) has fallen, and in 2013, about 1/5 of firms had insufficient income to cover their interest payments and more than 30 percent had an ICR<2. The corporate sector remains vulnerable to adverse shocks to profits and interest rates. A uniform decline in profits by 10 percent would increase the share of companies with ICR<2 by 2 percentage points and the share of debt held by these firms by 3 percentage point. Conversely, a positive shock to corporate profits does little to improve the share of firms potentially unable to service their debt. 10 percent positive shock to profits would lower the share of firms with ICR<2 by about 1 percentage points and debt of vulnerable companies held by banks by 2 percentage points. This finding suggests that a rebound in economic activity may have limited impact on firms in poor financial health, and a more active approach to resolving corporate weakness may be needed. Econometric analysis suggests both weak firm balance sheets and high debt overhang play a role in holding back investment. The estimation of a standard firm-level investment model highlights the important role played by firm leverage, debt overhang, firm specific demand shocks, and access to liquid assets in determining investment decisions in Italy. Moreover, their role has intensified in the post-crisis period, consistent with the idea that financial constraints might become more binding during periods of heightened risk aversion. The implications of the declining health of the corporate sector for aggregate business investment are nontrivial. Using the estimated sensitivities of investment to net worth, debt overhang, sales and profitability, and the change in these variables between 2006 and 2013, a simple back of the envelope calculation suggests that 8–10 percent of the decline in aggregate corporate investment could be due to firms’ deteriorating health. 00.10.20.30.40.50.6Baseline10% decline in EBITDA 100 bps rise in Effective Interest Rate Combined Shocks10% increase in EBITDA ICR between 1.5-2 ICR between 1-1.5 ICR<1 Scenarios:Debt Held by Vulnerable Firms, 2013 (Percent)Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff estimates. ICR<1 ICR between 1-1.5 ICR between 1.5-2 ICR(right scale) Share of Vulnerable Firms and Interest Coverage Ratio (percent, median) Source: Orbis, and IMF staff estimates. Page 24 Box 4. Nonperforming Loans in Italy Nonperforming loans (NPLs) in Italy have reached systemic levels hindering the recovery. The vast majority of bad loans relate to the corporate sector, in turn affecting bank profitability and solvency and hampering attempts to further build up capital. Hence, despite ample and cheap liquidity, banks have become cautious in extending new credit, especially to SMEs. Given the absence of alternative sources of corporate financing, this has constrained investment and undermined the economic recovery. The crisis had a profound impact on the buildup of NPLs, which was exacerbated by bank-specific factors. Dynamic bank-by-bank panel regressions suggest that lower profitability and higher lending in the past are related with higher NPLs in Italy, indicating that faster loan book expansion on average results in worse asset quality. A number of macro-economic variables are significant as well. For instance, lower growth, exchange rate appreciations, and falling house prices are significantly associated with higher NPLs. The prolonged recession also led to higher default risks in corporates and banks. Staff estimates show that corporate and bank default probabilities peaked in mid-2012. And while default probabilities have come down substantially since then, NPLs have continued to rise. A dynamic macrofinancial state space model illustrates how the dynamics have changed over the past few years. The estimates suggest that (i) further output losses would fuel credit risk considerably more than in the past; and (ii) higher interest rates would now have a much more substantial impact on corporates than in the past. The removal of bad debt from banks’ balance sheets has the potential to boost solvency levels and increase lending to the real sector. Staff estimates show that under the assumption of adequate provisioning, a full write-off of existing sofferenze would (i) increase the banking system’s Tier 1 capital ratio by 1.1 percentage points, or (ii) free up capital resources amounting to about €150 billion in new loans to the real economy. See Special Issues Paper on Nonperforming Loans. Hypothetical provisioning gaps are calculated based on NPL gross values. Profitability and Regulatory Tier Capital in Select EU Countries Problem Loans Net of Provisions/ Pre-Provisioning Income (percent) Regulatory Tier 1 Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets (right axis) Sources: SNL, FSI, and IMF staff estimates.Notes: SNL data reflect lastest year available(2013 or 2014). 1618T1T1*T1**3%5%10%15% Tier 1 Capital (Percent of RWA) Tier 1 ratio Hurdle rate Hypothetical provisioning gapSources: SNL; and IMF staff estimates.Notes: * RWA effect (from removal of bad debt; and generation of new (average-risk) loans. ** RWA and profit effects. Page 25 Balance sheet cleanup is yet to begin for a large share of the financial and corporate sectors. Over the last two years, large banks (Unicredit, Intesa) have taken steps to cleanse their balance sheets, including by establishing private Asset Management Companies (AMCs). However, smaller banks lack the capacity to do so. In the corporate sector, the process of deleveraging has also been slow. A fragmented banking system, substantive NPL provisioning and pricing gaps, the heterogeneity of the NPLs portfolio, the widespread reliance on relationship lending, and a lengthy insolvency process have been the main obstacles to cleaning up balance sheets. Repairing Balance Sheets A broad-based strategy to simultaneously strengthen bank and corporate balance sheets will support the nascent recovery. Repairing balance sheets will free up resources for new lending to productive firms and sectors. It would also unclog the transmission of monetary policy and allow firms and households to benefit more fully from QE. The comprehensive strategy could involve a “stick-and- carrot” approach: i. Strengthen provisioning Adequate provisioning would help narrow the sizable gaps between the book and market value of NPLs. The ECB’s BSA revealed sizeable provisioning gaps and capital shortfalls among the 15 participating banks, which are expected to be filled by July 2015. Remaining uncertainty about banks’ asset quality would need to be resolved by applying the new EU- wide harmonized asset classification framework to all banks operating in Italy. Strict supervisory enforcement is essential for ensuring correct classification and adequate provisioning. Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS) increased the volume of the planned rights issue from €2.5 to €3.0 billion. MPS reclassified €5.7 bn of loans from performing to nonperforming, and increased NPL coverage to 49 percent. Similarly, Banca Carige’s action plan comprises a rights issue up to €850 million (€200 million more than originally planned), fully pre-underwritten by Mediobanca. Banca Popolare di Milano and Banca Popolare di Vicenza had already closed their (arguably small) capital shortfalls at the time the ECB’s results were published. A new asset classification framework, harmonized on the EU level and fully consistent with the past approach, has been introduced in January 2015, and is applicable to all banks operating in Italy. See Circolare n. 272 del 30 luglio 2008 (Matrice dei conti), 7 Aggiornamento, 20 January 2015. z NPL Coverage (Percent, latest available) NPL (billion euros, right scale) NPL Coverage (left scale) Sources: IMF FSIStatistics; and Bank of Italy.1/ Data reported by Bank of Italy in FSR April 2015. Page 26 ii. Accelerate write-offs. Supervisory actions that effectively introduce time limits for write-off of vintage NPLs can play an important role in encouraging banks to deal faster with the problem. One possibility is to raise considerably capital charges for vintage NPLs after a certain period. Separately, imposing macro- prudential limits on the (relative) size of the NPL (or bad debt portfolio) and using measurable performance indicators of banks’ restructuring efforts can help limit a further build-up of NPLs. iii. Improve further the insolvency regime. Additional reform efforts to rationalize and streamline procedures will facilitate the swift exit of nonviable firms and restructuring of viable firms. Remaining gaps in the pre-insolvency and reorganization procedures should be addressed to allow a seamless transition between different existing mechanisms and remove obstacles to advanced restructuring procedures such as debt/equity swaps (Box 5). Reforms should aim to accelerate the start and shorten the length of insolvency procedures, for example by increasing the effectiveness of asset sales and reducing litigation within the insolvency process. Establishing qualifications for insolvency practitioners and allowing the specialization of courts in insolvency law would help strengthen the institutional framework. iv. Restart the NPL market. As part of an overall strategy, an active distressed debt market could play an important role in tackling the NPL problem. Private AMCs should be encouraged including through regulatory measures and tax incentives for NPL disposals. If properly designed, a centralized, system-wide, state-backed AMC that is consistent with the EU state aid rules and within the limited available fiscal space could help jumpstart the market for bad assets. Specifically, the vehicle should (i) purchase assets at market prices; (ii) use transparent and uniform valuation criteria; and (iii) have strong governance, including operational independence and accountability. v. Provide tax incentives. To complement these efforts, tax incentives could motivate provisioning and write-off. Consideration could be given to shortening further the five-year period over which banks can deduct loan-loss provisions from taxable revenues. This would also eliminate the build-up of deferred tax assets. vi. Foster restructuring or resolution of distressed SMEs. Given the high number of SME NPLs and the limited incentives for banks to tackle problem loans (in light of their close relationship with firms), a triage approach could speed up the process of dealing with distressed SMEs. Establishing standard criteria for bank assessments of the viability of SMEs and introducing guidelines for creditor-led restructuring would help with the separation of nonviable firms (for liquidation) from viable firms (for rehabilitation) and allow banks to concentrate efforts on those with better recovery prospects. Page 27 Box 5. The Insolvency System in Italy The high levels of NPLs in the Italian financial system and the vulnerability of the corporate sector highlight the importance of addressing the regulation of insolvency procedures in Italy. A number of issues have been identified in the Italian insolvency practice that may prevent the speedy resolution of NPLs and the restructuring and liquidation of firms. The insolvency regime is complex, with tools that lack coordination. The bulk of distressed enterprises in Italy can use debt restructuring procedures, formal reorganization or bankruptcy. However, there are significant disincentives for the use of debt restructuring options. The two procedures of informal or hybrid debt restructuring ( piani di risanamento and accordi di ristrutturazione ) do not offer a flexible solution to distressed companies as the goal is often to achieve full payment to creditors. In contrast, formal insolvency procedures ( concordato preventivo and fallimento) do not set limits to the haircuts creditors can suffer. Informal debt restructuring agreements cannot be easily transformed into a formal reorganization plan in the current system. In addition, there are obstacles to adopting advanced restructuring solutions, such as debt/equity swaps, because of shareholders’ interference and the existence of preemption rights. Insolvency procedures suffer long delays. Liquidation lasts more than 8 years on average, with preferential and unsecured creditors recovering 29 and 6 percent of claims respectively. Apart from the general inefficiency of civil courts, specific bottlenecks in insolvency procedures contribute to these delays: (i) litigation within the insolvency process, that may involve several rounds of appeals all the way to the Supreme Court; and (ii) difficulties in the collection and sale of assets, despite reforms that have introduced flexibility in the procedure. Insolvency cases tend to be initiated too late, limiting the scope for recovery. Various incentives have been introduced for debtor companies, such as the possibility that management remains in control during reorganization ( concordato preventivo ). However, there are no effective disincentives for directors to continue trading even when insolvency is imminent (wrongful trading). Courts and insolvency administrators are not specialized. While in smaller districts, the de facto specialization of judges would not be possible, courts in larger towns would benefit from having civil judges specialize in insolvency matters. The recently created enterprise courts do not have competences on insolvency matters. In addition, there are no specific qualifications for insolvency administrators, and their professionalization is limited. Very large firms (with more than 200 employees) can use special procedures. Small enterprises are not subject to general insolvency law. The authorities acknowledged that asset quality had deteriorated, and write- offs had been limited. They noted that the adoption of the new asset classification framework by all EU member states in January 2015 should help resolve uncertainties about Italian banks’ asset quality through harmonizing asset classification. However, this would not be enough to revive the market for NPLs— given the still-sizable pricing gaps—and a more proactive approach is needed. The advice on the potential use of supervisory actions to speed up the write-off process, Page 28 such as introducing time limits on vintage NPLs, was received well and could be implemented at the national level within the new SSM framework. The authorities noted, however, that such actions would be more palatable if combined with other elements in the strategy. This would also help alleviate concerns about pro-cyclical tightening in regulatory requirements. Work on the design of a state-backed AMC, consistent with EU state-aid rules, was ongoing. But the authorities noted that it will focus on sofferenze loans transferred at fair market value. The intention is for the state-backed AMC to help jump-start the market, while enabling banks to continue supporting customers in temporary difficulty. The authorities agreed that the reduction in the period of tax deductibility would be useful, although the initial fiscal cost could be significant. The authorities broadly agreed that a more efficient insolvency regime will be important to reduce the stock of NPLs. However, views on how this would best be achieved varied. Some considered targeted amendments to the existing regime to be sufficient given recent reforms to the insolvency framework; others favored a more systematic overhaul of the insolvency regime—as recommended by staff— which would target the remaining gaps in pre-insolvency procedures. There was wide agreement on the need to accelerate the start of the insolvency procedures, reduce delays from litigation and increase the effectiveness of asset sales, and introduce qualifications requirements for insolvency practitioners. Views on the need to clean up corporate balance sheets were more varied. Some questioned the premise that there was debt overhang in the corporate sector. Others noted the increasing polarization within SMEs, with the “good” performers poised to lead the recovery, and the “bad” performers burdened with debt and holding up resources that might be better used elsewhere. While acknowledging the issue with these “bad” performers, the authorities noted that (i) it is a difficult problem to solve; and (ii) the case for policy intervention is less compelling than in the financial sector. Nevertheless, the authorities were intrigued by a creditor-led triage approach towards SME restructuring and the experience of other countries in establishing standard criteria for SME viability assessments and restructuring guidelines. Strengthening Banks and Reviving Firms Improving corporate governance would complement balance sheet repair. The recent decree law on the largest banche popolari (BP), which requires them to transform into joint stock companies—in line with past IMF advice—marks a historical change in the governance structure of BPs. It will spur consolidation and generate efficiency gains, improve risk and NPL management, and improve governance. The recent measures to reduce foundations’ stakes in banks by applying diversification thresholds is potentially helpful. Broadening these efforts Page 29 would help tackle remaining issues in the governance of banking foundations and smaller cooperative banks. Diversifying SMEs’ funding will help ease credit constraints. Recent actions— such as launching mini-bonds; introducing tax credits for investment in innovation projects; allowing institutional investors to invest directly in SMEs; and creating incentives for listing on stock exchange—are important steps. Further efforts could include: i. Enhance the use and enforcement of collateral. More efficient collateral enforcement mechanisms could expand the availability and lower the cost of credit. Introducing contracts based on fiduciary arrangements and expanding the possibilities for out-of-court enforcement will allow a quicker recovery. Reforming the secured transactions law and improving the registry for collateral will expand access to finance. ii. Greater sharing of credit information As emphasized in past consultations, expanding access to the key registries by nonbanks and including other relevant data (e.g., payments on taxes, retail credit, and utility bills) would improve credit monitoring and support the shift from collateral-based to risk-based lending. The authorities expressed their commitment to improve governance and enhance competition in the banking sector. In addition to the recently implemented reform of the BPs, steps were also being taken to strengthen the small cooperative banks—the weakest link in the banking system—that face difficulties managing risks and NPLs, and raising capital. These banks were given a year to self- reform, with the hope of establishing cooperative banking groups (in the spirit of Crédit Agricole). The authorities stressed that government support had cushioned the decline in credit supply to SMEs. They were open to exploring options to improve enforcement of collateral. Besides fiduciary contracts, the authorities expressed interest in out-of-court enforcement and summary procedures for enforcement in commercial credit relationships. Reforming security interests and registration of movable collateral has been on the agenda since December 2013 but is yet to be completed. Page 30