Effectively addressing the enormous financial sector challenges is of paramount importance, given the ramifications for the financial system and economic activity. Non-financial corporates account for almost two-thirds of bank NPLs, a large fraction of which are subject to enforcement. Closing unviable enterprises and rehabilitating viable enterprises that need a fresh start would unlock capital for lending to healthier firms and sectors. However, neither is likely to proceed apace, unless long court processes are substantially shortened and weak bank profitability is addressed. There is also a notable pricing gap between the market value of NPLs and those on the banks’ books. Weak profitability, related to high NPLs, compressed interest margins, and elevated operating costs, hinders a timely repair of balance sheets through retained earnings. Although ECB actions are helping improve funding conditions, calculations based on publicly available data for the 15 largest banks suggest that, at current lending rates and funding costs, a number of smaller banks are likely to face profitability challenges (Box 4) and thus may continue to deleverage. Measures to lower NPLs and curtail operating expenses, including through bank consolidation, are critical. At the same time, as a matter of principle, alongside efforts to strengthen individual banks, the effective use of the framework for the prompt resolution of failing banks is needed. Delayed or reactive resolution can exacerbate uncertainty and destroy value for individual banks and the system as a whole. Indeed, unless asset quality and profitability problems are addressed in a timely manner, lingering problems of weaker banks can eventually weigh on the rest of the system. The authorities are implementing a multi-pronged approach, including legal and insolvency reforms, a framework for bank consolidation, and other measures. Legal measures. Recent measures include insolvency reforms to shorten the duration of procedures and increase both the survival rates of distressed enterprises and creditors’ recovery values, civil procedure measures to strengthen debt enforcement, an out-of-court mechanism for the enforcement of secured credit over immovable assets in commercial loans, and flexible forms of security interests over enterprise assets. These positive changes will require proper implementation, including adequate judicial infrastructure and registration systems. Consolidation and governance reform. To spur much needed consolidation in Italy’s highly fragmented banking system that comprises about 640 banks, the authorities passed legislation to transform the governance structure of the larger cooperative ( popolare) banks (March 2015) and of the smaller cooperative (mutual) banks (February 2016). The largest popolare banks must be transformed into joint stock companies by end 2016. So far, one potential merger—between Banco Popolare and Banca Popolare di Milano—has been announced that, once completed, would create the third largest banking group in Italy. Mutual banks must consolidate under joint-stock (holding) companies with at least €1 billion in equity in 18 months. Page 28 Box 4. Banks’ Profitability Challenge ) t n c r p ( t a g n i d n 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Negative gap = loss-making (rhs) Actual lending rate Breakeven lending rate Sources: Haver, SNL and IMF staff calculations. Note: 1/ weighed by total loans (as of end- 2015). Italy: Difference between Actual and Breakeven Lending Rates ― Sample Banks (Expected Loss Provisioning) (percent, weighted average) 1/ A bottom-up analysis of the 15 largest Italian banks suggests that—absent strong reforms—a number of smaller banks are likely to face profitability challenges , owing to low interest earnings (including from high NPLs) and high operating costs. Staff calculated the net return on equity (RoE) based on current net interest margins (NIMs) and commissions/fee income at end-2015 ― after accounting for firm-specific capitalization and default risk of the loan portfolio, which were obtained from the 2015 Transparency Exercise of the European Banking Authority. Assuming that loan provisions are forward looking, reflecting expected losses, current lending by about half the number of all banks in the sample generates profits; larger banks are profitable but a number of smaller banks are likely to struggle. Applying this analysis to historical data suggests that, since 2009, lending rates for most banks were below what would have been required to fund sufficient loan loss reserves ex post. Put differently, credit risk turned out to be underpriced; if credit conditions reflected subsequent loan performance, the rise of NPLs (and resultant provisioning needs) would have implied a higher lending rate for banks to maintain their profitability. Credit easing would improve overall bank profitability without materially altering the negative earnings outlook for a number of smaller banks. In a sensitivity analysis, all Italian banks are assumed to participate in the ECB’s TLTRO II as of June 2016 and—in an extreme assumption—cease to remunerate deposits, reducing their average funding cost of currently about 1.5 percent to the ECB’s marginal refinancing rate of zero. At the same time, their lending rates are considered fully variable and adjust in response to the recent decline of the marginal policy rate (i.e., the ECB’s deposit rate) and the historical pass-through of term premia to NIMs. Under these very favorable funding terms, overall system profitability would improve, assuming sufficient loan demand. Even so, one-third of banks in the sample could still face profitability challenges, which may not be solved through higher loan growth. For the larger banks, robust credit growth could improve bank profitability. Staff estimates that the current easing measures by the ECB lower the NIMs of Italian banks by 11 basis points on average. This suggests that lending growth in Italy would need to increase to at least 3.6 percent annually (or about 3 percentage points above current credit growth) for banks to maintain current profitability over the amortization period of their loan book to offset the negative impact of lower NIMs. In this regard, it would be important to ensure that banks have adequate capital to support strong credit growth. Sources: Bloomberg L.P., EBA Transparency Exercise (2015), ECB, SNL, and IMF staff calculations. Note: 1/ based on the historical pass-through of policy rates and the elasticity of net interest margins to changes in term premia between Jan. 2010 and Feb. 2016; total mortgage and corporate loans at end-2015 to EA residents.; scenario is based on the estimated impact of the increase of monthly asset purchases (until Sept. 2017) by the ECB and a reduction of the deposit rate by 10 bps (as per ECB decision on March 10). Annual Loan Growth Required to Maintain Net Interest Margin, end-2015 (y/y percent change) 1/ Required loan growth Current loan growth (y/y, Jan. 2016) DEU FRA ESP ITA EA ____________________________________ See Jobst, Andreas, and Anke Weber, 2016, “Profitability and Balance Sheet Repair of Italian Banks,” Selected Issues Paper. Page 29 Other initiatives. In early 2016, the authorities set aside previous plans for a system-wide bad bank following an inability to agree with the EC on addressing state-aid concerns, and instead launched or supported initiatives to backstop capital issuances of banks and facilitate NPL securitization. Further, the Bank of Italy is helping create an NPL information center to encourage private non-bank participation in the market for NPLs. GACS. This mechanism seeks to provide government guarantees for the securitization of NPLs. Under GACS, banks can move their bad loans at market values into special purpose vehicles for their eventual sale to markets. They can buy public guarantees for the senior tranches of securities issued against these bad loans, as long as these tranches are rated as investment grade. No state aid is expected, since the fees paid by the banks for the public guarantees should cover expected costs. Staff agrees with the authorities that it will have at best a marginal impact on the large gap between the price of NPLs on banks’ books and their market price. Banks expressed cautious optimism, with some indicating they intend to create vehicles involving GACS, although none has yet been finalized. Atlante. In April 2016, to prevent the failure of capital increases by smaller banks, Italy’s largest banks together with nonbank financial institutions and banking foundations created a fund that, so far, has raised €4.25 billion. The aim was to backstop capital increases of banks and possibly purchase non-investment grade tranches of NPL securitizations (so as to reduce the pricing gap between what banks are willing to sell at and those sought by investors). In the event, capital raising by Banco Popolare di Vicenza failed to attract private investors’ interest in May 2016, and Atlante invested € 1.5 billion, taking over 99 percent stake in the bank. The announced capital increase by Banca Veneto is an important test of the ability to attract sufficient private sector support in bank recapitalization and avoid the need for Atlante to invest in these banks. Resolution framework. With the bail-in provisions of the BRRD taking effect from the start of 2016, retail investors are likely to be impacted if any future resolutions were to occur (Box 5). Retail holdings in Italy are relatively large compared to other countries, comprising about one- third of about €600 billion worth of bank bonds and half of about €60 billion worth of subordinated bonds. The authorities are very concerned about social and potential confidence effects of resolutions, however, particularly given the social backlash that followed the limited burden sharing in the four small banks resolved in November 2015. Thus, except in the case of very small banks, it is not clear to staff whether and how the current resolution framework will be implemented. That said, delaying resolution in cases of unviable banks can be costly. Bridge banks were created for the four small banks that were resolved in November 2015, owing to the shortage of time and concerns related to European state aid rules. However, the creation of bridge banks is nonstandard for non- systemic institutions and invariably more expensive than the standard purchase and assumption operation. Page 30 The bail-in tool of the BRRD has been operational in Italy since January 1, 2016. This requires bail-in of at least 8 percent of total liabilities as a pre-condition for availing resolution funds. The liabilities subject to bail in are capital instruments, then subordinated debt, and subsequently uncovered bank bonds and other senior liabilities. Deposits can be bailed in only for the part exceeding €100,000. Italian law goes beyond BRRD by establishing full depositor preference over unsecured senior debt from January 1, 2019. Between January 1, 2016 and December 31, 2018, uninsured deposits rank pari-passu with senior debt, unless the resolution authorities decide otherwise. Italian households hold significant amounts of senior bank bonds and subordinated debt in their portfolios. While these holdings have been declining over time as a result of changes in their tax treatment and the low yield environment, they are still high. Households hold about one-third of senior bank debt and almost half of total subordinated bank debt. According to the Bank of Italy, about 50 percent of senior retail bonds will mature in 2017 and only a small amount will be left by 2020, assuming that banks find alternative sources of financing. As an illustration, if a resolution is needed under current rules, it would likely entail bail-in of junior and senior creditors. Staff calculations based on publicly available data from SnL show that, for the majority of the 15 largest Italian banks, the 8 percent minimum requirement would currently imply bail-in of retail investors of subordinated debt. For about two-thirds of the number of banks in the sample, losses would also be imposed on some senior debt holders. These calculations are just an example of the current liability structure of the largest banks and are not an assessment of viability. In a resolution case, presumably the banks’ own funds (capital) would have shrunk further, which would mean that bail in of 8 percent of liabilities would push deeper into senior debt. This example points to the importance of proactive measures to ensure banks’ viability. Box 5. Italian Banks’ Liability Structure and the Bail-in Requirement Share of Domestic Investor Held Banks' Debt Securities Held by Domestic Households, 2015Q3 France Germany Italy Netherlands Portugal Spain Source: Moody's Italy: Structure of Bank Bonds 2015Q2 (Billions of euros) Subordinated (non Covered, 100 retail), 36.2 Subordinated (retail), Senior retail, 200.2 Uncovered senior debt (non retail), Sources: Bank of Italy; Consob; Dealogic; and IMF staff estimates. Italy: Bail-inable Liabilities of the 15 Largest Banks (Percent of total liabilities) 1/ Uninsured deposits 2/ Subordinated Tier 1 capital (ex. hybrid) Senior debt 3/ Hybrid securities 4/ 8 percent minimum k n a b l l t l l a m S m u d i t g r a Sources: SnL; Dealogic; and IMF staff estimates. The chart shows weighted averages by assets for the 15 SSM banks. 1/ Most recent year available. This is generally 2014. 2/ Assuming 50 percent of deposits are uninsured. 3/ Uses Dealogic data on maturing debt to approximate percentage of covered/total bonds. Assume covered debt amounts to 20 percent. 4/ Uses information on hybrids as reported under liabilities in SnL and those under tier 1 capital. Page 31 A more ambitious and proactive approach can enhance the authorities’ strategy in effectively repairing the banking system. The financial sector remains subject to risks, as a number of banks may continue to find it difficult to generate sufficient profits to bolster capital, write-off bad debts, and finance new credit. Buffers to cope with shocks are very limited. In this regard, it is not evident that the banking system is durably ahead of its problems. Thus, the emphasis needs to be on a comprehensive framework that facilitates and supports strategies for NPL workouts, procedures for timely bank restructuring and insolvency, and a coordinated approach to banking system consolidation. Advancing insolvency reforms. Recent reforms to accelerate debt enforcement actions represent a welcome development, although their impact is only likely to be realized over time as they gradually improve the legal environment for credit. Distressed enterprises need a streamlined and flexible system of out-of-court and in-court restructuring options, with fast-track solutions for the existing stock of NPLs. In this regard, debt restructuring principles for multilateral workouts and adoption of a triage approach for indebted firms would be important additions to the restructuring toolkit. Enterprise courts with insolvency competences, qualified insolvency administrators, and adoption of best practices by courts across Italy would notably enhance implementation. The systematization underway (the Rordorf Commission) also offers an opportunity to address outstanding issues, including integrating recent reforms into a coherent insolvency and creditor rights framework, incorporating special insolvency procedures for large companies, introducing effective incentives for early treatment of distressed firms, and rationalizing creditor priorities. Accelerating NPL resolution. The Bank of Italy is implementing a new NPL reporting framework by end 2016. Banks should be required to present comprehensive NPL strategies with ambitious targets to significantly reduce NPLs over the medium term (including through more effective internal workout procedures, outsourcing to external servicers, joint ventures, and sales). Best practice elements of such strategies include separating NPLs from usual credit management, developing a comprehensive suite of loan restructuring tools, and requiring enhanced management and board of directors’ focus on the NPL strategy. As NPL management is highly specialized, a dedicated expert team in the Bank of Italy could critically review banks’ NPL strategies, provide comprehensive feedback on their implementation, and require urgent mitigation in areas where shortfalls are identified. Guidance should also be provided on banks’ approaches to provisioning and loan restructuring practices. Page 32 Consideration could also be given to time-bound tax incentives to encourage accelerated workouts and remove bad debt and real estate assets from balance sheets. Moreover, private asset management companies could be encouraged to pool NPLs from the smaller banks that lack the resources or capacity to manage them. Supervisory encouragement and oversight of consolidation. Given the large number of operating banks, consolidation can be an important route toward a more efficient banking system, particularly for weaker banks. The emerging banking groups need to be assessed ex ante as sound from capital, assets, management, earnings and liquidity perspectives. This would result in a healthier and more vibrant banking system. In that regard, subjecting banks that are not under the supervision of the SSM to a process of capital assessment following an asset quality review would clarify uncertainty, with follow-up actions in line with regulatory requirements. The supervisor should set clearer expectations of the bank consolidation process including in terms of viability and time-bound operational cost reductions, while banks’ business models need to become more efficient through streamlining branch networks and exploiting other synergies realized through consolidation. Atlante. Atlante’s recent intervention helped preserve financial stability. It is not a game changer, particularly given its limited resources, but has bought time for measures to place weaker banks on a sounder footing. It is important, therefore, that timely and effective progress is made, as otherwise it would impose a burden on the profitability of participating banks. In this regard, although Atlante is privately run, supervisors should ensure that banks’ future investments are based solely on commercial considerations, and the use of funds is tied with strict governance improvements in the banks they invest in. This is especially so if Atlante is to be scaled up or if similar initiatives are launched for future capital backstops or investing in NPLs (the resources currently available are unlikely to notably impact NPL pricing). Foreign investor participation could be encouraged. There should also be a clear requirement to dispose assets (bank equity or junior tranches of NPL securities) in a timely manner. Prompt resolution of unviable banks. The political concern of bailing in retail investors is a barrier to the application of the resolution framework. To address concerns about bailing in retail investors, consideration could be given to (i) identifying and dealing firmly with cases of mis-selling to retail investors—through application of the relevant penalties on the seller and remediation measures for the buyer (e.g., structured buy-back or debt exchange programs); (ii) preventing irregular selling practices to retail customers, such as by strengthening legal and regulatory safeguards, increasing the quality of information, and improving the effectiveness of controls; and (iii) safeguarding poor households through a means-tested social safety net that is a more efficient and better targeted instrument. Moreover, central bank liquidity backstops for viable banks remain the quintessential stabilizer and backstop against contagion. Italian households are wealthy, with strong balance sheets (stronger than the public sector). Net financial wealth is twice GDP and net total household wealth is 5½ times GDP, one of the highest among advanced countries. Page 33 The authorities were fully aware of the scope of the banking system problems but stressed that their efforts were the most they could do under the current circumstances and constraints and will bear fruit over time. They considered NPLs to be at a turning point, with the flow of new bad debts projected to decline as the economy recovers. They stressed that the recent insolvency reforms, together with Atlante and GACS, would reduce the current high stock of NPLs over time. Moreover, any success by Atlante in reducing the markups on NPL sales would reduce pricing gaps on bank balance sheets. They thus emphasized the critical importance of implementing the current measures and supporting (nominal) growth and strongly cautioned against aggressive NPL reduction that would be procyclical and undercut growth. There was agreement on the need for swift market-driven bank consolidation, including addressing governance and profitability issues with the smaller mutual banks. However, the authorities were cautious about forcing consolidation, in view of the fragile state of confidence. They considered that onsite supervision and banks’ own due diligence are adequate safeguards to ensure the emergence of strong banking groups through bank consolidation. The authorities strongly felt that the bail-in rules of the BRRD exacerbate systemic risk and that a longer transition period would have been welcome. They stressed the risks of bail-in as too high, even from being applied to small institutions, and pointed to the social pressures that were brought to bear following the burden sharing in the four small institutions of November 2015 (which was the first time that bail-in occurred in Italy in several decades). In that regard, they noted that banks themselves had internalized the possible systemic risk associated with the failure of capital raising by banks, and thus had supported the creation of Atlante. The authorities also emphasized that European state-aid rules are being applied too restrictively and inhibiting a less costly restoration of banking sector health that, as it is financed by private resources, would not be borne by the taxpayers. Page 34