Outlook and risks Tight financial conditions are expected to persist and weigh on the recovery . Reflecting the weak H1 outturn, tight credit and balance sheet pressures, staff projects growth to be -0.1 percent in 2014, lagging the rest of the euro area. For 2015, growth is expected to rise to 1.1 percent, as steady exports gradually lift domestic demand. Inflation should pick up slowly supported by the ECB measures announced in June, but given the large slack, will remain below the ECB’s euro area target over the projection period. Real Lending Rate to NFCs (in percent) Italy Spain France Germany Sep-10 Jun-11 Mar-12 Dec-12 Sep-13 The risks to the outlook are still tilted to the downside . These risks are interconnected (RAM) and if they were to materialize, regional and global spillovers could be significant (Box 2): Geopolitical tensions and export slowdown . Disruptions in energy supplies from tensions in Russia/Ukraine or the Middle East would impact oil and gas prices (Italy imports 90 percent of its gas) and hurt growth. Italy’s banking and investment exposure to Eastern Europe are another area of vulnerability. A slowdown in global growth or a further loss of competitiveness would derail the export-led recovery. Stagnation and low inflation could translate into a need for further fiscal adjustment in order to achieve favorable public debt dynamics, especially as growth is forecast to be lower than the real interest rate paid on debt (see DSA). Low inflation would also reduce prospects for real wage moderation and worsen corporate debt burdens. Bond market stress and financial instability. Domestic policy slippages, delays in EU reforms, or large negative surprises in the European AQR could undermine confidence and push Italy into a bad equilibrium. As the third largest sovereign bond market, the outward spillovers could be large. Reform upside . Rapid progress on the reform agenda could see improved confidence and activity reinforce each other. The clearance of public sector arrears and unlocking of increased cash holdings by corporates (2 percent of GDP in 2012–2013) could boost investment more than expected. Page 10 Competitiveness Reforms are critical to sustaining the recovery and improving productivity and competitiveness. Growth is projected to average 1 percent during 2014–19, supported by a modest cyclical recovery. Potential growth estimates remain at around ½ percent, reflecting the trend decline in productivity and the collapse in investment. As detailed in the External Sector Report Assessment (Annex), Italy’s external position is broadly consistent but likely still weaker than suggested by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The cyclically-adjusted current account in 2013 was near balance (0.3 percent of GDP) and very close to the EBA-estimated norm. However, Italy’s net international investment position (NIIP) has deteriorated by 16 percent of GDP since joining the Euro area, with net liabilities equal to 29 percent of GDP. Although foreign investment in portfolio debt securities turned positive in 2013, led by investment in government securities, Italy remains vulnerable to a loss of market confidence, owing to large refinancing needs of the sovereign and banking sectors. Given Italy’s weak productivity and competitiveness, a modest weakening of the real exchange rate would lead to stronger growth, consistent with reducing high unemployment and public debt, while strengthening the external balance sheet. On this basis, a real effective depreciation of 0–5 percent, supported by structural reforms and continued progress in fiscal consolidation, would help close the competitiveness gap and address economic imbalances over the medium term. Authorities’ views on economic outlook and risks The authorities agreed that financial conditions would weigh on the recovery, but emphasized potential upside risks . While acknowledging downside risks to their 2014 growth forecast of 0.8 percent, the MEF noted that activity will pick up on account of the reforms undertaken since 2011 (0.8 percent higher in 2015 relative to a no-reform counter-factual). With private consumption and machinery investment showing positive growth, they believed the recovery would take hold in the coming quarters. Tight credit conditions have reduced growth by about 1 percentage point, but this will be mitigated by the clearance of government arrears, reduced sovereign spreads, and post-AQR confidence going forward. Monetary policy should provide support as credit risk eases—the BoI estimates that the June ECB announcements would raise growth by 0.5 percent by 2016, mainly through lower interest rates and a weaker exchange rate. The authorities expect growth to approach 2 percent in 2018 once all reforms are implemented. Domestic and external risks have receded against the background of improving global conditions and domestic political stability . The authorities considered the risk of deflation to be moderate since energy prices explain a large share of the decline and inflation expectations remain well anchored. However, the BoI cautioned that the length and depth of the recession had increased the sensitivity of inflation to the business cycle. Structural changes had increased the frequency of price adjustment and reduced firm pricing power, steepening the Phillips curve. Following the ECB actions, the BoI projects inflation to rise to a still low 0.8 percent in 2015 from 0.4 percent this year. In the short-run, lower inflation could support consumption through higher disposable income. The authorities agreed that geopolitical tensions, including developments in Russia/Ukraine, along with a growth slowdown impacting EMs, were the most salient external risks. Page 11 Italy: Risk Assessment Matrix and Transmission Channels Potential Deviations from Baseline Sources of Risk Vulnerabilities Impact if realized (color = severity) Policy Response Trigger Event (color = relative likelihood) Bond Market stress due to incomplete reform Fiscal : high public debt and gross financing needs Bailout cost Asset quality Higheryields combined with negative AQR surprises could undermine confidence in sovereign and push Italy into a bad equilibrium -Build fiscal buffer through higher surplus -Ensure compliance with fiscal rule to boost credibility -Activate OMT if needed Financial stability risk from negative Italy AQR surprise Banks Financial stability risk from dilution/delay of regulatory reforms Lower than anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation in Italy and advanced economies due to a failure to address legacies of financial crisis Geopolitical tensions with energy and financial market disruptions Weak balance sheets (NPLs and sovereign exposure) Low profitability Credit crunch Asset quality Real -SMEs facing credit crunch -Dismal productivity (especially for non-tradeables) -Cumbersome business environment and energy costs Stress on banks leads to higher funding costs, falling credit, and slower growth -Greater push to clean up NPLs -Restore bank profitability -Faster progress on Banking Union - clarify backstops Stagnation, low inflation and high unemployment - will complicate efforts to reduce public debt Rising energy prices and falling external demand hurt engine of growth (tradeables) -More ECB action to ease monetary conditions, if inflation remains too low -Accelerate structural reforms to improve productivity (labor, product market and judiciary) -Strategy to restructure SMEs -Neutral fiscal stance plus budget rebalancing to support growth 1 The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 12 Box 2. Spillover Implications from Geopolitical Risks and Low Inflation Italy: Financial Exposures to Russia and Ukraine (Billions US dollars) to Russia to Ukraine Italy has sizeable trade and financial exposures to the rest of Europe with a high dependency on energy imports . On trade, while more than half of Italy’s total merchandise exports are still directed to the EU, the rebound since 2009 has been driven by exports to non-EU countries exports, including EMs. Italy imports nearly 80 percent of its energy needs, and it is a net importer of both oil and natural gas. Financially, the direct exposure of Italian banks to the euro area is also considerable (23 percent of GDP), with the largest exposures to Germany and Austria. An increase in geopolitical tensions in Russia/Ukraine and/or the Middle East could affect Italy through higher energy prices and weaker external demand. Simulations suggest an increase in Russia and Ukraine tensions that pushes up oil and gas prices by 15–20 percent and increases long-term sovereign yields by 100 bps could shave up to half a percentage point from GDP growth in Italy over the medium- term. The shock is modeled as temporary and affects Italy through its energy imports and sensitivities of investment to tighter financial conditions. The results are consistent with the average growth impact on EU countries included in the simulation. Italy is also exposed to geopolitical tensions via financial and investment linkages . Italian banks’ consolidated claims in Russia and Ukraine total roughly 2 percent of Italy’s GDP, while a significant portion of profits from Unicredit, Italy’s largest bank, come from operations in Russia and Ukraine. In addition, Italian direct investment into Russia and Ukraine has increased significantly in recent years, reaching US$3 billion in 2012 after averaging less than US$50 million annually during 2002-07. However, Italian direct investment stock in the two countries combined totals less than 1 percent of Italy’s GDP. Italy can also be a source of outward spillovers to the rest of the world The re-emergence of sovereign stress in the Euro area (due to incomplete reforms, unanticipated outcomes from the AQR and stress tests in the absence of a fiscal backstop) represents a source of global risk. As highlighted by the DSA, a prolonged period of low growth and inflation could also weaken the fiscal position and market confidence in the sovereign. Analysis conducted in the context of the recent FSAP and highlighted in the 2014 Triennial Surveillance Review shows potential spillover effects to global banks from an isolated shock to Italian banks and the sovereign are limited given the decline in global banks’ exposure to Italy since 2008. However, GVAR estimates suggest there are notable spillover effects from an increase in Italian sovereign credit spreads to those in Ireland, Portugal and Spain. Spillovers from Italian sovereign spreads to the real sector are small, while cross-border spillovers to GDP are channeled primarily though real economic ties ____________________________________________________ S M/13/307 and Country Report No. 13/347. Gray, Gross, Sydow and Paredes, Modeling the Joint Dynamics of Banking, Sovereign, Macro and Financial Risk using CCA in a Multi-country Global VAR , presented in 2014 Triennial Surveillance Review—Risks and Spillovers Source: Bank for International Settlements and Coordinated Direct Investment Survey. Outward Direct Investment Position as Reported by Italy Consolidated Foreign Claims on Ultimate Risk Basis Page 13