A greater push to clean up bad loans would support new lending in the recovery Context The European AQR is leading Italian banks to recognize further losses and raise capital… Ahead of the AQR, the large Italian banks booked net losses of nearly €22 billion in 2013, announced plans to dispose of NPLs and have raised €11 billion in capital. The foundation owner of Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena sold most of its shares in the bank, and after raising €5 billion in capital in June, repaid the bulk of its state aid. Page 18 Corporate NPLs by Region (Percent of Total Loans) …but, NPLs continue to rise and deleveraging persists. Since 2007, the NPL ratio has tripled to 16 percent at end- 2013, and has reached 29 percent for corporate loans (higher in the South). The largest increase has been for “bad debt” loans in insolvency (“sofferenze”). The continued rise in NPLs has weighed heavily on banks’ profits, pushed up lending rates, and added to the pressures on banks to deleverage and reduce their risk exposure. Source: Bank of Italy. Note: About 60 percent of the banks' loan portfolio is concentrated in the North. Low provisioning and lengthy foreclosure procedures are the main obstacles to cleaning up balance sheets. Despite the rising NPL stock, write-off rates continue to decline, while recent NPL sales have been limited to those in default over ten years. Provisioning has improved but the coverage varies—it is lower in mid-size banks where capital buffers are thin and weak governance has made it difficult to raise outside capital. NPLs disposal is also hindered by the slow recovery process (three years to foreclose on collateral and seven years to complete a bankruptcy). Italy ranks 21 out of 31 among high income OECD countries in resolving insolvency (Doing Business). Advice Cleaner balance sheets would free up resources for financing the recovery. Write-off rates would need to triple from their historic average to bring the bad debt ratio to pre-crisis levels within 10 years, suggesting that a greater push by all stakeholders is urgently needed to accelerate NPL disposals. A three-pronged approach should be considered: a) Stronger provisioning and write offs Supervisory guidelines could foster convergence in provisioning rates, including forbearance loans under the moratorium program—this could provide incentives for banks to coordinate and be more pro-active in addressing problem loans. To encourage write-offs, the supervisor could monitor bank progress in working out NPLs and conduct targeted on-site inspections of loan collection performance. As tried in other countries (Japan, United States), the supervisor could also impose higher capital charges or time-limits for writing off old NPLs. b) Develop the distressed debt market An active NPL market would provide an alternative to lengthy bankruptcy, draw in needed financing, and boost loan recovery values. Private NPL asset management companies (AMCs) could be encouraged through tax incentives (accelerated depreciation or preferential capital gains), while ensuring bad assets are transferred at fair market value. Page 19 Authorities’ Views c) Enhanced enforcement and insolvency regimes The authorities should expand specialized insolvency benches within courts and introduce time-limits to expedite business reorganization. Adopting international best practice guidelines along the INSOL Principles for Multi-Creditor Workouts could encourage more out-of-court workouts. Also, greater reliance on online court filings could speed up foreclosures. After weathering the crisis, Italian banks have made great efforts to clean up balance sheets without significant State support . The authorities stressed that the inflow of new bad debt is beginning to stabilize. Encouragingly, banks are exploring market-based solutions for NPL management and disposal, capitalizing on growing foreign interest. However, the financial and operational challenges for banks to work through large NPLs are significant. With respect to harmonizing provisions, they noted that supervisory responsibility, including for minimum prudential standards on provisioning, would be transferred to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in the fall. Tax incentives to jumpstart the distressed debt market may also conflict with state aid rules. The authorities highlighted that past BoI inspections had helped prepare banks for the ECB comprehensive balance sheet assessment . The 2012 BoI loan inspections covered 40 percent of NPLs using a conservative definition in line with the EBA standards, and tightened collateral valuation. One difference, however, is that the ECB’s AQR is also looking at performing loans, including those under the loan moratorium program, which could push provisioning needs higher. In response to regulatory pressure, some mid-tier banks are preparing plans for possible capital needs later this year. In line with the European Council decision, the authorities are putting in place national arrangements for resolution mechanism and public backstops and stressed the need to coordinate closely these arrangements at the European level. Improvements in corporate governance would also strengthen capital raising and stability Governance Reforms to improve bank corporate governance should continue. The BoI has taken steps to strengthen the role of independent board members and the “fit and proper” test for directors. The role of the foundations has also diminished, as banks have sought outside sources of capital. Governance reforms should continue by requiring published audited accounts by foundations participating in banks, limits on their leverage, and proper governance rules. The ban on foundations controlling banks should be applied in practice, and over time, foundations should reduce their stake in banks within proper concentration limits. The largest cooperative banks should also be encouraged to convert to joint stock companies and consolidate as a way to achieve synergies. Page 20 Figure 3. The Financial Sector Remains Under Pressure Price to book value ratios have increased, as concerns about financial stability have eased. Price to Book Value Ratios of Banks Italian banks US banks European banks Jan-08 Jan-10 Jan-12 Jan-14 But NPLs continue to rise... Non-Performing Loans and Coverage Ratio Past due Restructured Substandard Bad debt Coverage ratio (rhs) (Percent of risk-weighted assets) Italian Banks Change in Capital Adequacy Capital ratio increases come largely from de-risking... Recapitalizing Deleveraging De-risking European Banks' CDS Spreads (Basis points) French banks German banks Italian banks Spanish banks Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 Jul-14 ...particularly in the corporate sector. NPL Ratio by Sector (Percent) Corporates Households 1/ 1/1/2008 4/1/2009 7/1/2010 10/1/2011 1/1/2013 ...supported by an LTRO funded increase in government securities. ECB Liquidity Support and Bank Holdings of Italian Government Securities (Billions of euros) ECB support Change in holdings of government securities (Jan 2011=0) 2011 Q3 Capital Cut in balance sheet Fall in average risk weight 2013 Q3 Sources: Bloomberg; Bank of Italy; SNL; ECB; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Includes bad debt only. Page 21 The financial sector needs greater profitability, diversification and market-based funding alternatives Profitability (Return on Equity, percent) Bank Profitability in Select Economies The financial system faces a number of challenges to restore profitability in a weak growth environment . Shrinking loan volume, low net interest margins, and rising loan losses have weighed on bank profits. While large banks have cut costs, through staff reductions and branch closures, mid-size banks have lagged behind. In an environment of low growth and weak asset quality, the supervisor should encourage banks to reduce their operational costs further through continued rationalization of branch networks, digitalization of retail banking, and mergers. France Germany Italy Spain UK Sources: ECB, FSI Capital Markets Authorities’ Views Deeper capital markets could diversify sources of finance and support new lending activity. Italian corporates rely more on debt versus equity—with debt-to- equity ratios 17 percentage points higher than the Euro area average (123 percent). Italian institutional investors’ exposure to equities is limited, with just 16 percent of pension assets in equities (compared to 50 percent for the largest international pension funds) and less than 1 percent in Italian equities. Encouraging institutional investors, such as pension funds, to raise their allocation in equities and alternative assets, to be more in line with those of other large global investors with the appropriate benchmarks would expand the supply of long-term risk capital. Reducing the tax bias against equity financing would encourage family-owned firms to seek more outside equity. Over time, reducing the gap between the taxation of public and private securities would also support more investment in the private capital markets. The authorities highlighted that the shift to the SSM could foster Europe-wide consolidation and a rethink of banks’ business models . Italian banks have made progress in cutting branch networks (by 7 percent since 2008), while scope still exists to incorporate technology in retail banking. Rising compliance costs and greater competition at the European level will likely add to bank pressures to lower costs and seek out appropriate mergers. On corporate governance, a newly issued BoI regulation and a draft decree pending Parliament’s approval will implement most of the IMF’s FSAP recommendations, including the power to remove board members (Appendix II). On the foundations, the BoI has argued that the ban on foundations controlling banks be enforced to facilitate capital raising and consolidation. Page 22 A range of measures have been undertaken to support equity investment in corporates and mobilize new sources of financing. These include an enhanced Allowance for Corporate Equity (ACE) program, which expands tax benefits for increasing retained earnings and raising public equity; elimination of withholding tax on medium- and long-term financing for foreign-based investors; proposals to allow direct lending to firms by insurance companies and other non-banks; and a proposal to allow for multiple-voting shares to encourage family-run SMEs to raise outside equity capital. A broad strategy to revive the SME sector would complement financial sector reform Context SMEs are the backbone of the Italian economy… SMEs account for about 80 percent of the corporate workforce and 70 percent of firm value added in Italy. They are more prevalent and smaller than elsewhere in the euro area. …but they are suffering more from the financial crisis . Italian SMEs suffer from high leverage and weak profitability and are more vulnerable to financial stress than large firms. Their small size and low productivity are particularly evident in the trade and tourism sectors. Compared to the euro area, business startup and firm exit rates are lower, limiting the economies ability to innovate and shift resources to more productive areas. Leverage, by Firm Size (debt to debt plus equity, 2011) Micro Small Medium Large Source: Bank of Italy. Advice A broad based strategy to assist SMEs growth and restructuring will strengthen balance sheets and improve productivity. Such a strategy is complementary to efforts to reduce bank NPLs: Guidelines for creditor-led restructuring. Establishing standard criteria for assessing SME loans and guidelines for restructuring viable, but distressed, firms could help overcome creditor coordination problems and encourage greater use of the insolvency regime and out-of-court workouts. This would help identify non-viable firms for a quick exit and open opportunities for a “fresh start.” Shifting public support schemes away from guarantees and moratorium for existing firms to financing for new firms could support the restructuring process. New fiduciary loan contract. Efficient collateral enforcement mechanisms that do not rely on court decisions could expand the availability and lower the cost of credit. A new loan contract based on fiduciary arrangements could allow quick Page 23 and efficient enforcement in the event of default (Box 3). Introducing a nationwide electronic registry for all types of collateral would support the use of fiduciary contracts. Greater sharing of credit information . The system of credit registries and bureaus is fragmented with limited sharing of information. Expanding access to the key registries by nonbanks and including other relevant data such as payments on taxes, retail credit, and utility bills would improve credit monitoring and support the shift from collateral-based to a more risk-based lending. Authorities’ Authorities’ Views Response The authorities highlighted active government support as crucial for relieving the SME credit squeeze during the crisis . These included a moratorium scheme for SME loans (currently covering some €23 billion in principal), rapid expansion of the Central Guarantee Fund and support to bank lending through the Cassa Depositi e Prestiti . The payment of government arrears (some 60 billion planned over 2 years) would also give liquidity support to SMEs. The Fondo Italiano d’Investimento was created in 2009 to invest in SME risk capital to help them grow and aggregate. On a new loan contract, the authorities had explored modifying existing contracts to allow for 3 rd party collateral, but this was difficult to implement without a new law . Instead, they are now considering introducing guarantees on movable property and have presented draft legislation to Parliament in December 2013. Greater sharing of credit information is welcome but faces challenges from Italy’s data privacy laws. Policies at the European level could also support growth by easing monetary conditions and reducing financial fragmentation Recent ECB actions have helped to ease financial conditions … Bank funding costs have eased and several banks have reissued unsecured senior debt. The improvement in funding conditions has also facilitated a gradual repayment of the LTRO, with Italian banks having repaid one third of their Eurosystem borrowing. According to the BoI, recent ECB measures (T-LTRO) could provide liquidity of more than €200 billion over the life of the program. The BoI will extend the pool of eligible collateral for refinancing operations to SME loans and mortgages and is also exploring ways to allow for refinancing of overdraft bills, which are widespread among SMEs. …but more can be done. The spread between the yield on bank bonds and the swap rate has diminished, but fragmentation across the Euro area still persists and euro area inflation is below the ECB’s target. If inflation remains too low, the ECB should consider a substantial expansion of its balance sheet, including through asset purchases. Faster progress towards the banking union will further reduce financial fragmentation. Italy needs to play its part, for example by completing national arrangements for resolution and backstopping in advance of the ECB assessment. Page 24 Discussions are ongoing between the MEF and BOI on the national backstop, while legal impediments to bail-in remain. Finalizing the national backstop and clarifying the bail-in process would enhance the predictability of the resolution framework. Box 3. A New Fiduciary Loan Contract for Efficient Collateral Enforcement Efficient collateral enforcement mechanisms that do not necessarily rely on court decisions could expand the availability and lower the cost of credit for small firms . Civil law jurisdictions, such as Italy’s, are increasingly considering the concept of fiducia (fiduciary ownership agreements) as a way to facilitate contract enforcement of collateral outside the court system. In a fiduciary agreement, a borrower will receive a loan from a lender in exchange for transferring the title, but not the possession, of certain assets (collateral) to a fiduciary, third party. If the loan is repaid in full, the title reverts to the borrower. If the borrower defaults, the fiduciary party transfers the asset title to the lender without resorting to the courts. The lender benefits from reduced uncertainty, time and cost of securing the collateral. The borrower benefits not only from a lower cost and broader access to credit, but also from maintaining possession and use of the underlying collateral for his or her ongoing business, e.g. machinery. Fiduciary Party Fiduciary Contract Business Guarantee = Title Transfer Use of Asset Default = transfer of asset title Lender Loan Brazil and France have introduced these types of contracts recently France . In 2006, the French Civil Code was amended to include the so-called “ fiducie-sûreté. ” This is a contract by which the full title is transferred to a lender or to a third party to secure the payment of the borrower’s debt. On default, the “fiduciary party” may realize the assets and use the proceeds to repay the loan. Any surplus is repaid to the borrower. The French law is also very flexible, allowing all kinds of present or future assets to be transferred to the fiduciary. Brazil . In 2004, the notion of “Fiduciary Ownership Agreements” was introduced whereby a borrower, as security for its obligation, transfers the ownership of a movable property to the lender, keeping possession of the asset until the debt is repaid. The lender acquires a limited, transitory and conditional property, which is automatically extinguished upon repayment of the debt. The asset given in collateral may be recovered by the lender through summary proceedings in case of default. These types of fiduciary arrangements do not exist in Italy and could have cross-cutting benefits. In addition to expanding credit availability, such a fiduciary contract could also enhance market discipline by strengthening contract enforcement. Allowing borrowers to voluntarily switch to a fiduciary contract in exchange for a lower rate could also signal their willingness to repay. Efficient foreclosure arrangements could also support alternative means of financing, such as factoring or securitization of SME loans; unlock other forms of collateral besides real estate, and foster a market for credit insurance, such as for trade credit. Page 25 Figure 4. Small and Medium Enterprises SMEs are more prevalent in Italy than elsewhere... SME Demographics, 2012 SMEs (millions) Firms per 1000 population (rhs) ...and startup and exit rates are relatively low. Enterprise "Churn" Rate, 2011 Startups/Total enterprises Exits/Total enterprises UK France Germany Spain Italy Italy Germany France Spain UK ...but borrowing rates remain higher for smaller loans. Lending standards have tightened for all firms... Bank Lending Standards Survey (Balance of positive and negative answers) Lending Rates (Percent) Firms, loans < 1mln Firms, loans > 1mln SMEs Large firms 09Q1 11Q1 11Q1 12Q1 13Q1 14Q1 Mar-11 Sep-11 Mar-12 Sep-12 Mar-13 Sep-13 Mar-14 Lending has declined for all firms... ...with falling investment, especially by smaller firms. Loan Growth 1/ (2008 = 100) Micro Small Medium Large Firm Investment - Industry (2009 = 100, firm size by employees) 20 – 49 50 – 199 200 – 499 500 and over Sources: Eurostat; Bank of Italy; Cerved Group; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Data based on sample of limited liability companies. Page 26