The economy is emerging gradually from a prolonged recession. Financial market sentiment and confidence indicators have improved substantially since end-2014. Despite the recent bouts in volatility, sovereign bond yields have fallen below precrisis levels buoyed by the ECB’s quantitative easing (QE). The stock market has rallied; bank and corporate funding costs have fallen; and rising business and consumer confidence has stemmed the decline in domestic demand. In the second half of 2014, private consumption continued to recover, supported by pent-up demand for consumer durables and expectations of better employment prospects. Investment expanded slightly in the last quarter of 2014. After 14 quarters of almost stagnant or contracting real activity, the economy expanded by 0.3 percent q-o-q in 2015:Q1, on the back of rebounding investment (Figure 1). The nascent recovery has been grounded in recent policy actions. At the European level: Recent measures have provided much-needed demand support. QE has had a powerful effect on asset prices, including bond yields and the euro (Figure 2); TLTROs have improved funding conditions; the ECB’s Balance Sheet Assessment (BSA) has helped resolve uncertainty about bank balance sheets; and the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) flexibility has allowed Italy’s fiscal stance to be fairly neutral in the near term. At the national level Prime Minister Renzi’s government has set out an ambitious agenda to overhaul Italy’s political and economic system. While progress was initially slow and piecemeal— reflecting the resistance of vested interests—reform momentum has picked up, contributing to higher confidence. The Jobs Act, an overhaul of Italy’s labor market, was approved by Parliament in December, and several of its elements have been implemented. A new law to convert Italy’s 10 largest cooperative banks, representing 15 percent of banking system total assets, into joint stock companies has spurred expectations of consolidation in the sector and fuelled gains in banks’ shares. Reforms of product and services markets, public administration, education, judicial and tax system are also progressing. Despite the positive uptick, the recovery is lagging and fragile. Italy’s performance since the crisis has been among the weakest in the euro area. Real activity is still far from precrisis levels and private investment is 30 percent below its 2008 level. The output gap in 2014 exceeded 4½ percent, one of the largest in the euro area. Spain France Germany Real GDP (2008=100) Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook. Page 9 Headline inflation was positive in May 2015 after turning negative for some months in the second half of 2014 and early 2015, but continues to hover around low levels. Part of the decline in the price level is explained by the sharp drop in oil prices. Core inflation is below 1 percent, suggesting that weak demand and the large output gap also play a role. Long-term inflation expectations are still significantly below the ECB’s objective. Real lending rates to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have come down but remain relatively high. More importantly, credit to the corporate sector continues to contract. Unemployment exceeds 12 percent and is even higher if workers in the wage supplementation scheme are included, and among the young. With roughly 60 percent of unemployed without a job for at least a year, the risk of permanent skill destruction is high. Reflecting the large increase in unemployment, income inequality and the risk of poverty have also increased. Despite several years of difficult but necessary fiscal adjustment, public debt has continued to rise. At over 130 percent of GDP, it is an important source of vulnerability to changes in market sentiment and limits the room for fiscal maneuver. Diagnosis What is the root cause behind Italy’s persistent growth weakness? Structural bottlenecks, depressed demand, impaired balance sheets, and subdued growth expectations have all reinforced each other, pushing the economy into low-growth equilibrium. Structural bottlenecks Productivity has been stagnant since the early 2000s (Figure 3). There are many possible explanations—including an inefficient public sector; high levels of taxation; a lengthy judicial process; a fragmented labor market and inflexible workplace practices; and underdeveloped corporate financing markets—which have perpetuated an unfavorable business model. As a result of these structural rigidities and the loss of an important adjustment mechanism with the adoption of the euro, Italy has struggled to respond to the rapid global changes of the 2000s (IT revolution, the rise of China). For a discussion of issues related to youth unemployment in Italy and the Euro Area more broadly, see speech by the IMF Managing Director, December 9, 2014. LT unemployment(% total unemployment)Risk of poverty(right scale) Euro Area Incidence of Long-Term Unemployment and Poverty Risk (percent) Source: Eurostat. Page 10 Depressed demand With high public debt, there was little fiscal space to support the economy after the global crisis. Also, financial fragmentation along national borders led to a pro-cyclical tightening in monetary conditions. Given nominal wage and price rigidities and structural impediments to the reallocation of resources across firms and sectors, the economy was unable to adjust. Impaired public and private balance sheets The collapse in demand deteriorated the health of firms and banks. In turn, balance sheet weaknesses exacerbated the decline in economic activity—investment was held back by reduced credit supply (due to financial constraints) and credit demand (due to muted confidence and debt overhang). The prolonged recession also contributed to a steady rise in the public debt‐to‐GDP ratio. Self-fulfilling expectations: Subdued growth expectations and policy uncertainty fed into lower investment and weak activity. Outlook and Risks Against this backdrop, the economy is expected to recover only moderately in 2015– Following a contraction of 0.4 percent in 2014, real GDP is projected to expand by 0.7 percent in 2015, supported by domestic demand and net exports. The latter will benefit substantially from the depreciation of the euro as a result of QE and the lower oil prices. With the favorable tailwinds from QE continuing—and with investment gaining further momentum—growth is projected to pick up to 1.2 percent in 2016. The large output gap is projected to close only gradually given the deep output losses and the moderate pace of recovery. In the short term, loose monetary conditions, low oil prices, reduced policy uncertainty, greater confidence from the renewed reform momentum and policy efforts to strengthen lending will support the rebound of private investment from its current depressed levels, while the fiscal stance remains broadly neutral. Over the medium term, growth is projected to hover around 1.1 percent, with the contribution from net exports likely subdued due to a rise in imports as private demand strengthens. As a result, the output gap is projected to narrow slowly from 4 percent in 2015 to 0.8 percent in 2020. With real activity still below potential even at the end of the projection period, inflation is expected to stay below the 2 percent target and unemployment to remain over 10 percent throughout the period. Without the full implementation of deep structural reforms, longer-term growth prospects remain bleak. Potential growth estimates are low, at about ½ percent, reflecting crisis legacies such as the collapse in investment, but also unfavorable demographics and the slowdown in productivity that predates the crisis (Box 1). Progress on the ambitious reform agenda has been important in lifting confidence and supporting the cyclical recovery. However, the weak implementation record of past reforms calls for conservative estimates of the long run growth dividend of ongoing and planned reforms. Similar to the approach taken by the authorities, the potential growth projections do not incorporate the likely effect of announced structural reforms. Page 11 Box 1. Potential Output in Italy Identifying potential output is important at the current juncture. Estimates of potential output have been revised dramatically over the past 8 years, suggesting the crisis has had a lasting effect on labor, capital, and total factor productivity (TFP). A multivariate filter approach was used to re-estimate potential output for four EA countries (France, Germany, Italy, and Spain). This method incorporates empirical relationships between actual and potential GDP, unemployment, and inflation. Judgment using additional information on capacity utilization and the labor market improves the plausibility of results. Potential growth in Italy declined significantly already in the precrisis period and then further during the crisis. drop in TFP growth accounts for most of the decline prior to the crisis. During the crisis, around ½ of the drop in potential growth comes from lower capital contribution (due to the collapse in investment), with the remaining shortfall evenly split between TFP and labor (due to the increase in structural unemployment). Compared to other large EA countries, Italy’s TFP growth lags behind. Structural characteristics including government inefficiency, the small size of firms, and labor and product market rigidities may explain differences in average TFP growth rates. The analysis suggests that the slowdown in TFP growth in Italy may be related to the lower ICT diffusion in the Italian services sector—a result of rigid product market regulations. Previous studies have also found that the inability of Italian SMEs to (i) respond to the challenge of increased competition from China and (ii) take advantage of the ICT revolution given the lack of meritocracy in managerial selection and promotion, may explain some of the TFP slowdown. Under current policies, potential growth is set to increase slightly in the medium term. Potential growth is projected to reach 0.4 percent over 2015–20, well below precrisis rates, supported by labor and capital. The latter is expected to pick up as a result of balance sheet cleanup and a return to positive investment. However, as capital and labor accumulation is likely to remain subdued in the near future, raising potential growth hinges on Italy’s ability to lift productivity through structural reforms. Italy’s competitiveness has suffered from stagnant productivity and rising labor costs. As detailed in the External Sector Report Assessment (Annex I), Italy’s external position as of 2014 is broadly consistent but likely still weaker than suggested by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Despite the improvement in the current account surplus in 2014, in structural terms it is still 0–1.5 percent of GDP weaker than justified by fundamentals and 1993–20002001–20072008–20142015–2020 ∆ Capital ∆ Trend employment ∆ Trend TFP Potential growth Italy: Potential Growth Inflation Pure MVF RES MVF RES judgment Italy: Output Gap Total Factor Productivity (Log change, percent) Germany France Spain Sources: ISTAT; IMFWEO; IMF Staff Calculations Page 12 appropriate policies. And while Italy’s share of world exports has generally moved in parallel with its European peers, price-based indicators of competitiveness particularly those based on unit-labor cost have deteriorated since Italy joined the euro area both in absolute terms and relative to the euro area average. Taking into account a broad range of indicators and model-based estimates of the REER gap for 2014, staff considers that a real effective depreciation of 0–10 percent—supported by structural reforms—would be appropriate to restore competitiveness. Given the 9 percent depreciation of the euro since the end of 2014, Italy’s external position will likely strengthen in 2015. The risks to the outlook are broadly balanced. These risks are interconnected and if they were to materialize, regional and global spillovers could be significant (see RAM): Downside Stagnation and low inflation that complicate efforts to reduce public debt remain an important downside risk. Confidence may suffer if public support for the reform agenda wanes. If unabated by a forceful area-wide policy response, adverse developments in Greece could have a substantial impact on Italy via confidence effects, though direct exposures are limited. Upside QE, euro depreciation, and lower oil prices could have a larger positive impact than currently expected. Rapid progress on the domestic reform agenda could boost confidence further and spur a faster recovery. The authorities estimate that the structural reforms already announced could raise trend growth by about 1/3 percentage point by 2020, if fully implemented. Italian Ministry of Economics and Finance, Economic and Financial Document ( Documento di Economia e Finanza) Page 13 Italy: Risk Assessment Matrix and Transmission Channels Authorities’ Views on Economic Outlook and Risks The authorities expected a slightly stronger pickup in growth in 2016. QE was anticipated to contribute significantly to the recovery through the exchange rate and interest rate channels—with an estimated cumulative impact of 0.7 (MEF) and 1.4 (BOI) percent in 2015 and 2016. The decline in oil prices could add another 0.3 percentage points cumulatively over 2015 and 2016. However, erring on the side of caution, the MEF incorporated only half of the impact of QE and oil prices, and no impact from structural reforms in its projections given uncertainties even under full implementation. The authorities acknowledged that financial conditions could weigh on the recovery. They noted that while bank lending to NFCs is still declining—mainly owing to credit demand factors—credit supply conditions Italy: Real Growth Projections IMF0.71.2MEF (Budget Update, Apr 2015)0.71.3BoI (Economic Bulletin, Apr 2015)>0.51.5 Impact if realizedPolicy ResponseTrigger EventVulnerabilities (color = severity) (color = relative likelihood)-Observe structural fiscal targets to boost credibility-Activate OMT if needed-Greater push to clean up balance sheetsand removing unviable firms from market-Faster progress on Banking Union - clarify backstops-Accelerate structural reforms to improve productivity -Strategy to restructure SMEs-Neutral fiscal stance plus budgetrebalancing to support growth-Run higher fiscal surpluses to reduce public debt -Push for SME restructuring -Stick to planned structural reforms to consolidate gains from QE/oil prices. Potential Deviations from BaselineSources of Risk 1 The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non‐mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Sovereign stress re- emerges due to policy uncertainty, and adverse political and social events in other highly indebted EA member states. Financial stability riskfrom failure to address weak asset quality. QEand lower oil prices could have larger positive impact than currently expected. Weakdemand and persistently low inflation in Italy and other advanced economies from a failure to fully address crisis legacies. Russia/Ukraine:mounting conflictleads to disturbances in globalfinancial, trade and commodity markets. Fiscal: high public debt and gross financing needs Banks: High NPLs and sovereign exposure Low profitability Real: -Largecorporate debt overhang -Dismalproductivity (especially for non-tradeables)-Cumbersome business environment -energy costs Asset quality Assetquality Bailout cost Credit crunch Higheryields could undermine confidence in sovereign and push Italy into a bad equilibrium. Furtherdeterioration in corporate financing conditions; weakening of bank balance sheets and solvency positions. Recovery cannot be supported by financial sector. Stagnation, low inflation, and high unemployment--will complicate efforts to reduce public debt. Rising energy pricesand falling external demand hurt engine of growth (tradeables). Higher growth will help efforts to reduce public debt. Faster-than-expected implementation of domestic reform agenda. Political uncertainty re- emergesas publicsupport for domestic reform agenda declines. Halt in reform agenda could undermine domestic confidence, and lead to stagnation. Page 14 are improving, and lending rates have declined. Furthermore, the latest investment survey of Italian firms suggests widespread and growing optimism both in the construction and services sectors. The authorities broadly agreed with the overall assessment of the external sector. They concurred that further improvement in competitiveness would be desirable to lift potential growth. However, they cautioned against relying too much on labor-based indicators of competitiveness, which show a much wider gap than other price-based measures. Domestic and external risks have receded owing to recent actions at the EU level, domestic political stability, and the strong reform agenda. Important upside risks stem from their conservative estimates of the impact of QE, euro depreciation, and oil price decline, as well as the effect of recently implemented and planned structural reforms. The authorities considered that risks from very low inflation had diminished somewhat, in light of the recent pickup in inflation expectations. The BOI expected QE to push up inflation with an estimated impact of just over 0.5 percent both in 2015 and 2016. With confidence gathering momentum, contagion risks from adverse developments in Greece were seen as limited in the near term. However, there was more concern about longer-term implications, if perceptions about the irreversibility of the euro area were to change permanently.