Labor reforms need to tackle pervasive duality and better align worker and firm incentives Context Labor market reform is one of the cornerstones of PM Renzi’s agenda… The “Jobs Act” outlines ideas for universal unemployment benefits tied to training and job-search; a national agency responsible for coordinating active policies (ALMP); and rationalized contracts with more flexibility. Legislation thus far has focused on increasing flexibility at the margin, by reducing restrictions on short-term hires, and boosting female participation with tax incentives. …but dismal labor prospects and stagnant productivity call for more radical action . With 70 percent of new contracts being temporary, additional flexibility at the margin does little to reduce duality and incentivize investment in workers. Page 14 Staff Advice Link unemployment support to employability. In deep recessions, the current wage supplementation scheme hampers reallocation of labor from unprofitable firms and should shift to a more universal support system conditional on job search and training. Implementation Status Proposed in Jobs Act but not yet implemented. Simple contracts. A single labor contract with gradually increasing protection would enhance fairness by reducing duality, especially if it were to replace open-ended contracts. Grandfathering could ease adjustment to the new system. Staff proposal goes further than the “trial” contract in Jobs Act. National coordination of ALMP. Build on the experience of successful schemes like Finland’s, to reduce regional disparities and improve monitoring and evaluation. Greater job openings and seekers could create new markets for more flexible work, especially among women and the elderly, similar to U.K. and U.S. job exchanges. information sharing on Decentralized wage setting To allow firms to adapt more quickly to changing economic conditions, Italy should promote more firm-level wage bargaining, together with greater flexibility in national contracts e.g. on non-wage terms such as shifts and working hours. Staff goes beyond Jobs Act and suggests new market- based institutions for job matching. The idea is not included in the Jobs Act. Authorities’ Views The authorities underscored that the short-term priority has been to create new jobs . Lifting restrictions on temporary contracts was an urgent measure to boost labor demand in the face of very high unemployment. Moving forward, the authorities will develop options to improve ALMPs and design an experimental contract with gradually increasing protection. Social partners noted the difficulty of implementing the new experimental contract, while keeping existing temporary contracts. They also highlighted the need to increase labor market participation and welcomed the idea of creating job exchanges. On wage setting, the authorities pointed out that moving to a fully decentralized system could prove costly and disruptive . They agreed firm-level bargaining should be more representative, but noted that it would be costly to negotiate all terms of a labor contract at the firm level. Some national-level template is needed. Labor economists highlighted the importance of sufficient flexibility in national-level agreements to allow for firm-level differences linked to productivity. Judicial reforms to improve court efficiency would have wide ranging benefits Context The lengthy judicial process is a major factor behind Italy’s weak business environment It takes more than a thousand days to enforce a contract in Italy— Page 15 Advice more than twice the OECD average. The huge backlog (5.2 million civil cases) is slowly decreasing but remains an obstacle to improving judicial performance. Justice and Unemployment in Italian Regions Greater judicial efficiency would bring cross-sector benefits by lowering the cost of credit, encouraging investment, and facilitating employment . Staff analysis of regional disparities finds that halving the duration of labor disputes is associated with an increase in probability of employment by about 8 percent. Recent reforms, such as the increase in court fees, are welcome, but the judicial system is still slow compared to the European average. Measures to accelerate the judicial process include: promoting the use of mediation and allowing all qualified professionals to be mediators; rationalizing the types of cases that reach the Supreme Court; requiring performance indicators for all courts; and disseminating regional best practices such as the Strasbourg Program to improve case management in the Turin Court (IMF WP/14/32). Time to resolve case in labor court (years) y Authorities’ Views Judicial reform remains a priority for the government . The backlog of cases fell by 11 percent since 2009 and processing times were reduced by an average of 3.7 percent since 2011. The authorities are now exploring options to use assisted dispute resolution, restrict appeals to the Supreme Court, and reinforce commercial courts. They pointed to future efficiency gains from the introduction of electronic document filing, and the positive reaction to the idea of monitoring court performance. The authorities earlier proposed dropping the requirement for lawyers to participate in compulsory mediation—Italy is one of the few EU countries that requires lawyers to be present—but faced stiff resistance by the legal profession which succeeded in reinstating the requirement in parliament. Greater efforts against corruption are needed to improve the business environment Context Advice Public sector corruption remains a serious problem in Italy . Although cross- country comparisons are challenging, Italy fares poorly in global rankings of perceptions of corruption, e.g. according to Transparency International Italy ranks 30 out of 31 among high income OECD countries in perceptions of corruption. The authorities highlighted linkages between corruption and money laundering. The anti-corruption legal framework should be further enhanced . The effectiveness of anti-corruption efforts could be improved by criminalizing the false accounting offense and changing the statute of limitation provisions. Page 16 Figure 2. The Case for Structural Reform Potential growth has steadily fallen... Potential Growth and Contributions of Components, 1990–2018 (Percent) TFP*: Solow residual L*: Labor input K*: Capital input Y*: Potential GDP .. dragged down by weak productivity, especially in services. Real Value Added per Worker in Services (2000 = 100) Wholesale and retail trade Professional services 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018 Labormarket duality has increased... .. while productivity and wages have diverged. Temporary Contracts (share of new contracts signed) Wage-Productivity Differential (2006=100) Real compensation per employee Labor productivity The judicial system is very slow... y w g b x Days to Enforce a Contract g B k v g P y y G k g K ) ( v ...and regions with better public institutions are more resilient. Public Sector Efficiency and Regional Output Regional public sector efficiency Sources: ISTAT; Ministry of Justice; Doing Business; Eurostat; and IMF staff estimates. Page 17 Authorities’ Views Currently, the statute of limitations continues to run after the first instance court judgment becomes final. This means that with typically lengthy appeals procedures for corruption, cases may be dismissed as time-barred even after a first instance conviction. One option could be to change the law to re-start the limitation period after the first instance court decision. The authorities agreed on the importance of sustained action against corruption . They noted that the 2012 anti-corruption legislation aligns the legal framework with relevant international standards and lays the foundation for effective anti-corruption activities. Since 2013, the BoI requires enhanced due diligence by financial institutions in their dealings with domestic “politically exposed persons”, in line with international standards and as recommended by staff last year. The government recently approved measures to provide greater powers to the national anti-corruption authority (ANAC). Accelerate competition policy reforms to improve the business environment Advice Rapid implementation of reforms in sectors that are essential inputs to production would support growth. Progress has been made on some measures, such as the liberalization of the gas sector. But, in other areas, notably the opening up of professional services and privatization of local services, reforms have stalled. The transport authority was legally established in 2011 but is still understaffed. Addressing these staffing shortages, opening up the legal profession and enhancing competition in the retail sector would reduce markups and raise productivity. The short-term adjustment costs from liberalization could be offset by improved sentiment and new investment in deregulated sectors. Authorities’ Views The authorities pointed to important liberalization measures on the horizon They have committed to legislate the recommendations of the antitrust authority by September 2014—an important first step to enhancing competition, encouraging new entrants, and lowering the cost of services. The reform timeline includes an initiative to restructure rail and local public transport by end-2014.