In 2015, the economy started to recover after three years of recession. It expanded by 0.8 percent, buoyed by exceptionally accommodative monetary policy, declining commodity prices, and improved confidence on the back of the authorities’ reform efforts. Private consumption and inventory re-stocking were key contributors, while external demand weighed on growth (Figure 3). However, the recovery is not yet robust. Quarterly growth slowed over the course of 2015 to end the year at a seasonally-adjusted 0.2 percent q-o-q (Figure 4) and picked up slightly to 0.3 percent q-o-q in 2016 Q1. While the economy continues to expand—industrial production, for instance, rose in April— other recent high frequency indicators suggest some loss of momentum. Business and the purchasing managers’ indices declined significantly in May. The recovery in investment is very slow. Although transportation-related investment rebounded strongly in recent months and there are tentative signs of stabilization in the construction sector, the investment ratio remains far below that of key euro zone partners, following the sharp decline in 2010–14. Page 13 After several years that net exports contributed positively to growth, net exports are now a drag on growth as slowing global demand weighs on exports while imports recover. Real exports are back to their pre-crisis (2008 Q1) peak, but this is a relatively modest performance compared to large euro area partners that are 15–25 percent above pre-crisis peaks. The current account and trade balances remain in surplus, including from favorable commodity prices and more generally import compression in recent years. Inflation is very low. Headline is back in negative territory since February owing in part to the decline in oil prices but also subdued demand (as seen in low core inflation). Long-term inflation expectations are still significantly below the ECB’s objective, despite recent actions. Labor market indicators have been broadly improving, but labor market conditions are still challenging. Unemployment declined to 11.7 percent at end 2015 (from a peak of 13.1 percent in November 2014). However, long-term unemployment remains high at close to 60 percent of unemployed persons; youth unemployment is above 35 percent; and female labor force participation remains relatively low. Regional differences are sizable. In a positive development, job creation picked up recently among those in the 50–64 year age group and the share of workers in new permanent contracts is up notably. Nonetheless, skilled young Italians are increasingly emigrating abroad, which also weighs on potential growth. Reflecting the deep recession, the incidence of absolute poverty has increased—to 5.7 percent (1.4 percentage point higher than 2011) with significant regional differences. Income inequality has also increased and is well above the OECD average. Banks have made progress in strengthening their capital position but face significant challenges from weak asset quality and low profitability (Figure 5). With the economy turning around, nonperforming loans (NPLs) appear to be stabilizing at about 18 percent of loans, one of the highest in the euro zone. Provisions amount to Although data are still limited, empirical work by the Bank of Italy suggests this is due largely to the economic recovery and tax incentives, with the Jobs Act contributing at the margin. Permanent Contracts (Share of new contracts, in %, 4 qtr ma) All Men Women > Page 14 45 percent (excluding collateral and guarantees, a variable markets often focus on as court times to access them are very long). High NPLs are adversely affecting profitability—profit margins are among the lowest in Europe—and weighing on banks’ ability to extend credit. Overall lending conditions are subdued. Credit to households has been growing modestly, but credit to the corporate sector has continued to decline and is about 11 percent lower than five years ago, despite the decline in real lending rates to SMEs. Recent bank surveys suggest an incipient improvement in both the supply of and demand for credit, although more granular data show that this is the case for larger and healthier firms. Following the 2014 asset quality review and stress tests of the largest banking groups that comprise about 60 percent of assets in Italy, banks raised about €4 billion in capital in the first half of 2015. Common equity tier 1 ratios improved to 11.5 percent on average for the significant banks at end 2015, which was about 2 percentage points below the average and the lowest in a sample of large European banks compiled by the European Banking Authority (EBA K q Q Q hu Q pp Q = Q ll ll cc Page 15 Risk Dashboard). In the context of the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process, provisioning and further capital requirements were imposed on a few specific banks. Nevertheless, reflecting concerns about the speed of dealing with the NPL overhang and weak profitability in a period of very low interest rates, Italian banks have come under intense market pressure, losing over 40 percent of their market value this year. Four small troubled banks, accounting for about 1 percent of system-wide deposits, were resolved in late November 2015, before the stricter bail-in requirement under the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) came into effect at the start of 2016. The authorities implemented a limited bail-in of equity and subordinated debt and spared senior bondholders. However, in the face of significant social pressures as nearly half of the €0.8 billion of subordinated debt that was bailed in was held by retail investors, a fund has been set up by other banks to compensate a large number of retail investors. Fiscal policy continues to be expansionary to support growth (Figure 6). The government tightened the fiscal stance considerably during the crisis to register a peak structural primary surplus of 4.1 percent of GDP in 2013, among the highest in the euro zone. Since then, fiscal policy has been eased, and is set to ease further in 2016, with the structural primary surplus projected to decline to 2.6 percent of GDP. Meanwhile, the overall deficit is projected to decline to 2.4 percent of GDP in 2016 (from 2.9 percent of GDP in 2012–13) with the sizable interest savings of more than 1 percent of GDP largely offset by the fiscal relaxation (Fund advice had been to use the interest windfall to reduce debt). Debt continued to increase to 132.7 percent of GDP at end-2015. In terms of composition, real primary spending has been contained in recent years, mainly through cuts in capital spending and the wage bill (through attrition of the workforce and a wage freeze). Social benefits including pensions continued to rise and remain an outlier in the euro area (although full implementation of past pension reforms would ensure its long-term The banks were split into four bridge banks and one bad bank, with the resolution cost of €3.6 billion borne by the national resolution fund, which in turn drew upon liquidity from three major banks. ll Page 16 sustainability). Meanwhile, the government has been easing the tax burden, e.g., through a monthly bonus of €80 for workers with incomes below €24,000 (phased out for incomes up to €26,000); cuts in social contributions for new hires; and the elimination of an effective but unpopular real estate tax on primary residences (home ownership rates are high). Additional revenues were sought through, e.g., a voluntary disclosure scheme and gaming revenues. Italy’s competitiveness has suffered from stagnant productivity and rising labor costs. As detailed in Annex I, Italy’s external position as of 2015 was broadly consistent but likely still weaker than suggested by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. From an average deficit of 1¼ percent of GDP in the 2000s, the current account moved into balance in 2013 and, by 2015, registered a surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP, driven by a growing trade surplus, helped by lower commodity prices (Figure 7). Nonetheless, the 2015 cyclically-adjusted current account surplus was about 0–2 percent of GDP weaker than justified by fundamentals and appropriate policies. From a savings-investment perspective, the steady rise of the current account since 2010 is related mainly to the decline in investment as both the corporate and the public sector deleveraged. Competitiveness has suffered from stagnant productivity and rising labor costs, leading to a gradual appreciation of the real effective exchange rate (REER) since Italy’s joining the euro zone both in absolute terms and relative to the euro zone average. In 2015, the fall in the value of the euro contributed to a sizable depreciation of the REER, bringing its value close to 1999 levels. Taking into account a broad range of indicators and model-based estimates of the REER gap for 2015, staff considers that a real effective depreciation of 0–10 percent—supported by structural reforms— would be appropriate to restore competitiveness. W ill ill € illi € illi -20246810CurrentaccountREER IndexREER LevelES Source: IMF staff estimates. EBAmethod Estimated REER Gap for 2015 (Percent) ULC-BasedCPI-based GER ITA EA Sources: ECB, IMF staff estimates. Harmonized Competitiveness Indicators (Cumulative appreciation, percent, 1998Q4-2015Q4) Page 17