Sustained implementation of reforms and broadening of the effort in three priority areas are key to raising growth. Reform efforts in the past few years have built on a host of earlier initiatives. In the last two decades, for instance, there have been about five important labor market reforms, three public administration reforms, three education system reforms, and numerous justice reforms. However, reforms were generally piecemeal and implementation lagged, with the overall economic results being less than desired. Thus, sustained and full implementation of the current reform efforts is critical. In addition, further efforts are needed in three mutually reinforcing areas: product and service markets, which have the potential to yield near- and longer-term growth dividends ( World Economic Outlook , April 2016); public administration to improve the quality of services, enhance efficiency, and lower costs to business and investment; and a wage bargaining system to align wages with productivity, improve competitiveness, and complement the Jobs Act. Product and Service Market Reforms Regulatory rigidities and barriers to competition remain significant in certain sectors. Key problems are concentrated in network industries (e.g., energy and transport), professional services (e.g., legal, notaries, and pharmaceutical), and the provision of local public services. Together these services account for about one-third of the total value added in the economy and about 30 percent of household’s final consumption, and contribute about 40 percent of input to other sectors’ output. The Monti government introduced several reforms in 2011–12, aimed at reducing entry barriers in several non-tradable sectors, removing unnecessary regulation of economic activities, and improving the business environment through administrative simplification. Although de jure measures of competition improved, business perceptions of de facto barriers to competition remain considerable. Analysis by staff suggests potentially sizable gains from product and service market reforms, especially when coupled with public sector reforms (Box 1). Parliament has been debating the Annual Competition Law for over a year. Although the government is required to present to parliament a draft law on enhancing competition on an annual basis since 2009, such a law has not yet been approved. The current draft includes some recommendations of the competition authority and proposes measures aimed at addressing regulatory barriers to entry and competition in the insurance, postal, communications, pharmaceutical, electricity, gas and fuel distribution sectors and further liberalization of professional services (notaries, lawyers, architects and engineers). However, on the back of pressure from vested interests, many provisions of the draft law have been weakened during the parliamentary discussions—in particular, related to the insurance sector and professional services, such as notaries, lawyers, and pharmacies. Bold steps to open up professions and services to competition can have immediate payoff. Strengthening the draft law in line with the recommendations of the competition authority and ensuring an annual process of adopting pro-competition laws would be critical to their Page 21 effectiveness. Going forward, consideration should be given to enhancing competition in other areas, including: Provision of local public services. Given the impact of public sector inefficiency on firm productivity (Box 1), enhancing competition in local public service provision would be critical to tackling rent seeking and could yield sizable economic benefits. The competition authority has provided specific proposals, such as liberalizing local transport and waste collection, while past spending reviews outlined a proposal to significantly rationalize local public companies over three years, with the goal of improving efficiency and the quality of services offered. Retail, transport, and permits. Italy’s retail sector remains one of the most regulated in Europe according to the OECD product market regulation indicators, and even measures legislated to liberalize certain aspects of this sector have been poorly implemented by regional authorities. Large-surface retail outlets remain subject to special rules, especially concerning new openings; incumbents are excessively protected from new entrants; and restrictions on promotions, discounts, and below-cost sales are very severe. There is also substantial scope for further liberalization in electricity generation (hydroelectric power plants), radio spectrum frequencies, local public transport and taxis, ports and airports. Competition in a number of sectors is hindered by permit schemes, and service providers are given the right to use public infrastructure for long periods with no competitive procedures. As these are essential inputs to production, enhancing competition should raise growth. The authorities agreed with the critical importance of enhancing competition in product and service markets. They expect the current draft Annual Competition Law to be adopted by mid-2016, and concurred that there is scope to strengthen the current draft law in a number of areas, including in legal and professional services. In that regard, the government submitted the National Plan for Professional Reform in February 2016, with a view to implementing the European Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications. Other areas such as communications, healthcare, transport and other public services are expected to be tackled in future annual competition laws, and be linked to the reform of the public administration. Page 22 Box 1. The Impact of Product Market Reforms on Firm Productivity in Italy While Italy has made some progress in liberalizing its product markets in recent years, business perception of barriers to competition remains unfavorable. According to the OECD Product Market Regulation indicators, Italy was the sixth least regulated economy as of 2013 among the 31 OECD economies for which this indicator is available. In some areas such as telecommunications and airlines, Italy is at or close to OECD best practice, but in other areas such as road transportation and retail, it remains heavily regulated. However, the World Bank’s Doing Business indicator paints a very different picture, largely reflecting its emphasis on de facto rather than de jure measures. Italy has moved up only one spot in its ranking—from thirtieth place out of 31 OECD economies in 2012 to twenty-ninth place in 2015. A recent IMF working paper examines empirically the potential role of removing obstacles to competition in Italian product markets in boosting growth and productivity. Using annual firm-level data from Italy over 2003–13 from the Orbis database by Bureau van Dijk, OECD product market measures of regulation (PMR), and Italy’s input-output matrix, it tries to address three questions: (1) did the performance of previously regulated sectors improve as barriers to competition were removed? (2) what was the impact on downstream industries, which use the output of regulated network industries as inputs in their production function? And (3) how is the response to liberalization shaped by government efficiency? Reforms that raise competition in product market can affect the economy in two ways. First, deregulation is expected to affect firms in the regulated sectors themselves, through the usual effects of competition on growth. Greater competitive pressures could lead to reallocation of output across heterogeneous firms, as inefficient firms exit, and/or induce firms to innovate and adopt new technologies, thereby raising sectoral productivity. This effect by itself could be important as regulated industries account for close to 30 percent of Italy’s GDP. Second, higher competition, which may lead to lower mark-ups, greater availability of services and higher quality products and services, could benefit firms that use the output of regulated industries as inputs. These are the so-called downstream effects. This is another quantitatively important channel as regulated sectors account for about 30 percent of total inputs in the Italian economy, according to Italy’s input-output matrix. There is evidence of a positive association between deregulation in network sectors and value added and productivity of firms in these sectors. For instance, a one-standard deviation improvement in the PMR is associated with 3 percent relatively higher growth in sales, 10 percent relatively larger firms (in terms of output), and 4.7 percent relatively higher value added per worker. Firms using outputs from network sectors as production inputs also benefit. Upon deregulation of network sectors, those firms that use regulated inputs more intensely increase their size and productivity relatively more. There is also evidence of complementarity between better quality of public services and product market deregulation. In provinces with more efficiently provided public services, the positive association between deregulation and firm performance in previously regulated sectors is significantly stronger. For instance, a one-standard-deviation improvement in the PMR is associated with a 0.3 percent increase in output for a firm in a province in the upper quartile of government efficiency, but only 0.1 percent for a firm in a province in the lower quartile of government efficiency. ______________________________________ Lanau, Sergi, and Petia Topalova, 2016 “The Impact of Product Market Reforms on Firm Productivity in Italy,” IMF Working Paper WP/16/119 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). W Page 23 Public Administration Reforms Public sector inefficiencies weigh on investment and productivity. According to the World Bank’s Doing Business indicators for 2016, for instance, it takes 1,120 days to enforce a contract, 227 days to obtain a construction permit, and 124 days to get an electricity connection, substantially longer than the OECD average. Weak public sector performance can be attributed to several factors, notably, excessively long and burdensome bureaucratic procedures, overlapping competences and intra-institutional conflicts, and the lack of administrative capacity, including an aging workforce and skill-job mismatches (e.g., the agency for collective bargaining for the public administration found skills mismatches in one-third of positions studied). The average length of a tendering procedure is 210 days, compared to an EU average of 77.4 days, while the number of single-bid contracts that are awarded is close to one third. This adds to a perception of corruption as a widespread phenomenon. The number of local public enterprises has proliferated to more than 8,000, against the backdrop of a complex framework and direct awarding of service contracts with no open tender. In many areas, local service provision is dominated by monopolies assigned to companies owned by or related to local governments. There are also notable regional differences. An enabling law was approved in August 2015. It foresees reforms to simplify procedures, streamline and accelerate decision making, rationalize local public enterprises, and improve the recruitment and management of staff, among others. A set of legislative decrees was proposed for discussion by the government in January 2016, and is in the process of being implemented. Others are planned for later this year. A reform of procurement is underway, including through centralizing purchasing power to about 35 bodies, down from tens of thousands. A new framework aims to systematically regulate state-owned enterprises in line with the principles of efficient management, protection of competition and reduced public expenditure, and with an enhanced oversight role for the Court of Auditors. New provisions clarify that state-owned enterprises are subject to the bankruptcy legislation. However, state-owned giants such as Eni, Enel, Finmeccanica, Poste Italiane, Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, Ferrovie, and Rai are left outside the perimeter of rationalization. The government plans to implement stricter rules for disciplinary firing of public sector workers. Timely implementation and follow-up are key, and several challenges would need to be tackled as part of successfully modernizing the public administration. These include improving the skill-mix in the public sector, matching positions with skills, and aligning wages with productivity; accelerating court processes to ensure timely enforcement, including by the public administration of laws (Box 2); tackling privileges and employment in public enterprises, including through privatization; ensuring most products at all levels of government are covered under rationalized procurement procedures; and further strengthening anti-corruption efforts, particularly by implementing AML/CFT measures on domestic politically exposed persons. The authorities intend to complete the legislative process by end-2016. While agreeing that completing the transformation of the public administration will take time and will require full and timely implementation of the reforms as well as constant monitoring, the authorities expressed optimism about the efficiency-enhancing impact of the reforms. They noted that, in the context of the 2016 stability law, a broader range of public administrations and local governments is required Page 24 to purchase through centralized procurement bodies and use benchmark pricing. They broadly agreed with the assessment and identification of priorities on justice and insolvency reforms. Box 2. Civil Justice Reforms Reform of the court system is essential to ensure enforcement in a timely manner, including implementation of laws. An over-burdened court system is a hindrance to efficient resource allocation. This includes ensuring the public administration implements legislative decrees. Despite incremental reforms, Italy has one of the slowest court systems in the adjudication of civil and commercial disputes in the EU. According to the European Justice Scoreboard 2016, only Malta, Portugal and Cyprus have less efficient systems for the resolution of civil and commercial cases. Civil or commercial cases are resolved in first instance on average in more than 500 days from the start of the process. Appeals can multiply that by more than three times to around six years. The government is adopting actions to increase the quality of the judicial system and reduce the backlog of cases. These include promoting alternative dispute resolution techniques, reinforcing the auxiliary staff of the courts with personnel from other parts of the public sector, and introducing better information technology. The development of court performance indicators and best practices (Project Strasbourg 2.0) aims to reduce the gap between the best managed courts and those that are underperforming, which however represent a majority in certain geographical areas. The reform of the appeal system needs to be a priority. Consideration should be given to rationalizing the type of cases that reach the Supreme Court (Corte di Cassazione). The enterprise courts should be further strengthened. The specialization afforded by the enterprise courts should translate into a more efficient commercial justice in a variety of cases, including corporate litigation and insolvency cases. Recent reforms to reduce the time for enforcement of secured claims are important steps. These reforms—including the enforcement of commercial secured credit and the introduction of new forms of security interests over movable assets—should reduce the inflow of NPLs by improving the position of creditors and the realization of collateral. Effective introduction of the electronic civil procedure ( processo civile telematico ) should reduce the time for enforcement of unsecured credit. Reforms of the law of secured transactions should improve the legal environment of credit, increasing the possibility of creating security interests over movable assets. However, many important technical details remain to be solved, including the creation of an efficient, notice-based registry, and the transposition into law of the measures announced in early May also requires special attention to a number of technical issues in the implementation of the new contracts and security interests. ____________________________________ See Garrido, José, “Insolvency and Enforcement Reform in Italy,” forthcoming IMF Working Paper. Page 25 Labor Market Reforms The labor market is characterized by high (youth) unemployment, low (female) labor force participation, inefficient wage setting, and job-skill mismatch. The gradual liberalization of employment contracts since the mid-1990s contributed to high labor market duality. Meanwhile, wage setting has generally outpaced productivity gains and is not differentiated regionally. The authorities have passed the necessary legislation to implement the Jobs Act. The Act is a comprehensive overhaul that attempts to make the labor market more flexible and inclusive, improve the reallocation of labor across firms and sectors, expand the safety net to protect workers from higher labor market flexibility, and enhance job matching. It introduces a new standard employment contract in which protection rises with tenure. As it affects new workers (current workers are grandfathered), the Act is expected to have its full impact only over the long term. Going forward, the authorities are keen to implement active labor market policies (ALMPs). Effective implementation, including through a new National Employment Agency, will require significant national-regional cooperation on provision of services, sharing of information over an under-developed infrastructure, enhancing placement capacity, and instituting regular and coordinated monitoring of service delivery. At the same time, boosting (female) labor force participation and ensuring that refugees are integrated into the workforce are topical issues that would improve labor market and economic outcomes (Box 3). To complement these reforms and boost employment, a new wage bargaining system is needed. Italy’s two-tier collective wage bargaining system leaves little scope for many firms, especially small enterprises and many in the South, to engage in firm-level negotiations. Rules on collective bargaining are set by social partners rather than by law. However, social partners are no closer to a comprehensive new system. Decentralized bargaining can strengthen the responsiveness of wages to productivity and labor market conditions, and alleviate regional disparities in labor outcomes and economic performance. In addition, public sector wage setting in line with productivity developments can better reflect the value of public services as well as address over time the current wedge between public and private sector wages. hu Public-Private Sector Wage Differential (Percent) Source:Eurostat, Annual National Accounts. Note: Differential is the percent change between hourly public wage and hourly private wage. Hourly wages are calculated by using wages & salaries and employees' hours worked from annual national accounts data by A*10 industry breakdowns. ll zz Page 26 Box 3. Boosting Female Labor Force Participation and Responding to the Refugee Surge Female labor force participation. A Selected Issues Paper examines the scope for increasing the role of women in the formal economy and the potential benefits of closing gender gaps in the Italian labor market. Existing studies and evidence from Italian provinces suggest a substantial role for policies, such as removing fiscal disincentives (lowering the tax wedge) and enhancing the supply of child- and elderly-care services, to support women’s decisions to enter the labor market. Having more women in the labor force would increase potential output and paves the way for increased diversity in senior corporate positions, which could bring added economic benefits. New evidence reported in the SIP from 300,000 firms in Italy suggests that the higher presence of women in senior corporate position is tied to stronger corporate profitability, particularly in sectors with larger shares of women in the labor force and with higher demand for creativity and innovative capacity. Refugee surge. The authorities estimate that about 270,000 refugees are expected to reach Italy in 2016, much higher than last year, and have been considering urgent action, e.g., to establish new asylum centers. As identified in a recent Staff Discussion Note, policies can help open up the refugees’ path to the labor market, reduce the net fiscal cost, and counter some of the adverse fiscal effects of population aging, e.g., minimizing restrictions on taking up work during the asylum application phase; to the extent feasible, strengthening targeting of ALMPs to refugees, e.g., wage subsidies to private employers; easing avenues to self employment (including access to credit); facilitating skill recognition; lowering barriers to entrepreneurship; reducing restrictions on geographical mobility (including those linked to housing); and improving education policies. Most of these policies have broad application to Italy’s labor market. _______________________________________ Topalova, Petia, 2016 “Female Labor Force Participation in Italy: Drivers and Benefits,” Selected Issues Paper. Aiyar, Shekhar, et. al., 2016 “The Refugee Surge in Europe: Economic Challenges,” IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/16/02. The authorities are confident that the Jobs Act will bring about important changes to the labor market, and concurred on the need for more decentralized bargaining. They pointed to the positive effect of the Jobs Act that are already reflected in the labor statistics. They remain committed to strengthening ALMPs to decrease the duration of unemployment, and expect the National Employment Agency to reach its potential once the forthcoming constitutional reform shifts responsibility for the management and specific design of ALMPs from regions to the center. They noted that the 2016 Stability Law incentivizes firm-level bargaining through tax relief on productivity wage components and non-monetary compensations. While the expiration of several central contracts is an opportunity for such improvements, they were concerned, however, about the potential locking in of current low inflation expectations into wage bargaining contracts. K LL X Z K Y W – Z X K Y K W – Page 27