Raising Public Sector Efficiency The Italian public sector is inefficient. According to the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators for 2015, it takes more than 230 days to obtain a construction permit, 120 days to get an electricity connection, and more than 1,100 days to enforce a contract in Italy, substantially longer than the OECD average. Perception-based measures paint a similar picture, with Italy ranking amongst the worst on measures of government efficiency and public sector corruption. The authorities themselves have assessed corruption as a criminal phenomenon of great significance. As the services provided by the public sector are inputs into firms’ production processes, their inefficient provision may lower the marginal productivity of the labor and capital employed by firms. Raising government efficiency would not only provide better quality services at a lower cost but would also raise private sector productivity. Exploiting the variation across provinces in Italy, staff analysis establishes that public sector inefficiency has a sizable effect on firm productivity. If public sector efficiency rose to that of the best province in Italy, productivity of the average firm could increase by 5–10 percent, and overall GDP by 2 percent (Box 2 and Figure 4). Limited geographical differentiation in public sector wages and downward rigidity in private sector wages (due to competition with the public sector) also prevent firms from adjusting wages in line with productivity. Ease of doing business Ease of enforcing contracts Ease of obtaining construction permitsEase of paying taxesWastefulness of public spendingDiversion of public funds Irregular payments and bribesQuality of public institutions Corruption Italy: Quality of Governance Indicators (Italy's rank; 29 OECD countries) Closer to the center indicatehigher quality of governance. Sources: World Bank Doing Business Indicators, World Economic Forum, Transparency International, and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 Box 2. The Impact of Public Sector Inefficiency on Italian Firms Do public sector inefficiencies hold back firm productivity? Italy ranks poorly on measures of public sector efficiency. It has also fallen behind many advanced economies in terms of labor productivity. Establishing a causal link between these two stylized facts is not easy but is possible given Italy’s large regional heterogeneity. Within Europe, Italy has the largest variation in the quality of the public sector. It takes more than twice the number of days to get a construction permit in Sicily than in Lombardy. Similarly, the median firm in the North produces 9½ percent more per euro spent on employees than the median firm in the south. To estimate the causal effect of public sector inefficiency, staff analysis uses a simple difference-in- difference empirical strategy. The key identifying assumption is that productivity of firms in sectors that are more reliant on the government would be more affected by government inefficiency. In other words, the difference in productivity of firms in the construction industry—one of the most dependent on the government—located in Lombardy vs. Sicily should be larger than the difference in productivity of firms in the basic metals industries—one of the least dependent on the government—located in these two regions. The analysis relies on a rich firm-level dataset and uses novel measures of government dependence. The productivity of about 450,000 micro, small, medium, and large firms in the Orbis database is measured as the ratio of operating revenue (or gross value-added) to costs of employees (or number of workers). Government dependence is proxied by the frequency of news about a certain sector mentioning the government (Pellegrino and Zingales, 2014). Giordano and Tommasino (2011) developed measures of government efficiency for Italy’s roughly 100 provinces, which captures how efficiently government units transform inputs into outputs relative to the most efficient province in the area of health care, education, civil justice, child care, and waste collection. Data are from 2007. There is strong evidence that the inefficiency of the public sector holds back firm productivity. For example, for a firm in a sector above the median in terms of government dependence, being in a province with above median public sector efficiency increases output per euro spent on salaries by 11 percent. These estimates imply significant macroeconomic benefits if public sector efficiency rose to the frontier in all provinces. Productivity measured as output per euro spent on salaries could increase by up to 22 percent in the sectors that depend the most on the public sector, while gross value added per employee costs could rise from 2 to 10 percent. For the average firm, output would expand by 3 percent. x gd M z H un hu Max Min Avg European Quality of Government Index, 2013 (Country average and within country regional variation)Sources: European Commission (DG REGIO), based on World Bank Governance indicator and regional-level survey data. Output per employee costOutput per workerGVA per employee costGVA per workerOutput Effect of Public Sector Efficiency onFirm Productivity (Point estimate and 95 percent confidence interval),percent) Sources:Orbis; Pellegrino and Zingales (2014); Giordano and Tommasino (2011); and IMF staff estimates. Page 17 A comprehensive public administration reform is in the works. The draft enabling law on public administration reform, approved by the Senate and under discussion in the Lower House, outlines ideas to (i) reform the system of recruitment, selection, and evaluation of public employees by introducing new performance evaluation schemes for managers and maintaining pay to performance; (ii) reorganize the public administration, including substantial rationalization of local governments and enterprises, and deregulation of local public service; (iii) simplify and digitize administrative procedure to make them faster, more efficient, and more business friendly; and (iv) streamline legislation governing state-owned and local public enterprises to minimize overlapping regulations from different levels of government and peripheral government bodies, and promote competition. The swift adoption and proper implementation of the public administration reform will be crucial to unlock the private sector growth potential. As the draft enabling law provides only the broad contours of the changes envisioned, the reform should include: i. Public administration reform It should increase the autonomy and accountability of public sector managers; strengthen benchmarking and performance‐based budgeting; and improve mobility of workers and wage differentiation across regions and in line with productivity. ii. Local public services reform In many areas, the provision of local services is dominated by monopolies assigned to companies directly owned by (or related to) local governments. The existence of more than 8,000 local public enterprises has been highlighted as a source of inefficiency and a burden on public finances. Hence, reforming local public services and rationalizing local public enterprises would yield significant economic benefits. iii. Public tenders Public tenders for the provision of local public services are required, and the Competition Authority has been given the power to question actions by local authorities. However, data on contract award procedures suggest that the majority of contracts are still done through “in-house” awards or similar procedures. More transparency in tendering procedures and standardization of contracts— particularly for the provision of local public services—can help improve their quality and cost. Improving the efficiency of the civil justice will have wide-ranging economic benefits. Despite incremental reforms, the judicial system remains highly inefficient. Building on the recently introduced measures, consideration could be given to rationalizing the type of cases that reach the Supreme Court (Corte di Cassazione); allowing for further specialization of the courts—including in commercial and insolvency matters; using ad hoc measures to reduce the backlog of pending cases; and pushing ahead with the project to develop court performance indicators. Page 18 Reducing corruption will improve the business environment. Legislative measures to enhance the anti-corruption framework should be adopted and effectively implemented. This includes increasing the powers of the Anti-Corruption Authority (ANAC), criminalizing the false accounting offense, and changing the provisions on statute of limitations for corruption crimes to ensure that these crimes can be prosecuted regardless of the delays caused by lengthy appeals. Overhauling the public administration is a key building block of the government’s agenda. The authorities emphasized their commitment to complete the legislative process of the draft enabling law on public administration reform by end-2015. In the current system of fiscal decentralization, the full implementation will take time, but process will be carefully monitored to ensure a leaner, faster, and more business-friendly public sector. The reform of local public services is already in train. Guided by previous spending reviews, the 2015 Stability Law requires municipalities to submit concrete rationalization plans, with implementation timeframes and cost savings estimates. For economically important local public services (such as utilities), strong incentives were put in place to promote consolidation and pave the way for market deregulation. The authorities also highlighted measures taken to improve procurement . A technical working table composed of a restricted list of procurement aggregator bodies is established, responsible for specifying the list of product categories and the respective spending thresholds. The Anti-Corruption authority publishes reference prices and is in the process of standardizing public contracts. The authorities were optimistic that these reform efforts will increase significantly the efficiency of public services. Several academics, however, noted that the scope for rationalization and raising efficiency may be limited without addressing public sector employment, and rethinking the role of the state in providing services in a more radical manner. Judicial reform remains a priority for the government. The measures undertaken in the last few years have been bearing fruit, as evidenced by the 15 percent drop in the number of pending civil cases since 2009. The authorities have also adopted reforms to reduce the flow of cases by promoting alternative dispute resolution techniques, such as arbitration, negotiation assisted by counsel, and mediation. On- going efforts aim to reduce appeals, improve the recently created “enterprise courts,” and develop court performance indicators and best practices (Strasbourg 2.0). The authorities continue their fight against corruption. The anti-corruption legislation, approved in late May 2015, includes enhanced powers for the Anti- Page 19 Corruption authority, the criminalization of false accounting, and changes to the statute of limitations for certain crimes, including corruption. Increasing Competition in Product Markets Regulatory hurdles and entry barriers limit competition in several nontradable sectors. This has an adverse effect on the business environment, raising costs for the sectors that need to compete globally and eroding the competitiveness of the economy. Key problems are concentrated in some network industries (e.g., road transport, post), professional services (legal, accounting, engineering, pharmaceutical), and the provision of local public services. Taken together, these services account for about 30 percent of total value added, and contribute more than a third of inputs used by other sectors. Consumer and producers would benefit from more competition in product and service markets. While Italy has taken significant steps to liberalize product markets since 2008, progress on legislating the needed reforms and implementing those already legislated has been uneven. The swift approval and implementation of the Annual Competition Law would be an important step to boost competition in a wide range of sectors. Additional measures in sectors that remain highly regulated (such as transport) would also help improve competition, lower markups, and increase the purchasing power of households. Careful consideration should be given to the regulation of services that have the potential to benefit from new technologies (e.g., the platform services in the new sharing economy), weighing the social cost that the adoption of these technologies might entail against the widespread productivity gains they would generate. Efforts to fully implement existing legislation should be strengthened, which would narrow the gap between legislated regulations and perceptions of product market efficiency. The authorities emphasized the significance of the adoption of the Annual Competition Law. This is the first time an annual competition law was adopted, following the 2009 legislation which introduced such a requirement, thus signaling the new government’s commitment to open markets as a means to revitalize the economy. They agreed that there is scope to enhance competition in sectors, such as -20246AirlinesTelecomElectricityProfessions GasRailRetailPostRoad transport Distance from OECD average Distance from best practice Italy: Product Market Regulation, 2013 Source: OECD Product Market Regulation Database, 2013 Page 20 roads, local transport, and ports. Some of these areas will be tackled in complementary draft bills. The authorities concurred that implementation remains the Achilles’ heel of product and service market reforms in Italy, since measures legislated at the center are implemented by regional governments, often leading to uneven outcomes. The planned Constitutional reform, which will give the state the exclusive power over matters related to competition, should help with the consistent implementation of legislated regulation and the tangible improvement in product market efficiency. Reducing Duality, Improving Labor Reallocation, and Raising Human Capital A pillar of the reform agenda, the Jobs Act is an overhaul of Italy’s rigid labor market. The overarching goal of the reform is to improve reallocation of labor across firms and sectors by reducing the uncertainty and expected cost of dismissal; expand the social safety net to protect workers from the higher labor market flexibility; and enhance the job matching process to ensure their swift return to gainful employment. The reform also aims to tackle the pervasive duality in the labor market, which is inequitable and limits labor productivity; and raise female labor participation, which is very low and represents an underutilized source of growth. Several elements of the reforms have already been fully implemented; the legislative process for reforming the wage supplementation scheme and ALMP has also begun. Specific plans for the potential introduction of a minimum wage are yet to be presented. If fully implemented, the Jobs Act would create better incentives to hire and train workers. The introduction of a new open-ended labor contract with gradually increasing protection and the extension of the coverage of unemployment benefits are an important start. But other elements of the Jobs Act are equally important. The planned reform of the current wage supplementation scheme will encourage the transitions of workers from unprofitable to profitable firms and to jobs that better match their skills. The plan for national coordination of ALMPs—to reduce regional disparities and improve implementation, monitoring and evaluation—should speed up the process of filling vacancies. Further decentralizing wage setting could enhance job protection and creation. Improving the ability of individual firms to adapt working conditions (such as working hours, tasks, and wages) to their specific circumstances could prevent costly labor shedding, better align wages with productivity, and alleviate regional disparities. This could be achieved by allowing greater flexibility in national contracts—by including top-up agreements for the most profitable businesses and opt-outs for firms in temporary difficulties; and by tackling the existing constraints to second-stage wage bargaining, which remains a rarely used option in Italy. Page 21 Improving the quality of human capital would play an important role in raising labor productivity. Educational outcomes in Italy are poor relative to other advanced economies: Italy has the fifth lowest share of population with upper secondary education among OECD countries; its students score below the OECD average in math, reading, and science; and its adult population has relatively low literacy and numeracy skills. Thus, if properly designed and implemented, government’s efforts to prioritize spending on education and improve school outcomes could yield significant economic dividends. The authorities are committed to fully implement the Jobs Act. Authorities underscored that the Jobs Act is unlikely to create new jobs in the short run, but it will increase productivity by changing the composition of the labor force. While still early to judge, recent labor statistics showing an increase in the share of open-ended contracts are encouraging. The ultimate effect on labor market duality will only be discernible once the open-ended contract fiscal incentives expire. The authorities noted that strengthening ALMP will be crucial to decrease unemployment duration, but it is difficult given the decentralized provision of such services. The constitutional reform, which will transfer the responsibility of ALMP back to the state, will help in this regard. The successful implementation of the Youth Guarantee Scheme could serve as a positive example. Both the authorities and social partners agreed that more firm-level bargaining is desirable. Several hypotheses were put forth about the reasons behind the low take-up of second-stage bargaining, including the lack of a general agreement on union representation, the high prevalence of small enterprises for which firm-level O Mean Score in PISA 2012 Sources: OECD, Programme for International Student Assessment. Average test scores of 15-year-olds' competencies in mathematics, reading and science. O Mean Score in PIAAC, 2013 Sources: OECD, Programme for International Assessment of Adult Competencies. Average test scores of 16-24 year-olds' competencies in literacy and numeracy. Italy: Educational Outcomes of Students and Young Adults Page 22 bargaining is difficult and costly, the poor macroeconomic environment which has limited the scope for productivity bonuses above national agreements, and the lack of fiscal incentives. The authorities emphasized that the planned school reform is complementary to the overhaul of the labor market. The Good Schools plan aims to improve educational outcomes and raise labor productivity by (i) providing better incentives for teachers through open-ended employment, performance pay, and greater school autonomy; and (ii) enhancing the curriculum to better link education and employment. The planned reform, which was recently approved by the Senate, is expected to complete the legislative process by the end of 2015.