There is now a window of opportunity to push ahead with deeper reforms to lift growth and reduce unemployment. This will help move the economy out of its low-growth equilibrium and deliver the high and sustained growth rates necessary to bring down faster unemployment and debt. Policy efforts should focus on the three root causes of Italy’s growth weakness: (i) tackling the long-standing productivity problem; (ii) supporting bank and corporate balance sheet repair; and (iii) rebalancing fiscal adjustment and reducing public debt from its very high level. At the same time, policies at the European level will need to complement national efforts by supporting demand—thereby helping to close Italy’s large output gap—through accommodative monetary conditions and reduced policy uncertainty. PM Renzi’s reform agenda includes ambitious initiatives in many areas. The National Reform Program (NRP) aims to revive the Italian economy by (i) improving the business environment through an overhaul of public administration, civil justice reform, and further liberalization of product and services markets; (ii) raising labor productivity through wide-ranging reforms of the labor market and education system; and (iii) supporting private investment through Unemployment and Public Debt Unemployment rate Public debt(Percent of GDP, right scale)Source: ISTAT; and IMF staff estimates. Page 15 better access to credit and other funding sources. According to the latest Economic and Financial Document during the first 13 months of the new government, almost 60 percent of the newly announced reforms and 70 percent of the decrees inherited from previous governments were implemented (see also Appendix I). The challenge now is to maintain the momentum and fully implement the reform initiatives. Only the delivery of real change on the ground will strengthen confidence in a lasting manner, secure a robust recovery, and lift potential growth in the long run. Simultaneous actions on multiple fronts would also be mutually reinforcing.