Italy has wrestled with addressing long-standing structural rigidities for several years. Structural rigidities—not least product and service market inefficiences, wage growth in excess of productivity, high taxation, an inefficient public sector, and lengthy judicial processes—have contributed to Italy experiencing one of the lowest productivity growth rates among advanced economies over the last three decades. Reforms lagged or were piecemeal, and generally failed to address rigidities. This left Italy in a weak position to adapt to the enormous global trade and technological changes that occurred during this period. At the same time, high public debt left Italy exposed at the eve of the global financial crisis and limited fiscal space to respond to shocks. Public debt was around 100 percent of GDP both at the time of euro accession and at the eve of the global financial crisis, and has since climbed to almost 133 percent of GDP, the second highest in the euro zone. High debt and structural rigidities exacerbated the impact of the global financial crisis and restricted Italy’s ability to cope with its fallout. Output contracted sharply by 9 percent during 2007–14, and the recession lasted longer than Italy’s European peers (Figure 1). The decline was especially severe in manufacturing, where the crisis appears to have exacerbated a trend decline in a number of subsectors that started well before 2007 (Figure 2). Although services have assumed a larger share of the economy, productivity is generally low and has greatly lagged that of manufacturing. The decline in total output had attendant implications for bank balance sheets and led nonperforming loans to rise to 18 percent of loans, an overhang that is weighing on the recovery and potential growth. Notwithstanding efforts to kick-start growth, Italy’s income gap is set to grow further. Under current staff projections, the economy is not expected to return to its pre-crisis (2007) real output peak until the mid-2020s. Italy is, thus, likely to experience nearly two lost decades, while its euro zone partners are projected to grow cumulatively by 20–25 percent. The prospect of relatively low growth within the euro zone has important implications. For one, growth may be too weak to firmly unwind financial fragilities, and balance sheets could remain a source of vulnerability for a protracted period. Also, with slow growth, unemployment would remain high, well above pre-crisis levels. Absent further productivity-enhancing measures, real wage growth in Italy would lag its partners or competitiveness would lag—both of which would weigh on the economy and could have implications for emigration from Italy. USUK Austria BelgiumDenmarkFrance Germany Italy NetherlandsNorwaySwedenCanadaJapanFinlandGreeceIrelandPortugalSpain0.00.51.0 Average GDP Growth Average GDP and TFP Growth (1990-2015) (Percent)Source: AMECO. Spain Italy France Germany Labor Productivity (Real GDP per employed person, 2007=100)Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook (April 2016). Page 10 Figure 1. Italy: A Modest and Fragile Recovery, 2007–16 Total Corporations Households Credit Growth (Percent) Sources:IMF, WEO; Eurostat; IMF, FSI; and IMF staff estimates. France Italy Germany Spain Real GDP (2007=100) Projections France Italy Germany Spain Real Exports (2008Q1=100) France Italy Germany Spain Real Investment (2007=100) France Italy Germany Spain Government Debt (Percent of GDP) France Italy Germany Spain NPL Ratio (Percent) Output is projected to return to its pre-crisis peak only by 2025... ..and real exports lag behind euro zone partners. Public debt remains far above that of partners, limiting space to respond to shocks. ...and bank balance sheets are highly strained, ... Investment has contracted sharply, ... ...weighingon credit growth, particularlyto firms. Page 11 Figure 2. Italy: Lagging Productivity and Manufacturing, 1996–2016 Source: ISTAT. Industry excl. construction Services (right scale) Gross Value Added by Industry (Percent of GDP) Economy Industry excl construction Services Productivity by Industry (1996=100) Computer, Electronic & Optical Products Textiles, Wearing Apparel, Leather & Products Electrical Equipment Transport Equipment Industrial Production: Manufacturing (2010=100) Rubber, Plastics, Nonmetallic Mineral Products Chemicals & Chemical Products Industrial Production: Manufacturing (2010=100) Basic Metals & Fabricated Metal Products Wood & Paper Products, Printing & Reproduction Other Mfg incl Furniture, Repair & Installation Industrial Production: Manufacturing (2010=100) Basic Pharmaceutical Products/Pharmaceutical Prep Food, Beverages & Tobacco Industrial Production: Manufacturing (2010=100) Productivity in manufacturing has increased,while that of services has been declining steadily for severalyears... ...even as the economy has become more serviceoriented. Food and pharmaceuticals,however, have been growing.Severalmanufacturing subsectors, including high- tech, have been on a long-term decline. Some,including medium-tech, have been severely affected by the global financial crisis... ...while others were broadly stagnant even before the crisis. Page 12 Cognizant of Italy’s complex challenges, the government has been pursuing a range of important reforms. The list of reform initiatives has been impressive, and includes institutional, public administration, fiscal, labor market, and banking sector reforms. In particular, the government’s signature labor market legislation, the Jobs Act, is being implemented. Legislation has been passed on the reform of cooperative and mutual banks. The insolvency system is being revised. A framework law on public administration has been approved and some implementing decrees have been issued. A reform of the state budget is underway. A reform of the education system has been approved by parliament and is being implemented. Legislation has also been passed and a constitutional referendum is planned for October on institutional reforms aiming to facilitate decision making and the transfer of competencies from regions to the center. There is an urgent need to accelerate and deepen reforms, especially before new headwinds emerge. Within an incomplete economic and monetary union, there is urgency for Italy to reduce decisively its exposure to risks. This includes, among other things, ambitious product and service market reforms to enhance competition and investment; a new wage bargaining framework to align wages with productivity; insolvency reforms to deal with current nonperforming loans; and making room for notable cuts in the labor tax wedge while achieving medium-term fiscal targets. Half-way through Prime Minister Renzi’s term, however, the environment has become more complicated. A constitutional referendum is planned for October, while general elections must be held no later than May 2018. The global economy remains unsettled, and euro zone policymakers grapple with a host of complex challenges, not least the surge in refugees, including those coming through Italy, the risks of Brexit and Grexit, and criticisms of the euro zone’s fiscal and financial sector policy frameworks.