Growth is expected to be modest in 2016–17 and over the longer term. Real GDP growth is projected at 1.1 percent in 2016 and about 1¼ percent in 2017–18, supported by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies and continued low oil prices. The measures contained in the 2016 budget are estimated to boost growth by about 0.3 percent in 2016 and 2017. Investment is expected to pick up gradually, financed largely by firms’ retained earnings and modest credit provision by the banking sector. However, bank financing could become a binding constraint to a further pickup in investment, unless strong progress is made in restoring corporate and bank balance sheet health. Weak external demand is also expected to weigh on net exports. Backloaded fiscal consolidation according to the authorities’ plans would result in a decline in real GDP growth in 2019–21 to around 0.8 percent. Beyond that, growth of around 0.8 percent is projected in the steady state, including a dividend on structural reforms of about 0.3 percent per year over the medium to long term, in line with the authorities’ estimate. Absent reforms, staff estimates potential growth of around ½ percent, which reflects crisis legacies such as the collapse in investment as well as unfavorable demographics and slow productivity growth that predates the crisis. As the output gap closes, inflation will rise gradually, yet slower than that of Italy’s euro zone partners owing to a projected productivity differential. Relatively low nominal growth is expected to slow the pace at which Italy is able to grow out of its crisis legacies and structural vulnerabilities, leaving it exposed to adverse shocks. Risks are tilted to the downside. Risks are manifold and interconnected (see Risk Assessment Matrix). Upside risks relate to better-than-anticipated effects of monetary and fiscal easing, strong implementation of structural reforms, larger-than-expected lagged impact of euro depreciation, and a sustained period of low global energy prices. Downside risks, on the other hand, arise from delays in addressing bank asset quality; intensified global financial market volatility, including from Brexit; the global trade slowdown weighing on exports; and the refugee influx and security threats that could further complicate policy making. Setbacks in the reform process could weigh on investment and undermine sentiment, which could result in stagnation. If downside risks were to materialize, regional and global spillovers could be significant given Italy’s systemic weight. In this regard, efforts by the Italian authorities to address decisively the low productivity, high public debt, and bank balance sheet vulnerabilities are of paramount importance. At the same time, efforts at the European level should continue to strengthen the euro zone’s architecture (see staff report for the Article IV consultation on euro area policies). Page 18 Italy: Risk Assessment Matrix gg = = oo oo nn ll oo ’ rr “ ” “ ” “ ” nn Q cc dg pp dd Q rr W ll dd ll q q q nn pp ill lli hu ill dd Page 19 There is broad agreement with the authorities on the near-term outlook and the long- term challenges facing the Italian economy. Real growth projections in 2016–17 are largely aligned (text table), although the authorities expect the GDP deflator and thus nominal growth to be somewhat higher. They consider the resilience of the economy to have improved as a result of the ongoing reforms. They agreed that a further pickup in investment is critical to a sustained recovery and, in that regard, viewed the slowdown in external demand and its potential impact on investment as a key downside risk. Other downside risks include deflation and adverse euro zone political developments such as those associated with Brexit. The authorities noted that, in view of the substantial output decline during the crisis, the output gap remains large, and considered the common EU methodology to result in too small of a gap. As discussed in detail in subsequent sections, views differed on the policies to address some of the underlying challenges. There is also broad agreement on the external sector assessment. The authorities emphasized the importance of structural reforms in lifting potential output and improving Italy’s competitiveness. They consider the price-elasticity of exports to have declined over the past twenty years—hence, the impact on exports of euro depreciation has been lower than expected—while sluggish external demand has also weighed on export performance in the near term. They cautioned against relying on labor-based indicators of competitiveness, which show a wider competitiveness gap than other price-based measures, as they consider these may underestimate Italian firms’ capacity to compete. Italy has the second largest manufacturing sector in Europe and the seventh globally, although staff notes that manufacturing has suffered significantly (Figure 2).