Fiscal targets for 2016/17 remain unchanged with a primary surplus goal of 7 percent of GDP. Authorities have reiterated their commitment to fiscal discipline which they see as an important anchor to stability and confidence. Public debt reduction has been better than expected in nominal terms, following the PetroCaribe debt buyback. The debt to GDP ratio is expected to remain broadly constant in FY16/17 due to a combination of small amortizations during the year and pre-financing for large redemptions coming due in early FY17/18. In the current low inflation and growth environment, the debt-to- GDP ratio could exceed 102 percent by end- March 2020 in the absence of further measures. The government is cognizant of these risks and is currently identifying measures, including the scope for debt-for-policy swaps, to reduce debt to the targeted 96 percent of GDP by end-March 2020, as envisaged at the start of the program. A significant tax package will structurally improve the tax system. Starting July 1, 2016, the exemption threshold for the personal income tax will be raised to J$1,000,272 from the current J$592,800. A further increase to J$1,500,096 has been announced for April 1, 2017. The marginal tax rate for earnings above J$6 million will be increased from 25 to 30 percent on July 1, 2016. The introduction of a top bracket for higher earners is an important first step for increased progressivity in the tax system. The cost of this tax reform is estimated at 0.7 percent of GDP (about J$12.5 billion) in FY16/17 and a further 0.9 percent of GDP (about J$16 billion) in FY17/18. The revenue loss for FY16/17 will be offset mainly by higher fuel excises and departure taxes, which are estimated to generate about $14 billion in revenues annually. Y Y Y nu nu Public Sector Debt (Current Projections vs. EFF Request) Debt, J$bn (EFF request) Debt, J$bn (current) Debt % GDP (current, RHS) ProratedFull year Revenue loss from PIT reforms12.515.5 Offsetting measures Increase SCT on fuel by J$7 a liter6.57.4 Increase departure tax to US$355.36.4 Increase SCT cigarettes by J$2 per stick0.60.7 Implement new LNG taxation regime1.41.6Total FY16/17 measures13.816.1 PIT Reform and Offsetting Measures (J$ billion,FY16/17) Page 29 With the support of IMF TA, authorities are exploring revenue offset options for FY17/18 to continue rebalancing towards indirect taxation, including the scope for environmental/carbon taxes. As the balance shifts further toward indirect taxes it will be essential to strengthen conditional cash transfers to mitigate the impact on the poor. Capital and social spending will continue to be protected and enhanced. Social spending in FY16/17 remains protected with a floor under the program. Capital spending will increase by around 2/3 percent of GDP relative to the FY15/16 outturn (including the 1/2 percent of GDP additional space created at the 10 th review). The government’s list of priority projects identified for the additional space is included in the TMU. The budget includes a contingency reserve of 1 percent of GDP to cover changes in debt service costs and natural disasters, and also to mitigate potential overruns in the wage bill. However, given the uncertainties surrounding revenues in FY16/17, it is imperative to identify other revenue and spending contingencies early which can be deployed if needed to safeguard fiscal targets without compressing capital expenditure. The reduction of the large wage bill, which continues to crowd out other spending, hinges on reforms to modernize the public sector. The public sector wage bill is budgeted to exceed 10 percent of GDP in FY16/17, driven by the downward revision in nominal GDP and delays in reaching wage agreements with some unions, which shifted their pay increase from FY15/16 to FY16/17. Given continued upward pressures in the wage bill, concrete steps have been agreed with the authorities to strengthen information and control systems over the wage bill (MEFP ¶10). The costs to economic growth of failing to deliver a significant reform on the wage bill will likely be significant because it will continue to entail major difficulties in financing higher levels of pro-growth public investment and/or further increasing the tax burden. Informed by the ongoing compensation review which is expected to be concluded in December 2016, the authorities’ goal is to achieve the wage to GDP ratio of 9 percent by FY18/19 (MEFP ¶10). The compensation review will also provide inputs to the medium-term wage policy to guide the next round of wage negotiations (expected to begin in November 2016). The implementation of the human resource management system (HCMES) is ongoing, and the pace needs to be accelerated by giving it higher priority with more ambitious action plans and stricter timelines. Strengthening information gathering to arrest duplication and inefficiencies in public employment are necessary. The comprehensive review of allowances and the employee verification exercise (both proposed structural benchmarks for end-November 2016) will represent key first steps to improving control and oversight over the wage bill. Pilots in the Ministry of Finance and the Public Service will be implemented for both exercises by end-August 2016. In addition, the allowances pilot will Page 30 encompass Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Ministry of National Security, which together represent the lion’s share of central government employment and receive the majority of allowances. For the employee verification exercise, the pilot will target public employees in the civilian workforce of the police, the non-teaching personnel at the Ministry of Education, and the National Insurance Scheme—areas where turnover of personnel is highest and maximum gains could be had from a headcount exercise. Significant capacity constraints limit faster progress in this area; thus, both exercises will be completed for all central government employees by Q1 2017. Reforms to the public pension system are necessary for its sustainability. Full implementation of the reforms could lower cash flow costs from the unfunded public pension system by as much as 0.5 percent of GDP in the long run, with immediate gains of about 0.1 percent of GDP if the government does not make matching contributions. The new government is expected to re-table the draft law in parliament by July 2016 (MEFP ¶10). The main features from the previous draft should be maintained, including the mandatory contribution of 5 percent and increasing the retirement age to 65 years. These are essential reform measures in order to improve the sustainability of the system, especially in light of population aging. Parametric changes should also follow in order to lower an overly generous benefits accrual rate, and reform the benefits calculation formula. Improvements in public financial management (PFM) will enhance management of domestic arrears. The approval for the new organizational structure of the Accountant General Department ( proposed structural benchmark end-September 2016 ) will greatly aid in the department’s transition to becoming a modern treasury and enhancing its capacity. The ongoing expansion of the TSA will soon make it the only account in the public sector with a positive balance, providing a complete picture of the government’s cash position at any point in time. The review of legal provisions for all revenues to be paid into the Consolidated Fund and improving accounting and fiscal reporting will also be important steps in this direction.