Growth is projected to increase over the medium term. Growth for FY16/17 is revised down to 1.7 percent, largely reflecting the slower-than-expected increase in investment. Agricultural recovery is expected to contribute to a third of the real growth for the fiscal year, in addition to a recovery in manufacturing and sustained growth in BPO, tourism, and trade. Over the medium term, growth is projected to gradually rise to around 2¾ percent, as large transportation and energy infrastructure projects come to fruition and planned structural reforms raise private investor confidence and investment. Inflation and current account balance projections are influenced by oil prices. Headline inflation is expected to be 5.3 percent (y/y) by end FY16/17, as oil prices recover. Core inflation is also expected to rise, due to indirect impacts from the oil price increase. The current account deficit is expected to continue to decline as the economy grows and domestic production gradually replaces imports. Macroeconomic risks remain significant (Annex I): Reform fatigue, capacity constraints, and the thin parliamentary majority of the current government could pose challenges to implementing key reforms. Continued sluggishness in growth and job creation may undermine public support for reform and fiscal prudence. Uncertainty regarding the revenues from the ongoing PIT reforms and accompanying revenue offsets (see ¶37) pose risks to the fiscal position, which may then translate into weaker growth if disappointing revenues crowd out critical capital spending. Government financing could be challenged by the still fragile domestic bond market, competition from potential corporate issuances, and the reliance on financing from international markets and other IFIs (both of which are dependent on continued strong program performance). Growth could also be affected by natural disasters, a worsening of the Zika virus (particularly insofar as it impacts tourism), and an economic slowdown in trade partners. Derisking activities from overseas banks may interrupt international financial flows (Box 3 and ¶22). The authorities broadly concurred with the outlook and risks. The BoJ’s growth forecast is 1.6 percent in FY16/17, with slower-than-expected investment growth being the main risk. They are optimistic about growth over the medium term, as the new Economic Growth Council’s strategy for raising growth to 5 percent in four years unfolds, combined with the planned implementation of the large investment projects in energy and infrastructure. They are, however, concerned about capacity constraints of the government, which could delay reform implementation. Page 18