AND EXTERNAL IMBALANCES Recent data suggest a gradual economic recovery is underway. The economy is estimated to have grown by 1.6 percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2014, and by 0.9 percent over 2013/14 as a whole, with improving performance in mining, agriculture, and tourism. Recorded unemployment remains high, but is declining (from 16.0 percent to 13.5 percent in seasonally adjusted terms between April 2013 and January 2014). Domestic demand has been very weak due to both fiscal consolidation and real income losses from the growth slowdown. Despite this, the ongoing depreciation has lead to rising import prices which has fed through to CPI inflation which was 7.6 percent at end-April. The central government primary fiscal surplus was 7½ percent of GDP in 2013/14. This adjustment—from 5¼ percent of GDP in 2012/13, and 3½ percent in 2011/12—was borne largely by expenditure compression as tax revenues fell short (by about 1 percent of GDP), reflecting lower imports and weak employment. This was even with a tax package that was introduced with the 2013/14 budget. The overall balance of the public bodies has neared zero, but performance has remained uneven, with continued shortfalls for the oil company Petrojam and Clarendon Alumina Production (CAP). The overall balance of the combined public sector has overperformed relative to the projections made at the start of the program owing to lower interest costs. The current account deficit remains substantial but has improved sharply. The ongoing fiscal consolidation, weak domestic demand, and an 8 percent adjustment in the real exchange rate (since mid-2012) have all contributed to the external adjustment. The current account deficit was 9.5 percent of GDP in 2013/14 (a reduction of 2 percentage points relative to the previous year) and gross international reserves have started to recover (standing at US$1.8 billion at end-May), Real GDP Growth and Inflation (percent change) Real GDP growthInflation, eop Page 8 covering about 3 months of next year’s imports of goods and services. There has, however, been a switch towards borrowed reserves since late 2013, as Jamaican banks have invested in longer-term FX deposits at the central bank. Financial market conditions have tightened, slowing credit growth. Reserve money growth has fallen below program projections. The liquidity of the financial system has also been tighter than expected, mainly due to liquidity sterilization by the Bank of Jamaica (BOJ) and ongoing inactivity of the secondary markets in government bonds since the February 2013 debt exchange. This lack of trading likely stems from a higher risk premium on these instruments after the second debt exchange in three years, a lingering apprehension about the sustainability of the reform effort, and market participants’ reluctance to restart trading at overly discounted prices. The BOJ has responded since late 2013 by stepping up open market operations and providing liquidity through an overnight window, two-week repos and, in early 2014, six month repos. Through these actions, most of the earlier liquidity contraction had effectively been reversed by the end of the fiscal year. Despite these efforts, interbank rates for overnight funds have risen (peaking at 14–16 percent by mid-February) and credit to the private sector has decelerated to 7 percent (y/y) in March 2014. Moreover, new credit is increasingly concentrated in retail credit with banks reluctant to extend credit at longer maturities to fund corporate investment. Standard indicators of the soundness of the financial system remain broadly positive, but may not fully reflect underlying vulnerabilities. Commercial banks’ capital adequacy ratios remained stable, at 14 percent at end-December, while non-performing loans (NPLs) declined to 5.2 percent of total loans from 5.8 percent at end-September with almost full provisioning. Stress test results for end-March 2014 from the BoJ confirmed that while loan delinquency is expected to stay high under various macroeconomic stresses, banks’ capital positions largely remained in compliance with capital requirements under a range of hypothetical shocks—including a simultaneous impact of increases in interest rates, currency depreciation, credit quality deterioration and deposit outflow. Securities dealers also meet the applicable capital and leverage requirements at 10 percent of risk weighted assets and 6 percent of total assets, respectively. However, the financial system remains heavily exposed to government debt holdings, and a decline in the market value of government bonds could have a sizeable negative impact on financial institutions’ capital.