A comprehensive growth strategy (MEFP ¶35–41) Reinforcing the credibility of the macroeconomic reforms is key to support investment and growth. Key supply side impediments to overcome are: High electricity costs . Several projects and initiatives to achieve fuel-source diversification, facilitate energy conservation, liberalize the electricity market and reduce the cost of energy are moving ahead. A forthcoming 381 Megawatt Plant—the centerpiece of the energy strategy—is estimated to cut electricity costs by a third, from their current very high levels (about 300 percent higher than in the U.S.). This would alleviate a perennial investor concern. Construction has been delayed from early 2014 but the authorities indicated their commitment to its operation in 2016. A new Electricity Act, developed with World Bank assistance, should strengthen governance in the sector and facilitate access to the grid by new power producers. Bureaucratic red tape. A tracking system for the approval of construction permits—which has been a source of extensive investment delays—is being implemented during 2014, in collaboration with the World Bank. Further reforms to enhance the business climate aim to extend land titling (with Inter-American Development Bank (IaDB) support) and create an on-line process for business registration (delayed from June 2014 to early 2015). In addition, the authorities plan to streamline cumbersome import-export requirements through a Port Community System that would build on the ASYCUDA system for automating customs procedures (to be introduced gradually from end-2014). Governance. In mid-March, the authorities tabled the Integrity Commission Act to establish a single anti-corruption agency. U Domestic Electricity Tariffs, 2012 (US ₵/kWh) Source: CARILEC. Page 11 Labor market impediments The authorities plan to enhance the job training component of the social protection programs. Recently tabled legislation will introduce flexible work arrangements, allowing more continuous use of machinery and more varied opening hours. There is also a need to enhance labor market flexibility (including by tackling high separation costs) to facilitate the needed adjustment of labor from nontradeable to tradeable sectors. Limited access to credit . The authorities noted the BOJ’s efforts to address this important bottleneck by addressing liquidity constraints and highlighted their current campaign to encourage the use of recent legislation on the use of movable property as collateral. Further actions will be aided by a developmental FSAP undertaken by the World Bank. Tax compliance costs. Ongoing efforts to improve the ease of paying taxes include steps to promote e-filing and e-payments. The authorities also pointed to plans to support business taxation simplification and transparency, particularly for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), and legal and administrative changes for handling business tax appeals. Crime . Violence in Jamaica has deterred investment, affected capital formation, and discouraged business development. Corporate surveys consistently identify crime as a key constraint to doing business in Jamaica. Recent government initiatives to reduce crime include the development of the National Crime Prevention and Community Safety Strategy (NCPCSS), and a Community Renewal Program (CRP). Infrastructure shortcomings. The government is pursuing strategic investments, in particular to finalize a network of critical highways and establish Jamaica as a logistics hub. The latter initiative comprises the privatization of the Kingston Terminal Port (before end-2014) and the Norman-Manley Airport, and the establishment of a transshipment port. The recent creation of Agroparks (sponsored by the IaDB and the European Union), in which land is prepared for farming and then leased to private entrepreneurs, has started to increase agricultural production. The authorities were encouraged by the progress to-date on policies to enhance growth and job creation. They emphasized that a very large number of legislative measures had been adopted during the past year including the fiscal incentives regime, which had lowered the effective tax rate for business operators. They pointed also to initiatives that were underway to promote delivery of government services to support investment, including through more expeditious provision of services such as water and electricity. The real depreciation of the exchange rate since mid-2012 opens up an essential but contentious path to restoring Jamaican competitiveness. The depreciation of the exchange rate has been highly unpopular domestically and there has been little apparent recognition of the job- creating benefits of currency adjustment. This is in part fueled by the slow responsiveness of exports (other than tourism) to the weaker currency and the clear near-term costs through imported inflation. It is also a product of historical experience whereby past depreciations led to bursts of inflation with little benefit for the real economy. However, there are now promising signs that domestic production is beginning to replace imports for some agricultural goods and the impact on net exports (in particular in agriculture and agro-processing) should continue to grow. Page 12 Following the substantial adjustment that has taken place, the remaining overvaluation of the Jamaican dollar appears modest. Staff judge this overvaluation to be around 3–15 percent relative to medium-term fundamentals and planned policies. This is less than the 8–22 percent assessed in April 2013 (see Annex III) but ongoing depreciation of the nominal exchange rate will be needed, particularly given the sizable inflation differential with Jamaica’s main trading partners. Policies to raise productivity and remove obstacles to investment and trade will be essential to complement exchange rate adjustment in restoring external competitiveness and lower the current account deficit toward its longer-term equilibrium (of around 5 percent of GDP). The authorities agreed on the merits of exchange rate flexibility, and noted the emerging shift to domestic production in response to the recent depreciation. At the same time, they pointed to the economic uncertainty and adverse social implications generated by rapid exchange rate depreciation. Accordingly, they emphasized the case for limiting the need for nominal exchange rate changes through supply-side measures to improve external competitiveness and through a further reduction in inflation to more moderate levels. B.