EQUITABLE GROWTH For decades, Jamaica has been stuck in a negative spiral of low growth, high unemployment, and precarious fiscal finances. Since the mid-1990s, annual economic growth has averaged less than 1 percent and unemployment has been high (especially for the young). Weak fiscal discipline, the materialization of contingent fiscal risks, and low growth have kept public debt above 100 percent of GDP since the early 2000s, depressing investor sentiment and crowding out private sector investment. Jamaica was hit hard by the global recession of 2008–10 . Negative growth and its consequences for labor markets caused poverty rates to nearly double (from 9.9 percent in 2007 to 17.6 percent by 2010). Declining receipts from exports, tourism, and remittances caused the current account deficit to surge, triggering a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate and a spike in inflation. A reform program, supported by the Fund, was put in place in 2010, predicated on a gradual fiscal adjustment, an upfront debt exchange, and front-loaded financial support from the international community. However, fiscal slippages and delays in structural reforms caused the program to go off track within the first year. As a consequence, Jamaica’s external position eroded further, debt rose to almost 150 percent of GDP, and international reserves were rapidly depleted. In 2013 the Jamaican authorities decided to redouble their reform efforts, narrowly avoiding a full-blown balance of payments, banking and fiscal crisis. The authorities’ program, which has been supported by the Fund since May 2013 through an extended arrangement under the EFF, tackles head-on the challenges of low growth and high debt. The reform effort has significant political support from the current government (which holds a two-thirds majority in parliament) and has performed well despite the complexity and difficulty of the reform agenda. The authorities’ program tackles key shortcomings that were repeatedly highlighted by Fund surveillance. The strategy comprises several, mutually reinforcing areas: Boosting private sector-led growth. Protecting social spending and fortifying the safety net. Putting the public debt on a sustainable downward trajectory. Restoring competitiveness through productivity improvements and allowing the exchange rate to adjust as a means to reduce the reliance on imports and create jobs. Securing funding for private investment through strengthening the financial system and lessening the crowding out from government borrowing. Page 6 Critical reforms were frontloaded during the first year of the program, including a comprehensive public sector wage agreement, a debt exchange, a sweeping tax reform, and a difficult fiscal adjustment (Box 1). Box 1. Achievements in the First Program Year During the first year of implementation of the Fund-supported program, important policy adjustments and structural reforms were implemented: To help restore debt sustainability, as prior actions, the Debt Law was adopted, and future debt service was reduced through a February 2013 debt exchange for domestic government debt. The primary surplus of the central government was increased to 7.5 percent of GDP in 2013/14, with near balance for the overall public sector. A draft 2014/15 budget, consistent with the program, and a comprehensive public sector investment program have been tabled. A fiscal rule was adopted in March 2014, putting limits on the annual overall public sector balance, anchored on a reduction in public debt to 60 percent of GDP by 2025/26. This legislation also established a new permanent budget calendar, under which the budget is to be adopted before the start of the fiscal year. Fiscal consolidation was supported by a multi-year wage agreement, as a prior action. Wide-ranging tax reform has been implemented, including a Charities Act, the replacement of discretionary tax waivers and many sectoral tax incentives by transparent and standardized incentives, and import duty reform to reduce tariff dispersion. The elimination of the zero rating of government purchases under the General Consumption Tax has been delayed to June 2014 (MEFP ¶12). Tax administration was strengthened by increasing staffing of the Large Taxpayers Office, and legislation to increase the powers of the tax administration. Reform of the securities dealers sector was started, making less risky business models (collective investments schemes) available to securities dealers, and preparing a legal and regulatory framework to mitigate risks posed by the retail repo business model (MEFP ¶28 and ¶29). Legislation was adopted or tabled in parliament to address unlawful financial operations and strengthen financial sector supervision. Reforms to improve the business climate included streamlining of the business registration process, and progress in reducing the backlog in construction permits. A new Bankruptcy Act has been tabled in parliament. Page 7 These reforms have undoubtedly been painful but have benefited from broad societal and international support. Domestic stakeholders have organized to support, monitor, and help shape the reforms, which involved burden-sharing across all parts of society. A broad partnership agreement was signed in the summer of 2013 between civil society organizations and the government. Stakeholders have also created the Economic Policy Oversight Committee (made up of representatives from financial institutions, private sector organizations, and unions), to monitor and contribute to the design of the program. The World Bank, the Inter American Development Bank, and several bilateral development partners have collaborated with the Fund to provide financial support, intensive technical input, and investments in capacity building to support the program.