Jamaica’s economy has been afflicted for several decades by a combination of low growth and rising public debt. Real growth has averaged 0.7 percent since 1990 and unemployment has rarely dropped below 10 percent. Meanwhile, the public debt has been above 100 percent of GDP since 2000. Poor fiscal discipline propelled the debt increase, which crowded out private sector credit, raised financing costs, and further depressed growth. Weak growth, in turn, undermined fiscal performance and caused further increases in debt. An IMF-supported program was approved in 2013 to avert a severe fiscal and balance of payments crisis. The economy contracted by 0.2 percent in FY2012/13 in the wake of Hurricane Sandy. The current account deficit deteriorated to 12 percent of GDP. Foreign reserves dropped sharply to 1.4 months of imports, resulting from weak foreign inflows, including from the multilateral institutions, central bank foreign exchange sales to sustain the exchange rate, and debt payment. At the same time, fiscal performance fell short of budget targets and public debt rose to nearly 150 percent of GDP. To prevent the looming crisis, the IMF’s Executive Board approved a four-year EFF-supported program in May 2013 (SDR 615.38 million, 225 percent of quota at the time of approval of the EFF, 161 percent of current quota). The authorities’ economic reform program aimed to sustainably reduce debt and boost growth. The goals of the reforms include boosting growth and employment, improving external competitiveness, achieving fiscal and debt sustainability, strengthening the financial system, and supporting the poor. To increase the credibility of the reform program against a history of repeated reform failures, the authorities frontloaded important policy actions. These include a multi- year public sector wage agreement, an upfront tax package, and a debt exchange to secure an immediate reduction in the debt stock. Significant progress has been achieved owing to strong program ownership and implementation. Sustained fiscal consolidation. For three years, the central government primary surplus was maintained at 7½ percent of GDP, while public debt fell by 20 percentage points of GDP, aided by the PetroCaribe debt buyback in 2015. The faster than anticipated decline in debt allowed for Page 12 a reduction in the primary surplus target (to 7.25 and 7 percent of GDP in FY2015/16 and FY2016/17 respectively) to accommodate growth-enhancing capital spending. Stabilization of the macroeconomic environment. Inflation has more than halved and is now at historical lows, while the current account deficit improved by over 7 percentage points of GDP. Foreign reserves now cover 6 months of imports. Improved stability is reflected in increased business and consumer confidence, as well as a fall in EMBIG bond spread, which is now aligned with the emerging market average. Jamaica also successfully reentered the international financial market, issuing external bonds of US$800 million and US$2 billion in 2014 and 2015, respectively, supported by upgrades in the country’s credit ratings by all major rating agencies. Strengthening the tax system and tax administration. Tax incentives and discretionary waivers have been significantly reduced and replaced with a rules-based and transparent framework (Box 1). Tax administration has been improved through capacity building in the Large Taxpayers’ Office, better compliance supported by the publication of a National Compliance Plan, and enhanced tracking of goods in customs with the ASYCUDA World system. In public financial management, a comprehensive plan has been created to expand the Treasury Single Account. Greater financial sector resilience. The legal and regulatory framework for retail repo transactions of securities’ dealers (SDs)—which finance the acquisition of long-term government bonds with short-term, deposit-like investments—was improved by transitioning all retail repo contracts to a trust. Also, backstop facilities for the SDs have been established and the minimum transaction size for retail repos steadily increased. The foreign asset investment cap for the collective investment schemes (CIS)—an alternative for retail repos with more transparent risk distribution—has been increased, encouraging the development and use of this new investment product. Meanwhile, gaps in financial sector supervison are being addressed, including by the new Banking Services Act which improved the banking supervision framework, information access, and supervisors’ authority. The Bank of Jamaica (BoJ) Act was amended to vest the BoJ with overall responsibiility for financial stability and strengthen its governance structure. The domestic debt market reopened. Capitalizing on the liquidity influx from the J$60.4 billion (4 percent of GDP) bond redemption in February 2016, the government successfully issued J$15 billion bonds domestically. This first issuance since the NDX was oversubscribed, with no adverse effects on the yield curve and the financial sector z Secondary Government Bond Market Activities trading volume average yield Source: Bank of Jamaica. Page 13 balance sheets. Secondary market trading is also now slowly restarting, which should help further improve financial intermediation. Stronger social safety net. During the fiscal consolidation, social expenditures were protected with a required minimum level of targeted spending, at about 1.5 percent of GDP. The conditional cash transfer program (PATH) has been strengthened with recurrent increases in transfer amounts well beyond inflation. A social protection strategy was launched in July 2014, and a National Poverty Reduction Committee has been tasked with developing a poverty reduction program. Better business environment. The construction permit approval process was streamlined to reduce the processing time to 90 days. A new insolvency legislation was passed to streamline the bankruptcy process and facilitate the rehabilitation of insolvent businesses. An online system for business registration is being put in place to reduce the turnaround time for registrations to two days. Supported by these reforms, Jamaica’s ranking in World Bank’s 2016 Doing Business Indicators improved by 7 positions. oo oo oo oo nu = EE = EE = Page 14 Box 1. Tax and Customs Administration in Jamaica: Reforms and Challenges Strong FY15/16 performance. Tax revenues in FY15/16 were on target with budget for the first time since the global financial crisis. Tax revenues were over 25 percent of GDP, driven by strong arrears collections and improved filing. Tax policy reforms including (i) transparent incentives which minimized the room for ministerial discretion (following IMF TA advice), (ii) the broadening of the GCT base to include government purchases, electricity and some foodstuffs, and (iii) the implementation of the Employment Tax Credit have driven much of the improvement. Capacity building in tax and customs administration also played a significant role in improving compliance and doing business. Significant administration reforms . A key reform of the Tax Administration of Jamaica (TAJ) has been the strengthening of the Large Taxpayers’ Office (LTO) which yields half of total Corporate Income Tax (CIT) revenues. Improvements in LTO are key to safeguarding the revenue base in countries with capacity constraints. Significant reforms have been undertaken in the context of the program, with the help of an IMF advisor: Capacity increases and amendments to the Revenue Administration Act have allowed the TAJ to (i) compel for third-party information to cross-check taxpayers’ information and activities, (ii) require mandatory e-filing for LTO clients for main tax types including the General Consumption Tax (GCT) and the CIT. A National Compliance Plan has been published and performance indicators have been established to improve compliance measurement. TAJ was empowered to collect outstanding arrears and seize and sell taxpayers’ property. Customs administration reforms have also focused on capacity strengthening, with the hiring of new auditors for the Post-Clearance Audit unit, and the implementation of the ASYCUDA World software which has helped strengthen the tracking of imports and exports. The Jamaica Customs Agency (JCA) and TAJ are respectively transitioning into full executive agency status and semi-autonomous revenue agency, which will lower costs, enhance efficiency of service delivery, and improve decision-making and management practices. Challenges remain. A recent GCT gap analysis by FAD shows that Jamaica’s GCT collections could be higher by as much as 2 percent of GDP if compliance were improved and by 5 percent of GDP if tax expenditures and policy were improved. These gaps, while still sizable and on par with Latin America, have been declining in recent years due to the ongoing reform efforts. Within the region, Jamaica outperforms smaller countries like Dominica, Barbados and St. Vincent but fares worse than Trinidad and Tobago and Dominican Republic. These gaps are calculated against a theoretical benchmark and effective gains would likely be much smaller. Nevertheless, the analysis points to significant gains that could be reaped from improved compliance and policy. As identified by a recent FAD TADAT assessment, reforms going forward should address inaccurate taxpayer data, low on-time filing and payment rates, delays in the payment of GCT refunds, and low quality of audits leading to high rates of objections. In terms of tax policy, a continued broadening of the GCT base will not only reduce the policy gap but also improve compliance as exemption loopholes are closed. However, the reform dividends in the form of growth and job creation have been disappointing. Over the past three years, real GDP growth has remained at the historical average of about 0.6 percent. Despite a decline in the unemployment rate by about 3 percentage points since 2013, it remains high at over 13 percent. The weak growth is partly due to negative external shocks: the drought conditions for two consecutive years led to a decline in agriculture; the chikungunya outbreak in 2014/15 reduced labor productivity; and the falling aluminum prices depressed exports. nu dg Page 15 However, there have also been positive shocks (e.g., lower global oil prices), though these factors appear to have done little to support faster growth. The weak growth is reflected in Jamaica’s Human Development Index which has been declining since 2011. Inequality, which increased from 0.38 in 2001 to 0.46 by 2013, is high with one-fifth of the population living under the poverty line.