Modifications to the quantitative PCs for September 2016 and December 2016 are proposed. Revisions are proposed to the existing PCs on central government primary balance, tax revenues, and overall balance of the public sector due to the downward revision to growth. The following new structural benchmarks are also proposed: Draft a consultation paper for the resolution framework for the financial sector, including proposals on (i) the scope, roles and responsibilities, and powers of institutions that would be covered by the resolution regime; and (ii) the legal structure of the regime (i.e., administrative, court-based, or a combination (end-October 2016). Complete a two-part pilot to build a comprehensive database on all allowances paid to public employees in the Ministries of Finance, Health, Security, and Education (end-November 2016). Verify each government employee’s work position, eligibility for allowances, and role in the government, across the Ministry of Finance, the civilian population of the Ministry of Security, and the NIS, and non-teaching personnel in the Ministry of Education (end-November 2016). Submit to Cabinet implementation plans and timelines to (i) privatize entities (to be identified by end-July), (ii) implement shared corporate services across ministries in HR administration and payroll execution, asset management, communications (end-September 2016). A new organizational structure of the Accountant General Department will be approved by the Corporate Management Development (CMD) branch in the Ministry of Finance and the Public Service (end September 2016). Safeguards assessment. The updated safeguards assessment of the BoJ, completed in September 2013, found that the BoJ has relatively strong safeguards, particularly in financial reporting and the audit mechanisms. The BoJ publishes audited financial statements annually and continues to receive unqualified (clean) audit opinions. In addition, the BoJ has made progress in further improving the safeguards framework by strengthening its independent oversight functions, enhancing transparency in the financial statements, and conducting an independent external review of the internal audit function. There is ongoing work on the recommendation to amend the BoJ Act to address shortcomings in the legal provisions on governance and autonomy. The program is fully financed and staff’s assessment of Jamaica’s capacity to repay the Fund remains broadly unchanged (Table 11). This capacity is deemed adequate, and will continue to depend on the timely and strong implementation of the government’s reform program. External multilateral financing for FY15/16 has evolved broadly in line with earlier program assumptions. Debt service to the Fund and the purchase profile remain unchanged in the absence of significant revisions to the macroeconomic outlook. Financing Needs 8413225704Uses of debt financing Budget financing 8413225704Financing Sources Short-Term124168228 Medium/Long-Term14042926466 Deposits drawdown-68813110 For 2015/16, projections include US$1500 financing for the PetroCaribe debt buyback. (In US$ million) Public Borrowing Program Page 34