Since late 2012, monetary policy has been successfully geared toward rebuilding reserves and containing inflation. The BOJ has pursued a tight monetary policy to contain inflation, weaken the pass through from the currency depreciation into domestic prices, avoid the entrenchment of inflation expectations, and support some accumulation of international reserves. The results of these efforts are becoming more visible with both declining inflation and a steady build-up of reserves. Going forward further reserve accumulation is still warranted (Annex IV) and efforts should be made to shift the composition of reserves away from the recent reliance on borrowed reserves. The authorities explained that to avoid possible refinancing pressures, an early rollover and a gradual return to owned reserves would be sought. Implementation of monetary policy has been challenging, aimed at shielding credit to the economy despite the tight overall policy stance . With the continued lack of activity on the secondary market in government bonds, the resulting loss of market liquidity, and the coincident decline in interbank market activity and in credit to the private sector, the BOJ has been forced to help banks’ manage their liquidity through intensified open market operations (including, at times, simultaneously injecting and withdrawing liquidity at different maturities). This increased role for the BOJ in compensating for the lack of market functioning has increased the urgency of improving the Page 18 BOJ’s instruments to achieve its targets for inflation and reserves. Specifically, the BOJ should move from a policy of managing quantities to an increased reliance on interest rates through the creation of a corridor for short-term market interest rates. This would help both to provide clearer signals of the monetary policy stance and to improve the pricing of short-term liquidity. Consistency between policy interest rates and the monetary stance should also help limit the dollarization pressures that currently complicate attainment of the BOJ’s reserves targets. Furthermore, the provision of liquidity to banks on a more predictable and consistent basis could help address undue risk aversion on the side of banks in providing credit. The authorities broadly concurred with a cautious reorientation along these lines and were planning an initial step of making the overnight stand-by liquidity window available to banks with more certainty and at a price consistent with its policy goals (MEFP ¶33). Although the targets for NIR and NDA (combined with a flexible exchange rate) provide appropriate intermediate monetary anchors at the current juncture, over the medium term the BOJ plans to put in place the operational tools for an inflation targeting framework (MEFP ¶34) For many years now Jamaica has struggled with both substantial inflation and reluctance to allow for needed exchange rate flexibility. This has led over time to a chronic problem of currency overvaluation, suppressing growth and raising vulnerabilities. A commitment to a managed floating regime will be a critical buffer for an economy with little diversification that is subject to significant external shocks. The monetary anchor would then need to be squarely based on price stability through an inflation targeting framework. While such a shift is some years away, the building blocks for an eventual move should be steadily put in place by improving the functioning of the foreign exchange market, upgrading statistics, building technical (modeling and forecasting) capacity within the BOJ, and amending the BOJ law to strengthen its independence. A well-functioning credit channel and active money markets are also important building blocks for inflation targeting. E.