Fiscal Sustainability Fiscal discipline is the central plank for macroeconomic stability in Jamaica. Decades of high public debt and interest bills have hindered public service provision, including security, education, and energy. The risks from a precarious fiscal position have also undermined confidence and raised risk premia, crowding out private investments. Strong program implementation in the last three years has improved fiscal credibility and lowered borrowing costs. Staying the course is critical to further reduce debt and create the space for productive spending. Improving Monetary Framework Monetary policy should be guided by an overarching mandate for achieving price stability. Until its recent steady decline, inflation has been high and unstable, making expectations hard to anchor. Although the BoJ regards inflation target as its nominal anchor, the effectiveness of actual monetary operation is weakened by the central bank’s multiple objectives, which include managing credit conditions to promote production, trade, and employment, while maintaining monetary stability as well as the external value of the currency. A flexible exchange rate with a firmly established single mandate for achieving price stability will bolster BoJ’s policy credibility and provide clear policy signals. BoJ’s governance and autonomy also need to be improved to increase transparency and accountability in conducting monetary policy as fiscal dominance dissipates. Other factors such as developing financial markets, advancing modeling and JamaicaTrinidad and Tobago BarbadosBelizeThe Bahamas Volatility of Price Level (Average coefficient of variation, 2001-2015) Page 20 forecasting ability, and improving policy communication, are also important. The work program for monetary reforms should be organized around the long-term goal of moving to a full-fledged inflation targeting regime. The annual inflation targeting readiness review is a helpful step in this direction. Strengthening Financial Sector Stability Improving prudential regulations for the retail repo industry is important for financial stability. Regulatory requirements for SDs need to be tightened and the risks of the retail repo industry be reduced to a systemically safe and prudentially manageable level, drawing on IMF TA recommendations. The authorities are currently working on prudential guidelines, including introducing an operational risk-weighted asset component in calculating the SD’s CAR, requiring regular stress test reports, and limiting SD’s exposure to any counterparty. They are also aiming to implement a minimum retail repo leverage ratio. Due to the strong sovereign-financial sector nexus in Jamaica, the speed of regulatory tightening needs to take into account the health of the SD sector and domestic financing needs. Strengthening debt management and developing domestic debt markets will help lower public borrowing costs and financial stability risks. While successful reopening of the domestic government bond market in February 2016 was an important milestone, more work is needed to build a deep and liquid domestic debt market (Box 2), so as to reduce the currency, duration, and concentration risks for both the government and the financial sector. To the extent that the market conditions and the absorptive capacity of the domestic investor base allow, the upcoming bond redemptions should be refinanced in the domestic market, to help rebalance the debt portfolio from FX to local currency (Annex IV). Additional reforms, in line with recommendations from IMF TA, to reform the primary dealer system and introduce competitive auctions to replace taps should be pursued. Page 21 Box 2. Re-establishing Domestic Bond Market Access It took Jamaica three years to reestablish domestic market access following the 2013 National Debt Exchange (NDX). Jamaica regained international market access quickly (in July 2014) supported by strong program performance, investors’ search for yield, and the exclusion of international bonds from NDX. However, with 2 debt exchanges in a span of three years, reestablishing domestic market access after the NDX took almost three years. The hard work of facilitating debt market development is still ahead. Efforts are needed in: Prioritizing debt market development in the medium-term debt management strategy to prevent exclusive focus on meeting immediate funding needs at the lowest cost. This would include developing a domestic debt market development plan in consultation with the key stakeholders, including the private sector. Better coordination between the MOFP and the BOJ to avoid competition between debt and monetary policy objectives, to address liquidity swings from large bond redemptions coming up in FY 2017/18. More active use of liability management operations to enhance market liquidity and to mitigate refinancing risks. Retiring undervalued bonds or refinancing high-coupon bonds helps book budget savings, build more liquid benchmarks, and improve the composition of government’s debt portfolio. Promoting bond market liquidity by reforming the primary dealer system to incentivize two-way price making, switching to an auction-based primary issuance mechanism, and building a larger T-bill market. Ensuring stable demand for J$ government bonds by conducting active outreaches to domestic investors. Coordination with the regulatory authorities may also be needed to prevent drastic reduction in the demand for J$ government bonds over the medium term. Reforms on contingency planning and crisis management should continue. A national crisis management plan and agency-specific contingency plans in all supervisory agencies (BoJ, MoF, FSC, JDIC) have been adopted. Regular financial crisis simulation exercises are necessary to identify weaknesses in the plans. Recovery plans for certain participating institutions are needed to give them access to the emergency liquidity and capital support facilities. A working group led by the JDIC has been designing reforms to the legal framework for the resolutions of the financial sector, but tangible progress is still needed. Multi-pronged efforts are needed to address potential future loss of correspondent banking relationships. The trend of globally active banks scaling back their correspondent banking presence has caused interruptions in money service businesses (Box 3). While this has not yet significantly impacted the domestic deposit taking institutions in Jamaica at this point, there is prospective risk that should be addressed to avoid potential disruptions in financial services and reputational risks for the financial sector. In this regard, Jamaica should continue to address K K Y K Z V ee oo oo Page 22 remaining weaknesses in its AML/CFT framework in the context of implementing the recommendations by the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force’s mutual evaluation, enhance the risk-based supervision of the financial sector, notably the money service business (MSB) sector, and effectively communicate its compliance efforts to overseas partners. In addition, contingency plans, including possible interventions from the BoJ for a limited period, should be prepared in the event of a broader loss of correspondent bank linkages. Authorities’ views Authorities concurred with the need to safeguard and further enhance macroeconomic stability. In particular: Authorities are cognizant of the gains achieved by the sustained fiscal discipline, including confidence in both domestic and international markets. They agreed with the need for sustained consolidation, while also emphasizing the need to rebalance fiscal policy towards growth. They also agreed that the rising dollarization of government’s debt portfolio needs to be addressed through active measures to develop the domestic debt market. They are committed to continued reforms of the SD sector and strengthening the national crisis management framework and resolution schemes. They expressed concerns about the potential negative impact of reductions of financial services by overseas banks on financial sector stability and financial inclusion, and requested Fund support in their effort to communicate the issue with overseas financial regulators. They agree with the need to further refine the monetary framework, but emphasized that the decision to pursue inflation targeting needs to be a deliberate one and further investigation is needed to determine whether it is a path suitable for Jamaica. Page 23 Box 3. Loss of Correspondent Bank Relationships and the Impact on Jamaica Decisions by globally active banks to scale back operations has affected the operation of money service businesses (or cambios) in Jamaica. In 2012, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) issued recommendations that identified cambios as high risk entities. Enhanced scrutiny by correspondent banks, including requirements for Jamaican respondent banks to have in place a solid risk management system for suspicious transactions, led to an intensified assessment and monitoring of cambios. Subsequently, multiple overseas correspondent banks gave notice to Jamaican domestic banks that prohibited transactions on behalf of cambios through their accounts, given the difficulty of undertaking due diligence on such transactions. As a result, domestic banks have stopped cash transactions with cambios altogether (Cash transactions are about 20 percent of total cambio transactions). There have also been some losses of correspondent bank relationships (CBR). Since 2012, five domestic banks have had some of their CBRs terminated. But the FX transactions of these banks have not been impacted, as they were able to maintain their existing relationships with other overseas banks or find replacement for their lost CBRs A large Canadian bank exited the Jamaican market in 2014, citing a reevaluation of their business mix as the reason. However, this appeared unrelated to regulatory restraint and was more a product of a broader realignment of that bank’s global business model. The shifting pattern of global banking has not significantly impacted financial flows into Jamaica, but its implication on financial inclusion could be relevant. Cambio transactions are typically small exchanges with individuals and provide convenience for workers in the tourism industry. The disruption in cambio services may also potentially drive FX transactions underground and increase dollarization in Jamaica. Possible actions are currently being discussed in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) to mitigate the impact on the loss of CBRs for the region. These include: (i) collective action and bundling of services to increase the business volume brought to a smaller number of correspondent banks; (ii) introduction of a scheme to purchase CBR insurance policies; (iii) the possible creation of a US-licensed special purpose vehicle (SPV) to process international transactions; and (iv) payment of CBR service fees.