There is scope for improving liquidity provision and modernizing the structure of monetary operations. Empirical analysis indicates that the policy rate was broadly aligned with the neutral rate after the rate cuts by a total of 50 bps in 2015 (Box 4). Meanwhile, the BoJ cut the policy rate by another 25 bps in May 2016 to 5 percent, given the moderate inflation outlook. More policy rate cuts are feasible if inflation expectations decrease. Meanwhile, pricing for short-term liquidity provision (14-day repos) could be further reduced to be consistent with the lowered policy rate. The transmission from BoJ’s policy rate to market interest rates is relatively weak (Box 4). In line with IMF TA advice, improving monetary policy effectiveness requires establishing a clear operational target and further narrowing the interest rate corridor by consolidating the instruments that define its boundary, taking consistent actions to steer the target within the corridor. Improving the turnover and depth of the interbank market and the secondary bond market will also help strengthen monetary transmission. Page 31 The BoJ should continue to build international reserves. Although the reserve position has significantly improved over the program period, further accumulation is warranted. The near- term goal should be to raise reserve coverage to over 100 percent of the ARA metric by 2017. In addition, the reliance on both borrowed reserves and FX surrender requirements should give way to market purchases overtime. In line with IMF TA advice, the BoJ intends to move to fixed-volume FX auctions to improve market price discovery. The central bank is also weighing measures to address the risk of potentially speculative FX positions of financial institutions that could contribute to further financial stability. Progress is needed to establish a resolution framework for the financial sector . Clearly defining the roles and responsibilities of different agencies in the resolution process is critical. As a next step, a consultation paper with concrete proposals on the framework should be drafted proposed structural benchmark for October 2016 ), following which legislations to support the framework and the national crisis management plan should be drafted and tabled. The BoJ’s mandate for financial stability needs to be substantiated with concrete tools, and information exchange among financial regulators needs to be strengthened. The Financial System Stability Committee—instituted by the amended BoJ Act in 2015—should be formally established to advice on evolving financial stability risks and promoting information exchange across the various agencies (MEFP ¶15). Reserve Adequacy (In percent of GDP) Reserves ARA metric Export revenues 100% of short-term debt 20% of M2 Other liabilities Page 32 Box 4. Monetary Stance and Monetary Transmission in Jamaica The policy rate is a main tool for calibrating monetary policy stance in Jamaica . To assess the appropriateness of the monetary stance, it is useful to compare the current rate with the neutral interest rate—i.e., the prevailing rate at which output gap is closed and inflation stable. Several models are used to estimate the neutral rate Uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) condition. The method relies on the assumption that nominal domestic interest rate should be equal to nominal international interest rate, plus expected nominal depreciation and a country risk premium. Dynamic Taylor Rule. In this model the policy rate is assumed to respond to deviations of (i) inflation from the BoJ’s inflation target, and (ii) real GDP from its potential. General equilibrium. This semi-structural model relates the output gap to the neutral interest rate and the inflation rate to the output gap (Philips curve). For the 2 nd and 3 rd models, systems of equations were estimated using Kalman filter. Model estimates indicate that the current interest rate is aligned with the neutral rate. Based on quarterly data from 2000 to 2015, the UIP method suggests the neutral rate for 90-day T-bills to be 6.3 percent at end-2015, compared to the actual rate of 6 percent. Meanwhile, both the Taylor rule and general equilibrium methods suggest a neutral rate for BoJ 30-day CDs at around 5.1 percent, compared to the actual rate at 5.25 percent. Hence, assuming the output gap being closed in 2016 and inflation within target, the interest rate stance appears broadly appropriate. Monetary policy is responsive to inflation conditions, but not to output gaps. Estimates show that there is a positive relationship between inflation gap, i.e. deviation of inflation from its target, and interest rate gap, which indicates that the policy rate has been adjusted to close the inflation gap. On the other hand, monetary policy has not been used to actively moderate business cycles. Moreover, regression results show that the policy rate stance has little effect on economic growth of the subsequent period, indicating potential weakness in monetary transmission through the credit channel, as discussed below. Changes in the BoJ policy rate have limited effect on market lending rates. Theoretically, changes in the central bank’s policy rate will cause changes in inter-bank rates and the interest rates on short-term government securities in the same direction, through arbitrages among commercial bank asset holdings. A reduction in the interbank rate from an increased supply of funds will tend to reduce bank lending rate and increase credit availability. However, these interest rate channels appear to be relatively weak in Jamaica. Results from estimating a autoregressive distributed lag model using monthly interest rate data shows that a reduction in the BoJ policy rate by 1 ppt leads to a 0.4 ppt reduction in the interbank rate over three months, lower than both advanced and emerging market averages. The pass-through from interbank rate to bank lending rate is even lower, at 0.15, compared to 0.3 and 0.9 in the average advanced and emerging market countries respectively. In addition, data indicates that the pass-through has been lower in the more recent period (after 2010), which is likely a result of the debt exchanges and their impact on bank liquidity and profit. q * mm * Page 33