Jamaica’s growth strategy should focus on fostering the development of a dynamic private sector (Annex II). Jamaica’s per capita GDP growth has averaged 0.3 percent since 2000; the current potential growth is less than 1 percent. Investments and FDI inflows are among the lowest in the region. Traditional goods exports such as bauxite and sugar are losing market share to intense global competition, while the process of diversifying into new export categories has been slow. Tourism has contributed to the largest share in total exports of goods and services, but the upward potential of the sector is constrained by the enclave model that limits positive spillovers into the rest of the economy. Mobilizing the private sector is essential to support an increase in potential growth. z V K tt Fixed Investmentto GDP (In percent, average from 2011 to 2015) z V K tt FDI Net Inflows, Average 2000-2014 (In percent of GDP) Page 24 Private sector dynamism is constrained by multiple factors. Staff analysis indicates that high crime, lack of financial access and high financing cost, and high tax compliance cost are among the primary deterrents to private sector growth. World Bank’s Doing Business indicators show that trade facilitation, contract enforcement, and property registration are some of the areas Jamaica needs urgent improvement in. In addition, better infrastructure, greater external competitiveness and improved public sector efficiency and resource allocation will help foster private sector-led growth. Access to and Cost of Financing Low financial access and high financing cost hamper private sector growth. Commercial banks have historically focused on providing government financing, resulting in crowding out of private credit. Low level of bank operational efficiency and high taxation of the financial sector have led to high interest rate margins on loans to the private sector. Efforts are needed on both macro and micro fronts to improve financial access and reduce the interest rate spread. Financial regulations. Increasing banking sector competition, including by allowing qualified new entrants, conditional on implementing requisite supervision and regulation, should help lending rates become more responsive to policy rate changes and lower interest rate spreads. High collateral requirements (currently averaging over 200 percent of loan value) hinder financial access. The Security Interests in Personal Property Act was a helpful step to encourage the use of movable properties as collaterals, although complementary regulatory changes are needed to make the new law effective. The reporting requirements for opening bank accounts and applying for loans are onerous. Implementing a risk-based approach in assessing applicant risks can help reduce the reporting cost for low-risk borrowers. Improving land titling and creditor protection, and speedy implementation of the new bankruptcy law are also important. Taxation. The financial sector currently faces a combination of asset taxes, a higher CIT rate, and distortionary transaction taxes, resulting in combined statutory tax rates of 40-50 percent. A more equitable tax treatment across regulated and non-regulated entities would help lower the interest rate spread and costs of financial services. Reforms could be combined with the introduction of a capital gains tax and broadening indirect taxation to the financial sector. Tax reforms, combined with more competition and better credit assessment, could increase private credit creation and support growth. Financial services . The development of agency banking services, mobile money products, and factoring and leasing services should facilitate financial inclusion and deepening, especially tt tt Page 25 among the under-banked population, such as rural borrowers and SMEs. Advancing electronic payment/transaction systems can help reduce the usage of cash and bank operating costs. Equity and debt markets . Developing financial markets to provide alternate financing sources is important for building private sector entrepreneurship. For example, expansion of the junior stock exchange should be encouraged. However, this should be achieved by lowering barriers to entry and simplifying listing requirements—with appropriate risk control—rather than using tax incentives to encourage listing, which is subject to abuse. Energy, Logistics, and External Competitiveness Energy generation sources should be diversified to help sustainably reduce energy cost. Several projects are underway to diversify Jamaica’s energy landscape, including the conversion in the Bogue power plant from diesel- to natural gas-based power generation and the new 190MW gas-powered plant by Jamaica Public Service. Upgrading the grid infrastructure and improving metering and billing should help reduce distribution losses and lower electricity cost. Strengthening public-private partnerships in renewable energy and the power sector’s regulatory framework to encourage private-sector participation will facilitate investments in the sector. Efforts are ongoing to improve critical infrastructure . Concession of the Kingston Container Terminal and privatization of the international airport in Kingston will help modernize and lower operational costs of both structures, increasing Jamaica’s attractiveness as an investment destination and a logistics hub. Improving road connectivity across the island would promote linkages between tourism and the rest of the economy. Exchange rate flexibility is needed to avoid the past patterns of the competitiveness erosion from currency overvaluation. In applying EBA-lite methodologies on exchange rate valuation, special consideration is given to external sustainability, given Jamaica’s large negative international investment position (-140 percent of GDP, Annex III). Convergence to a more sustainable IIP position (-70 percent of GDP, about the average for other emerging market countries at a similar GDP per capita level) in a period of no more than 15 years would require a somewhat more depreciated real effective exchange rate. The equilibrium real exchange rate model also points to overvaluation, while the current account model points to modest undervaluation. Given the mixed findings, staff’s view is that the exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. That said, given the importance of the IIP sustainability, the balance of risks is toward a modest overvaluation, which was a past pattern that eroded external competitiveness. Thus, it is essential to maintain a floating exchange rate, with the Jamaican dollar depreciating by at least as much as the inflation differential with trading partners. Maintaining a flexible exchange rate would imply that interventions in the FX market—which should be governed by BoJ’s decisions—should be largely for the purpose of building reserves and smoothing out excessive exchange rate volatility. Page 26 Efficient allocation of public resources Further tax policy reforms are needed to support private sector development. Notwithstanding tax reform achievements over the last few years, current PIT, education tax and social contributions (NIS and NHT) impose high tax rates on moderate-income workers, discouraging formality. The ongoing plan to lower the PIT burden is a bold step in moving away from reliance on distortionary direct taxes, encouraging formality and rebalancing towards indirect taxes. These reforms, however, need to be backed by strong implementation of offsetting measures to safeguard revenues and avoid undermining fiscal performance (¶37). Efforts are needed to reduce taxpayer compliance costs and improve tax administration, particularly given the risk of revenue loss from the ongoing PIT reform Significant progress has been achieved in improving compliance among large taxpayers. In the future, there is scope for expanding audit capacity to improve compliance also among the medium and small taxpayers. Also, in light of the new transfer pricing law, and in line with IMF TA advice, a review of Jamaica’s international tax regime is warranted, with a focus on thin capitalization rules, tax treaties and withholding taxes. This is especially important given the reliance on taxes from the financial sector which has large multinational players. The new Special Economic Zones (SEZ) will also pose leakage risks. Stronger domestic ties from SEZs, while increasing value added to the economy, will also put additional strain on a still developing revenue administration. Regulations to safeguard revenues should be passed as soon as possible, including clear administrative penalties, sanctions against tax evasion, and strong bonded warehouse controls. With help from the World Bank, Phase III of the Customs Act is expected to be tabled by December 2016 and will include measures to facilitate trade and streamline customs procedures (e.g., uniform documentation requirements, improving multi-agency coordination, and permitting electronic payments) to lower the costs of compliance to importers and exporters. Improving public sector efficiency will support private sector-led job creation. The recent announcement of the divestment of Petcom to private investors is a welcome step. The authorities’ commitment to a time-bound action plan for the divestment of public enterprises and implementing shared-corporate services ( proposed structural benchmark end-September 2016) is important. A strategic examination of the role of government in different areas will be needed with a view to scale back some services and prioritize others. Strengthening control systems and ee + + T Page 27 accountability, and addressing duplication and inefficiencies in public employment will be key first steps to achieve the 9 percent of GDP wage bill target and open fiscal space for growth-enhancing capital spending (¶38). Protecting the poor Strengthening PATH transfers and services is key to protecting the poor and reducing inequality. Rebalancing from direct to indirect taxes will require improved targeting of PATH transfers to ensure that any increased funding only goes to the neediest. Speedy implementation of the national identification system (NIDS) will be an important step in this regard. The first phase of the project, which included the development of the legislative and institutional framework and designing the ICT infrastructure, has been completed with IDB support. In addition, services currently provided through PATH, such as entrepreneurship and skills training, should be strengthened and expanded to help workers transition into dynamic sectors. Authorities’ Views There was agreement on the need for reforms to boost growth. Authorities emphasized that promoting growth is the central mandate of the current government. They have launched an Economic Growth Council, comprised of private sector leaders, to advise the government and hold it accountable on initiatives to stimulate growth. The authorities also plan to invest in agro-parks and water infrastructure, seek out large foreign investments, and improve skill training for young people, in order to support growth and job creation. Authorities noted that the PIT reforms will be an important step in rebalancing from direct to indirect taxes and could generate compliance dividends from increased formality. They are committed to increasing the efficiency of the public sector, and noted that the plans for divestment and outsourcing will yield significant gains. Authorities are cognizant of the risks posed by transfer pricing practices and SEZs and will seek to put in place containment measures, while noting that staff should be mindful of capacity constraints. On the junior stock exchange tax incentive, the authorities noted that the tax incentive played an instrumental role in SMEs’ decision to go public, and intend to continue implementing the incentive while tightening rules to prevent its abuse. On exchange rate valuation, the authorities agree that external competitiveness should be maintained. But they stressed the importance of exchange rate stability in facilitating economic activities and reducing dollarization pressure. Page 28