Upfront and sustained adjustment of the primary balance is at the heart of the authorities’ fiscal strategy. Experience across smaller countries offers support for the proposition that important debt reduction can be implemented through sustained increases in the primary balance as long as the emphasis is on structurally reducing the wage bill and boosting tax revenues (Box 2). Given the high debt and its effect on confidence and activity, Jamaica will unfortunately need to sustain its high primary surplus for many years and will, as a result, not be in a position to smooth economic volatility through countercyclical policies. Such an effort will require a significant social and political commitment over the course of several years. The authorities confirmed their determination to maintain the primary surplus of the central government at 7½ percent of GDP, and the balance of the combined public bodies at zero, during the program period (MEFP ¶26). The 2014/15 budget remains aligned with program targets . The ongoing reduction in the government wage bill owing to the multiyear wage agreement allows for the maintenance of capital spending, despite a return of nontax revenues to previous (lower) levels. Given a lack of buoyancy in tax revenues, new tax policy measures were needed to maintain the tax revenue ratio (MEFP ¶9), and the room for new spending initiatives remains constrained. In addition, recent history suggests a possibility of revenues continuing to fall short which underscores the imperative of efforts to strengthen revenue collection (see below) and puts a premium on identifying spending contingencies early on which can be deployed if needed to safeguard achievement of the overall fiscal target without a further contraction in critical capital expenditures. Accelerating improvements in revenue collection will be key to the success of the government’s fiscal strategy. The recent elimination of discretionary tax waivers and the replacement of sector-specific tax incentives with a more standardized approach should reduce rent seeking and create a broader and more reliable revenue base (MEFP ¶11–14). However, the objective of broadening the revenue base to create room for lower tax rates has been only partly achieved and more could be done (e.g. by including electricity consumption in the Generalized Consumption Tax above a consumption threshold to protect the poor). The IaDB is providing technical assistance to help gauge the scope for such further efforts. On the administration side, taxpayer registration is relatively low and high compliance costs discourage filing and payment. Furthermore, the audit program pursues relatively few cases to completion. Under a new action plan, developed with FAD/IaDB TA, the government is prioritizing: (i) establishing a tax administration modernization program with a dedicated manager and staff; (ii) developing a set of productivity indicators to judge performance; (iii) implementing new IT systems for both tax and customs administration; Even so, an exceptionally large adverse shock could necessitate a temporary deviation from the debt reduction path, and for this purpose an escape clause was built into the fiscal rule. Tax revenue as a share of GDP is expected to effectively increase by 0.1 percent of GDP from 2013/14. The larger increase shown in the tables reflects the extension of the General Consumption Tax to government purchases which will raise recorded revenues and expenditures by the same amount. Other new tax measures include broadening the base of the excise and consumption taxes, along with raising taxes on financial entities’ assets. Page 14 (iv) strengthening the Large Taxpayer Office (LTO), with increased audit coverage, and mandatory electronic filing and electronic payment; and (v) introducing new enforcement powers (e.g., to seize and sell property) through additional legislation (MEFP ¶15, 16). Getting greater control over the financial performance of the public bodies is critical. Repeated slippages in the balance of the many public bodies have highlighted the vulnerability of the government’s goals for the overall balance of the public sector. Lessening this vulnerability would involve strict government oversight to control the finances of public bodies, adjusting regulated prices on a timely basis to promote cost-recovery, and addressing overdue payments to public utility companies, including by local governments. The authorities broadly agreed with these measures but also argued for excluding large commercial entities, in particular, Petrojam, from the overall public sector balance, given that its operations were determined by commercial considerations and were outside the direct control of government. A range of reforms are underway to strengthen fiscal institutions: Fiscal Rule . Legislation was recently adopted to establish a fiscal rule that will constrain annual budgets by a goal for public sector debt— excluding the central bank and commercially- oriented public entities— of no more than 60 percent of GDP by 2025/26. This new regime signals the authorities’ determination to maintain strict fiscal discipline anchored on an ambitious target for debt reduction. While no particular definition of public debt is unequivocally superior, the shift that is foreseen under the fiscal rule (after the program period) to a more broad measure of public debt—beyond that defined in the Fund- supported program—is warranted (see text figure). In this regard, work is ongoing to define which public entities are considered to be commercially-oriented, and to entrench the rule into public expectations so that future governments are held accountable for deviations from the rule (MEFP ¶17, 18). Contingent Liabilities . Much of the past build up of debt occurred as fiscal risks materialized. Preventing a repeat requires much stronger controls over guarantees and other contingent liabilities. To address this, the government is planning to incorporate a comprehensive fiscal risks statement in the annual budget and has put a cap on the cumulative value of loans for PPPs, at 3 percent of GDP for the next three years. In addition, the government is committed to Direct government debt (excl. IMF credit)Authorities' definition EFF definition (baseline) Fiscal Rule (public sector, consolidated)Public Sector (non-consolidated) Alternative Public Debt Indicators, End-March 2014 The coverage options are defined as follows:-Public sector: provides the widest coverage of debt(captures central government debt and all public bodies' debt).-Fiscal Rule (public sector,consolidated):Nets-out cross-holdings of debt among public bodies and the central government.-EFF definition (baseline) : Includes government direct debt and debt of public bodies that is guaranteed by the central government, and PetroCaribe debt.Authorities' definition: Includes central government direct debt and external guaranteed debt. Page 15 refrain from any further government financial support for the state-owned Clarendon Aluminum Production (CAP) company. Public Financial Management . The authorities’ have an extensive agenda for PFM reform, supported by the World Bank and IaDB (MEFP ¶19, 20). Several actions are worth highlighting that will support the effectiveness of the fiscal rule. These include developing early and accurate budget envelopes and priorities; increasing the reliability of revenue projections; fully implementing the central treasury management system; enhancing the capacity to assess and report fiscal risks and contingencies associated with PPPs; and implementing the newly created Public Investment Management System to improve investment planning. A sustained reduction in the wage bill depends critically on accelerating reforms to modernize the public sector (MEFP ¶24). The multi-year agreement that limits public sector wages, and aims to help reduce the wage bill to 9 percent of GDP, has been vital to achieving the near-term fiscal adjustment. However, such a compression in real wages is not sustainable over a longer horizon and will need to be replaced by deeper reforms that: Address duplication and inefficiencies in public employment; Close, streamline and divest public entities; Align remuneration with job requirements; Automate the systems for remuneration and human resource management; Strengthen control systems and accountability (including in auditing, and procurement). While some of these steps have started, the pace of reform needs to be accelerated and given a higher priority, with an ambitious action plan and strict timelines. This would allow the government to have ready a more comprehensive approach to personnel management and control of the wage bill once the wage agreement expires (in early 2015). Page 16 Box 2. Episodes of Large Debt Reduction in Smaller States—Benchmarking the Ongoing Debt Reduction in Jamaica Experience from successful debt reduction episodes underscores the importance of adhering to strong primary fiscal surplus objectives to achieve lasting gains in debt reduction. .Jamaica’s public debt reduction goal (50 pp of GDP from 2012/13 to 2019/20) would place it near the top of smaller countries which successfully reduced their debt through a large fiscal consolidation. Out of 35 cases in which countries started to improve their primary fiscal balance, 14 successfully reduced their debt ratio 4 years out and 11 of these cases featured a cumulative improvement in the primary balance over the 5-year period. While most countries in the successful and unsuccessful groups raised their tax revenue during the adjustment period, successful episodes tended to be linked to a larger reduction in the wage bill… …combined with less compression in the non-wage current primary spending, confirming results for a wider set of countries (Tsibouris et al. (2006)). References: Amo-Yartey, C. and T. Turner-Jones (2014)), Caribbean Renewal: Tackling Fiscal and Debt Challenges, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C., Tsibouris, G., Horton, M., Flanagan, M. and W. Maliszewski (2006) “Experience with Large Fiscal Adjustments”, Occasional Paper No. 246, International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook. ––––––––––––––––––––––– 1/ The full sample covers all cases in which an episode of fiscal consolidation is defined to start with an improvement of the primary fiscal balance by one percentage point of GDP or more and last as long as the primary fiscal balance does not deteriorate from the previous year. Fiscal consolidation is deemed successful if a country’s debt to GDP ratio remains lower four years following the year preceding the fiscal consolidation episode. The analysis focuses on the 30 percent largest episodes of fiscal consolidation, abstracting from resource exporters. The focus is on countries no larger than Jamaica, as smaller economies tend to be more open and with smaller fiscal multipliers (Amo-Yartey and Turner-Jones (2014)), which would lessen the output cost of adjustment. 2/ The case of Jamaica is as currently projected under the program. It is benchmarked against the successful episodes in the sample given the envisaged size of the debt reduction. ll iji hu V nu I L Residual Primary deficit Growth Inflation Interest payments Debt reduction Success: Contribution to Debt Reduction 2/ (percentof GDP) L V ll hu V nu hu L hu ã é P ll hu I ll K tt Residual Primary deficit Growth Inflation Interest payments Debt reduction Non-Success: Contribution to Debt Reduction (percentof GDP) SuccessNon-success 75th 50th 25th Wage Bill (change during consolidation episode, percentage points of GDP) SuccessNon-success 75th 50th 25th Other Current Expenditure (change during consolidationepisode, percentage points of GDP) Page 17 Significant unfunded liabilities make public sector pension reform a priority. Spending on pensions has risen from 2 percent of GDP to 3 percent over the past decade. The authorities have tabled a White Paper on public sector pension reform that proposes parametric changes, including a gradual increase in the normal retirement age from 60 to 65 years (MEFP ¶25). The reforms were expected to be implemented by 2016 and would limit the rise in pension fund deficits to about 0.5 percent of GDP over the coming decade. However, the general public pension system remains financially unsustainable and steps will be needed to assess and close the emerging gap. Under the program, Jamaica’s public debt has been put onto a sustainable path. Over the past year, significant progress has been made in identifying and implementing policies to ensure the government’s goal—of public debt at 96 percent of GDP by March 2020—becomes a reality. At end-March 2014 estimated debt stood at 140 percent of GDP and it is expected to fall by 5–8 percentage points per year into the medium term. While there are significant uncertainties surrounding any debt forecast, under currently identified policies the debt level is expected at 99 percent of GDP by March 2020. However, the authorities continue working to identifying additional debt-asset swaps, asset sales and the withdrawal of existing guarantees so as to achieve the 96 percent of GDP goal by March 2020 (MEFP ¶22). Nevertheless, Jamaica’s public debt trajectory remains vulnerable to a range of macroeconomic, fiscal and contingent liability shocks (Annex II). There was general recognition of these vulnerabilities and there is an ongoing effort to mitigate them through the range of fiscal reforms discussed above and efforts to strengthen debt management and improve debt recording and monitoring. The authorities are in the process of preparing an enhanced debt management strategy, as well as a plan for Jamaica’s return to international markets. D.