Targeted actions are needed to leverage the impact of the growth strategy on employment prospects, especially for young people, the low skilled, and women. Skills development will be critical to address Jamaica’s very high unemployment among youth (which stood at 33.3 percent in January 2014). In 2013, approximately 1,400 people received training for entering the workforce through the HEART (Human Employment And Resource Training Trust) workforce colleges. To help address chronic unemployment, especially among low-skilled labor and persons with special needs, about 40,000 Jamaicans were employed under the Jamaica Emergency Employment Program (JEEP) by end-2013. Women have been hit particularly hard by the downturn since 2008, as female unemployment has increased by 3.6 percentage points, to 17.4 percent (male unemployment rose by 2.8 percentage points, to 10.1 percent). Programs should address the risk of marginalization and lack of opportunities including through access to basic health and education services for young children from poor households. Education systems need to be reoriented to the changing economic demands, with more emphasis on technical and ICT skills. The government has put significant weight on strengthening social protection programs (MEFP ¶41,42) In the past, the fiscal room for social programs has been crowded out by Jamaica’s high interest costs. Despite the significant fiscal adjustment that has taken place, the government has underscored the importance of reversing this erosion and is committed to, as a minimum, maintaining the real value of social spending over the next 3 years. The existing conditional cash transfer program (PATH), a vital component of that social safety net, is being strengthened with repeated increases in the transfer amounts (well beyond inflation), and with World Bank and IaDB assistance. A recertification exercise has been initiated to ensure it remains well targeted. There is also some scope to expand support for the training of program participants and addressing areas of duplication and overlap with programs outside of PATH. Page 13 C.