Forward-looking indicators have improved despite slow growth. Business confidence has increased to an all-time high in February 2016. Consumer confidence is also trending up. With agricultural recovery remaining slow, growth is estimated at 0.8 percent in 2015. Good tourism performance (arrival increased by 2.1 percent y/y in 2015) continued to drive growth, with recovery in manufacturing, including the normalization of petroleum refinery operation, also contributing. Net foreign direct investments increased by 30 percent in the first three quarters of FY15/16. The unemployment rate dropped to 13.3 percent in January 2016 from 14.2 percent in January 2015. Trade and construction generated the largest employment gains. q Index of present business conditions Index of future business conditions Real GDP growth, y-o-y (right)Source: Bank of Jamaica. Business Conditions and Real GDP Growth IMF Stand-byArrangementIMF Extended Fund Facility Page 16 Falling oil prices have lowered inflation and the current account deficit. Inflation was 2.4 percent in April 2016, among the lowest historically, primarily owing to lower global oil prices and continued weakness in domestic demand. The current account deficit was 2.2 percent of GDP in Q4 2015, an improvement of 8.7 percent of GDP over Q4 2014. The improvement was mainly due to reduced import costs of fuels. Exports also declined, partly due to the drop in bauxite exports. Supported by low inflation in Q1 2016, the real effective exchange rate depreciated by 2.4 percent y/y; the J$ depreciated by 6 percent against the US dollar. The BoJ made net foreign exchange (FX) market sales in the run-up to the general elections to smooth market movements associated with political uncertainties as well as from the liquidity injection resulting from a large bond redemption in February. More recently, net FX market sales have occurred in April/May to reduce the exchange rate pressure which appears to have resulted from the prospect of a large US$ corporate bond issuance by a foreign financial institution. The financial system is stable and credit growth is slowly recovering. Financial stability indicators are improving; the higher risk appetite largely reflects lower bond spread and higher foreign inflows. Banks’ capital adequacy ratio hovers around 15 percent and NPLs are less than 5 percent of total loans. The banking sector’s profit margin improved slightly in 2015 compared to the previous year. The December 2015 stress tests indicated that the banking sector was generally resilient to shocks. Private sector credit growth is showing some uptick, increasing by 11 percent y/y in Q1 2016, partly reflecting increased capital investments in hotel and business process outsourcing (BPO) industries. Household debt as a share of disposable income has risen in the past five years, and was at 70 percent in 2015, reflecting faster growth of household debt relative to income growth. Corporate loan growth increased in real terms slightly by 4.8 percent y/y in 2015. Banks’ exposure to the corporate sector, however, has declined for three years in a row, to around 17.2 percent of total bank assets in 2015, while corporate sector NPLs continued to decrease. Private lending through corporate bond issuance has been buoyant, increasing by 24 percent in Q4 2015 in real terms, albeit from a low base (non- financial corporate bond stock is estimated at around 30 percent of bank credit stock). The Jamaica Stock Exchange finished highest globally in 2015—an increase by 97 percent, driven by investor confidence, higher earnings by listed companies, and greater investor interest from the ongoing switch from retail repos to collective investment vehicles—and continues to rise in 2016. ill q pp nd nd pp V nd X Page 17