Risks remain high (Annex I). Investor confidence is frail as doubts remain about the efficacy of the various adjustment efforts, financing constraints, and possible reform fatigue. The slow recovery of economic confidence risks also delaying the return of liquidity to the debt market. On the fiscal side, weak revenues, a deteriorating performance by the public bodies, or a disruption in external financing (including PetroCaribe financing by Venezuela), all represent risks that could strain public finances and derail debt reduction. The debt outlook could also worsen as a result of less favorable financing terms. Finally, Jamaica remains vulnerable to natural disasters, lower partner-country growth, and oil price shocks, as well as the economic drag of pervasive crime. Failure of Jamaica’s reform effort could have serious adverse regional repercussions, including through financial linkages . The main economic channels would be through financial sector entities that are also located in other Caribbean islands, and through holdings of Jamaican government bonds. Trade linkages are limited. Failure of Jamaica’s program could also undermine traction within the region of fundamental economic reform. The authorities broadly shared the staff’s view on the economic outlook and risks. They saw upside potential for growth over the medium term as large (privately financed) strategic Fiscal impulse Expenditure impulse Fiscal and Expenditure Impulses: Initial Contributions to Growth in Aggregate Demand (percent of previous year's GDP) Page 10 investments are implemented and transform the economy. At the same time, and notwitstanding their unwavering comittment to implementing the program, officials were concerned about the society’s capacity to absorb ongoing painful reforms, including exchange rate depreciation, without tangible benefits becoming manifest in the form of jobs and income growth. They also highlighted the administrative and legislative capacity constraints to reform, which had already resulted in minor delays. Finally, they stressed the difficult trade-offs between the pace of fiscal and external adjustment and the space for supporting domestic demand, particularly through delaying needed public investment.