Growth is expected to remain weak due to anemic consumption, lackluster investment and fiscal drag. The economy is projected to grow in line with potential at 0.5 percent in 2016, before slowing to 0.3 percent in 2017, excluding the possible effect of the yet-to-be-adopted supplementary budget (Table 3). Consumption . Private consumption will grow modestly in 2016, underpinned by lower commodity prices, targeted fiscal transfers, and rising labor force participation. The rising ratio of retirees to workers, however, has increased the share of non-wage income to total net disposable income, currently at 50 percent, making consumption less dependent on wage developments. Public spending and taxation . Fiscal policy will pose a drag on growth in 2017, reflecting the withdrawal of past stimulus and waning reconstruction spending. Net exports . A slow global recovery and yen appreciation are expected to dampen export growth. Investment . High profits, an aging capital stock, and supportive credit conditions should provide a favorable environment for investment. However, heightened uncertainty, sustained appreciation of the yen and shrinking domestic markets will curb investment demand. As a result, the expansion of the credit cycle is expected to be restrained in the medium term. Inflation will remain well below the BoJ’s inflation target. Average headline inflation is projected to remain at around 0.2 percent in 2016, reflecting drag from low energy prices, the recent yen appreciation, lower inflation expectations, and weakness in demand. Over time, inflation will gradually rise, supported by energy price developments and slowly building wage-price pressures, but with adaptive expectations progress will remain slow. Page 16 Risks to the near-term outlook are tilted to the upside from likely additional fiscal demand support, but downside dominates in the medium term (Annex I). Domestic risks . Upside risks reflect the likely adoption of a substantial supplementary budget for 2017. On the other hand, incomplete policies may lead to further appreciation of the yen, triggering renewed deflation risks. External risks . A sharper-than-expected moderation of growth in China and/or weaker growth in advanced economies – including due to the outcome of the Brexit referendum – could lead to global financial turbulence causing safe-haven yen appreciation, potentially derailing the recovery (See forthcoming Supplement to this report). Financial stability risks . If the decline in JGB market liquidity became structural, it could trigger higher volatility in government bond yields. Moreover, risk exposures from equity price volatility and from the rapid expansion of overseas loans could impact financial stability, particularly given global financial volatility and rising USD funding costs. Macro-financial feedback loops could be shock amplifiers . At the core of the risk nexus lies the sustainability of low risk premiums in a high public debt environment, and a stable financial system in the context of unprecedented unconventional monetary policies. In this environment, shock amplification can occur through macro-financial linkages between stagnation and deflation, financial imbalances, or public debt dynamics (see figure). The main risk stems from loss of fiscal confidence, leading to higher sovereign risk premiums, and forcing abrupt further fiscal adjustment with adverse feedback loops to the financial system and the real economy. Risks from imbalances in the financial system, although limited at present, constitute a tail risk with scope for an adverse feedback loop if they triggered a sovereign backstop. Page 17 Macro-financial Linkages as Shock Amplifiers Available buffers and policy responses to downside risks depend on the size and origin of the shock. A coordinated response, making use of fiscal and monetary policies should be the first line of defense to counter downside growth shocks. The fiscal response will need to be contingent on the behavior of the sovereign risk premium and its impact on financial stability. Substantial downward shocks with a large adverse impact on growth, inflation, and debt dynamics or the failure of policies to make progress toward fiscal sustainability over the medium term could exhaust the effectiveness of conventional buffers. Authorities’ Views The authorities were confident that growth will pick up, and the BoJ was confident that inflation could still reach its target in FY 2017 . While noting recent weakness in consumption, the government expected the economy to continue its modest recovery as investment picks up and the employment and income situation improve. They noted that the decision to postpone the consumption tax and introduce an economic stimulus package should prevent demand from stalling and accelerate the recovery further. The authorities maintained their medium- term growth target of 2 percent underlying the fiscal consolidation plan and would update their medium-to long-term projections this summer. The BoJ noted that their inflation forecast hinged on inflation expectations becoming more forward-looking and rising towards the target during their timeframe, triggered by the emergence of a positive output gap, rising actual inflation, and their strong commitment and recent policy actions. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s risk assessment, but highlighted that external factors dominated, including the slowdown in overseas economies and volatility in global financial markets. Page 18