Japan should be at the vanguard of structural reform. The economy faces the formidable challenge of a rapidly shrinking labor force which needs to be countered by higher labor force participation and faster productivity growth. Despite some progress in a number of areas, the impact of reforms has yet to substantially materialize and potential growth remains far below what is required to realize the “revitalization” scenario. While swift implementation of already announced reforms is essential, it should be accompanied by further substantial reforms to boost confidence and contribute to higher domestic demand. Policy Issues and Staff’s Views Structural reforms are progressing in a number of areas . Female labor force participation, which had been rising gradually since the mid-2000s on tightening labor market conditions, got a further boost with Abenomics, possibly as a result of increased availability of child-care facilities and cash transfers to families with children. Significant progress has been made in corporate governance reforms which are expected to unlock large corporate cash positions. Measures taken so far include the Stewardship Code inducing greater institutional investor activism; the amendment of the Companies Act and the adoption of Corporate Governance Code requiring listed companies to appoint outside directors on a “comply or explain” basis; and the launching of the JPX-Nikkei Index 400 comprising only profitable firms with good corporate governance and disclosure. Deregulation in designated special economic zones (SEZs) is under discussion at the local government level. Even so, these measures may not suffice to counter the headwinds on labor supply from adverse demographics. Further high-impact reforms are urgently needed. Labor market reform: Building on encouraging progress, female labor force participation can be boosted further by eliminating tax-induced disincentives to work and raising the availability of child-care facilities through deregulation. Drawing more aggressively than planned on foreign labor by relaxing immigration restrictions in sectors with labor shortages as well as incentivizing older workers to remain in the workforce would help address labor shortages that hamper investment. New hiring should See Ganelli and Miake (IMF WP, forthcoming). 0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4565860626466681994M41997M42000M42003M42006M42009M42012M42015M4 FLFP (15 to 64 years old) Job Vacancy Ratio (RHS)Source: Haver Analytics. Female Labor Force Participation Rate and Job Vacancy Ratio (In percent) Abenomics Stock of Foreign Labor Force (In percent of labor force, 2008) Source: International Migration Outlook 2010. Page 15 take place under contracts that balance job security and flexibility to reduce labor market duality and raise horizontal mobility, contributing to higher productivity and wage growth. The authorities should move quickly to clarify the legal and regulatory environment surrounding these “intermediate” contracts. At the minimum, these reforms should counter the declining labor force, but in the medium-term they need to boost potential growth above current levels. Corporate governance reform: Governance reforms should be strengthened to unlock renewed dynamism in product markets. Next steps should include more ambitious requirements for independent directors, greater transparency of beneficial ownership, as well as other measures to reduce incentives to hoard cash such as introducing regulatory limits to discourage excessive cross-shareholdings, removing bottlenecks which prevent takeovers, and introducing pre- packaged reorganization plans for bankruptcy procedures. Deregulation: The conclusion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement could provide a boost to activity, but only if it leads to deregulation of agriculture and domestic services sectors and elimination of most tariffs and non-tariff and investment barriers in Japan. Deregulation in SEZs should be expedited with a view to rolling out these reforms nation-wide as soon as possible as it would raise productivity and provide investment opportunities, including inward foreign direct investment. The financial sector should help drive more efficient resource allocation . It should take advantage of the recent corporate governance reforms to unwind cross-shareholdings, foster consolidation in the enterprise sector, and promote exit of unviable enterprises. The authorities should phase out financial sector support schemes for SMEs that do not invest or hire workers and promote the expansion of securitization and the provision of risk capital. The supervisory agency’s guidance to move from collateral to risk-based lending and its efforts to promote better risk management should help. Private-sector led consolidation in the financial system, in particular among regional banks, would also be beneficial. Given the substantial changes to the portfolio allocation of the GPIF, it will be important to strengthen its governance structure. To further promote portfolio rebalancing of households to riskier investment through tax-exempt individual savings accounts, consideration should be given to extending the 5-year term limit and gradually raising the maximum contribution limit. As part of the tripartite dialogue, the authorities are rightly calling for higher wage increases. The labor market is very tight with the unemployment rate at historic lows and participation rising. With booming profits, corporations have the opportunity to establish favorable wage-price dynamics. Ongoing wage increases are a good start, and their momentum should be further strengthened by raising all administratively controlled wages and prices, calling for a supplementary wage round, the conversion of some of the seemingly permanent bonuses into base wages, and a stronger-than-usual winter bonus round. Higher-than-usual minimum wage increases and strengthening tax incentives for firms that raise wages should be considered. Page 16 The authorities emphasized significant progress with ongoing reforms, such as corporate governance. They noted that enhancement of corporate governance was leading to a historic shift in Japan’s corporate culture, which should result in a much more dynamic corporate sector. The authorities felt that their “comply or explain” approach would be effective in a Japanese context. The “ Seiroshi ” tripartite dialogue among the government, corporate sector, and labor, in which PM Abe actively participates, led to large wage hikes for two consecutive years by encouraging large companies enjoying record high profitability to grant generous wage increases and higher contract prices to their suppliers. In addition, the authorities emphasized progress on other structural reforms such as labor market reforms and deregulation: 25 related bills have been submitted to the Diet, with the final stage reforms in the energy sector being approved on June 17, 2015, adding to the 44 bills which have already been passed (Annex I). The authorities highlighted that the FY2015 tax reform aimed to support growth. The statutory corporate tax rate was cut by 2.5 and 0.8 percentage points in FY2015 and FY2016, respectively, reducing it by a cumulative 3.3 percentage points by FY2016. To finance the CIT-rate reduction, encourage companies to make more active efforts to improve their profitability and develop new technologies, and induce companies to record corporate income, the deduction limitation for loss carried forward was modified. It is being lowered from 80 to 65 percent in FY2015 and to 50 percent in FY2017. The pro-forma standard taxation (based on value added and capital base of corporations) will be expanded from ¼ to ½ of local enterprise tax revenue between FY2014–16. These changes should reduce the tax burden on companies with “profit-earning power” and allow a broader sharing of the tax burden. The authorities eased requirements to qualify for tax incentives for wage hikes.