After a brief slowdown, growth rebounded sharply in early 2014 (Figure 1) GDP growth accelerated to 6.7 percent (q/q, saar) in the first quarter of 2014, exceeding market expectations by a wide margin. The two main drivers were strong rush demand ahead of the consumption tax increase and a sharp rise in private nonresidential investment. Net exports remained a drag on growth. Private consumption. Last-minute consumer spending ahead of the April 1 consumption tax rate increase lifted private consumption growth to 9.2 percent (q/q, saar). The acceleration was similar in magnitude to the pick up of demand ahead of the 1997 tax increase (from 3 to 5 percent). High frequency data indicate that private consumption declined in April, broadly as expected. Business investment expanded substantially faster than projected. Private nonresidential investment grew by 34.2 percent (q/q, saar) in the first quarter, the second highest pace since the bubble burst in early 1990s. Staff estimates that ¼ to ⅓ of the increase could be related to temporary factors , with the remaining part related to fundamentals: high corporate profitability, an aging capital stock––more than 16 years on average in manufacturing sector— and rapidly rising capacity utilization. Exports recovered slower than expected given the yen depreciation and external demand when benchmarked against an empirical model for export growth (Figure 2). Customs trade data show that real exports of goods declined by 1.0 percent (q/q, sa) in the first quarter, mainly because of weak external demand, but also because of limited passthrough of the depreciation to export prices in local currencies and competitiveness problems in the external sector (Appendix III). Institutions which are not obliged to charge consumption tax on their services (such as financial sector institutions, hospitals, and small firms) frontloaded purchases of investment goods on which they pay consumption tax. Because of changes in the BOP statistics, national accounts data on exports and imports in the first quarter of 2014 are not comparable with data from 2013 (Table 1). t-6t-5t-4t-3t-2t-1t Japan: Synthetic Real Consumption (Monthly index; t-6 = 100) Source: Cabinet Office / Haver Analytics. Page 7 Imports , on the other hand, were pushed up by demand for consumer items ahead of the consumption tax increase (e.g. tablets, smartphones) and grew by 4.6 percent in the first quarter (q/q, sa). This trend reversed in April, when imports declined sharply (9.9 percent, m/m, sa) in line with declining consumption. Labor markets tightened and capacity constraints started to bind. Excess capacity has shrunk to pre-2008 levels and the unemployment rate declined to 3.5 percent in May with labor shortages particularly acute in construction, health and hospitality services Capital and foreign exchange markets have been relatively stable this year. As a result of the BoJ’s aggressive asset purchases, Japanese government bonds (JGBs) yield remained near historic lows of 60–65 basis points for 10-year bonds. Negative real lending rates aided a notable pickup in bank lending, including to small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) (Figure 3). After rising 57 percent in 2013, equity markets have moderated somewhat (about 7¼ percent) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) has been broadly unchanged since the beginning of the year (Figure 4).