The economy is expected to recover moderately in 2015–16. Following negative growth in 2014 (-0.1 percent), the economy is projected to grow by 0.8 and 1.2 percent in 2015 and 2016, respectively (Table 1). Private consumption should gradually strengthen as real compensation is forecast to grow by 1 percent and 1.2 percent in 2015 and 2016, respectively, after declining by 0.6 percent last year. Higher nominal wage growth and lower headline inflation, helped by the oil windfall, will more than offset moderating employment growth. The higher real purchasing power will contribute to steady consumption growth this Mar-10Mar-11Mar-12Mar-13Mar-14Mar-15 Capital adequacy ratio Major banks Internationaly active banks14.515.515.715.315.215.6Domestic banks12.812.413.114.314.314.0Regional banksInternationaly active banks11.313.214.114.314.314.4Domestic banks 1/11.411.311.111.311.011.0 NPL ratio Major banks1.81.81.81.81.31.1Regional banks3.23.23.23.23.12.6Source: Japanese authorities.1/ Domestic banks have significant unrecognized gains in their balance sheet. Growth in Real Compensation (Year-on-year percent change) (minus) Inflation Nominal compensation Real compensation Sources: Haver Analytics;and IMF staff estimates. Page 12 year and carry over into 2016, with these “base effects” accounting for half of 2016 GDP growth. Positive wealth effects from the stock price rally contribute in a limited way given the relatively small share of equity holdings by households. Business investment is projected to grow modestly, supported by lower production costs from declining oil prices, record-high corporate profits, ongoing corporate governance reforms, and the availability of credit. Lending is projected to grow slightly faster than GDP, as there are no lending constraints, but less than broad money, which is boosted by QQE (Table 2). The Tankan survey shows that the manufacturing sector still has excess capacity, implying that it will take time for investment to accelerate. Net exports are expected to continue to contribute moderately to growth in 2015–16. The pace of export growth is set to rise gradually in line with the recovery of external demand, while production offshoring remains a structural headwind (Box 1, Table 3). Import growth will gradually rise in line with stronger domestic demand, but dampened by the weaker yen. Despite a substantial improvement in the headline structural primary balance, the drag on growth from fiscal consolidation in 2015 and 2016 will be manageable at 0.2 and 0.7 percentage points, respectively (Table 4). The modest growth impact in 2015 is due to the fact that half of the fiscal improvement comes from last year’s consumption tax rate increase (including from collection lags), whose adverse growth effects have already occurred. For 2016, the growth impact will be larger as a bigger share of the adjustment comes from declining government consumption and investment. Under current policies, potential growth will rise to 0.6 percent over the medium term (Table 5). The rise in female labor force participation will partly offset the drag from population aging, which will nonetheless continue to be a structural headwind to investment. The recently implemented corporate governance reforms will help lift potential growth by reducing incentives for accumulating large cash buffers and by supporting investment, dividend payouts, and M&A activities over the medium term. Inflation is expected to increase gradually under current policies. Although QQE is having positive effects, the effect on inflation has so far been limited as the expectations channel seems to be weak (Box 2), leaving yen depreciation as the key transmission channel. Several factors will put upward pressure on the price level in the near term, including the recovery of oil and commodity prices from their lows, the lagged effect of the recent episode of yen weakening, and the closing of the output gap. Continued tightening of the labor market could accelerate favorable wage-price dynamics. As a result, under current policies, staff expects inflation to rise gradually to 1½ percent over the medium term. Risks to this growth and inflation outlook are tilted to the downside (Annex II). Near term. The economic recovery could stall on weakness in domestic demand. Wage growth following the spring Shunto (annual synchronized wage bargaining) round and spending of the Page 13 oil windfall could disappoint. Smaller wage growth would imply larger multipliers from the fiscal adjustment in the pipeline, resulting in more depressed demand. Declining JGB market liquidity could spark volatility in government bond yields, possibly triggered by global developments, and cause gyrations in the stock market and the exchange rate, undermining consumer and business sentiment. Other external risks include lower-than-expected growth in China and the U.S. and safe-haven appreciation. Medium term. Weak domestic demand and incomplete fiscal and structural reform policies, could result in either stagnation or stagflation. Without swift progress in structural reforms, headwinds from population aging and production offshoring could undermine domestic demand. If, on the other hand, continued aggressive monetary easing and further yen depreciation raise inflation, expectations of monetary policy normalization could arise at a time when potential growth is low and fiscal deficits are large. In both cases, doubts about long-term fiscal sustainability could lead to a jump in the sovereign risk premium, forcing abrupt further fiscal adjustment with adverse feedback to the financial system and the real economy. This could compound low profitability of the banking system and trigger excessive volatility in the JGB and currency markets. The authorities were confident that growth would accelerate. They expected the recovery to continue on the basis of robust domestic demand in the near term. The increase in base wages and total compensation following this year’s collective wage bargaining round is expected to underpin private consumption, while easy financial conditions and high profits would support the nascent recovery in corporate capital expenditure. In a “revitalization” scenario under which the authorities were designing their medium-term fiscal consolidation plan, they expected real GDP growth to rise to about 2 percent over the medium term through steady implementation of the three arrows’ strategies for the revitalization of the Japanese economy. The BoJ was determined to achieve its 2 percent inflation target “around” the first half of FY2016. The BoJ noted that inflation could become negative and remain subdued throughout the summer of 2015, but would pick up strongly toward the end of this year with the dissipation of the negative effects of falling oil prices, higher wage growth, a further rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations, and the positive output gap. While acknowledging that the evolution of wage-price dynamics was uncertain in the context of an unprecedented effort to dislodge a deeply entrenched deflationary mindset, the BoJ noted that the introduction of the price stability target and QQE had shifted trend inflation away from zero percent after 15 years at that level. See Kaihatsu and Nakajima (BoJ Working Paper Series No. 15-E-3). Page 14