Accelerating structural reforms is the only effective policy lever to address downside risks and maintain confidence in Abenomics. Demand-side policies in response to downside risks will depend on the nature of the risks. Specifically, the fiscal policy response would need to be contingent on the behavior of the sovereign risk premium and monetary policy on inflation developments and the stability of financial markets, with macroprudential policies stepping in as needed. Should Abenomics fail to reinvigorate domestic demand or adverse external shocks occur, the resulting weaker outlook could sap investment and confidence and abort the nascent favorable wage-price dynamics. The resulting stagnation scenario would cast doubt on fiscal sustainability, leading to higher sovereign and corporate risk premiums, though only when the BoJ reaches the limits of its QQE program. Fiscal policy could attempt to revive demand but the stimulus would need to be very large to push growth back to the baseline. Further concomitant easing by the BoJ could at least delay the rise in risk premia, but in the end an adverse feedback loop Simulations were conducted with the IMF’s GIMF model and a Japan-specific satellite model of the banking system. Stagnation with a 100 bps interest rate shock from 2018 +stimulus in 2016 and 2017 (1% of GDP each) +additional monetary easing with a delayed rise in interest rates from 2020 +structural reforms (no rise in interest rates) Source: IMF staff estimates. Growth under Various Scenarios (Percentage points, deviation from the WEO baseline) Page 23 including the financial system would likely take hold. In contrast, accelerating structural reforms would be the only effective and sustainable policy lever, with higher productivity growth and labor and product market deregulation boosting demand and preventing the rise in risk premia, allowing growth to be 1 percentage point above the baseline. Stagnation with rising risk premia would induce immediate mark-to-market losses on banks from their significant government bond holdings. Retail and wholesale funding costs would rise, compounding losses from equity holdings. Using the input from the GIMF scenarios, stress tests suggest a significant adverse impact on capital adequacy. Moreover, weaker activity and tighter financing conditions are likely to boost non-performing loans. Conversely, the structural reform scenario would have a positive effect on capital levels over the medium term from better earnings and lower credit risk.