Structural impediments hamper demand and wage growth. Low confidence in economic prospects, related to an aging and shrinking population, is holding back investment and credit demand, constraining portfolio rebalancing (See Selected Issues Paper “Impact of Demographics on Growth and Inflation in Japan”). Labor market duality and inflexibility are limiting the pass-through from a tightening labor market and high profits of large firms to wage increases (Figure 6). Weak The government’s plan to reach the nominal GDP target was approved on June 2, 2016, and can be understood as combining the old three arrows. Porcellachia (IMF WP16/20) models conceptually how these features cause weak real wage growth and contribute to deflationary pressures. Specifically, a rising share of non-regular workers who earn lower wages than regular workers, not only reduces average wages directly, but also causes a decline in labor’s overall bargaining power, hampering wage growth. See also Selected Issues Paper “Labor Market and Wage Developments”. Page 14 demand and a lingering deflationary mindset are reducing the ability of firms to raise output prices. Labor market duality is hampering lending owing to the inability of part-time workers to obtain bank credit, and hurting investment, corporate restructuring and mergers and acquisitions due to the high level of job protection. The financial sector does not sufficiently support risk taking, limiting access to risk-based capital, as suggested by high reliance of banks on fixed asset collateral and slow restructuring of non-viable SMEs. Policies could have been more effective . The stop-go nature of fiscal policy, with yearly supplementary budgets, discretionary changes in consumption tax hikes, and optimistic growth assumptions underlying medium-term budget projections have left fiscal policy without a credible medium-term anchor and are contributing to policy uncertainty (Figure 7). Weak monetary transmission, sluggish wage-price dynamics, and a falling natural rate of interest are preventing the needed rise in inflation expectations, creating a communication and credibility challenge for the BoJ. Structural reform efforts did not sufficiently address the above- mentioned structural impediments, notably in the labor market. Perceptions of weakness in the policy framework have contributed to the tendency of the yen to appreciate when the Japanese economy is hit by negative shocks. Global weakness and volatility constituted headwinds. Sluggish global growth and overcapacity in the traded goods sector prevented the weaker yen from materially boosting exports in 2014–15. Since mid-2015, concerns in emerging markets and revisions to the expected path of monetary policy in advanced economies led to heightened volatility in financial markets and safe- haven appreciation pressures, which intensified in early 2016. Declining commodity prices since mid- 2014 did not boost activity as expected, but instead put downward pressure on headline inflation and forced the BoJ to repeatedly push out its timeline for hitting the inflation target. Authorities’ Views The authorities emphasized that despite a deflationary mindset and structural impediments to growth, policies are gaining traction. They recognized that the public’s See Selected Issues Paper “Economic Policy Uncertainty”. tt AA Capital Employment Hours TFP Potential Growth Rate Potential Growth (percent) Page 15 deflationary mindset is changing more slowly than anticipated. Together with labor market rigidities, this had led to a subdued response of wages to the very tight labor market. Low growth expectations related to an aging and shrinking population and unfavorable external conditions had dampened investment, exports, and credit demand, creating a challenging environment for monetary policy. Nevertheless, the BoJ emphasized that QQE and NIRP significantly reduced real interest rates and encouraged more risk-taking by banks as they rebalanced their portfolios away from JGBs. The authorities also pointed out that they had met their commitment to cut the primary deficit in half compared to the 2010 level while at the same time facilitating higher nominal growth through flexible fiscal policy implementation. Meanwhile, structural reforms had helped to generate a virtuous cycle between corporate profits, employment and real income, as evidenced by three consecutive years of base wage increases.