About one and half years ago Japan adopted a new economic revival plan dubbed the “three arrows of Abenomics”. The three-pronged strategy combines aggressive monetary easing, flexible fiscal policy, and structural reforms to end decades’ long deflation, raise growth, and lower public debt. Since then, economic policies progressed along several dimensions. Arrow I—aggressive monetary easing has continued as planned. Asset purchases under the BoJ’s Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) program are being executed at the planned pace and the BoJ’s balance sheet grew to 52 percent of GDP by end-May 2014. Policy Board members have maintained their forecast of reaching 2 percent inflation in or around fiscal year 2015, which is considered a key marker towards achieving the BoJ’s price stability target of 2 percent inflation in a stable manner. Arrow II—fiscal policy has shifted from stimulus to revenue policy. After adopting two stimulus packages in early 2013 and 2014, discussions have turned to tax reform. With a higher consumption tax rate of 8 percent in place, attention has shifted to the next planned increase, to 10 percent, in October 2015. A decision is expected by the end of this year and will take into account various factors, including economic performance in the third quarter. The government is also reviewing options for reducing the corporate income tax (CIT) rate to stimulate investment. The size of the rate cut and offsetting measures have yet to be determined. Arrow III––gradual albeit limited progress on structural reforms (Annex I). Discussions since the fall of 2013 led to a few concrete outcomes. Reforms that are being implemented include an electricity sector reform, a bill to encourage farmland consolidation, governance and investment reforms at the Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF), and the adoption of a corporate Stewardship Code. Large areas of Japan, including Tokyo, have recently been designated as Special Economic Zones (SEZs) with concrete reform plans yet to be announced. Finally, progress on labor market reforms has been limited with the exception of raising the number of childcare facilities to facilitate the employment of women. On June 24, the government unveiled an update of its growth strategy, which includes plans to lower the corporate income tax rate and additional corporate governance reforms among other measures (Annex I). The political environment for further reform remains favorable with about two years left until the next scheduled national elections. The ruling coalition enjoys large majorities in both Houses of the Diet. Prime Minister Abe’s approval rating has declined, but remains relatively high at around 50 percent. For Abenomics to succeed, reforms need to be comprehensive and sustained for an extended period. This would help secure the new inflation target and generate powerful synergies Page 6 to overcome structural headwinds from a shrinking labor force and a large fiscal adjustment need. This year’s policy discussions focused on how to solidify Abenomics’ early gains.