In the absence of an ambitious policy shift, the timeframe for achieving all targets should be pushed out and policies reset for steady but more gradual progress while building risk resilience. By embarking on more realistic goals, these measures would help strengthen policy credibility and reduce uncertainty. Nevertheless, compared to staff’s reload package, the reset option would generate weaker nominal growth, higher and prolonged fiscal consolidation needs, and render the economy more vulnerable to fiscal confidence and financial stability shocks. Policy space will be very limited and should be used sparingly. Without ambitious income policies and the associated comprehensive reforms, an expansionary fiscal policy stance could be counterproductive by raising risk premiums. Nonetheless, the weak outlook suggests that the fiscal stance will need to be broadly neutral in the near term. Similarly, since achieving the Page 22 inflation target will take longer, loose financial conditions will have to be maintained for an extended period. Hence, monetary policy would have to be reset for the long haul and carefully balance the benefits of providing further easing with the potential risks to medium-term financial stability, including JGB market liquidity, the profitability of financial institutions, disintermediation, and reduced market functioning, and limits to JGB purchases and negative interest rates. The resulting weak inflation and low growth require a drawn-out fiscal consolidation and a more flexible monetary policy framework. Absent higher nominal growth, the required fiscal adjustment would be cumulatively larger and have to take place over a longer time horizon to avoid an excessive drag on growth, implying greater vulnerability to shocks. A gradual fiscal consolidation by about ¼ to ½ percent of GDP per year in structural terms would need to be maintained for as long as needed to turn debt dynamics around. The monetary policy framework would need to become more flexible, with the BoJ abandoning the use of a specific calendar date for achieving its inflation target. While such a shift should raise BoJ credibility by setting a more realistic goal, the transition will need to be well communicated to avoid perceptions that the BoJ is reducing its commitment to achieving its inflation target and to limit the potential for adverse market reactions, including yen appreciation