In response to falling inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy was eased further in October 2014. In a bold step, surprising markets, the BoJ expanded its QQE framework by increasing net purchases of JGBs to 80 trillion yen annually, extending the average maturity of JGBs purchases to about 7–10 years, and tripling its purchases of private assets (ETFs and J-REITs). Mainly because of the sharp fall in oil prices, in April 2015, the BoJ delayed the timing for achieving the 2 percent inflation target to around the first half of FY2016 while continuing to emphasize that it will continue QQE until the 2 percent inflation target is achieved in a stable manner. Policy Issues and Staff’s Views Despite some progress, lifting inflation is taking longer than expected. Policy actions thus far have raised underlying inflation and eased financial conditions through reduced real interest rates, a depreciated yen, and a booming equity market. Credit has started to pick up and land and real estate price growth has turned positive, underpinning a nascent revival of construction activity. The output gap is closing and wage pressures are gradually rising. However, the transmission to inflation is taking longer than expected, in part because of the effect of lower energy prices, the deep entrenchment of the deflationary mindset, and structural impediments to stronger wage-price dynamics. Weak monetary policy transmission creates a policy conundrum. As intended, the BoJ’s balance sheet has more than doubled since the beginning of QQE. However, given weak credit growth there has been a large build-up of excess reserves. Tepid demand is the key bottleneck to credit growth as indicated by loan officer surveys, while weak credit assessment capacity at banks may play a secondary role. More confidence in the outlook for domestic demand would strengthen investment, suggesting that structural reforms could strengthen monetary policy transmission. Service sector reforms as well as policies to invigorate the labor market would be most beneficial. In January 2015, the BoJ extended the Loan Support Program by one year to the end of March 2016 and raised the ceiling of the Growth Support Funding Facility by 1 trillion yen to 2 trillion yen per financial institution and from 7 to 10 trillion yen overall while opening both facilities to non-BoJ deposit account holders. Mar-13Aug-13Jan-14Jun-14Nov-14Apr-15 Excess / Total Reserves Page 20 The BoJ needs to stand ready to ease further, provide stronger guidance to markets through enhanced communication, and put greater emphasis on achieving the 2 percent inflation target in a stable manner. Additional easing : Reflecting the weak and delayed transmission, further easing should take the form of increased asset purchases and lengthening their duration. This would further lower the long end of the yield curve and strengthen the commitment to low interest rates “for as long as it takes,” while accelerating portfolio rebalancing by institutional investors. At the same time, further fiscal and structural reforms remain imperative to unburden monetary policy and, together with macroprudential policies, mitigate financial stability risks. Enhancing communication to guide markets : The BoJ should communicate more clearly the drivers that underpin its forecasts, including the output gap and wage-price dynamics and the factors that are believed to raise inflation expectations. In addition, the BoJ could clarify the indicators used to assess whether inflation is on track and spell out the criteria for judging whether its target has been sustainably achieved. Similarly, clarifying the conditions that would trigger additional actions would be helpful as this would help guide expectations when there is a need to adjust the asset-purchase program and facilitate preparations for an eventual exit. In this context, the publication of the oil price assumption underlying its forecast and studies of the effectiveness of its QQE and progress of the regime shift it is trying to engineer is highly welcome. Reaffirming the BoJ’s commitment to achieve the 2 percent inflation target in a stable manner : To strengthen this commitment, the BoJ should reiterate that it remains open to all further avenues of easing when and if appropriate by: raising the amount of purchases of assets, lengthening their duration, broadening their range, and lowering the deposit rate on excess reserves and the policy rate. The BoJ stressed that its monetary framework is clear and working well. It emphasized that reaching 2 percent inflation in a stable manner is the primary objective and that use of a timeframe of achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time with a time horizon of about two years emphasized their commitment and contributed to engineering a regime shift. BoJ officials assessed that underlying inflation has been improving significantly, although the firmness is currently masked by the temporary negative impact of the sharp decline in oil prices. Hence they saw no need for further easing at this point, but they repeated that the BoJ stands ready to ease further, with all options on the table, if underlying inflation momentum falters. Page 21