The authorities recently announced a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan. Following the halving of the primary deficit of the national and local governments between FY2010 and FY2015, they intend to achieve a primary surplus by FY2020 under the “revitalization” scenario. The consumption tax rate increase to 10 percent in April 2017, is a key measure, together with a further 1½ percent of structural adjustment over 2018–20 to be identified at a later stage. Policy Issues and Staff’s Views Sound principles need to underpin the fiscal consolidation plan to secure its credibility. Low and stable JGB yields should not be taken for granted as shifts in investor sentiment could happen abruptly. A concrete and credible medium-term plan based on the following principles would remove uncertainties about fiscal intentions, which could be hampering domestic demand, and create space to respond to downside risks: Use of prudent and realistic economic assumptions; Page 17 Adoption of a long-term goal of putting debt on a downward path; Specification of adjustment in terms of structural fiscal balance; and Upfront identification of specific structural revenue and expenditure measures Stronger fiscal institutions will be necessary to impart credibility to such a plan Continuous large deficits, the record high level of public debt, the use of optimistic growth assumptions, and the uncertainty introduced by recurrent recourse to supplementary budgets suggest large benefits from anchoring fiscal discipline in a more credible medium-term budget framework. As the fiscal adjustment will span at least a decade, such a framework should include rules to curb expenditures, limits on the use of supplementary budgets, and publication of independent assessments of the outlook and budget projections by the Fiscal System Council. This would prevent procyclical policies, remove a source of volatility, and establish clear visibility about the direction of policies. The announced medium-term plan provides a useful anchor to guide fiscal policy. Planned adjustment in 2015 and 2016—mainly withdrawal of past stimuli and waning reconstruction spending—is appropriate in striking a balance between reducing fiscal risks and maintaining growth momentum. However, in 2017, on the basis of current staff projections, mitigating measures of about 0.3 percent of GDP need to be introduced in order not to jeopardize growth and inflation momentum at the time of the next consumption tax rate hike. But this scenario will not stabilize debt. Further adjustment by 1½ percent during 2018–20 strikes the right balance between supporting growth and progress with fiscal consolidation. However, the reliance on optimistic growth assumption under a “revitalization” scenario, risks harming confidence in the authorities’ plans as it limits the amount of structural adjustment needed to achieve the FY2020 target. Further balanced consolidation will be necessary to place the public debt-to-GDP ratio on a downward trajectory (Annex III). The recent decline in the fiscal deficit through containment of spending and higher consumption tax revenue (Figure 5) and the similar measures planned for 2016–20 will temporarily stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio at about 250 percent before it accelerates again under current policies To put debt on a downward path in the long run, staff sees the need for a further adjustment in the structural primary balance by 4½ percent of GDP. This adjustment scenario should be balanced in two ways: to maintain growth momentum its pace should be measured, at about ¾ percent of GDP per year; and, it should comprise both expenditure and revenue measures, including further increase, in the consumption tax rate beyond 10 percent. -12-10-8-6-4-2024175200225250275300200520102015202020252030Gross debt (LHS): Policy adjustment scenario Japan: Gross Public Debt and Fiscal Balance Sources: Cabinet Office; and IMF staff estimates and projections.1/ Gross debt of the general government including the social security fund.2/ Withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and consumption tax increases to 10 percent in 2017 are assumed. 3/ Assumes a stimulus of 0.3 percent of GDP in FY2017 and an additional adjustment of6 percent of GDP in the structural primary balance (0.75 percent of GDP each between 2019 and 2026) with a multiplier of 0.5. Gross debt (LHS): Baseline scenario Fiscal balance (RHS): Baseline scenario Page 18 On the expenditure side, entitlement reforms to contain social security spending growth will be crucial. The consumption tax rate increase should be implemented with a single rate structure Equity concerns that the higher consumption tax could harm low-income households should be addressed through the existing cash transfers—targeting of which could be improved once the new tax identification numbers are introduced—instead of reducing rates on essential items, as this would hurt efficiency, increase compliance and administrative costs, and result in permanent revenue losses. An upfront credible commitment of further gradual consumption tax rate increases at a moderate pace over the long run would help smooth any negative confidence effects. The authorities emphasized that they aim to achieve both economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation and firmly maintain the target to achieve a primary surplus of the central and local governments by FY2020. The authorities noted that they are likely to achieve the interim target of halving their primary deficit of the central and local governments to GDP ratio by FY2015 from the ratio in FY2010, which demonstrates their capability to deliver on their commitments. In order to achieve FY2020 target, they will proceed with the following three measures: (i) overcoming deflation and revitalizing economy through steady implementation of three arrows of strategies, (ii) reforming expenditures, and (iii) revenue measures. They underscored the importance of firmly maintaining a visible anchor (FY2020 target) to guide fiscal policy while acknowledging that more efforts will be needed after achieving a primary surplus to put debt firmly on a downward trajectory. With regard to the expenditure reform, the authorities emphasized that concrete and credible measures would be essential. They were considering constraining the increase of expenditure as done under the current Abe administration. Social security and local government finance are the key policy areas of the reform, with a need for emphasis on effective and concrete measures for social security reform. They noted that the expenditure reform would not jeopardize the economy because its essence was to constrain expenditure growth rather than implement across-the-board cuts. In addition, they noted that further progress in structural reform would be essential to accelerating the closure of the output gap and emphasized the role of structural reforms, e.g., deregulation, to promote private investment. Meanwhile, public investment is being implemented in a focused and efficient manner taking into account depopulation trends. Transfers should be carefully examined and well-targeted in order to maintain cost effectiveness. The For a full list of measures, see 2014 Staff Report (page 16). -0.9-0.8-0.7-0.6-0.5-0.4-0.3-0.2-0.100.1year 12345678 (i) 5-stage: 0.5 percent of GDP increase each in year 1-5 (announced in year 1) (ii) 2-stage (pre-announced): 1 percent of GDP increase in year 1 and 1.5 percent of GDP in year 4 (both announced in year 1) (iii) 2-stage (ad hoc): same as in (ii) except that the second tax increase is announced in year 4 Source: IMF staff estimates. Consumption Tax Hike: Deviation in Growth from Baseline (In percentage point) Page 19 authorities agreed that the next consumption tax rate increase would be an important contribution to restoring fiscal sustainability.