Despite the improvement in financial sector soundness, medium-term vulnerabilities are expected to rise. The low interest rate environment and large excess reserve balances are reducing profitability. With major banks expanding abroad, securing stable funding in all foreign currencies will be essential. Total interest rate risk has declined. Interest rate risks on foreign bonds have become comparable to those on JGBs as banks have extended the maturity of their foreign bonds. Interest rate exposure remains high for regional banks, reflecting the longer maturity of their JGB assets and higher share of corporate bond holdings. As QQE is maintained, liquidity in the JGB market may diminish, raising risks of volatility. Given the importance of the JGB market, spillovers to other financial market segments are likely. So far, traditional liquidity indicators of the JGB futures market such as the bid-ask spread and the daily price range to transaction volume ratio show that the JGB market has been functioning normally, though other indicators show some decline in liquidity (Box 3, Figure 6). Liquidity of the JGB market could suffer more as the BoJ’s share of JGBs increases further, especially in specific maturity segments. In this context, the doubling of the BoJ’s securities lending facility is a welcome backstop to JGB market liquidity, while its cost and access criteria should remain under review to ensure its effective use. Continuing consultations with market participants and close monitoring of liquidity will be essential. Financial sector policies should guard against risks from unconventional policies. Financial institutions need to continue to be tested for their resilience to higher volatility of asset prices, exchange rates and interest rates, and lower liquidity in markets. Banks look well capitalized, but their risk management needs to be further strengthened and business models adapted to raise profitability in the medium term (Figure 7, Table 6). Banks lending in foreign currency should secure robust funding sources to manage their gaps between illiquid loans and stable funding, which have recently stabilized. Regional banks, accounting for 36 percent of total bank assets, are more Some Japanese banks have access to host central bank facilities, while the BoJ provides collateralized FX lending to domestic banks. In terms of supervision, Memoranda of Understanding are in place between Japan and most host and home country authorities. See Kurosaki et al. (BoJ Working Paper Series No. 15-E-2) for more details. 0 1 2 3 4 FY20060708091011121314 Foreign bonds JGBs Interest Rate Risk among Major Banks (In trillion yen, as of Sept. 2014) 1/Source: Bank of Japan. 1/ Impact of a 100 basis points increase across all maturities. Only duration is considered for foreign bonds while convexity and higher order terms are considered as well for JGBs. Page 22 challenged from lack of regional diversification, longer duration of assets, and higher share of corporate bond holdings. Their capital standards need strengthening, including by reassessing the treatment of unrealized losses in capital. Insurance companies need to enhance profitability to work through the legacy of guaranteed return products. While there are no immediate concerns, macroprudential policies should be readied in case exuberant equity market developments and riskier lending (including abroad) threaten financial stability. The FSA noted that financial sector health has further improved. Internationally-active banks have ample capital and liquidity to meet Basel III capital requirements as well as the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). Various risks such as foreign funding risk and interest rate risk are being closely watched in light of banks’ business and market developments. The FSA did not see any immediate risks from booming asset markets and is focusing supervisory efforts on improving risk management. As for the Japan Post Bank (JPB), the application for new lending businesses is being examined to ensure that these new services will be provided in a sound and efficient manner, in accordance with the Banking Act. Similarly, it is being verified whether the implementation of new services would impede competition between JPB and other financial institutions, and the appropriate provision of the services, in accordance with the Postal Services Privatization Act.