The staff’s reload package puts income policies at the fore in order to raise inflation, combined with further demand stimulus in the near-term based on a temporary, modest, fiscal expansion and further monetary easing. Ensuring coordinated demand support while tackling labor market reforms and removing policy uncertainty will create important synergies. To maximize long-term sustainability, these policies should be enshrined in stronger policy frameworks and high-impact structural reforms to raise growth and address demographic headwinds. Invigorating wage-price dynamics to raise inflation Sustained nominal wage increases can help trigger positive wage-price dynamics and raise inflation expectations. A deflationary mindset and a secular decline in the bargaining power of labor have led to upward wage inflexibility, while a rising share of non-regular workers with lower wages has dampened average wage growth. This highlights the need for policies to directly target the wage formation process and reforms to reduce labor market duality. Higher wages passed on to prices will boost actual and expected inflation which would stimulate economic activity through lower real interest rates and support fiscal consolidation. Despite important steps to encourage higher base-wage increases, bolder measures are required to trigger positive wage-price dynamics Income policies : The government could replicate the “comply or explain” approach adopted under the corporate governance reform to ensure that profitable companies raise wages by at least three percent (the inflation target plus average productivity growth) and back this up by stronger tax incentives or penalties as a last resort, given that the latter would be contractionary if they failed to trigger higher wages. In addition, the government can commit to raising administratively controlled wages annually in line with the inflation target and ensure similar policies are adopted at the prefectural level. These measures can be supported by calling for supplementary wage rounds in addition to the “Shunto” and conversion of bonuses to base pay. In FY 2014, about 78,000 enterprises made use of the tax incentives leading to foregone fiscal revenue equivalent to 0.05 percent of GDP. Applying the incentive to base wages and increasing the amount would raise the effectiveness of the measure. Page 19 Labor market and corporate governance reforms : Promoting “intermediate” contracts that balance job security and wage increases, including by clarifying the legal framework and providing subsidies for converting non-regular workers to such contracts, would reduce labor market duality and reinforce income policies provided new hiring is done under these contracts. It would also stimulate productivity growth through greater incentives for skill formation. Moreover, accelerating the recently introduced “equal-pay for equal work” program would help close the wage gap between regular and non-regular workers faster. Eliminating disincentives to full-time or regular work due to the tax and social security system such as the spousal deduction and allowance, as well as raising the availability of child-care facilities through deregulation remain critical. Further corporate governance reform—such as more ambitious requirements for outside directors, greater transparency of beneficial ownership and explicit limits on cross- shareholdings—would encourage corporates to use their high cash reserves more efficiently, which could result in higher wages, dividends, and investment. More sustained, balanced, and coordinated demand support is needed to ensure the success of income policies. To facilitate the pass-through of higher wages to prices it is imperative that monetary and fiscal policy give a balanced and sustained growth impulse in the near term, warranting a modest near-term fiscal expansion, calibrated on the need to accelerate the closing of the output gap. Supportive demand policies are also critical to ensure that structural reforms to raise potential growth such as policies to boost labor supply do not create deflationary pressures. Fiscal stimulus should be coordinated with further monetary easing, where all policy tools should remain on the table. Given the overriding importance of signaling the need for a comprehensive and balanced policy package, there are merits in using all tools: some overall increase in asset purchases, some shift to purchases of assets held outside the banking system, and a modest further cut in deposit rates. Fiscal and monetary actions should be closely coordinated in terms of timing, mix, and level of stimulus. Generating wage-push inflation is not without risks and success is not guaranteed. The main aim of income policies is to raise wages and prices in tandem, without increasing unit labor costs, distorting relative prices, or undermining competitiveness. Nevertheless, incomes policies may not successfully raise inflation, if for instance, firms increase hiring of non-regular workers, if there are timing and coordination problems, if “comply-or-explain” policies do not deliver sufficient compliance, or if there is the perception by firms or households that policies can be reversed. Possible declines in competitiveness and profitability—especially for labor intensive SMEs and export-oriented companies— could have an adverse impact on employment and growth in the near term. Finally, efforts to increase public wages are likely to encounter political resistance in light of ongoing fiscal consolidation plans. In particular, building on their 2013 joint statement, the Government and BoJ could deepen their consultations– through the established Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy–on macroeconomic conditions and how to most effectively support income policies. Page 20 Achieving fiscal sustainability through reliance on gradual consumption tax hikes A credible fiscal consolidation course needs to be charted now, including a pre- announced path of gradual consumption tax hikes (Figure 8 and Table 4). Given low potential growth, and the need to avoid leaning excessively against the BoJ’s easing policies, committing to a gradual increase in the consumption tax towards at least 15 percent, e.g., in increments of 0.5–1 percentage points over regular intervals, would better balance the objectives of supporting growth and achieving fiscal sustainability in the long run. The precise path should be determined mindful of the need to secure political buy-in, compliance costs for firms, and the administrative burden for the tax authorities. Starting the increases as soon as possible and replacing the currently planned 2019 hike with such a pre-announced, gradual path would enhance the credibility of the long-run fiscal adjustment effort, reduce uncertainty for consumers, and avoid large intertemporal shifts in spending around the time of the tax hikes (See Selected Issues Paper “Fading Ricardian Equivalence in Ageing Japan”). The single rate structure should be maintained as much as possible and concerns for the tax impact on low income households addressed by targeted cash transfers. A steady fiscal consolidation by 0.5 percent of GDP per year through 2030 would be sufficient to put the public debt-to-GDP ratio on a downward path. In addition to the consumption tax increase, broadening the tax base, containing nominal social security spending growth to 0.5 percent and implementing some other expenditure reforms would balance the adjustment between revenue and expenditure side. Complementary policies to lift potential growth and strengthen policy frameworks More structural reforms especially in the labor market are the only viable option to significantly raise growth prospects. A stronger push on structural fronts would increase the chances of success of income policies by improving the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policy and raising growth expectations. In particular, reforms should aim to: Expand the labor force . Boosting the labor supply of women and older workers and allowing for more foreign labor would be crucial to address a shrinking working-age population and protect the tax base. Increase productivity . Significant benefits can be reaped from: (i) promoting trade, FDI, and technology sharing by supporting the full implementation and possible expansion of TPP as well as proceeding with other trade and bilateral investment agreements; (ii) reducing barriers to entry to retail trade, professional services, and certain segments of network industries; and (iii) expediting deregulation in Special Economic Zones (SEZs) and subsequent rolling out nation-wide reforms to improve productivity and provide investment opportunities. Enable capital deepening . The financial sector’s role in promoting innovation and new growth areas could be enhanced by encouraging securitization and private-equity funds; reducing For a detailed overview of consolidation measures see Country Report No. 15/197. See Country Report No. 15/197 and the Annex for more details on structural reform advice to boost growth. Page 21 government guarantees to SME lending to promote restructuring of viable firms and exit of nonviable ones; and fostering business succession. The fiscal framework should be strengthened to enhance policy credibility . The authorities’ medium-term consolidation plan of achieving primary surplus by FY2020 should avoid relying on optimistic growth assumptions, which undermines confidence by masking the required amount of structural adjustment, leaving fiscal policy without a medium-term anchor. The authorities use the revitalization scenario to anchor their policies, which expects more than 2 percent real and 3 percent nominal annual GDP growth over the medium-term on average. Their more realistic baseline case anticipates a primary deficit of more than 2 percent of GDP in FY2020. Strengthening the fiscal framework requires adopting rules to curb expenditure, especially on social security, limits on the use of supplementary budgets, and publication of more independent assessments of the outlook and budget projections (See Selected Issues Paper “An Independent Fiscal Institution for Japan”). Social expenditure reform, especially of medical expenses, has taken on added importance as fiscal revenues are being delayed. To this end, an independent fiscal institution (IFI) could play an important role, including by preparing short and medium-term macro-fiscal forecasts, and providing real time monitoring of fiscal policy making (Box 2). This would allow the Ministry of Finance to adopt realistic macroeconomic assumptions. Clearer communication and better use of forward guidance can help strengthen monetary policy credibility and raise inflation expectations . The BoJ has gradually enhanced its transparency and communication framework over the past two decades. However, more can be done to improve monetary policy credibility and reduce policy uncertainty by publishing the staff forecast (Box 3). The BoJ could provide stronger forward guidance, including by communicating willingness to overshoot the inflation target and maintaining a large balance sheet, even once objectives are achieved, to strengthen its commitment and facilitate portfolio rebalancing. Moreover, while maintaining the BoJ’s pre-specified time horizon for meeting its inflation target has merit during the transition phase to higher inflation, its function as a commitment mechanism should be gradually phased out as inflation expectations become better anchored.