Implementation of the QQE framework has been smooth and transmission has gradually strengthened . After some initial bond market volatility, 10-year JGB yields have fluctuated in a narrow range around 60 bps since last summer. Together with rising inflation, this has contributed to a further decline in real lending rates. Financial institutions have started to rebalance their portfolios and banks have reduced JGB holdings (from 22 percent in end-2012 to below 19 percent of total assets by end March 2014) (Box 5). Still, insurance companies and private pension funds have kept asset allocations broadly unchanged. Finally, market and survey measures of long-term inflation expectations have risen to between 1¼–1½ percent and, after having been unchanged since last fall, have begun to rise again recently. Introduction of multiple rates would require adoption of an invoice-credit mechanism in line with the vast majority of OECD member countries with a valued added tax. Page 20 Box 5. Portfolio Rebalancing and Capital Outflows The success of Abenomics depends to a large extent on whether Japanese investors rebalance their portfolios towards higher yielding assets thereby lowering borrowing costs and intermediating risk capital. A moderate shift of portfolios towards higher yielding assets is underway . The share of currency, deposits, and central and local government securities has declined for households, public pensions, and other financial intermediaries such as securities investment trusts (chart). Portfolio rebalancing will likely accelerate over the near term. Rising domestic credit demand. Business lending has risen at the fastest pace since 2008. The latest loan officer survey shows a continued rise in credit demand in 2014. Ample intermediation capacity. Banks’ capital ratios are higher than at any time during the last decade, and loan-loss reserves are at pre-global financial crisis levels. The large share of excess reserves is depressing profits and raising incentives to increase lending to new and riskier projects. Review of investment strategies . The Government Pension Investment Fund, with 27 percent of GDP in assets under management, adjusted its targets from JGBs towards other assets including foreign bonds and equities in June 2013. Given the size of the fund, this change will likely have knock-on effects to other institutional investors. Negative real returns on household deposits. Japanese household hold more than 55 percent of their assets, or about 875 trillion yen (180 percent of GDP) in the form of bank deposits. With headline inflation estimated at 2¾ percent this year, real returns are negative. The introduction of new tax-incentivized saving accounts in 2014 could facilitate a rebalancing process. A widening of the interest rate differential with the US. Since mid-2013 benchmark yield differentials between Yen and US dollar denominated securities has widened, raising incentives to expand the share of foreign assets in investor portfolios. Rebalancing could result in higher portfolio outflows. An illustrative scenario analysis under different behavioral assumptions for institutional investors shows that additional outflows could range between USD 80–260 billion (chart). Although only a small share—about 20 percent—would likely go to emerging economies, the effects could be large enough to ease financing conditions. While instructive, the exercise is partial in nature and does not incorporate exchange rate effects, nor include potential flows associated with a rebalancing by households or firms (FDI). Prepared by M. Nabar and J. S. Kang (APD). Historical fluctuation (2 Std Dev) Share of Currency, Deposits, and Government Securities Corporate PensionsBanksOther Financial IntermediariesPublic PensionsInsuranceHouseholds Rebalancing Source: Bankof Japan Flow of Funds, Haver, and Staff Estimates Currency, Deposits & Government Bonds Holdings (Dec-2013) (In percent of total portfolio) 0100200300400500600Passive 1 1/Passive 2 1/Active 2/ Past trend Additional flows to AEs Additional flows to EMs Potential Capital Outflows (In billion US dollars) Assumptions: 1/ Financial institutions maintain investment strategies (2010/20122/013H2 avg.) except GPIF reductionofJGB holdings to its benchmarkrangelower-limit to purchase foreign assets. Banks increase domestic lending at 2013 pace, while increasing foreign investment to maintain 2013ROA.Foreign assets returns assumedat2% and 1.5% under scenarios 1 and 2 respectively. 2/ GPIF reduces domestic-bond holdings to 45%of total assets whileincreasing domestic stocks and foreign assets equally; insurance companies reduce JGB purchases to 2/3 of current pace to increase foreign investment. Other investors(e.g., investment trusts) accelerate pace of foreign investment about 50%. Banks domestic lending increase at 2008peak pace, while overseas lendingis as in 2011.Banks buy foreign assets amountingto half of additional reserves.Source:IMF staff estmates. Page 21 Monetary policy is appropriately accommodative and no further easing is needed at this point. With actual and expected inflation steadily progressing toward the 2-percent target (anticipated by 2016–17 in Staff’s baseline), increasing asset purchases now is not necessary. Rather policy space should be preserved to address downside risks. Since the current aggressive pace of monetary easing may need to be maintained for an extended period, clarifying asset-purchase plans post end-2014 could further enhance transparency. The BoJ should act quickly if actual or expected inflation stagnates or growth disappoints. Policy options include expanding purchases of private assets and government bonds, and further lengthening the maturities of assets being purchased. The latter would accelerate portfolio rebalancing by insurance companies and pension funds and reduce banks’ duration risks further, thereby facilitating risk taking. In addition, there is room to expand special lending facilities, including by increasing the size, reducing the funding cost, and lengthening the term beyond the current 4 years. The impact of these latter measures is, however, likely small, given already very easy financing conditions. Over time, sustained easing without complementary reforms would raise risks to financial stability and complicate the exit. Asset purchases are already unprecedented: each year that the QQE program is maintained, the BoJ will add approximately 5 percent of the outstanding stock of JGBs to its existing holdings, estimated at 23 percent at end 2014. Continuing with QQE in its current form for too long could impair market liquidity or give rise to financial stability risks as asset prices could become disconnected from fundamentals. As such, there are clear risks from potentially overburdening monetary policy. Therefore, structural and fiscal reforms are critical to strengthen policy transmission in a sustained manner and facilitate an earlier exit from QQE. Although exit still remains far off, planning for it should continue. Because of the larger share of longer dated securities on the BoJ’s balance sheet, a passive strategy as used in 2005/06 of rolling off maturing bonds would require more time to complete and imply higher interest rate risk. Indemnification against capital losses from rising interest rates (as large as 1¼ percent of GDP for a 100 bps rise) could be considered, but needs to be weighed against the potential fiscal risk from these contingent liabilities. BoJ communication has been effective, but more could be done going forward to help anchor expectations. The BoJ should continue to highlight the overarching goal of achieving the inflation target in a stable manner, but could clarify the indicators used to assess whether inflation is on track. In due course, the criteria for determining whether inflation has been sustainably achieved May-12Nov-12May-13Nov-13May-1400.511.5200.511.52 Quick Survey 10Y Inflation-Swaps 10Y Consensus Forecasts 10Y Break-even rate 10Y JGBs Long Term Inflation Expectations (In annual percentage points)Source: Bloomberg, Quick Survey, Consensus Forecasts, and IMF estimates. Page 22 could be spelled out, which would also help guide expectations when there is a need to adjust the asset-purchase program and facilitate preparations for eventual exit. The BoJ stressed that it has come halfway towards reaching its inflation target, and views that the progress will continue, albeit with reduced tailwinds this year. Tailwinds from last year’s depreciation were fading and the near-term evolution of inflation expectations remained uncertain. The BoJ expected inflation to start increasing again towards the end of the year, reaching around 2 percent—the price stability target—in or around fiscal year 2015, but was ready to act if inflation began to trail off the expected path. In this regard, they felt that the parameters of QQE beyond end-2014 could be extrapolated from the current path since the BoJ's forward guidance already conveys the idea that the easing stance will be maintained as long as it is necessary to achieve the inflation target in a stable manner. They cautioned, however, that they will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. The BoJ agreed that there was room to augment the communication strategy, but thought that providing specific forward guidance at this time could be counterproductive. They preferred to use speeches and press conferences by BoJ Policy Board members to help explain developments and its forecast. With inflation outcomes beginning to influence expectations in the right direction, they felt that providing specific information at this stage on indicators to help track progress toward 2 percent was not necessary to help anchor expectations. Rather the BoJ felt it would be counterproductive to provide more explicit guidance given the uncertain path of inflation towards 2 percent. Officials also pointed out that recently the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England had backed away from state contingent forward guidance. Nevertheless, as inflation approaches the target, the BoJ would continue to examine the effectiveness of its communication strategy so as to achieve 2 percent inflation in a stable manner. With regard to exit, they noted that they would apply a wide range of tools and draw on the BoJ’s own experience in 2005/06 and closely watch other central banks, including the U.S. Federal Reserve and The Bank of England.