More unconventional policy packages have merit but could be risky compared to the staff’s reload package . Unorthodox policy packages typically mentioned in Japan’s context include a monetized fiscal expansion, a sharp fiscal expansion combined with continued low interest rates, or a price level path target supported by a complementary exchange rate policy (Svensson’s foolproof proposal). While these packages could generate reflation quickly, helping to reduce government debt, they are subject to various risks. On balance staff analysis suggests that the reload package has a better chance of success than these more unconventional policy alternatives from a risk-return perspective. For example, if aiming for “escape velocity” through highly expansionary fiscal policy leads to an increase in the term premium, government debt dynamics would deteriorate further. Likewise, under the foolproof proposal, if the interest premium does not decline as envisaged, the policy would rely mainly on expenditure switching. Inflation then fails to converge to the inflation target and output only increases initially, worsening debt dynamics relative to the reload package. In staff’s judgement, as the financial market reaction to these alternatives are difficult to predict, relying on a broad set of instruments in a coordinated manner would be preferable from a risk-management perspective. Likewise, risks from the oft-discussed monetized fiscal expansion likely outweigh benefits. While this approach is likely to increase inflation expectations and nominal GDP, thus reducing public debt, there is a major tail risk of an inflation scare leading to a spike in interest rates. This could occur as the commitment to not resort again to monetary financing may not be credible in an environment of elevated deficits and high debt, leading to fiscal dominance. The impact on See Selected Issues Paper “Reflating Japan: Time to Get Unconventional?”. Page 23 Japan’s prosperity and the global economy (given the role of the yen and JGBs in international markets and Japan’s large NFA position) of such a tail risk scenario would be so severe that a risk- return calculus would again favor the reload package. Authorities’ Views The authorities argued that current policy frameworks are broadly appropriate. The authorities stressed that the delay of the consumption tax and the planned implementation of comprehensive and bold economic policies this autumn all aim to accelerate Abenomics in a coordinated manner to achieve the promised targets. The authorities noted that public sector wages are set based on private sector developments and that income policies are already incorporated in the current policy package through the tripartite negotiations, the increase in minimum wage growth, and the provision of tax incentives to firms that raise wages, and that it is necessary to consider the effects of the policy at this point. They understood the need to consider the impact on the economy when designing a consumption tax hike, but noted compliance costs for firms and the administrative burden for the tax authorities due to gradual consumption tax increases. They also recognized the need for more independent assessments of economic and fiscal developments, but felt this could be accomplished by strengthening existing institutions. The BoJ maintained that the practice of mentioning the timing for reaching its inflation target as a collective forecast of the policy board was useful for communication purposes. Removing it was not needed given its forecast and its efforts to maintain credibility and raise inflation expectations. In addition, the BoJ voiced concern that publishing a staff forecast could lead to confusion given that the board members’ projections are already made public. Nevertheless, the BoJ was aware that the current policy communication framework might be revisited if the BoJ judges sometime in the future that it would take a considerably longer time to achieve two percent inflation. More extreme unconventional policies, such as various forms of monetization, had been offered as solutions to Japan’s woes in the past, but were seen as too risky and to varying degrees not feasible within Japan’s current legal and institutional set up. The authorities remained determined to achieve the FY2020 primary surplus target. They emphasized that the target constitutes an important commitment to debt sustainability and is realistic under the current fiscal consolidation plan which calls for accelerated structural reforms combined with expenditure reforms. In particular, building on achievements during the past 3 years, the government will make efforts to enhance efficiency and promote institutional reforms, under the benchmark of the levels equivalent to the sum of the expected increase due to population aging (approximately 1.5 trillion yen in 3 years) until FY2018. The delay of the consumption tax should have only a modest impact on the achievement of the fiscal consolidation target in FY2020 as its primary impact is to shift the revenue increases from FY2017 to FY2019. The authorities emphasized that ongoing structural reforms are already in line with staff’s advice. Efforts are underway to promote the improvement of involuntary non-regular to regular workers. Also in order to provide women and young people with a wide range of choices on how to work, consideration is being given to achieving equal-pay for equal-work. Removing Page 24 disincentives in tax and social security to full time work for spouses remains on the agenda. Efforts to invite foreign professionals into the country have gained momentum, including through a possible Japanese-version green card system for highly skilled foreign professionals. Finally, the authorities noted that upcoming structural efforts will focus on product and regulatory reform and deregulation in the services sector, and that they are considering changes to the credit guarantee scheme.