Spillovers have been mild during the first year of Abenomics. Exports have changed little in response to the weaker yen and capital flows through overseas’ bank lending and investment (FDI) have remained broadly in line with past trends (Table 3). Although net capital outflows by Japanese investors picked up in the second half of 2013—mainly to advanced See 2014 Spring APD REO Chapter 3 for more details on changes in Japan’s position in the supply chain. Page 24 countries—this was more than offset by non-resident inflows into Japan (particularly into equities). More recently, net inflows have turned positive again after a period of outflows in January/February. Spillovers are likely to rise over the near term as exports and imports adjust to the weaker yen, potentially adversely affecting competitors, at least in the near term. Spillovers through capital markets are also expected to rise as Japanese investors, especially, banks, pension funds, and insurance companies, start diversifying their investments overseas. These outflows will help to cushion the effects of tightening global financial conditions, including in emerging markets (EMs). A scenario analysis shows that portfolio rebalancing by banks and institutional investors could lead to additional capital outflows of up to US$260 billion (Box 5)—almost doubling the size of foreign portfolio investment and bank lending relative to past trends—over the near to medium term. Some of these flows would go to EMs, moderating tightening financial conditions. Under a global downside risks scenario with sharply tighter global financial conditions and growth disappointments in several EMs (2014 Spillover Report), growth would slow substantially in Japan with negative feedback effects via trade and supply-chain channels. A slowdown in Japan would feed back to trading partners in the region, in particular suppliers to Japanese exporters and producers of final goods. As long as Japan continues to proceed with its reform agenda, positive spillovers will dominate over the medium-term. Under the baseline, completing all three arrows continues to be the preferred policy package for both Japan and the global economy as it would avoid overburdening monetary policy and undue weakening of the yen, boost import demand through higher growth while strengthening Japan’s competitiveness, and removing an important tail risk by restoring fiscal sustainability. During a growth slowdown, allowing fiscal stimulus to play a larger role would help minimize potential spillovers to the rest of the world. This underscores the need for a concrete medium-term fiscal strategy beyond 2015, which would create room for more fiscal flexibility. The authorities expressed skepticism about the assessment of the external position. They highlighted considerable uncertainty whether the current account would rise to around 2 percent of GDP as expected by staff. The factors cited for this uncertainty included persistently high oil prices, the continuation of relocation of production abroad, and declining competitiveness in some manufacturing sectors. The authorities agreed that spillovers of successful Abenomics would likely be positive. They noted that spillovers had been benign so far and that potential capital outflows could help ease financing conditions of EMs in the region. They also added that spillovers through the The scenario assumes a sooner than expected tightening of financial conditions (by 100 basis points largely through higher term premia) in advanced economies, resulting from perceptions of stability concerns, rather than through stronger economic growth. This is combined with a deeper than expected structural slowdown in EMs of ½ percentage point annual growth over the next three years. Page 25 trade channel would be more limited than in past episodes of large depreciations due to structural factors, including from the offshoring of production. The authorities were somewhat skeptical about staff’s estimates that growth spillovers from EMs were larger for Japan than for other advanced economies.