After a brief contraction, growth is expected to return to a moderate yet still above- potential pace later this year. An uneven quarterly growth profile reflects the advancing of domestic demand in the first quarter and a corresponding payback in the second quarter (-3.7 percent q/q, saar). The baseline assumes a return to moderate growth in the second half of the year, with a gradual handoff from stimulus to private sector-led growth. GDP is projected to grow 1.6 percent in 2014 for the year as a whole before decelerating to 1.1 percent in 2015 on unwinding fiscal stimulus (Table 1). Business investment is forecast to contribute more than 1 percent to GDP growth in 2014. Cyclical factors are providing a push for the recovery, including from tight capacity constraints— businesses report capacity utilization near pre-2008 levels (Tankan survey)—and tax incentives for replacing old capital stock. In addition, structural factors, including healthy corporate balance sheets and improved business growth expectations (Cabinet Office survey), provide a fertile ground for a continuation of investment spending (Figure 5). Private consumption is expected to slow substantially in the second half of the year contributing 0.4 percent to GDP growth this year. Real incomes are forecast to decline moderately as the effects of higher inflation—2¾ percent in 2014 due to the tax increase—is mostly offset by nominal labor income growth of about 2½ percent. A decline in the savings rate by See J. S. Kang (2014), “Balance Sheet Repair and Corporate Investment in Japan”, draft IMF Working Paper. Nominal labor income growth of 2.5 percent comprises (i) a 1 percent increase from overtime pay, bonuses; (ii) a first rise in base wages of 0.5 percent for regular workers in several years; and (iii) employment ground of 0.5 percent. The reversal of a 10 percent public sector wage cut after the earthquake adds another 0.4 percent. Page 8 0.5 percentage point, similar to experiences in other countries following VAT tax rate increases, is expected to sustain consumption in the second half of the year. Exports are forecast to grow moderately this year, supported by improving global growth and benefitting from a delayed response to the yen depreciation since late 2012. Historically, Japan’s trade balance has started to improve about 1–1½ years after a large depreciation. Under the baseline, potential growth will increase modestly over the medium term. Structural bottlenecks pose an impediment to a sustained recovery (Box 1). With labor supply declining as a result of demographic changes and structural rigidities constraining productivity growth and labor reallocation, potential growth is currently estimated at about ½ percent. The investment recovery and some benefits from structural reforms, including from raising female labor supply and deregulation, is estimated to increase potential growth to 1 percent over the medium term. An ambitious push on structural reforms and the effect of ending deflation on private initiative pose upside risks. Inflation is projected to reach 2 percent over the medium term and interest rates are expected to rise slowly. Headline and core inflation excluding food and energy, have risen to about 1.7 and 0.7 percent in April (y/y), respectively, excluding the effects of the consumption tax increase. Price increases are still related to last year’s large depreciation, although inflation of non-tradable items has begun to rise recently (Figure 6). Because of the consumption tax increase, headline inflation is projected to temporarily rise to an annual average rate of 2.8 percent in 2014, assuming full pass-through of the tax increase to final prices. Underlying inflation is projected to slow temporarily—and is forecast at 1.1 percent this year—as the pass- through from the yen depreciation comes to an end. With the output gap—estimated at about -1 percent in 2014—closing steadily and inflation expectations rising, inflation is projected to increase to 2 percent by 2017 (Table 4). Because of rising inflation expectations, long-term interest Potential growth estimates are based on a production function approach. The projected increase in potential growth by 0.5 percent comprises the net effect of a rise in the capital stock (0.6 percent) modest productivity improvements (0.1 percent) and a declining contribution from labor (0.2 percent). In April, headline CPI rose to 3.4 percent (y/y) from 1.6 percent in March, broadly consistent with full pass-through. Staff’s forecast is based on an estimated expectations-augmented Philips curve, using quarterly data over q1-1981 to q3-2013 with inflation expectations, the output gap, crude oil price index, and corporate goods inflation (to capture cost-push factors) as the main determinants. The effects from higher inflation expectations are uncertain but correlations between long-term inflation expectations and actual inflation could be substantial. In 2005 correlations ranged between 0.6 and 0.75, depending on the measure of inflation (headline, core, core-core). 1234Oct-12Jan-13Apr-13Jul-13Oct-13Jan-14Apr-14 Headline Core (ex. Food) Core-Core (ex. Food & Energy) Headline (ex. Consumption Tax (CT)) Core (ex. CT) Core-Core (ex. CT) Year on Year Inflation (In percent)Source: Cabinet Office / Haver Analytics Page 9 rates are expected to gradually increase over the medium-term, but are flat in the near-term as a result of QQE. Box 1. Structural Impediments to Private-Sector Led Growth The foundations for private-sector led growth and a durable exit from deflation remain uncertain. Because of further declines in the working-age population (text chart), staff projects potential growth not to increase above the pre- earthquake level of 1 percent by 2017 despite rising private investment and steady productivity growth. Headwinds from various structural factors hold back the recovery in staff’s baseline. Structural impediments to wage growth include the rising share of non-regular and part-time workers, particularly in the services sector, with less bargaining power, productivity growth, and lower wage levels (text chart). Low horizontal mobility of regular workers between firms amid high mobility within firms has mitigated the effects of a tight labor market on wages. Impediments to investment include the weak SME sector, which accounts for nearly 70 percent of total employment and over half of manufacturing value-added, but may not have benefitted from Abenomics due to rising import costs. Population aging is dampening prospects for future demand growth—a key determinant for domestic investment. Displacement of exports. Sales of Japanese subsidiaries are now exceeding exports from Japan. This trend is likely to persist under Abenomics, and will likely mean slower export growth. With rising incomes in regional trading partners, demand for commodities and consumer durables and services is expected to grow relative to investment goods, where Japan has had a comparative advantage. Greater import penetration in markets where Japan used to have strong competitiveness, such as electrical machinery, raises concerns that Japanese firms have structurally lost competitiveness. Higher energy costs. High imports of natural gas since 2011, which have been a major reason for the weaker trade balance, could affect competitiveness and spur a further movement of production abroad. Prepared by J. S. Kang (APD). See J. S. Kang (2014), “Balance Sheet Repair and Corporate Investment in Japan”, draft IMF Working Paper Change in part-time wages Composition effect Change in full-time wages Share of non-regular workers (RHS) Source: Haver Analytics, IMF staff estimates Rising share of non-regular workers drags wage growth (%, YoY)(% of staff) Japan: impact of aging on the level of real GDP (RHS, green x-axis) FRA (LHS) DEU (LHS) JPN (LHS) GBR (LHS) USA (LHS) Working-age Population, 1950-2050 (Index, 1950=100) (Real GDP level change) Source: U.N. and Anderson, Botman, and Hunt (2014), "Aging and Deflation", IMF WP forthcoming. Page 10 Near-term risks to the outlook are balanced, but the sustainability of the recovery over the medium term is at risk (Annex II). Near term . On the domestic side, the start of a positive investment-inventory cycle could raise demand and lift growth above staff’s baseline in the short term. Also, public investment spending has been constrained by absorption capacity and could grow faster than expected if access to (foreign) labor improves. These risks are broadly offset by the possibility of a sharper- than-expected moderation of growth in China or among ASEAN countries. This could lead to negative inward spillovers, which would affect Japan more strongly than other advanced economies (directly or via spillbacks) given its supply chain linkages and through its role as a supplier of capital goods (2013 and 2014 Spillover Reports). Geopolitical risks, including in Ukraine, could raise energy prices and adversely affect businesses. Medium term. Substantial uncertainty remains as to whether higher growth and inflation can be sustained over the longer term. Fiscal consolidation needs to proceed for a long time and the impact on growth could be larger than in the baseline. Together with a failure to implement high-impact structural reforms, this could erode confidence and limit gains in potential growth. As growth falls back and inflation momentum weakens, monetary policy could become overburdened and, with increasingly limited ability for policies to restore fiscal sustainability, the risk premium on government securities could rise (see “incomplete Abenomics” 2013 IMF Staff Report). Given the large JGB holdings by the financial sector, this would pose substantial financial stability risks. Such an outcome would have important spillovers via reduced demand for imports and tighter financing conditions in Japan and overseas (See Box 1.5 in the 2014 Regional Economic Outlook for Asia and Pacific). A sudden spike in bond yields remains the main tail risk over the medium term. In the event downside risks emerge, the government should continue with fiscal reforms, but in order to restore growth, inflation, and confidence in Abenomics, monetary and structural policies should respond. The scope for additional fiscal stimulus is limited in the absence of a concrete medium-term fiscal strategy beyond 2015. In a tail event of a widespread loss of faith in the sustainability of public finances, further fiscal consolidation would be needed to forestall a rise in risk premia and interest rates. The authorities emphasized that the economy appears well positioned to weather the consumption tax increase. They highlighted that fiscal stimulus spending would be frontloaded, limiting the growth slowdown beginning in the second quarter. They noted that the rise in base wages and bonuses would support sentiment and domestic demand over the coming period. The authorities broadly shared staff’s risk assessment but noted that many businesses were already anticipating slower growth in China and had begun to adjust their investment and expansion plans accordingly. Page 11 The BoJ expected a faster rise of inflation in the near term than staff. Like staff, they anticipated that inflation would stay around 1¼ percent for some time due to the waning effects of last year’s yen depreciation. However, they expected inflation to rise again in the second half of this fiscal year as the narrowing of the output gap would exert upward price pressure while inflation expectations would be pushed up further with the increase in actual inflation. They also saw the rapid labor market tightening and rising capacity utilization rates amid sluggish potential growth as signs that the output gap was already broadly closed. Regarding risks, the BoJ suggested the possibility that price stability may come in sight before potential growth picks up, highlighting the importance of accelerating the pace of structural reforms.