Structural reforms hold the key for faster growth. Measures to raise labor supply and employment would directly offset the drag on growth from an aging-related decline in the labor force. A more flexible economy would further encourage investment and productivity growth. Such a comprehensive reform program, by lifting confidence, would stimulate demand already in the near term and improve monetary policy transmission. The government adopted a revised growth strategy in June, but left many details undefined. Flagship reforms include plans to reduce the corporate income tax rate from over 35 percent to below 30 percent with the exact size of the cut, timeframe, and financing to be determined. Other important measures—some of which also lack specific timeframes— are further corporate governance reforms to encourage a more productive use of corporate savings and labor market reforms by possibly removing tax disincentives for women to work, greater use of foreign labor in health and household services, and measures to incentivize a shift from overtime- to performance-based remuneration. Few concrete measures were announced on agricultural reform or the role of SEZs. Since last year, reforms are progressing in a number of areas, but more forceful measures are needed to tackle growth impediments. While assessing the growth impact of structural reforms is inherently difficult, staff estimates that ongoing reforms could help lift potential HHHHLL Female labor participation Foreign labor Reducing Labor Duality Trade negotiations (TPP) Special Economic ZonesAgricultural reformElectricity sector reform Corporate taxation Corporate governance reform Financial sector reform Japan's Structural Reforms: Potential Direct Impact and Progress /1 Expected economic impact (Progress x Potential direct impact) 2/ Potential direct economic impact (H=High; L=Low) Sources: Staff estimates; See Annex 1.1/ Direct impact refers to macroeconomic growth effect, excluding potential spillovers or synergies from complementary reforms.2/ Progress assessed as likelihood of full reform implementation (25, 50, 75, or 100 percent) Page 12 growth to around 1 percent. But in order to raise trend growth above 1 percent, more ambitious reforms are needed in addition to implementing announced plans. Additional measures that would be needed include: Raising the employment of women, older workers, and foreign labor. Fully implementing plans to increase the availability of child care, gradually raising the retirement age, and relaxing immigration restrictions in areas with labor shortages could raise labor supply. Another important area is addressing labor market duality between regular and non-regular workers which contributes to subpar productivity growth because the time-limited and less protected contracts for non-regular workers lead to reduced training and effort. Encouraging the use of modified labor contracts to bridge this gap would stimulate productivity growth and increase the pass-through of labor market tightness into higher wages (Figure 7). Enhancing risk capital provision (Box 2). Measures should focus on increasing credit to new growth projects, for instance, by improving lenders’ access to credit registries, encouraging more asset based lending, and removing barriers to entry and exit of SMEs. Revisions to GPIF‘s investment strategy would provide further risk capital and lead to changes in investment strategies among other institutional investors. The introduction of individual savings accounts has been a positive step. Consideration could be given to extending the 5-year term limit and gradually raising the maximum contribution limit. Implementing comprehensive corporate governance reform (Box 3). Complementing the recently introduced Stewardship Code for institutional investors with a corporate governance code for firms and introducing measures to expand the use of independent outside directors would strengthen firms’ governance and potentially unlock corporate savings for more growth- effective use. Deregulating agriculture and domestic services sectors to raise productivity and encourage inward foreign investment. In this regard, early guidance on the modus operandi in the recently designated special zones could reduce uncertainty and boost investment. Benefits from a Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement could be substantial, provided it will eliminate most tariffs and non-tariff and investment barriers in Japan—with growth gaining about 0.2 percent per year. See C. Aoyagi and G. Ganelli (2013), “The Path to Higher Growth: Does Revamping Japan’s Dual Labor Market Matter?”, IMF Working Paper 13/202. Staff analysis using prefectural data suggests that land consolidation could increase long-term productivity by up to 30 percent, although the sector as a whole accounts for only 1 percent of GDP. See P. A. Petri, M. G. Plummer, and F. Zhai (2012), “The Trans-Pacific Partnership and Asia-Pacific Integration: A Quantitative Assessment”, Peterson Institute for International Economics and East-West Center. Page 13 Box 2. Facilitating (Risk) Capital The authorities have taken a number of steps to strengthen the financial sector’s ability to provide risk capital to the economy and facilitate more portfolio rebalancing abroad. The launch of tax-free investment savings accounts (NISA) encourages Japanese households—with more than US$16 trillion in financial assets—to put more savings into stocks and investment trusts. The extension of BoJ facilities stimulates bank lending and supports economic growth, while establishing a new ROE-focused index (JPX Nikkei 400) encourages a greater focus on corporate governance and profitability. Additional policy efforts should focus on intermediation (securitization and venture capital) and facilitate take-up on the demand side (exit and entry, corporate restructuring). Specifically: Securitization. There is room for boosting securitization activity backed by small business loans, possibly by encouraging more information sharing across multiple credit registries on repayment and default history of individual firms and by further easing terms on BoJ facilities (lower funding costs, longer maturity loans) for asset-backed lending. Venture capital firms have typically been less prominent in Japan than in other OECD countries (Nabar and Syed, 2011). Together with improvements in the GPIF governance structure, a further shift in targets toward riskier assets, such as venture capital could spur faster growth in funding for new businesses (as was seen in the US with the 1979 reform of the Employment Retirement Income Security Act allowing pension funds to invest in high risk assets including venture capital). Restructuring and exit of nonviable SMEs. Entry and exit rates of SMEs in Japan are on average about a third of those in advanced countries (Lam and Shin, 2012). The persistence of nonviable firms, kept afloat in part by credit guarantees, supervisory forbearance, and restructured loans impedes credit intermediation and risk taking in several ways—by deterring entry of new firms, expansion of healthy firms, and by eroding risk assessment capabilities at banks. Achieving turnover rates that reflect underlying fundamentals would require encouraging more out-of-court voluntary workouts to minimize stigma associated with bankruptcy and consolidating regional banks whose capital buffers are weakened if they were to call in non-performing loans. At the same time, small business entry could be facilitated by reducing the time and cost of starting businesses—streamlining business registration procedures and upgrading credit registries and personal credit information Prepared by S. Arslanalp (MCM) and M. Nabar (APD). 00.511.5200.511.52FY04FY05FY06FY07FY08FY09FY10FY11FY12 RMBS CMBS CDO Leases Consumer Loans Shopping Credits Sales Receivables / Commercial Bills OthersSource:Japan Securities Dealers Association, CEIC, and Staff Estimates Securitization Products Issuance by Underlying Assets Page 14 The authorities emphasized that a broad range of growth reforms is in train. The number of childcare facilities was rapidly expanding and measures to improve corporate governance showed early success with the adoption of the Stewardship Code by many financial institutions. They further highlighted that the measures taken so far have the potential to deliver significant growth payoffs. Already it was possible to see an impact on corporate profitability and base wages are going up for the first time in 15 years. They anticipated that the measures in the new growth strategy would add further support to private sector-led growth through additional concrete measures, but felt that the full impact of the structural reforms is likely to take a while to materialize and gains in potential growth were difficult to quantify. Depending on the scenario, they estimated real growth to range between 1¼ and 2¼ percent in the medium- to long-term. In the near term, confidence effects from structural reforms could already support the recovery by boosting investment. Box 3. Unstash Japan’s Corporate Cash Firms’ preference for holding large cash buffers is likely limiting the scope for increasing wages, dividends, and investment. Cash holdings by Japanese companies are large compared with other G-7 countries (text chart). The existing literature suggests that corporate governance is a significant determinant of cash holdings and that Japan has lower scores in this area compared to other G-7 countries regarding firm-level governance attributes covering: board composition; audit quality; shareholder rights; and ownership structure and compensation. Staff analysis finds that corporate governance reform could help reduce firms’ large cash holdings. An empirical analysis based on a panel of Japanese companies suggests that improving corporate governance—proxied in the regression by an index summarizing company disclosure of governance data—could significantly reduce corporate cash holdings. Reform options include complementing the recently introduced Stewardship Code for institutional investors with a corporate governance code for firms, and measures to expand the use of independent outside directors beyond current plans. Prepared by C. Aoyagi and G. Ganelli (OAP). See C. Aoyagi and G. Ganelli (2014), “Unstash the Cash! Corporate Governance Reform in Japan”; draft IMF Working Paper. A Stewardship Code is a set of principles for institutional investors to help improve long-term returns to shareholders and the efficient exercise of fiduciary responsibilities. 0%10%20%30%40%USUKJapanItalyGermanyFranceCanada Listed Firms Cash & Equivalents Holdings (2004-12 Average) (In percent of market capitalization) Source: Bloomberg Page 15