Safeguarding financial stability, particularly in the context of prolonged unconventional monetary policy, low growth, and demographic trends, remains essential. Preserving financial stability requires progress in upgrading macroeconomic policies Overall, the financial system has remained sound and resilient, with good capitalization and a declining NPL ratio (Table 5). For the time being, systemic risks stemming from unsustainable public finances are contained by the strong domestic demand for JGBs and the effects of the BoJ’s quantitative easing policies which are keeping the sovereign’s funding cost and refinancing risks to a minimum. However, over the medium term, failure to achieve reflation and higher growth and the likely resulting absence of progress toward fiscal sustainability will create increasing vulnerabilities from low nominal growth and low profitability as well as from possible reemergence of risk premia. Moreover, in such a scenario, the likely need for prolonged unconventional monetary policies could engender financial stability risks. Conversely, the financial system could help to reduce the likelihood that these downside risks materialize and support growth in the medium term by adapting business models, consolidation, and improving risk management to support more risk-taking by SMEs. Financial sector policies should safeguard the liquidity of JGB markets. Market conditions are significantly affected by the BoJ’s purchases which absorb more than new issuance, thus diminishing the availability of JGBs for collateral and asset-liability management use. There is some evidence of increased scarcity of JGBs in the cash market. While this has not yet led to structural changes in market functioning, with repo market transactions remaining high, JGB market liquidity appears to have declined after the expansion of QQE and the introduction of NIRP (Figure 5). Meanwhile, market liquidity has become less resilient as the probability that the market has moved into a mid-to- low liquidity state has increased sharply, suggesting that large transactions may have more The average lending fee for JGBs has increased in the special collateral repo market, which is important for market- making activities. High-liquidity regime Mid-liquidity regime Low-liquidity regime Market Liquidity of the JGB Futures Market (Probability of regime 1/) Sources:The Bank of Japan (BoJ); and Fund staff estimations. 1/ Estimated from a Markov regime-switching model following the October 2015 GFSR with the price impact as the measure of market liquidity. The BoJ kindly provided such data for the analysis. Page 25 significant price impacts than before. Together with the increase in foreign participation in the JGB market, these developments may expose the JGB and funding markets to higher volatility. In addition to the recent measures taken which have helped to enhance liquidity, the authorities could further strengthen their monitoring by regularly assessing the impact of developments in inventories of primary dealers on their market-making activities. Lower profitability and higher FX risks related to funding liquidity and international equity holdings of financial institutions warrant close monitoring. Banks . The flattening of the yield curve has been putting pressure on net interest margins and profitability, especially for regional banks which rely more on domestic activity. Moreover, the sharp rise in USD funding cost since last year has increased FX funding pressure on banks (Figure 4), as nearly 15 percent of their FX lending is funded by short-term market sources, exposing them to rollover risk. The authorities have encouraged banks to secure stable deposit bases in major foreign currencies. In addition, the authorities should ensure a sufficiently high liquidity coverage for significant foreign currencies if FX loans keep growing more rapidly than corresponding FX deposits. Finally, market risk associated with equity holdings has increased due to higher volatility. Institutional investors . Insurers and pension funds have accelerated the rebalancing of their portfolios towards more risky assets such as foreign bonds and equity. Most of the principal is hedged against FX risk but interest and dividend income remain largely exposed. The surging USD funding costs are raising the cost of these hedges which have shorter maturities than the underlying assets. As a result, some life insurers appear to have increased purchases of unhedged foreign bonds, raising concerns about their FX risk, as the USD funding cost could rise further. Finally, the yen appreciation has significantly reduced profits derived from international holdings. The resilience of regional banks should be bolstered through further regulatory reforms. Major banks are on track to meet the Basel III capital and liquidity requirements according to the phasing-in schedule. However, regional banks are facing additional challenges given lower profitability, higher interest rate risk, and high real estate and FX exposures. The authorities should reform the regulation of regional banks, including the required level of capital and the calculation of risk-weighted assets while enhancing some elements of the core capital. Consolidation could help improve profitability, but has been slow. The authorities have made significant progress to strengthen the macroprudential policy (MaPP) framework, but inter-agency coordination could be further improved. Recent Based on an estimated Markov regime-switching model for price impact indicators following the October 2015 GFSR. Recent measures include (i) allowing for consecutive use of its Securities Lending Facility for a longer period, (ii) raising the upper limit on the amount of sales per issue in February 2016, (iii) regularly publishing the bond market survey and liquidity indicators in the JGB markets since 2015, and (iv) the MoF’s plan to issue additional off- the-run JGBs with remaining maturity of 1–5 years in the Auctions for Enhanced-Liquidity in FY2016. Page 26 efforts include (i) establishing a macroprudential office in the FSA, (ii) launching the Council for Cooperation on Financial Stability between the FSA and the BOJ at the management level, and (iii) holding a monthly meeting between the MoF, FSA, and BoJ at the staff level for information sharing on international financial and capital markets. However, the FSA and BoJ could continue to intensify their cooperation via enhanced sharing of systemic risk assessments and findings from supervisory activities. In addition, although the FSA has the ultimate responsibility and discretion to implement regulations related to MaPP, it is important to ensure that the respective roles of the BoJ and FSA in managing the relevant tools remain clear. The upcoming FY2017 FSAP will make a detailed assessment. Reduction in corresponding banking relationships (CBRs) has not been observed . A reduction in the provision of cross-border financial services by Japanese banks, especially CBRs, in response to reduced risk-taking or regulatory changes has not been observed, but the situation should be monitored. Authorities’ Views The authorities highlighted the recent progress made to safeguard financial stability and promote economic growth. They pointed out that absolute bank profits are still close to historically high levels despite some recent declines. In addition, the expansion in overseas lending required enhancing banks’ risk and credit assessment capacity. In response to the potentially increasing FX liquidity risk, the authorities felt that supervisory dialogs regarding enhancing banks risk management should be carried out, rather than imposing one-size-fits-all FX liquidity requirements. The authorities expressed concerns over external risks, particularly the high leverage in Asia and emerging markets resulting from the global monetary easing and which could be affected by the slowdown in China and the Fed’s tightening. They noted that the adverse effects of NIRP on bank profitability were limited and emphasized that the overall effect would be positive once effects on economic growth and credit demand materialize and banks progress further in adapting business models to cope with a structurally flat yield curve. The authorities have encouraged regional banks to change their business models from collateral-based lending to business potential-based lending and indicated that consolidation of regional banks should be decided by themselves voluntarily as a management decision. The FSA highlighted the recent progress in strengthening the macroprudential policy framework, acknowledging the need to continue close inter-agency information sharing.