Japan’s fiscal balance is projected to improve over the near term, but longer-term plans remain undefined . The structural primary deficit is estimated to shrink by an annual average of 1 percent of GDP during 2014–16 after weakening modestly in 2013 to -7.0 percent of GDP on account of new stimulus spending (Table 2 and Figure 8). This adjustment in staff’s baseline assumes that the consumption tax rate will be raised to 10 percent, previous stimulus winds down, and commitments to current public expenditure containment are met (in sum 2¼ percent of GDP). But even with these measures, the authorities may not achieve their G20 goal of halving the primary deficit by FY 2015 to 3.3 percent of GDP (and this target would slip out of reach with a corporate income tax rate cut or the introduction of multiple consumption tax rates). No fiscal consolidation plans beyond 2015 have been announced to reach the G20 commitment of primary balance by FY 2020, which would stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio, but not bring it down. Even after factoring in the anticipated second stage increase of the consumption tax, further consolidation is needed to contain large fiscal risks. The consumption tax rate increase in April to 8 percent was a major achievement, but is only a first step towards fiscal sustainability. Staff’s debt sustainability analysis (DSA), which assumes implementation of both consumption tax rate increases, shows that the gross debt-to-GDP ratio continues rising beyond the medium-term. Without further policy measures, the fiscal position is unsustainable (chart, DSA Annex V). Staff estimates that after 2015 a further fiscal adjustment of 6¼ percent of GDP is needed under the baseline to put the debt-to-GDP ratio firmly on a downward trajectory. A gradual adjustment pace would strike the right balance between reversing the debt dynamics in a decisive manner and safeguarding the recovery. The second consumption tax rate increase in 2015 to 10 percent with a uniform rate should be confirmed . Raising the tax rate further at a moderate pace would help establish fiscal policy credibility. Staff estimates that fiscal consolidation in 2015 would slow growth by ½ percent, leaving growth in 2015/16 still above potential under the baseline. There is a valid concern, however, that the higher consumption tax could harm low-income households. These equity considerations would be best addressed through the existing subsidies—which could be improved once the new tax identification numbers are introduced—instead of reducing rates on essential items, as this The authorities’ target is defined on a consolidated central and local government basis. Fiscal adjustment scenario Japan: Gross Public Debt Sources: Cabinet Office; and staff estimates and projections.1/ Gross debt of the general government including the social security fund. 2/ Withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and consumption tax increases to 10 percent in 2015 are assumed. 3/ Policy adjustment scenario assumes a 8.5percent of GDP improvement (baseline scenario+6¼ points) in the structural primary balance between 2015 and 2020. Baseline scenario Page 16 would hurt efficiency, increase compliance and administrative costs, and result in permanent revenue losses. A post-2015 fiscal consolidation plan is urgently needed and should include further revenue measures and entitlement reforms. Such a plan should be as growth friendly and equitable as possible and would allow more near- term flexibility to respond to downside risks. Options (see text table) include gradually increasing the consumption tax to at least 15 percent, broadening the personal income tax base, and taking measures to contain pension and health care spending. Reforms of the spousal deduction from the personal income tax and threshold below which dependent spouses are exempted from paying social security contributions should be reviewed to remove disincentives to female labor force participation. A restructuring of the currently untargeted wage deductions scheme, which creates incentives for firms to expand their payroll to reduce the corporate income tax liabilities, could further enhance efficiency while raising revenue. Reforms of the fiscal framework could help safeguard hard-won consolidation gains. As the fiscal adjustment will span a decade, consolidation gains should be safeguarded through a stronger fiscal framework grounded in medium-term rules to curb expenditures and limits on the use of supplementary budgets. The government recently decided to move ahead with a CIT rate cut to below 30 percent, with details and an exact timeframe to be determined. Reducing the CIT rate would have economic benefits, but would require offsetting fiscal measures to prevent a further rise in fiscal risks (Box 4). Revenue losses could range between ½ to 1 percent of GDP depending on the size of the rate reduction (text table below). Staff analysis shows that a CIT cut raises investment and growth, but not sufficiently to make them self-financing. There is some scope for CIT base broadening, but an elimination of the most distortionary allowances or incentives, such as those for SMEs, would provide only limited revenue gains. Removal of some key allowances, for instance for K. Kang, M. Keen, M. Pradhan and R. de Mooij, 2011 "Raising the Consumption Tax in Japan: Why, When, How?," IMF Staff Discussion Notes 11/13. K. Kashiwase, M. Nozaki, and K. Tokuoka (2012), “Pension Reforms in Japan”, IMF Working Paper 12/285. Wage earners can claim standard deductions that rise with income up to a certain threshold and are substantially higher than actual expenses or similar deductions in other countries. These deductions create incentives for SMEs to incorporate and distribute profits through directors’ salaries, thereby reducing corporate income tax liabilities. For more details, see R. de Mooij and I. Saito (2014), “Japan's Corporate Income Tax: Facts, Issues and Reform Option”, draft IMF Working Paper. JapanUSUKFranceGermany Corporate Income Tax Personal Income Tax Consumption Tax Other Taxes Social Security Contributions Sources:OECD and IMF WEO database. General Government Tax and Social Security Revenue, 2012 Page 17 Research and Development (R&D) expenses, could weaken the positive investment effects of a rate cut and should be avoided (Figure 8). To limit fiscal risks while maximizing the economic impact, a new tax schedule should be announced upfront, but phased in over time. This would help reduce the revenue costs and allow offsetting measures to be introduced over time to limit their growth impact. As an alternative to a CIT rate cut, consideration could be given to opt for an Allowance for Corporate Equity (ACE) system, which would be a more cost effective way of encouraging investment and has recently been adopted in some advanced and emerging economies. Estimates of Authorities' Current Plan IMF's Additional Adjustment Options Total Savings2 ¼6¼ of which Revenue1.02.5 Increase consumption tax rate from 8 to 10 1/1.0Increase consumption tax rate from 10 to 15 2.5Cut corporate tax rate (details unknown) Cut corporate tax rate (from 34.6 to 25-30 percent) -0.5 to -1.0Broaden corporate income tax base ++ Broaden personal income tax base (including a reduction of the wage deduction)0.5 to 1.0Eliminate preferential tax treatment for pension benefit income 2/ Collect pension contributions from dependent spouses of workers covered by the employees' insurance 2/ Collect health insurance premiums from dependent spouses of workers covered by the employees' insurance + Reduce pension payroll tax-0.5Introduce carbon tax 3/ + Raise inheritance tax further ++ Expenditure 1¼ Withdraw the financial crisis fiscal stimulus00Withdraw the recent stimulus Curb growth rate of nominal non-social security spending (excluding interest payments) 4/ 1.5Limit annual nominal growth in social security spending (excluding the items below) 5/ Raise pension eligibility age to 67 or higher 2/ Reduce benefits for wealthy retirees 2/ Note: Staff estimates; '-' and '+' refers to unidentified costs or savings 3/ Fiscal savings are assumed to be 0.1 percentage points of GDP or lower and spent on energy saving initiatives. Options for Fiscal Policy Adjustment Until 2020 (Excluding reconstruction spending, in percentage points of GDP) 1/ Introducing multiple rates would reduce additional revenue. 2/ Lower bound estimate of Kashiwase, Nozaki, and Tokuoka, 2012 (IMF Working Paper 12/285).4/ Freezing expenditure in nominal terms.5/ Annual nominal growth at ½-1 percent. The authorities plan to use part of additional revenue from the second-stage consumption tax hike to increase social security spending. Page 18 Box 4. Reforming the Corporate Income Tax System The government announced in June plans to reduce the CIT rate as a way to stimulate the economy. The Japanese statutory rate (34.6 percent) and revenue to GDP ratio (3.4 percent) are among the highest in the OECD, some 5 percentage points higher than in other G7 economies. Despite recent reforms, Japan’s CIT system is relatively distortionary and complex. In 2012, the statutory rate was already lowered by 5 percentage points following a shift to territorial taxation in 2009, but large distortions remain. Differences in treatment between debt and equity financing and between incorporated and unincorporated firms are large and lead to distortions and arbitrage. A large number of special tax incentives has reduced transparency and effectiveness. Varying rates by region, firm size, and income level creates further distortions. A CIT rate cut could have a positive yet limited impact on investment, including through higher inward FDI. International evidence suggests that a 5 percentage point CIT rate cut may increase investment by some 2 or 3 percent. Japan-specific estimates point to potentially smaller effects. FDI is expected to rise too, but given that inbound FDI is relatively small in Japan, effects through this channel may not be very large. A CIT rate cut is unlikely to be self-financing. Revenue effects are generally based on static assessments when designing a comprehensive tax reform. Combining international experience with Japan-specific features suggests that the dynamic long-run effects following a CIT cut may be mitigated by perhaps 10–30 percent, far from fully offsetting its impact. The short-run fiscal costs can be reduced by gradually phasing in the tax reduction to reduce the windfall gain on returns to past investment. In the long run, other taxes need to be raised, such as the consumption tax; or the local CIT could be replaced by local property taxes. Revenue gains from base broadening are limited, but streamlining tax incentives including those for SMEs is needed. Tax incentives come at an estimated overall revenue loss of 0.2 percent of GDP at the central government level. Some of these incentives may be justified on efficiency grounds, including for stimulating R&D. The generosity of depreciation allowances and loss carry forwards is also comparable to that in peer countries. The number of tax incentives in Japan is very large, however, and not all seem effective, particularly those applicable to SMEs, including special reduced rates, which can in fact be distortionary. An Allowance for Corporate Equity (ACE) could stimulate investment, with minimal fiscal costs in the short run. Introducing an ACE would directly reduce the cost of equity financing, thus boosting incentives to invest. Moreover, it also eliminates debt bias, which gives incentives for excessive debt accumulation, making firms more vulnerable to shocks. If an ACE is applied only to new equity, as recently introduced in Italy, revenue losses will be incurred only gradually. The investment stimulus per yen of tax relief is thus maximized. Prepared by R. de Mooij (FAD) and I. Saito (APD). See also de Mooij and Saito (2014) “Japan’s Corporate Income Tax: Facts, Issues and Reform Options”, draft IMF Working Paper. un E T ee gd B Z x Source: OECDNote: Chile and Mexico data unavailable. Norway excluded (10.4%). OECD: Corporate Income Tax Revenue (2012) Page 19 The authorities considered the increase of the consumption tax a success and agreed that the second rate increase would be an important contribution to restoring fiscal sustainability. Despite widespread concerns, early indications were that growth implications of the tax increase were moderate and the decline in consumption had started to level off in May. Officials noted that ample fiscal stimulus was in train to prevent the economy from stalling. A decision on the second consumption tax increase is expected by the end of this year, taking into account several factors including economic conditions in the third quarter. The introduction of multiple rates on basic items was under discussion to address equity concerns, but required careful consideration given potential administrative and revenue costs. The authorities agreed that fiscal measures needed to be identified beyond 2015 to stabilize and bring down the debt-to-GDP ratio. They noted that the Fiscal System Council, an advisory body to the Finance Minister, had published long-term fiscal projections on an internationally comparable basis, which quantified the size of the required adjustment. The projections showed that, while public pension expenditure will stabilize, health and long-term care expenditures are expected to rise substantially. They noted that even under favorable macroeconomic conditions, there remained a sizeable gap vis-a-vis the FY 2020 primary balance target and noted that a concrete medium-term fiscal plan would be formulated in 2015. The authorities explained that the costs and benefits of a CIT rate reduction had been intensively debated. Views within the government varied on the size of the growth benefits, but there was broad agreement that a tax rate reduction was not self-financing and base-broadening measures were under discussion to secure offsetting financial resources. Compensating measures were thus seen as necessary to make a rate cut compatible with the government’s long-term goal of achieving primary balance by FY 2020.