A modest recovery is underway as domestic demand has bottomed out (Figure 1). GDP growth accelerated to 3.9 percent in 2015:Q1 (qoq, saar). The rebound in business investment is especially encouraging, but consumption remains sluggish and more than half of the reported quarterly growth stemmed from inventories. Leading indicators such as retail sales and industrial production suggest a continued modest recovery of domestic demand in 2015:Q2. Inflation expectations are still below the Bank of Japan’s (BoJ’s) inflation target and actual inflation has been pushed down by commodity price developments (Figure 2). After rising to 1.5 percent in mid-2014, core inflation (excluding fresh food and the effects of the consumption tax increase) declined rapidly and has been close to zero since February 2015. Initially, the decline reflected the waning effects of yen -1-0.500.511.52Jun-2013Dec-2013Jun-2014Dec-2014 Headline Inflation adjusted for consumption tax increase Sub-basket less sensitive to exchange rate (excl. C tax effect) Inflation expectation based on 10Y Swaps Sources: CEIC; Bloomberg;and IMFstaff estimates. Headline and Inflation Expectations (Year-on-year percent change)Apr-2015 Page 10 depreciation in 2013 and weak domestic demand. More recently, falling energy prices have added to disinflation. A CPI sub-index, with items less sensitive to the exchange rate, has been in deflationary territory since last October. Market-based measures of inflation expectations have declined since mid-2014 and recently stabilized at around 1 percent. Loose monetary policy has improved financial conditions and fueled asset prices. Notwithstanding recent volatility, Japanese government bonds (JGBs) yields have remained near historic lows (Figure 3). Financing conditions for firms also continue to improve with both bank lending rates and corporate bond yields near historic lows. As of May, the real effective exchange rate (REER) had depreciated by 7 percent compared to the average of 2014. Stock prices have more than doubled since the launch of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) by the BoJ, mainly driven by actual and expected earnings growth (Figure 4). Fundamental drivers include increased profitability of large corporations on the back of yen depreciation, lower corporate income tax rates, recent corporate governance reforms, and buybacks by companies. The portfolio allocation shift by the Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF) towards equities and other riskier assets and the BoJ’s additional purchases of ETFs have also contributed to this outcome. Land and real estate prices have bottomed out in most market segments and condominium prices in metropolitan areas are rising again after a two-decade slump. Portfolio rebalancing is progressing but credit growth has remained subdued. Balance sheets reveal that most financial institutions have reduced their holdings of government bonds, but only public pension funds and households have materially rebalanced towards riskier assets. Banks have been shedding their JGBs and building up excess reserves although lending to the non manufacturing corporate sector, including small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) has seen a modest See IMF Global Financial Stability Report (2015 April) for more details. United StatesEuro areaJapanEmerging markets Risk-free rate Equity risk premium Earnings (current and projected) Total return Sources: Haver Analytics; I/B/E/S; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; and IMF staff estimates.Note: Based on a standard three-stage dividend discount model. Decomposition of Equity Performance (percent contribution from Dec 2012 -Feb 2015) Historical fluctuation (2 Std Dev) Share of Currency, Deposits, and Government Securities Corporate PensionsBanksOther Financial IntermediariesPublicPensionsInsurance Households Rebalancing Sources: Bankof Japan Flow of Funds; Haver; and IMF Staff Estimates. Currency, Deposits & Government Bonds Holdings (2014Q4) (In percent of total portfolio) 9095100105110115120Dec-08Dec-09Dec-10Dec-11Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14 Japan: Residential Property Price Indices (2010=100) Residential property Residential land Detached houses Condominiums Source: Japan's Ministryof Land, Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism. Page 11 increase and overseas lending has picked up. In contrast, lending to the manufacturing sector has been broadly flat, owing to ample corporate cash balances, while household borrowing is continuing at its historic rate. Financial system soundness has continued to improve. Banks are benefitting from the recovery, loan growth and higher equity market valuations. With low credit costs and declining loan loss provisioning, capital positions have strengthened and internationally-active banks remain on track to meet Basel III capital requirements. Although major Japanese banks are more leveraged compared to other G-SIFIs, credit risks are limited by large holdings of low-risk assets such as government bonds. With interest rate margins squeezed by competition, most banks have expanded non-interest income. Moreover, QQE has reduced interest rate risk primarily for major banks, while regional banks have been slow to shed their JGB holdings given more limited lending opportunities. Insurance companies have dealt with low interest rates by investing in instruments with longer maturities and high-yield assets and expanding overseas investments while reducing guaranteed rates on their savings-type products. They have maintained their solvency margin ratios at levels well above 200 percent—the regulatory threshold to take corrective actions. The GPIF has aligned its portfolio allocation targets to international practices. Japan: Banks Capital Adequacy and Non-Performing Loans