Taking last year’s trade developments into account, the yen is assessed as broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (Annex III). The assessment takes temporary factors affecting the trade balance into account as well as structural shifts in the external sector, the effects of which have become more apparent during the last year. Structural factors are exerting a drag on the trade balance and making it less responsive to the movement of the yen. The rising share of offshore production—exceeding 20 percent of overall manufacturing output—and Japan’s upstream position in the global supply chain have reduced the sensitivity of exports to fluctuations in the yen. On the import side, with the supply of domestic nuclear power likely to be permanently lower, a portion of the current elevated energy imports will persist. Finally, imports of consumer electronics and IT devices have soared during the last few years and structurally increased the import share in Japan’s domestic final demand. Staff estimates that these effects lead to a permanent trade deficit, which is more than offset by a surplus on the income account. As a result, the current account norm is estimated at around 2 percent of GDP—about 1½ percentage point of GDP lower than assessed last year. Temporary factors have also weakened Japan’s trade balance, including due to rush demand ahead of the consumption tax increase. The expectation is that the external balance will strengthen—to a surplus of around 2 percent of GDP over the medium to long term— as these effects fade and exports pick up in line with past lags. For the time being, there is large uncertainty about Japan’s external assessment. In addition to the above factors, the assessment assumes the implementation of desirable macroeconomic policies and in the case of Japan this requires full implementation of all three arrows of Abenomics. The effects of the new policies on the external balance are uncertain given that they are trying to accomplish several goals – accelerate growth, lift inflation, lower public debt. As the policies are being implemented, the assessment will be revisited in the future as outcomes become clearer.