Growth remains subdued. After a strong start, economic growth slowed to 0.5 percent in 2015 due to weak private consumption, hamstrung by timid wage growth despite an unemployment rate close to an all-time low (Figure 1 and Table 1). Slack has emerged in the tradeable goods sector (in line with weak global markets) but firms prefer to hold on to their work force while employment growth has been concentrated in the less productive service sectors. Private investment was muted, reflecting lack of confidence in future demand prospects, and export growth slowed. Nevertheless, the external balance improved significantly as oil prices declined and service exports rose on the back of increased tourism from China. Growth in the first quarter of 2016 showed a modest rebound, driven in part by leap-year effects. While consumption picked up, investment remained weak, which could reflect increasing economic and policy uncertainty and declining growth prospects. The highly anticipated wage negotiations in the spring fell short of expectations as base wages rose by only 0.4 percent compared to 0.6 percent the previous year. High frequency indicators show continued weakness in industrial production and 2010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q12016Q1 Private gross fixed investment Government spending Net exports Private consumption Private inventories Real growth (q/q) Source: Haver Analytics. Contributions to QoQ Growth (SA) (In percent) Page 11 consumption. The Kumamoto earthquakes have hampered near-term growth but will only have a minor impact for the year as a whole reflecting reconstruction activity, some payback after production disruptions, and the fiscal stimulus. Inflation lost its forward momentum. Average headline inflation (excluding the consumption tax) declined from 1.2 percent in 2014 to 0.3 percent in 2015, due to falling oil prices. The decline has continued in 2016, with May numbers showing a 0.4 percent (y/y) decline in the price level (Figure 2). The BoJ’s Core-core inflation (excluding fresh food and energy) remained steady in 2015, reaching 1.3 percent at the end of the year, but has since fallen to 0.9 percent. Weakening inflation dynamics spilled over to medium and long-term inflation expectations due to their backward looking nature. Financial conditions remain accommodative but tightened recently (Figure 3 and 4). While interest rates declined and the credit cycle continued to expand, falling stock prices and the strong appreciation of the yen resulted in a modest tightening of financial conditions, posing a challenge to monetary transmission. Debt and equity markets. The nominal yield curve shifted down and flattened significantly in the first half of 2016, with the 10-year benchmark JGB falling into negative territiory. The shift in the yield curve also translated into lower lending rates and corporate bond yields, with corporate debt issuance picking up, especially in long maturities. In contrast, equity prices started to decline in the second half of 2015, led by finanical and energy sectors, and volatility increased. Portfolio rebalancing: Households continued to increase the share of risky assets in their financial portfolios, but the pace slowed recently, reflecting higher market volatility. Banks have accelerated rebalancing towards domestic lending, equities and investment trusts, and foreign securities (See Selected Issues Paper “Is Home Bias Weakening?”). Japan Post Bank continued to reallocate investments towards foreign bonds, and similarly, life insurers, who used to actively purchase super-long-term JGBs, increased the share of foreign bonds in their portfolios. The Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF) has almost reached its reduced target for JGB holdings, while other pension funds continue to rebalance towards domestic and foreign equities. EE Page 12 Credit cycle. Domestic credit growth picked up in 2015 and the credit cycle continued to expand (Table 2) (See Selected Issues Paper “QQEs Impact on Financing Conditions of Listed Firms”). Overseas loans continued to grow rapidly as did loans for, and equity investment in, real estate. Asset quality improved with the NPL ratio ― including that of overseas loans—declining further. Recently, financial institutions have become more cautious in extending overseas loans due to global growth concerns, especially in emerging markets, and higher foreign currency funding costs. Exchange rate. The yen depreciation started to reverse in the second half of 2015 and its appreciation accelerated in early 2016 to levels last seen prior to the 2014 expansion of QQE. Underlying drivers include safe-haven effects due to global financial market volatility, a narrowing of interest rate differentials with the U.S., market perceptions of limits to BoJ’s stimulus, and a rising current account surplus. So far the authorities have verbally expressed concern about disorderly market movements, but refrained from actual foreign exchange interventions. The weaker domestic and external economic environment triggered a sequence of monetary and fiscal policy responses in the first half of 2016. Supplementary budget and earthquake relief . In January, a 0.6 percent of GDP supplementary package was approved for FY2016. In addition, the government later announced a frontloading of the FY2016 initial budget, and the Kumamoto earthquakes in April prompted the formulation of a supplementary budget estimated to raise GDP growth by around 0.1 percent. Negative Interest Rate Policy: The adoption of the negative interest rate policy (NIRP) amid a weakening of the outlook and higher global uncertainty reinforced the BoJ’s commitment to its inflation target and added another tool to the policy framework, allowing it to be more open ended. So far the NIRP has been successful in lowering the entire yield curve and has not adversely impacted market functioning, beyond expected effects on JGB liquidity and bank profitability (Figure 5). More time is needed to see its full transmission to the real economy (Box 1) (See Selected Issues Paper “Negative Interest Rate Policy and Bank Deposit Rate”). Delayed consumption tax hike and planned stimulus . The authorities’ decisions to adopt additional stimulus and to postpone the scheduled 2017 consumption tax hike by two and a half years while maintaining the FY2020 primary surplus target, demonstrate the challenge of The supplementary package focuses on (i) increased funding for medical and long-term care which involves transfers to low-income households; (ii) boosting competitiveness in the agriculture sector through improvements in infrastructure and measures to promote agriculture exports; and (iii) improving disaster recovery and raising infrastructure spending. mm X = Page 13 simultaneously stimulating the economy and moving towards fiscal sustainability in a short timeframe. While these decisions will reduce deflation risks and support near-term growth, they will likely affect the achievement of the authorities’ medium-term fiscal target, unless abrupt consolidation takes place, which would again undermine reflation prospects. Structural reforms progressed in some core areas. New “three-arrows”. In September 2015, PM Abe announced a plan to promote the “Dynamic Engagement of All Citizens,” and a new “three-arrows” strategy consisting of: (i) a strong economy, with a target of raising nominal GDP to 600 trillion yen; (ii) childcare support to lift the fertility rate and labor force participation; and (iii) a social security system to prevent people from leaving employment to provide nursing care. Implementing measures remain to be elaborated. Minimum wage and corporate tax. The government has been rightly calling for higher wage increases through the tripartite dialogue and recently announced a floor of 3 percent on annual minimum wage increases (See Selected Issues Paper “Minimum Wages as a Policy Tool”). The government also cut the statutory corporate income tax rate below 30 percent in FY2016, one year earlier than scheduled, to entice firms to deploy their cash, although the impact on investment appears limited so far. Corporate governance reform. Progress so far includes acceptance of the Stewardship Code by 210 institutional investors; the application of the Corporate Governance code, inter alia requiring listed companies to appoint at least two outside directors on a “comply or explain” basis; the amendment of the Companies Act; and the launching of the JPX-Nikkei 400 index comprising only profitable firms with good corporate governance and disclosure. Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). The government reached an agreement on the TPP, but the ratification decision has been pushed back to the next Diet session in the fall. If fully implemented TPP would raise the level of GDP by 2–3 percentage points in the long run and associated deregulation would yield further significant benefits.