The program safeguards the fiscal targets for 2014 (¶s14 and 20). Regarding the central government, the authorities felt confident that the measures for 2014, along with ongoing improvements in tax administration, would suffice to raise the expected revenue. Nonetheless, they stand ready to implement compensating measures to meet the target should revenue fall short of projections (several options were discussed, in particular on the revenue side). Regarding NEPCO, the authorities expect gas flows to resume soon and reach the average program target in 2014. The program accommodates a temporary disruption in gas flows by adjusting the end-June 2014 targets (on the combined deficit of the central government and NEPCO) by about ½ percent of GDP (the end-2014 target on NEPCO’s losses is unchanged). If shortfalls in gas flows in the first half of the year cannot be offset by larger flows later in the year, corrective action is needed, which could be in the form of a temporary electricity tariff or a VAT surcharge. Fiscal consolidation in 2015 will be addressed proactively in the next reviews (¶s16 and 17). For the central government, passage of an adequate income tax law will be a key consideration for staff to be able to assess that the program remains on track to meet its objectives (and thus to recommend the fifth review). Further, the authorities plan to approve by end-September measures which—together with the income tax law—will yield 1.5 percent of GDP and thus cover the full adjustment for 2015. Additional NEPCO Losses, 2014–19 (No gas scenario, in percent of GDP) Sources: Jordanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 25 Additional grants could help manage the costs of gas shortfalls and also allow more spending on priorities (¶s10 and 11). Should additional grants become available, they would help first to manage any gas shortfalls (and in this context protect against a need for additional budget cuts). Grants could go also toward restoring public services to their pre-Syria crisis quality or capital spending to boost growth. There appears to be a multitude of studies on the impact of the Syrian crisis on Jordan with very different results, potentially undermining fundraising efforts. Staff noted that the recently completed USAID study provides a long-awaited solid estimate of the fiscal costs of hosting the refugees. It recommended merging this study with others on the macroeconomic and social impact into a consistent fundraising document.