STABILITY WHILE MANAGING RISKS The macroeconomic framework remains largely unchanged. It assumes that the recent shocks are temporary. In particular, it is assumed that the Syria crisis will taper off starting in 2016 with refugees gradually returning and trade links gradually normalizing. Gas from Egypt is projected to reach on average 100 million cubic feet per day (allowing for temporary disruptions), while the energy mix would improve over the medium term and mining exports recover starting in 2014 as the international fertilizer market normalizes and strikes are over. Growth is projected to increase, to 3½ percent in 2014, and to its estimated potential of 4½ percent in the medium term. While agriculture could suffer from the drought in early 2014, this should be more than offset by public infrastructure investments, which have a large growth multiplier. If supported by an acceleration in product and labor market reforms, potential growth and the employment responsiveness to growth could improve, thereby reducing chronically high unemployment. Inflation is expected to decline to about 2½ percent at end-2014, and 2 percent in the medium term, aided by an expected moderation in international food and fuel prices. (i) the final data to assess performance for end-March are not yet available; and (ii) there is no clear evidence suggesting that the PC might not be observed. A waiver of nonobservance is requested. See IMF country Report No. 13/130. Page 9 The current account deficit (including grants) would improve to about 4½ percent of GDP over the medium term, mostly reflecting the Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) facility becoming operational in mid-2015, which will substantially reduce the energy import bill. The adjustment in fiscal and energy policies is consistent with a gradual reduction of the combined central government’s primary deficit and NEPCO’s losses from more than 8 percent of GDP in 2013 to ½ percent of GDP over the medium term. This path remains unchanged from the second review and accommodates the higher fiscal costs from the Syrian refugees. The pace of adjustment is expected to create headwinds to growth, but these should be manageable, given shifts in the budget toward investment and because some of the improvement is coming from supply side effects. While external vulnerabilities have abated, they remain high. The exchange rate peg has been successful in anchoring monetary policy and underpinning macroeconomic stability against the backdrop of persistent shocks to money demand in an unstable region. The peg has also facilitated economic synergies with Arab countries, which account for approximately one-third of imports and over one-half of exports. Moreover, staff estimates that the current exchange rate level remains in line with medium-term fundamentals (Box 2). This assessment is buttressed by expectations of Jordan continuing to attract FDI, capital flows, and substantial grants. Gross usable reserves are projected to remain at comfortable levels, around 130 percent of the reserve adequacy metric. Tourism-based price measures remain competitive and non-traditional exports have risen on average over 7 percent in the past five years. Although most external shocks are expected to be temporary, Jordan will remain vulnerable given its geographical location and economic structure and until fiscal and energy sector imbalances are addressed (the exchange rate assessment assumes that they will be). Also, the country will eventually have to prepare for an exit from external aid. Risks remain elevated. The most prominent risks pertain to the Syria conflict becoming deeper and more protracted (see Box 1 on the transmission channels) as well as shortfalls in gas from Egypt—a complete stop of gas flows would create substantial fiscal and current account gaps. Moreover, Jordan is susceptible to global spillovers, in particular from higher U.S. interest rates, which could drive up domestic lending rates and depress growth. Also, a slowdown in EMs could further reduce the prices of phosphate and fertilizers, Jordan’s traditional main exports (Box 3), and adversely affect the current account. More generally, though, a protracted reduction Other liabilities (OL) Short-term Debt (SDM) Broad money (BM) Export revenues (TX) Reserves Reserve Metric Decomposition (In billions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Jordanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 10 in commodity prices would likely have a positive impact on the current account. Domestic risks remain non-negligible with resistance to reform beginning to increase, making a strong case for more outreach and developing contingencies. Indeed, a loss in domestic confidence may quickly reverse the de-dollarization trend, lead to outflows, and reignite pressures on reserves. To protect external stability and reduce vulnerabilities while improving Jordan’s labor market outcomes, the Article IV consultation focused on the following themes: Maintaining the momentum in fiscal and public utility reforms to return debt to a downward trend with a view toward more equity and growth. Preserving reserve buffers in a time of high uncertainties and further improving the resilience of the financial sector. Addressing long-standing obstacles to growth toward more inclusion, more transparency, and more jobs.