Monetary Policy Global financial conditions may pose a challenge. Historically, Jordan’s rates have closely followed the U.S. policy rate. Thus, the expected shift in U.S. monetary policy could be challenging for Jordan. This is because it would lead to a strengthening of the dollar, and with it the dinar—thereby weighing on competitiveness—and to a rise in global yields. Notwithstanding Jordan’s ability to access official or U.S.-guaranteed sources of financing, the tapering would make tapping international markets more expensive and would feed into higher domestic interest rates. Not only would this worsen debt indicators (see public sector DSA), but also, when combined with continued fiscal consolidation, may have potential negative implications for economic activity. Federal funds rate Jordan policy rate Jordan's Policy Rate and the U.S. Federal Funds Rate (In percent) Sources: Federal Reserve; and National Authorities. Spreads (In basis points) Sources: Federal Reserve; and National authorities Page 16 Staff stressed that monetary policy should carefully weigh the need to stimulate economic activity, with that of safeguarding reserve targets (¶s25 and 26). De-dollarization is expected to continue this year, but only marginally relative to last year. As such, it is not expected to be a key driver for gross international reserves. At the same time, the current account deficit will remain high; core inflation might be subject to further upward pressure; volatility in EMs could continue; and risks to the outlook remain elevated. Staff thus felt a neutral stance for monetary policy would be appropriate. Interest Rates (In percent) Increases in policy rates have typically led to increases in lending rates, albeit with a lag. At the same time, Increases (decreases) in the latter have historically been accompanied by decreases (increases) in credit growth. Sources: Jordanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Authorities’ Views Monetary policy will continue to focus on maintaining adequate reserve buffers and the attractiveness of the Jordanian dinar, while providing room for growth. The authorities assess the output gap to still be negative, and believe that the recent policy rate cuts will reduce the cost of borrowing, thereby stimulating private sector credit growth—and with it aggregate demand. Such actions could yield the desired outcomes, judging from the apparent historical workings of the credit channel of monetary policy—a pass through from policy rates to lending rates, and from lending rates to credit growth. Regarding the U.S. tapering, the authorities thought that, unless there was a change in the pace, this had already been priced-in. Staff noted that there is uncertainty surrounding the cyclical position of the economy. While measured formal sector output may still be below potential, high core inflation suggests pressures in the informal economy (which has become more important given the refugee situation). Also, staff cautioned that the credit channel of monetary transmission might involve lags that have not fully played out yet. Policy rate lagged 2 periods Lending rates (RHS) Lending rates Private sector credit growth (RHS) Page 17 Financial Sector The banking sector is stable and overall sound. Data for the second half of 2013 (the latest available) show aggregate capitalization of about 18 percent, well above the regulatory minimum of 12 percent. Capital is of high quality, with a high proportion of tier 1 capital (mainly common equity). The depositor base is resilient, with retail deposits accounting for about two thirds of total deposits. In particular, the loan-to-deposit ratio of 71 percent provides capacity for banks to increase lending without relying on external funding. Banks therefore have strong liquidity buffers, with liquid assets composed mainly of domestic sovereign bonds. They also enjoy healthy profitability, with an aggregate return on average equity of over 10 percent. Provisioning ratios have been steadily built up, to an average of 75 percent. Non-performing loans (NPLs) remain at 7.4 percent of total loans, but are declining from a peak of 8.5 percent in 2011. Looking ahead, lower impaired loans would help banks further increase coverage ratios as a buffer to future provisioning. Staff also underscored that banks’ exposure to sovereign debt has increased sharply in recent years and that banks will need to find new sources of earnings as the government consolidation proceeds. Financial sector reform has been progressing (¶27–32). Staff conducted an assessment of the banking sector to evaluate risks and assess progress in implementing the 2009 Financial Sector Assessment Program recommendations. The collection of supervisory data is being improved. Strengthening the monitoring of FSIs will support offsite supervision by accurate and timely regulatory reporting. The authorities have been making progress in introducing an automated system for the collection of FSI data, as well as an early warning system for monitoring systemic risk indicators. They plan to complete an automated data collection system by June, which would allow supervisors to conduct regular analysis on a quarterly basis, with data submitted by banks no more than eight weeks after the end of each quarter. Supervisory processes for home-host relationships require further attention. Offshore activities by many Jordanian banks are significant in terms of their revenue impact (Box 5). Regular onsite cross-border examinations are not yet a feature of the Net Profits Before Taxes (In millions of JD)Source: IMF Financial Soundness Indicators. NPL ratio ROAE Return on Aggregate Equity and NPL Ratio (In percent)Source: IMF Financial Soundness Indicators. Page 18 supervisory cycle or part of the CAMELS risk-rating approach. Staff emphasized that a systematic approach to home-host supervision was important and welcomed plans to host a supervisory college for Arab Bank. Initiatives to strengthen capital buffers and the regulatory framework are ongoing. The CBJ has implemented numerous bank-specific measures to increase capital buffers. For those few banks that have capital adequacy ratios just above the regulatory minimum, staff argued for raising capital. It welcomed the CBJ’s plans to strengthen the crisis management framework and encouraged the authorities to use Fund Technical Assistance (TA) to proceed with the implementation of Basel II. The anti-money laundering/combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework is being strengthened (¶33). During its April 2013 plenary meeting, the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force acknowledged the progress made in addressing the deficiencies outlined in the 2009 mutual evaluation report. To further improve the effectiveness of the AML/CFT regime, the authorities have requested Fund TA. Authorities’ Views The authorities felt that cross-border supervision and efforts to reduce banks’ vulnerabilities were appropriate. They agreed that there was scope for improvement on cross-border supervision, but argued that onsite reviews are performed at least once every two years with a full review of cross-border establishments. They also noted that informal channels of information-sharing with host supervisors are effective. Regarding capital ratios, the authorities pointed out that they were targeting a capital adequacy ratio of 14 percent to ensure that all banks are well capitalized. While some banks are still to achieve that level, supervisors are foremost working to address the structural features of weaker banks’ business models to improve asset quality, increase coverage ratios, and stabilize earnings. Capital injections or banks selling assets might be part of a comprehensive package.