Though Jordan has considerable potential, most of the obstacles to growth have been long standing. Jordan’s infrastructure is good and planned electricity tariff increases are not expected to strongly affect its competitiveness (Box 6). Also, the private sector has the capacity for innovation and ability to identify profitable products for investments. Jordan’s political risks are below the regional average, but are higher than the EM average and could be a deterrent to investment. While macro-risks are being addressed in the program, there are Arab Bank has extensive operations in the region and more broadly. It is active in over thirty countries and earns 80 percent of its group revenue outside of Jordan. See Political Risks Services Group, Inc. Page 19 weaknesses in the business environment, labor markets, and institutions. Discussions on structural issues were closely coordinated with the World Bank. Indeed, poor labor market and social outcomes are entrenched. Unemployment is a chronic problem, averaging 13.7 percent during 2000–10 and percent over the last three years. Young people, ages 15 to 24, account for almost half of the unemployed, and the youth unemployment rate, at about 31 percent, is among the highest in the world. Unemployment rates tend to be highest among the educated. For females, they are double that of males, because of much lower employment-to-working age population ratios and despite lower formal labor force participation. In fact, on all female labor market outcomes, Jordan ranks low, even below the MENA average, which in turn has worse female outcomes than the average of any other region in the world. World Bank analysis shows that poverty remains a concern. By 2010—the latest year for which data are available—an estimated 14.4 percent of the Jordanian population were below the poverty line. And about 33 percent of households experienced “transient” poverty—that is, they were poor during at least one quarter of the year, even though officially, they are considered non-poor because their annual per capita consumption exceeded the poverty line. At the same time, inequality appears to be an issue, with the top three expenditure deciles recording stronger consumption growth than the bottom four deciles. The World Bank is currently helping the authorities to strengthen their poverty analyses, including by estimating the distributional impact of policies. Jordan’s key challenge is to create jobs amidst ongoing fiscal consolidation. The consolidation is designed so as to minimize the adverse impact on growth by accelerating capital spending and creating room for private sector development. But the employment challenge is daunting. To absorb the new entrants to the labor force, Jordan will need to increase employment by an estimated 400 thousand full-time positions over 2013–20. These new jobs will need to be generated by the private sector, as employment in the public sector as well as emigration to the Gulf can no longer absorb as many Jordanians as they used to. Staff stressed that, in the absence of further reforms to labor and product markets, creating that many jobs would require an average annual real GDP growth of 6.1 percent—a tall order. Current growth forecasts would only generate 275 thousand jobs. Business Climate Reforms to improve the business climate need to be reinvigorated. Jordan’s scores in international comparisons are low, particularly on investor protection, contract enforcement, and access to finance. Reversing such outcomes would create an environment that is more conducive Emigration to the GCC has been an important employment strategy for Jordanians over the past several decades, especially among skilled males. Page 20 to investment and competition. It would also give incentives for workers to move out of the informal sector, where they have very little protection, and into the formal sector, with positive implications including on tax revenue. Staff reiterated that there is a pressing need to step back and review why long-standing reforms have stalled and whether there is a need to revamp the agenda. Legislation to improve the private investment climate is proceeding slowly (¶39). Staff urged the authorities to work with parliament to expedite approval of the laws on investment, secured lending, insolvency, and Public-Private Partnerships (PPP). Legislation in line with international standards could create a more level-playing field, by enhancing the transparency of the rules governing investment. Staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to approve any new incentives only after a cost-benefit analysis and in conjunction with compensating measures. It also noted that stability in the legal framework was important for investors and that re-opening agreed terms could thwart investor interest. Steps are taken to further promote access to credit and financial inclusion (¶42). The financing needs of the government might have led to some crowding out of the private sector (Box 7), but the gradual reduction of government financing needs will make more space for the private sector in the medium term. Moreover, most of the $70 million loan from the World Bank for Small and Medium-Size Enterprise finance has already been disbursed and the CBJ is seeking to mobilize further donor support. At the same time, weaknesses such as difficulties in providing collateral are being addressed. Labor Market Reform More focus is needed on the labor market (¶38). The NES is designed to address high unemployment and provide employment opportunities for Jordan’s growing labor force. To date, however, there has been no clarity on specific policy actions and associated timelines. Staff stressed the need to clarify NES’ implementation status, including specific measures, and to step up engagement with international institutions that have labor market expertise. Reforms could improve employment outcomes in the private sector. The fact that unemployment has remained high for so long suggests that the problem is largely structural and will not be resolved by a cyclical increase in output. What is needed are labor market reforms aimed at addressing: Skills mismatches. The education system may not be producing graduates with marketable job skills, as suggested by the concentration of unemployment among the youth and educated, and the fact that firms regularly cite the lack of suitable skills among job applicants as an significant constraint to hiring. Thus, more focus is needed on realigning curriculums with private-sector needs. To put the unemployed into jobs, policy-makers could also scale up and replicate promising training programs, such as the Job Compact. Page 21 Public sector hiring practices and compensation policies. The public sector has been an extraordinarily important source of employment. Its hiring practices have typically placed a premium on diplomas over actual skills, influencing educational outcomes and contributing to skill mismatches. At the same time, the comparatively greater job security, higher average wages, and more generous non-wage benefits offered by the public sector have inflated wage expectations among new entrants. Therefore, public sector hiring will need to place greater emphasis on skills and competition. Moreover, to strengthen the link between compensation and productivity, adjustments in government pay scales will be needed within a framework of overall wage restraint. Female participation. The NES suggests that various factors have led to weak labor market indicators for females, specifically: employers’ perceptions; limited access to information on job opportunities; the lack of targeted active labor market policies for females; the lack of maternity benefits in the private sector; and the absence of affordable and dependable childcare. Addressing such constraints could go a long way to unlocking the employment potential of Jordanian women. Quality of Public Institutions Implementing changes hinges on strong public institutions. A large body of empirical work identifies better quality of institutions as a key driver of sustainable improvements in living standards. It finds that better institutions—that is, environments and policies providing incentives that encourage productive activities and discourage rent-seeking, corruption, and theft—not only foster physical and human capital accumulation, but also enhance total factor productivity. Jordan performs well within the region in the perception of corruption though its ranking relative to other countries has deteriorated over the last years. Strengthening public institutions could help improve perceptions and support greater political involvement through more transparency and accountability. Hall, R.E., Jones, C.I. (1999), “Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker than others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83–116; Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J.A. (2001), “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation” American Economic Review 91 (5), 1369–140; and Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J.A. (2005) “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth” in Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1A; Edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Page 22 The committee to reinforce integrity could anchor efforts in transparency (¶40). Staff welcomed the establishment of this independent committee that will monitor the implementation and enforcement of an executive plan. This plan, which was prepared after broad consultations, sets an ambitious agenda of reforms, aiming at developing a culture of integrity in all of segments of the society, strengthening the rule of law and judiciary independence, and promoting transparency in government policymaking and decision-making. Strengthening the structural fiscal agenda would not only generate revenue, but also foster transparency (¶s 12, 18, 19, 35–37). Staff encouraged the authorities to train (possibly with Fund TA) and empower staff in the newly-established macro unit, which should become the linchpin for macroeconomic monitoring. Improvements in revenue administration are encouraging. Collection efficiency and segment management are benefitting from the reclassification of taxpayers based on size and industry; better information sharing across public agencies; and further improvements of the national registry. Looking forward, staff encouraged the authorities to go more strongly after tax evasion, including by strengthening penalties and modernizing its audit programs in line with international standards. Removing sales tax exemptions would help to streamline revenue administration. Public financial management (PFM) reforms are progressing but more is needed. Commitment controls will prevent a re-occurrence of arrears, providing assurances that the program’s cash targets are binding. Still, there is a need to improve the supervision of off-budget health funds and, to this end, the roll-out of the Government Financial Management Information System to the ministry of health is encouraging. Rather than looking into all trust accounts, staff encouraged the authorities to focus only on large ones with a view to consolidating them swiftly into the treasury single account. This would allow a better assessment of the size of the government transactions and the underlying fiscal position. A rigorous selection of public capital projects will help make the most of scarce resources and could boost growth. Staff welcomed that the authorities are establishing a framework for managing public investment with assistance from the World Bank. This will not only increase transparency of public spending but also maximize its impact on growth and jobs. Projects should be prioritized based on standardized financial and economic cost-benefit analyses, taking into account fiscal costs, including contingent liabilities. Such analyses should also inform the decision on whether to fund the projects from the budget or through PPPs. Mega-projects under consideration as PPPs will need to be carefully managed. Some of these projects could become a game changer in the long term. They include: a freight railway linking Jordan with Syria, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia; a water desalination plant on the Red Sea; the exploitation of oil shale; the construction of a pipeline from the Iraqi oil fields around Basra to the Aqaba port (for use both in Jordan and for exports); nuclear Page 23 energy; and direct gas imports through a pipeline from the Eastern Mediterranean. These projects could produce large positive externalities and improvements in the current and fiscal accounts. It is thus critical to strengthen the newly created PPP unit. Because some of the energy projects could generate revenue, staff recommended working proactively on addressing the challenges arising from the taxation of natural resources and designing a fiscal framework to anchor fiscal policies. Authorities’ Views The authorities felt that the standard indicators of business environment reforms did not tell the whole story. Though acknowledging some value in these indicators, they noted that the indicators could provide a misguided picture. For instance, adequate and broad access to finance is ensured by various products, including from micro-finance and nonbank financial services, and the credit bureau will help providing better information to lenders. There is also sufficient room for private sector credit. Nonetheless, a task force is looking into how to improve specific business indicators. On perceptions of corruption, the authorities believe that this has been unduly magnified; they are working with the media to turn around those perceptions. In terms of obstacles to growth, the authorities regard the ongoing regional uncertainty as the single largest impediment. Work is in progress to bring together sectoral strategies into a holistic framework. The authorities noted that they are reviving the structural reform agenda. They hope to achieve synergies and update the strategies in light of the challenges from the Syria crisis. The authorities see Jordan’s comparative advantage in skill-intensive sectors, such as business consultation and financial services. While the GCC had been the traditional client for medical and education tourism, this was now less so the case, but other MENA countries (for instance, Libya and Yemen) were substituting for that. The authorities have also started marketing religious tourism. Work is ongoing to address the chronically high unemployment. The authorities acknowledged the need to move toward the private sector as the main source of employment. They noted that the problem is challenging because of sizable disparities in unemployment across governorates—ranging from 10.5 percent in Amman to about 17.1 percent in Tafiela—and the massive influx of refugees. In this context, the authorities were skeptical of staff’s results that the Syria conflict had no statistical impact on formal labor outcomes, arguing that the presence of refugees is strongly felt throughout the country. In response, staff clarified that its results by no means imply the absence of pressures on the labor market, but rather that such pressures appear to be mostly felt in the informal sector, especially given that refugees are not allowed to Unemployment by Governorates (In percent) Source: Department of Statistics of Jordan. Page 24 legally work in Jordan. Furthermore, the authorities highlighted several initiatives to put the unemployed into jobs, particularly in remote and rural areas where unemployment tends to be the highest. These include giving incentives to qualified industrial zones to build factories in villages while at the same time intensifying their vocational training programs to make the unemployed employable.