A Difficult Environment Jordan faces issues of a political transition. A new election law paved the way to parliamentary elections in January 2013, which were peaceful though boycotted by the Muslim Brotherhood which viewed the changes as too incremental. Public protests have subsided in the last year, but the relationship between parliament and government has become more contentious and the opposition more vocal, including on corruption and political rights. Regional instability deeply affected the country. While slowing since mid-2013, the number of officially registered Syrian refugees has increased steadily over the last two years, amounting now to about 9 percent of Jordan’s population. In addition to macroeconomic implications (Box 1), this has triggered changes in the social landscape and the provision of public services has suffered. It could also worsen the already poor unemployment and poverty situation. Moreover, gas inflows from Egypt have repeatedly come to a halt, most recently at end-January, owing to sabotages of the pipeline. Policies were appropriately adjusted to cope with shocks. During 2012, they were focused on crisis management and, after confidence had come back at year-end, turned toward medium-term consolidation. The authorities have followed the recommendations of the 2012 Article IV in the context of the stand-by arrangement, which was approved on August 3, 2012, though progress on the structural front has been slow. Economy Slowly Picking Up Economic activity has been gradually recovering. Following a period of strong growth during 2000–09 (averaging about 6½ percent), growth dropped sharply to 2.3 percent in 2010, largely due to the global downturn. Since then, it has picked up marginally to 2.8 percent year-on-year through September 2013. In the last two years, measured growth was hurt by shocks, including the Syria conflict (which, together with the losses of the public electricity company NEPCO, added some 5–6 percent of GDP to the fiscal and external accounts in each of 2012 and 2013, requiring significant policy tightening). The ensuing unavoidable fiscal adjustment and a sharp contraction in mining (from industrial action in 2012 and difficulties in renegotiating contracts following the break-up of the international fertilizer cartel in mid-2013) have also played a role. Services (especially communication and finance) and construction have been the drivers of growth. Page 6 The labor market has stayed weak. Employment increased by just over one percent from 2011 to 2013, substantially less than the working-age population (which rose by 6 percent over the same period). As a result, the employment-to-working age population ratio continued to decline, to 32 percent in 2013. Nonetheless, the annual unemployment rate remained broadly stable, owing to a further drop in labor force participation. Gender disparities have persisted, with 54 percent of men, but only 10 percent of women of working age being formally employed in 2013. Despite subdued headline inflation, core inflation has increased. Demand pressures from an expanded population have contributed to a gradual increase in core inflation to over 4 percent y-o-y in February 2014. Nonetheless, headline inflation—after temporarily increasing to more than 7 percent in early 2013 on account of rising food prices and the liberalization of fuel prices in November 2012—has begun to decline, reaching 3.1 percent y-o-y in February. The current account deficit has started to narrow. It peaked in 2012, reflecting a number of factors, including higher energy prices coupled with disruptions to the flow of natural gas from Egypt, lower grants, and poorer export performance brought about by lower potash prices and strikes. While mining difficulties persisted and pressures on non-energy imports intensified with rising numbers of Syrian refugees in 2013, the current account is estimated to have improved last year by over 5 percent of GDP, helped by lower energy imports (related to the energy mix and lower prices), higher current transfers (related to Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) grants), and private receipts. Financial markets have recovered. After a peak in mid-2012, Eurobond spreads have declined steadily in 2013 to 317 basis points (bps) at Employment to working age population ratio Labor force participation rate Unemployment rate (RHS) Labor Market Outcomes (In percent)Sources: Jordanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Headline inflation (e.o.p.) Headline inflation (period average) Core inflation (e.o.p.) Core inflation (period average) CPI Inflation (In percent) Sources: Jordanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. EMBIG Jordan (In basis points) (LHS) Eurobond spread (In basis points) (LHS) Amman Stock Exchange (Index) (RHS) Eurobond Spread, EMBIG, and Amman Stock Exchange Index Source: Bloomberg. Page 7 year-end and have showed so far a limited response to the spike in volatility in emerging markets (EMs). The Amman Stock Exchange was stable until a steep drop in mid-2013, mainly in mining sector shares; since then, the market recovered to pre-2012 levels. At the same time, banks’ financial soundness indicators (FSIs) have largely reversed the deterioration that occurred in 2008–09 (see Table 5). Policies Focused on Fiscal Consolidation There was a turn-around in fiscal policies. Concerns about social tensions at the beginning of 2012 and expectations that gas from Egypt would resume temporarily put on hold plans for consolidation. But starting in May 2012, the authorities have been taking measures with a net reduction in the combined primary central government deficit and NEPCO losses of over 5 percent of GDP within two years. The most notable measure was a bold reform of general subsidies. In November 2012, the authorities liberalized fuel pump prices while introducing cash transfers to 70 percent of the population. Electricity tariffs for selected economic sectors and rich households have been increased three times since May 2012, anchored in a strategy to return NEPCO to cost recovery over the medium term. There were also tax and nontax measures, which recouped some of the revenue loss of 9 percent of GDP experienced during 2007–11. The Central Bank of Jordan (CBJ) complemented the fiscal efforts. Because it took time to formulate an appropriate fiscal response, temporary losses in confidence in 2012 resulted in a surge in deposit dollarization and pressures on reserves, which reached a low of $5.3 billion (64 percent of the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric) at end-2012. The CBJ responded by hiking policy rates three times that year. Since then, dollarization has been on a downward trend—from 25 percent in November/December 2012 to 19 percent by end-March 2014. This, along with a sizable influx of GCC grants and the issuance of dollar-denominated domestic bonds and a U.S.-guaranteed Eurobond, helped rebuild reserves to $11.5 billion at end-2013 (or 133 percent of the reserve adequacy metric). Starting in mid-2013, the CBJ’s focus shifted to stimulating economic activity by reducing policy rates (three times in August and October 2013 and January 2014) by a total of 75 bps. Private sector credit growth, which slowed in 2012, has recently picked up.