Staff considered that, given the expected rise in inflation, the authorities should stand ready to tighten monetary policy, if necessary. In view of the importance of anchoring inflation expectations, and with the aim of more effectively signaling a possible tighter stance of monetary policy, staff advised the authorities to speed up the planned introduction of a new policy interest rate instrument. Staff cautioned that NBK’s announced foreign-currency swap operations with banks aimed at alleviating the scarcity of long-term tenge liquidity should be seen as a temporary alternative to standard open market operations. Staff also noted that price controls should not be deployed as a policy tool given the damage they could do to the investment climate (and at a time when Kazakhstan is trying to diversify it economy). While agreeing on the need to stand ready to tighten monetary policy (which effectively involves tightening liquidity directly), the authorities did not expect to launch the new policy interest rate instrument this year. The authorities and staff agreed that faster progress in developing a more effective monetary policy framework is paramount. Rising dollarization signals underlying lack of credibility in the current regime. Against this background, and in view of the authorities’ stated goal of adopting inflation targeting over the medium term, staff advised the authorities to begin taking steps to enhance the monetary policy framework. In the near term, the key steps include: Introducing a new policy interest rate supported by open market operations. The continued volatility in the money market underscores the urgent need to make more rapid progress in this area. In staff’s assessment, the NBK’s tight exchange rate management, and its recent refocusing on the exchange rate both as primary objective and as dominant instrument of monetary policy, complicates the management of system liquidity (Box 3 and forthcoming IMF Working Paper 14/108 “Monetary Policy in Hybrid Regimes: The Case of Kazakhstan”). Gradually widening the exchange rate band. This would give more room for interest rate policy, and would also help correct any small exchange rate undervaluation with less pressure on inflation and reserves. Page 14 Improving communication, including by publishing the monetary policy guidelines for 2014. Later on, additional considerations could be given to strengthening inflation forecasting models and governance issues, for example, creating a standard monetary policy committee (see the accompanied Selected Issues Paper entitled “Toward Inflation Targeting in Kazakhstan”). In support of strengthening the monetary policy framework, the authorities have requested IMF technical assistance, which would identify the appropriate timeline for implementation of these steps. Box 3. Kazakhstan: Liquidity Management and the Role of Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy The de jure primary goal of NBK’s monetary policy is price stability; however, de facto, a tightly managed exchange rate guides the management of system liquidity. The NBK’s monetary policy guidelines are explicit about the primacy of the price-stability objective, with the view of promoting financial sector stability. In practice, however, the driving force behind the management of tenge liquidity, and in turn the conduct of monetary policy, is the tightly managed tenge/USD exchange rate and the frequency in which the NBK intervenes in the foreign exchange market. Tenge/USD (LHS) Ruble/USD (RHS) Exchange Rates (2008–14, weekly average ) As an open economy, Kazakhstan is exposed to external shocks, and periodically has resorted to one-step exchange rate devaluations. In early 2009, as a result of the sharp drop in global oil prices during the second half of 2008 (and following significant depreciation in the Russian Ruble and in currencies of other resource-exporting economies), the NBK devalued the tenge by 20 percent against the USD to a level of 150 tenge/USD. During 2009–13, the tenge/USD exchange rate was kept stable, despite volatility in other emerging market currencies. In September 2013, the NBK switched to the use of a multi-currency basket (with weights of 70, 20, and 10 percent for the USD, euro, and ruble, respectively) in smoothing “excessive” exchange rate fluctuations. However, in February 2014, the NBK unexpectedly devalued the tenge (by 18 percent), to a level of 185, and reestablished a tight new corridor of +/- 3 tenge (roughly 1.5 percent) around the new devalued rate. Sources: Bloomberg and IMF staff estimates. 1/ May 2014: latest available data. Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-14 Jan-13 Jan-12 Jan-10 Jan-11 Money Market Interest Rate (January 2010–May 2014) Refinancing rate NBK deposit rate 7D repo rate (weekly) The NBK’s benchmark interest rate, which historically has been stipulated as the official refinancing rate, plays little role in liquidity management and does not signal the stance of policy. The official refinancing rate and the NBK’s deposit rate have constituted a sort of an interest rate corridor: the deposit rate serves as a hard floor, because it is tied to a standing facility, but the refinancing rate plays only an indicative role, and has served instead as a soft ceiling. During 2010–12, key money market interest rates hovered around the deposit rate (close to zero), indicating excess system liquidity. However, since 2012, interbank rates have drifted higher amid tightening of tenge liquidity conditions. In particular, over the past six months, in part due to sustained speculations of tenge devaluation, key interbank rates rose significantly, temporarily exceeding the refinancing rate by a large margin. Jul-12 Sources: Bloomberg and IMF staff estimates. Jan-10 Jan-12 Jan-14 Jan-11 Jan-13 Jul-11 Jul-13 Jul-10 Page 15