Economic growth has decelerated significantly, but remains positive, as a result of the external shocks. GDP growth slowed to an annualized 2 percent during the first quarter of 2015, down from around 4 percent in 2014 and 6 percent in 2013. In addition to weaker external demand, slower growth was driven by the impact of lower income and profitability (resulting from lower oil prices) and confidence effects (reflecting regional developments) on private consumption and domestic investment. Private consumption expanded by 0.5 percent in 2014 (vs. 11.8 percent in 2013), while investment contracted by 3.4 percent (vs. 9 percent growth in 2013). The stimulus package has helped absorb some of the impact on consumption and investment. In the face of slowing demand and limited exchange rate movements, headline inflation fell sharply, from 7.4 percent year-on-year at end-2014 to 3.9 percent at end-June, 2015 ― well below the authorities’ objective range of 6–8 percent. The recorded unemployment rate remained at 5 percent in 2014. The fiscal stimulus aimed at supporting growth has increased financing needs. The overall fiscal surplus fell from 5 percent of GDP in 2013 to 1.7 percent of GDP in 2014. Among other Page 11 factors, the decline reflects a 1.8 percent of GDP increase in expenditures and net lending (partly due to the stimulus) and a 0.5 percent of GDP fall in oil revenues. The non-oil fiscal deficit increased from 6.8 percent of GDP in 2013 to 9.6 percent of GDP in 2014, while the stock of government debt increased from 12.9 percent of GDP to 14.5 percent of GDP over the same period. On July 14, 2015, with aim of financing a growing fiscal deficit and in response to reduced spreads in recent months, the authorities issued $4 billion in 10-year and 30-year global bonds. The issuance was well received and oversubscribed, with spreads of 285 bps and 335 bps, respectively, over U.S. treasuries. Monetary conditions have been tight for most of the past year, which have reduced pressures on the exchange rate recently, but, together with lower economic activity, slowed lending sharply . During the second half of 2014, due to rapid depreciation of the ruble, heightened speculation of tenge devaluation, and increased dollarization of bank deposits, domestic money market interest rates rose significantly. Since early 2015, with the use of overnight currency swap and repo instruments, the National Bank (NBK) has managed to stabilize money market rates below 10 percent and dampen pressure on the tenge. As a result, and following the successful global bond issuance, the NBK widened its exchange rate band from 170–188 to 170–198 tenge/dollar, on July 15, 2015. Meanwhile, while Kazakhstan’s sovereign bond spreads have declined somewhat, domestic lending rates remain elevated and overall private sector credit has grinded to a halt, contracting by 3.5 percent year-on-year as of May 2015 (vs. annualized growth of 6 percent in 2014 and 13 percent in 2013). Credit conditions are expected to remain anemic in the short term (Box 1 and Annex I). The external position has weakened largely due to the fall in oil prices. Kazakhstan’s real effective exchange rate has appreciated over the past year, mainly reflecting the depreciation of the ruble and sharp appreciation of the U.S. dollar, against which the tenge is managed. The current account balance turned negative in the second half of 2014, although there has been some improvement in the first quarter of 2015, in part reflecting the recent appreciation in the ruble and the rebound in oil prices. Based on a range of approaches used by staff, the tenge could be considered modestly overvalued by 4–14 percent (Annex II). Based on the IMF’s Assessing Reserve Adequacy (ARA) methodology, NBK’s gross reserves (which exclude the national oil fund) remain below the suggested adequacy range of 100–150 percent of the ARA composite metric. At the same time, the oil fund, with an accumulated value of around $75 billion (35 percent of GDP), provides a significant buffer for the economy as a whole. Administrative and prudential measures have succeeded in lowering NPLs significantly, but vulnerabilities in some segments of the financial sector have increased (Box 2 and Annex III). Recent preliminary estimate indicate that NPLs have fallen from 34 percent of total loans a year ago to 10 percent in July 2015 (preliminary data) following the revocation of BTA’s banking license—after the bank absorbed all the bad assets of the merged KKB-BTA entity—and the removal of tax, accounting, and other legal obstacles to write-offs and transfers to special purpose vehicles (SPVs). NPL write-offs lowered the system-wide capital to risk-weighted assets (CAR) marginally, from 18 percent at end-2013 to 17 percent at end-2014, still well above the regulatory These estimates, derived from the External Balance Assessment (EBA) methodology and CGER calculations, are broadly in line with market indicators, e.g., non-deliverable forward (NDF) rates suggest (as of end-June) depreciation expectations of around 10–15 percent over the next 6–12 months. Page 12 minimum of 12 percent. Nevertheless, some vulnerabilities have increased. In particular, deposit dollarization and declining lending activity are impacting banks’ profitability and increasing currency and maturity mismatches. Banks are particularly vulnerable to indirect foreign currency risk, due to the prevalence of lending to unhedged borrowers. Moreover, despite limits on credit concentration, lending mostly takes place in a few non-oil sectors that are currently under stress. Progress has been made in implementing FSAP recommendations (Annex IV). The NBK has started to undertake bottom-up stress tests for banks. The authorities have also revised legislation to exclude the requirement for depositor and creditor approval in P&A and bridge bank resolution. They are initiating discussions with bank supervisors in other jurisdictions to strengthen cross-border supervision. The authorities have also made legislative amendments to implement recommendations in the insurance sector and on pensions, and drafted a law to address regulatory shortcomings in the securities market. Progress, however, has been limited in adopting risk-based assessment tools and extending supervision beyond compliance with prudential norms. The authorities have embarked on an ambitious structural reform program, bolstered by extensive MDB engagement. Public investment under the Nurly Zhulu program aims to address infrastructure bottlenecks and generate jobs. Moreover, following the recent Presidential election, the authorities have launched a wide ranging reform program (“100 steps”) aimed at improving the efficiency of public administration and the rule of law, diversifying the economy, and addressing governance challenges. MDBs’ increased engagement strengthens the structural reform component of the authorities’ crisis response, with projects targeting the labor market, civil service and public expenditure reforms, business climate improvements, and support to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). In June, 2015, Kazakhstan completed negotiations to become a formal member of the WTO.