In view of slower growth and the availability of large buffers, staff supported a small fall in the overall surplus and a temporary deviation of the non-oil deficit from a declining trend. The overall balance is expected to narrow to 4.3 percent of GDP in 2014, from 5.2 percent of GDP in 2013. However, in cyclically adjusted terms, and excluding one-off spending on capitalization of the PLF, it will be roughly unchanged from last year at 4.9 percent of GDP. The non-oil deficit is expected to increase sharply to about 9 percent of GDP in 2014, virtually undoing the impressive adjustment last year. With some of the spending to be conducted through quasi-fiscal institutions, staff urged the authorities to ensure the high quality and transparency of spending. Furthermore, the authorities indicated that they remain committed to their goal of reducing the non-oil deficit of the unconsolidated budget (not accounting for NFRK) to 2.8 percent of GDP by 2020. While the authorities have yet to finalize the details of their medium-term fiscal plans, according to staff calculations and assuming unchanged policies, staff’s estimated sustainable level of the non-oil deficit of 6 percent would be achieved before 2018. Gross public debt is expected to stay at low levels (Appendix III), although contingent liabilities will need to be monitored carefully. Staff underscored that strengthening the fiscal policy framework remains a priority. Despite important steps outlined in the authorities’ fiscal strategy adopted last year, there is ample scope for further progress, especially in extending the coverage of the fiscal framework (Box 4) and in improving its integration within the broader macroeconomic policy framework. In particular, staff’s advice focused on: (i) consolidating NFRK within the authorities’ fiscal accounts and using the non-oil deficit of the consolidated budget as an anchor for fiscal policy; (ii) reducing the scope of extra budgetary activity and properly accounting for contingent liabilities; (iii) improving revenue policies, including by minimizing ad hoc changes in export duties and relying more on income, progressive, and resource-rent taxation; and (iv) replacing administrative price controls with targeted measures to protect socially vulnerable groups (see the accompanying Selected Issues Paper entitled “Assessment of Inclusive Growth”). The authorities broadly shared staff’s views but pointed to recent improvements, including the expected introduction of public audit system in the current year and Kazakhstan’s recent progress in the Open Budget Index. In this context staff welcomed the authorities’ cooperation with the World Bank in the area of introducing results-based budgeting. In addition, an IMF technical assistance mission in June 2014 is expected to advise the authorities on further improving public sector accounting and design of a risk management approach for budget planning. The capitalization of the PLF, which is about 0.6 percent of GDP and is planned towards the end of 2014, is expected to have only an indirect impact on growth through enabling the PLF to buy more NPLs and therefore contribute to credit growth. Based on staff calculations and assuming unchanged policies, this target is equivalent to the non-oil deficit of the consolidated budget of about 4.5 percent of GDP. http://internationalbudget.org/wp-content/uploads/OBI2012-KazakhstanCS-English.pdf Page 16 Staff stressed that continued prudent and transparent management of oil wealth is essential. Kazakhstan compares well with many other oil exporters in the transparency of operations of the national oil fund, which has dual objectives of stabilization and intergenerational equity. Staff urged the authorities to maintain the transparency, especially in the context of renewed initiatives to use NFRK for the government’s diversification and industrialization plans. In particular, the announced US$5.4 billion package from NFRK needs to be appropriately aligned with the principles of efficient and sustainable management of its assets. To the extent possible, all spending out of NFRK should be channeled through the budget. Lending programs through quasi-fiscal institutions and commercial banks warrant careful planning and implementation. In particular, staff (based on the results of its earlier analytical work) argued that public spending, while taking into account the positive impact on growth, should remain prudent to avoid Dutch disease problems. Furthermore, it will be important to ensure that development and diversification programs are transparent, cost-efficient, and in line with capacity. In this context, staff welcomed the authorities’ plans to cooperate with MDBs in choosing projects to be financed from oil savings. See “Republic of Kazakhstan: Selected Issues” September 2013 (Country Report No. 13/291). Page 17 Box 4. Kazakhstan: Improving Fiscal Coverage Accurate fiscal coverage is critical for the soundness of fiscal analysis and fiscal policy formulation. According to the GFS 2001 manual the general government sector encompasses all government units and all nonmarket nonprofit institutions that are controlled and mainly financed by the government units. In practice, since ensuring comprehensive fiscal coverage is costly, countries should prioritize expanding the coverage in areas that have the most policy significance. In Kazakhstan, as in many other countries, official statistics excludes important parts of the public sector. Government fiscal accounts in Kazakhstan include central and local government operations but leave out extra-budgetary funds (including NFRK) and the operations of the SOE sector. At the same time, the authorities are mindful of the need to monitor closely some operations of the quasifiscal sector. In this regard, two important recent policy developments were the introduction of monitoring mechanisms and ceilings for external debt of the broader public sector, and the creation of Baiterek (government’s development holding with total assets of about 6 percent of GDP), with the purpose of separating the quasifiscal and commercial operations of the SOE sector. Despite these improvements, expanding the fiscal coverage is essential for a fully informed conduct of fiscal policy. Consolidated budget Unconsolidated budget Non-Oil Deficit Priorities for improving fiscal coverage in Kazakhstan are consolidating NFRK within the budget, and fully reflecting state programs in the budget. While, following the recommendations of the STA technical assistance mission in July 2013, the authorities have started consolidating NFRK into their government finance reporting and expect to consolidate the State Social Insurance Fund this year, they continue to rely on unconsolidated fiscal accounts for fiscal policy formulation. As a result, the authorities’ definition of the non-oil deficit is different from that of staff. Moreover, the broader public sector is actively involved in implementation of government programs, including most importantly the Accelerated Industrial and Innovative Development program, of which the “Industrialization Map” is a key component. The financing mechanisms of these programs are diverse (direct transfers, subsidized loans, and PPPs) and Baiterek is a key player in these schemes. Accurate reflections of all the costs as well as accounting for contingent liabilities associated with these programs is crucial for ensuring that public funds are not wasted. Share of KIM projects in manufacturing output in 2013 Contribution to economic growth in 2013, percent 1/ Contribution to economic growth in 2012, percent 1/ Contribution to economic growth in 2011, percent 1/ Number of projects under KIM Investments , KT trillions Jobs, thousands Output of projects over 2010-13, KT trillions Source: Kazakhstan Ministry of Industry and New Technologies. Sources: Kazakhstani authorties and IMF staff calculations. in 2013 1/ Estimates of the Economic Research Institute of the Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning. The authorities’ accounting of the recent stimulus package in fiscal accounts highlights the deficiencies of limited fiscal coverage. Unlike staff calculations, the authorities’ fiscal accounts do not fully reflect the package which renders them uninformative of the true fiscal policy stance. This omission includes the implicit subsidies involved in lending: for the current year, Baiterek has already issued a 100 billion tenge bond to NFRK with 0.1 percent annual rate and 20 year maturity and will in turn lend to banks at annual rate of 2 percent, while the interest rate for final borrowers (SMEs) will be set at 6 percent. The costs associated with this lending are not reflected in the government’s fiscal accounts. Selcted Statistics on "Kazakhstan Industrialization Map" Program (KIM) Page 18