The fiscal stimulus is tailored to support growth. The 3–5 year Economic Support Package introduced last year includes $12 billion (5.8 percent of GDP) spending from the National Fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan (NFRK) and $7 billion (2.9 percent of GDP) in loans contracted from Multinational Development Banks (MDBs) (see table). The package is aimed at modernizing critical infrastructure, promoting SME lending via quasi-fiscal development institutions, and recapitalizing the PLF. While the large stimulus come at the expense of higher current account deficit and lower reserves in the oil fund, staff supported the package, given its’ growth-enhancing, countercyclical, structural, and frontloaded nature. It also urged the authorities to ensure transparency and high quality spending and welcomed the involvement of MDBs in monitoring and selecting the investment projects. Stimulus Packages 2014–2019 (In percentage of GDP) The authorities agreed with staff that medium-term fiscal consolidation should be an essential component for the success of the fiscal stimulus. Given the size of the stimulus, a credible medium-term plan, especially on the revenue side, is needed to ensure fiscal sustainability. Assuming unchanged policies, total revenues are expected to decline from 23.8 percent of GDP in 2014 to 19.7 percent of GDP in 2020. The non-oil fiscal deficit is expected to rise sharply this year, to 11.4 percent of GDP (from 9.6 percent of GDP in 2014), and to decline only gradually to 8.7 percent of GDP in 2020, or around 3 percentage points of GDP higher than staff’s estimated sustainable level of 5.5 percent of GDP. To close the projected gap, the authorities have suggested improvements in tax administration and unspecified large cuts in expenditures (equivalent to 5 percentage points of GDP over three years) that are not based on concrete measures. Staff suggested that to maintain a reasonable and credible path for expenditures, and in view of relatively low tax revenue as a share of GDP, the authorities should aim at raising the revenue base through implementing measures such as (i) strengthening the enforcement of tax collection; (ii) reducing tax exemptions; including in the Special Economic Zones; and (iii) making income tax rates more progressive. Financed from NFRK Financed from MDB Total To support fiscal transparency and ensure medium-term sustainability, staff emphasized the urgent need to further strengthen fiscal accounting and the fiscal policy framework. While important steps have been taken in improving fiscal coverage, more work is Page 19 needed to bolster the quality of fiscal accounting (Annex VI). Concerns remain regarding the treatment of the oil fund transactions, some revenue and expenditure items, and the definition of the fiscal anchor. Staff underscored the need for bringing fiscal accounts into compliance with the GFS 2001 manual, particularly in the context of the fiscal consolidation strategy. The authorities agreed to consider staff’s recommendations and if necessary request TA in this area. Public debt is expected to rise in the medium term, with increased international borrowing, but overall levels would remain relatively low. To help finance the fiscal deficit, the government has requested a $2 billion Development Policy Loan from the World Bank and $1 billion Countercyclical Support Facility from the Asian Development Bank. In addition to borrowing from MDBs and domestic debt issuance, the authorities noted their plans to tap international capital markets again this year when external market conditions allowed. The first such issuance took place on July 14. The global issuance also aims at helping build a yield curve in the absence of a well- functioning domestic debt market. According to staff’s calculations and assuming unchanged policies, the general government’s external debt is expected to rise from 3.8 percent of GDP at end- 2014 to 6.4 percent of GDP by 2020. At the same time, total government debt is projected to increase from 14.5 percent in 2014 to 30.7 percent in 2020 (Annex VII).