The authorities are taking more aggressive steps to reduce the large stock of NPLs. Staff saw the commitment to ensure that banks adhere to the NPL ceilings (15 percent by end–2014 and 10 percent by end–2015) as appropriately ambitious. It highlighted the importance of enforcing the NPL ceilings through credible supervisory actions, while ensuring adequate provisions. To facilitate the achievement of these targets, the authorities are buttressing existing policy vehicles and introducing an appropriate mix of incentives and penalties. The plan to substantially increase the financing of PLF—tenfold to 250 billion tenge (about US$1.4 billion)—is expected to be accompanied by expanding the eligibility of loans (especially real estate and construction) that can be purchased by the PLF and by granting special powers to the PLF. Moreover, the authorities recognize the need for expediting the parliamentary approval of their proposed legislative amendments concerning tax incentives for debt write-offs and the removal of legal obstacles to the transfer of NPLs into Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) or the PLF. Finally, the authorities are expected to revise the insolvency law to strengthen protection for legal rights of secured creditors. The authorities expressed commitment to fully implement the recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). Key priority areas, in addition to the single pension fund, insurance and securities market oversight, and financial infrastructure, include (Appendix II): The divestiture of nationalized banks. Given the systemic implications of the sale of BTA to Kazkommertsbank ― with the combined entity accounting for about 25 percent of banking system assets and over 65 percent of all NPLs ― the authorities shared staff’s assessment on the need to carry out an asset quality review (AQR), preferably by an independent international entity and prior to the completion of the transaction. Staff also recommended that a time-bound plan for working out those NPLs is prepared as part of the deal and that the implementation of this plan is carefully monitored. Bolstering the financial safety net and moving to risk-based oversight. In staff’s view, available resolution tools, as foreseen in current legislation, are impractical and should be amended. In particular, supervisors should have full authority to independently mandate the resolution methods (currently depositors and other creditors have a say in the resolution method) and have a clearly sequenced procedure for graduated intervention. A faster transition from granular compliance supervision towards more risk-based oversight is also needed. The sharp further increase in financial dollarization following the devaluation. The authorities shared staff’s view that the prevalence of dollarization renders the financial system increasingly prone to foreign currency risks. Dollarization is also likely to put upward pressure on NPLs in the coming months, requiring vigilance to the emergence of related credit risk. Staff welcomed the recent deployment of macroprudential measures aimed at halting the rapid growth in consumer lending. With a view to minimizing risks associated with rapid growth in consumer lending (46 percent in 2013), the NBK recently adopted the following measures: Page 13 (i) a 50 percent cap applied to the debt-to-income ratio; (ii) an increase in capital adequacy requirements on unsecured consumer loans to 100 percent (from 75 percent); and (iii) a 30 percent ceiling on the growth in consumer loans for each bank. In line with the FSAP recommendations, the authorities plan to monitor closely the impact of the regulations and stand ready to make necessary adjustments. The governance structure of the unified pension fund (UAPF) may be prone to conflict of interest, requiring effective checks and controls. Under the recently unified structure, the NBK chairs both the board of the UAPF and the Council for the Management of Assets (CMA) that governs the investment policy. Moreover, the NBK is the statutory asset manager, the custodian, and the supervisor of banks. The authorities are mindful of staff’s concerns regarding potential conflict of interest and the importance of separating ownership from control functions, and are committed to full transparency and accountability, including by the CMA, to ensure that the investment policy is free from undue interference.