Tight monetary policy has helped lower inflation, but the authorities concurred with staff that weak output and credit growth require caution about allowing market interest rates to remain too high for long periods. In view of rapidly declining inflationary pressures, subdued output growth, and weak lending conditions, the authorities are carefully evaluating the tradeoffs between the need for a tightening bias to contain the pressure on the currency and the goal of reviving lending and economic activity and stabilizing inflation around its objective range. Staff also urged efforts to avoiding periodic heightened volatility in money market interest rates. The authorities have taken important steps to overhaul the monetary policy framework in support of inflation targeting. These steps include strengthening communication, preparing the grounds for the imminent introduction of new policy interest rate instruments, and enhancing governance. In particular, the recently published monetary policy guidelines for 2015 and 2020 stress the planned introduction of a new policy interest rate, supported by open market operations, during the early phase of the transition to inflation targeting, which the authorities see adopting within 3–5 years. The NBK has also recognized the need to strengthen its governance structure, including by setting up a monetary policy committee (MPC) and achieving greater central bank independence in policy decision making. Moreover, the NBK plans to establish a money market committee responsible for the implementation of monetary policy, including the daily assessment of banking sector liquidity conditions and interbank market developments. Staff noted that modernizing the monetary policy framework will also help the recently announced plans to develop Astana as an international financial center. Page 20 Staff has stressed the need to gradually introduce greater exchange rate flexibility in tandem with improving monetary policy instruments, while avoiding a step-devaluation. Staff emphasized that greater exchange rate flexibility would (i) support a more independent interest rate policy; and (ii) help reduce imbalances. Staff supported the NBK’s opposition to another outright step-devaluation, given that previous episodes resulted in increased dollarization, re-fixing the exchange rate, and further expectation of devaluation. A large devaluation would also put immediate stress on private-sector balance sheets of unhedged FX borrowers (Box 3). In contrast, a gradual adjustment would give banks more time to address balance-sheet vulnerabilities, while correcting the exchange rate misalignment over time. In view of this, staff considered that greater flexibility could initially be introduced by gradually widening the exchange rate band, with the aim of removing it altogether when conditions allow. The authorities agreed that greater flexibility would support the reform efforts underway and alleviate imbalances. In light of this, and given reduced pressures on the tenge in recent months, on July 15 the NBK widened its exchange rate band from 170-188 to 170-198 tenge/dollar. To ensure stability, the authorities also agreed to communicate their plans consistently and credibly and continue to strengthen monetary policy instruments.