The growth outlook has become less favorable and inflation is projected to increase. Real GDP growth in 2014 is projected at 4¾ percent, one percentage point below earlier projections, despite the expected positive contributions from the fiscal stimulus. External demand has weakened recently, and household consumption growth is projected to decelerate due to lower credit growth and the negative wealth effect from the devaluation. Moreover, regional tensions and price controls announced after the devaluation are expected to adversely affect investment plans. Nonetheless, temporary inflationary pressures are likely to emerge from the devaluation with possible second-round effects from an increase in wages and social benefits. Staff’s projections suggest inflation could rise to 9 percent. The authorities, however, are determined to keep inflation within the central bank’s objective range of 6–8 percent, including through price controls and have for now maintained their real GDP growth projection of 6 percent for 2014.The current account is projected to improve to a surplus of 0.6 percent of GDP in 2014. As a result, official international reserves are expected to rebound to just over US$28 billion at end-2014 (equivalent to 5.2 months of imports). Medium-term growth prospects are mainly driven by a projected (albeit delayed) increase in oil output in the Kashagan oil field. Growth is expected to average around 5½ percent over the medium term. Production in Kashagan started in September 2013, but it was halted in early October after the discovery of gas leaks in the pipeline network, delaying the expansion in production by two years. Risks to the outlook are predominantly on the downside (Appendix I). Weaker confidence following the devaluation poses downside domestic risks to growth in 2014. Furthermore, Kazakhstan is vulnerable to a prolonged slowdown in emerging markets and additional unfavorable developments in Russia and Ukraine, given the strong linkages with Russia (especially in the context the Custom’s Union) and potential spillovers to Europe through gas exports from Russia (Box 2). The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment of risks, and noted that oil-fund resources, as in the past, could be used to support the economy in the event of an additional large negative shock to growth. Text Table 1. Kazakhstan: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Projections Real GDP Growth Oil Output Growth Non-oil Growth Output Gap (percent of potential GDP) Inflation (e.o.p.) Current Account Balance (percent of GDP) Gross International Reserves (percent of GDP) NFRK Assets (percent of GDP) Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and IMF staff estimates. 1/ NFRK. Actual Proj. 2015–19 (avg.) Proj. Page 11 Box 2. Kazakhstan: Economic Implications of the Russia-Ukraine Tensions The impact of Russia-Ukraine tensions has so far been limited. While the tensions may have contributed to weaker investor sentiments and pressures on the tenge, financial and risk indicators’ traditionally close links with those in Russia (largely reflecting common external factors) have weakened. Moreover, Fitch reaffirmed Kazakhstan’s rating at BBB+ with a stable outlook on May 9, while S&P had downgraded Russia two weeks earlier. CDS Spreads (Basis points) Kazakhstan Russia Sep-13 Jan-14 Mar-14 May-14 Nov-13 Sources: Bloomberg and Markit. Exports to Russia Kazakhstan's Exports to Russia and Ukraine (As percent of total exports) Nevertheless, further unfavorable developments will have more serious negative consequences. Russia accounts for about 8 percent of Kazakh exports and for about a third of imports, of which capital and intermediate goods are a significant share. Trade with Ukraine, albeit smaller, is not insignificant. Thus growth may be negatively affected though weaker exports, as well as higher cost of imports of capital and intermediate goods—especially given the customs union with Russia and its trade preferential treatments. Growth could also be impacted through investment by a number of Russian companies, mostly in the oil and minerals sector. According to staff estimates, the direct impact (through trade and FDI) on Kazakhstan’s growth of a 1 percentage point lower growth in Russia is in the range of 0.1–0.2 percentage points. However, the tensions could have much more serious implications in case of spillovers to activity in Europe through disruptions in gas exports via Ukraine. Other potential indirect effects include, on the negative side, lower global growth and increased risk premium, and, on the positive side, higher oil and grain prices. Finally, in the financial sector, the three Russian-owned banks—Sberbank, Alfa, and VTB—account for about 9 percent of Kazakhstan’s banking system assets and further sanctions could impact their activities in Kazakhstan. 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Sources: COMTRADE and IMF staff estimates. Exports to Ukraine