The growth outlook has weakened, with predominantly downside external risks (Annex V). Staff projects real GDP growth to decelerate to 2 percent this year despite the fiscal stimulus. Weaker demand from Russia and China, lower oil prices, confidence effects, and continuing delays in the Kashagan oil field are the main factors behind the projected slowdown. Next year, growth is projected to pick up to 3.25 percent driven by a gradual recovery in oil prices and output, and improved external demand. Still, the medium-term growth outlook is less favorable than projected last year, in light of lower projected medium-term oil prices and continued slow growth in Russia. Staff now estimates potential growth at around 4.75 percent (vs. previous estimates of 5.5-6 percent). Against this backdrop, staff has also cut its headline inflation forecasts to 5.2 percent this year and 6 percent over the medium term (from 6 percent and 7 percent, respectively). The current account is expected to gradually improve in the coming years, due to a projected increase in oil exports once Kashagan comes on line, but remain in small deficit over the medium term. Downside risks to the growth outlook are mainly external and related to oil prices and regional uncertainty, although the recent improvements in the outlook for oil prices and the Russian economy lessen the tail risks. The authorities’ real GDP growth projection for 2015 is 1.5 percent. Page 13 For the medium term, the authorities broadly shared staff’s outlook, but viewed the risks as more balanced, including because of the recent stability in oil prices and the Russian ruble. Under an adverse scenario, with further decline in oil prices, anemic growth and larger imbalances could persist over the medium term. In a downside scenario, where oil prices are assumed to decline by 25 percent (permanently) relative to staff’s baseline projections, growth rates are expected to remain below potential in the medium term. While the deviation from baseline growth is not large, the adverse cumulative impact on the current account, FX reserves, fiscal balance, and public debt is more severe. Staff's baseline vs. alternative scenarios Growth Downside Severe Current Account (percent of GDP) Downside Severe Fiscal Balance (percent of GDP) Downside Severe Gross Debt (percent of GDP) Downside Severe FX Reserves ($ billion) Downside Severe Oil Prices ($ per barrel) Downside Severe This is equivalent to a permanent oil-price shock applied in 2015 as a 0.5 percent standard deviation from historical oil prices. Page 14 Box 1. Credit Intermediation and Economic Growth in Kazakhstan Credit market characteristics Despite occasional bursts of growth, the credit market remains shallow. Financial intermediation has been falling since the 2007/2008 crisis. At 34 percent, Kazakhstan has a low credit to GDP ratio compared to peers. Financial disintermediation? P G t t i d k B The credit market is narrow with key sectors relying on other sources of financing. Energy and extractives rely primarily on foreign financing. Construction and real estate relied on wholesale foreign funding until it stopped in 2007. Consumer oriented borrowing (households, trade, services) dominates with over 70 percent of outstanding loans. Most businesses are cut-off from bank credit altogether. According to the latest World Bank survey less than 20 percent of firms have a loan or a line of credit. 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Loans by sector January 1, 2014 (Source NBK, Staff estimates) Loans by sector January 1, 2015 (Source NBK, Staff estimates) Industry Agriculture Construction Т ransport Communication Т rade Services Household Given its limited depth and scope, the domestic credit market has had a modest impact on economic activity. Analysis of quarterly credit data since 2004 reveals some correlation between credit growth and non-oil economic activity and no clear causality. The correlation is stronger in the run up to 2007/2008 crisis as the real estate bubble inflated. Given the limited scope of the credit market the main causality chain may run from oil prices through the economy to credit growth. (Annex I). Recent developments Credit growth slowed significantly over 2014 and so far in 2015. Overall bank credit to the private sector in May 2015 was lower by 3.5 percent in nominal terms relative to a year ago with a shift from foreign to national currency loans and from corporate to individual borrowers. The slowdown in credit is exacerbated by high interest rates, tight domestic liquidity, dollarization, and, to a lesser extent, prudential policies on unsecured consumer lending. Weighted average interest rates on tenge loans to corporations jumped from 10 percent at the end of 2013 to 18 percent during Page 15 Box 1. Credit Intermediation and Economic Growth in Kazakhstan (Concluded) 2015Q1. Broad money (M2) shrank by 8 percent in 2014 and a further 2 percent in 2015 mainly due to dollarization of deposits. Dollarization is increasing currency risks (Box 3), further deterring lending. Tight domestic liquidity, high interest rates and dollarization are byproducts of a tightly managed exchange rate in the context of high devaluation expectations. Prudential measures enacted in 2013 to limit the growth of unsecured consumer credit also contributed to the slowdown. The NPL overhang at 24 percent continues to restrict the banks’ ability to extend credit. Trade and services account for the highest share of NPLs (25 percent). The share of NPLs to total credit outstanding remains highest in construction, at almost 40 percent. NPL’s tie up client collateral and bank buffers which dampens credit activity. Debt is concentrated in construction and real estate The few businesses which have access to domestic credit are highly leveraged. Construction and real estate, which are still working though the fallout from the 2007/2008 crisis, have debt to equity ratios three times the average (chart). Real estate prices have remained stagnant. Debt to equity Excluding construction and real estate Short-term prospects and policies Probability, conditional on financial variables Real GDP Growth (%) Staff expects credit to contract by 5.5 percent in nominal terms in 2015 but grow moderately, by 3.7 percent, in The forecast is broadly consistent with economic developments, taking into consideration the limiting factors described above. The IMF Macro-financial Forecast Consistency Template (Annex I) indicates that projected credit growth is broadly consistent with growth in other relevant variables. Real Private Consumption Growth (%) Real Investment Growth (%) CPI Inflation (%) Employment Growth (%) Credit activity is likely to remain concentrated in trade and consumer lending. The prospect of a slowdown in real income growth could threaten these sectors and by extension private consumption. Despite the weak link between credit and growth, anemic credit could trigger second round effects on economic activity and asset prices, further weakening banks’ balance sheets. Credit is essential for private sector led growth and diversification. The government’s program aimed at extending tenge 500 billion of subsidized loans to SME’s of which Tenge 250 billion have been disbursed so far seeks to mitigate the impact of tight credit on the economy. MDBs, including the ADB, are carrying out similar programs. It is too early to measure the impact of these programs. To reverse the fall in credit and strengthen the link between credit and growth it is necessary to address the key obstacle to growth: tight liquidity, high levels of NPL and lack of access to finance. Page 16 Box 2. Lower Oil Prices and Financial Sector Vulnerabilities As an oil exporting economy, lower oil prices have a negative impact on Kazakhstan’s financial sector and on economic activity more generally. This box describes the solvency stress test that was performed on Kazakhstan’s banks to assess the impact on bank solvency of two shocks: lower oil prices and exchange rate depreciation. Stress tests on bank balance sheets as of end 2014 (latest available) reveal that the banking system is in a weak position to withstand shocks, particularly severe shocks. In the baseline, before any shocks are applied, three banks have capital adequacy ratios (CAR) below the regulatory minimum of 12 percent. The downside scenario would have the same 3 banks below the regulatory minimum. The severe scenario, however, would bring 17 banks (89 percent of banking system assets) below the regulatory minimum, and recapitalization needs would amount to 3 percent of GDP. The results are subject to the usual uncertainties associated with this type of tests. The assumptions underlying the stress test are: i) In the baseline scenario , estimates of oil prices reflect the WEO baseline, and real GDP growth and the exchange rate are based on staff’s macroeconomic projections. The projections assume further weakening in oil prices from the current $62.8pb to $58.9pb. Real GDP growth moderates from 4.3 percent in 2014, to 2 percent in 2015 and rises to 4.4 percent by 2019. The exchange rate depreciates from 179.2 (tenge/dollar) in 2014 to 185.8 in 2015 and to 188 by 2019 (i.e., within the current tenge/dollar exchange rate band). ii) iii) In the downside scenario , a 0.5 historical standard deviation on the oil price is assumed. Under this scenario, oil prices fall to $43.2pb in 2015 and $48.6bp in 2016. Real GDP grows by 1.2 percent in 2015 and by 2.7 percent in 2016. The exchange rate is subjected to a 1.5 standard deviation shock, which implies a depreciation to 198 in 2015 and to 200.5 in 2016. The larger standard deviation shock on the exchange rate compared to oil prices mimics the large currency swings during periods of stress. In the severe scenario , a 1.2 standard deviation from the baseline is assumed. Oil prices fall to $21.3pb in 2015 and $26.7pb in 2017. Real GDP grows by 0.1 percent in 2015 and by 2 percent in 2016. The exchange rate is subjected to a 3.5 standard deviation shock, which puts it at 15.5 percent depreciation from the current level in 2015. It depreciates to 215 in 2015 and to 217 in 2016. The historical relationship between macroeconomic variables and NPLs is analyzed using a vector autoregression (VAR) model. The variables included in the VAR model are: the ratio of NPLs to total loans (NPL), the percent change in the oil price, Kazakhstan’s real GDP growth, partner countries’ real GDP growth, and the tenge/dollar exchange rate. Unit root and lag length tests were performed and adjustments made accordingly. The model was estimated on quarterly data from 2000 to 2014. The relationship shows that NPLs respond to shocks in macroeconomic variables. NPLs are most sensitive to changes in domestic activity, followed by the exchange rate and oil prices A percentage point increase in real GDP growth results in a 0.318 percentage point decline in NPLs; a percentage point increase in the oil price results in a 0.006 percentage point decline in NPLs; a percentage point increase (depreciation) in the exchange rate results in a 0.047 percentage point increase in NPLs. Single equation estimation shows similar but slightly larger coefficients on the exchange rate and oil prices. The tests simulated balance sheets and profit/loss accounts for the individual banks given the NPL forecasts upon applying the effects of the shocks. In the simulation, liabilities are held constant. Given that historical balance sheet data are not available to staff, interest margins on current loans and liabilities, Page 17 Box 2. Lower Oil Prices and Financial Sector Vulnerabilities (Concluded) as well as net non-interest income are based on 2014 data. Given that estimates of collateral are unreliable, new NPLs are assumed to be provisioned for at 100 percent. This further dents profits. When net income is positive, the test assumes that 80 percent of profits are retained and the rest is paid out as dividends. A bank accumulates capital buffers when its capital ratio declined in the previous year. Capital covers the loss when net income is negative. The results reveal that a number of banks are unable to withstand higher NPLs due the shocks described above. No adjustments were made on capital to take into account of the phase-out of capital instruments ineligible under Basel III as was done in the FSAP. Even without this adjustment, banks are still highly susceptible, especially in the face of severe shocks. The results are presented in the table below. The downside scenario brings system CAR down to 16 percent while the severe scenario brings it down to 6 percent, well below the regulatory minimum. Banks have low levels of profitability, thus, a low buffer against shocks. An exchange rate only shock of a 15.5 percent depreciation from the current level results in 10 banks being below regulatory CAR, while a 25 percent depreciation results in 17 banks below regulatory CAR. A reverse stress test reveals that an increase in NPLs by 16 percent brings the system wide CAR to the regulatory minimum of 12 percent (assuming a 70 percent level of provisioning). At this level, 6 banks would Stress Test Assumptions and Results Historical Assumptions Domestic real GDP growth Oil price (in U.S. dollars) percent change over latest price (62.8) Exchange rate percent change over latest rate (186.1) Impact Nonperforming loans (percent of total loans) Capital adequacy ratio CAR < 8 percent 8 percent < CAR < 12 percent CAR > 12 percent Downside Severe Recapitalization to achieve 12 percent CAR Million Tenge Percent of 2014 GDP be below the regulatory minimum. NPLs decline over the projection period reflecting improvements in macroeconomic variable over time.