Growth amounted to 6 percent in 2013, but has slowed since then, while inflation has risen. Growth in 2013 was driven primarily by domestic demand, with household consumption growing at 9 percent year-on-year, helped by rapid expansion in consumer credit. As a result, the positive output gap widened, to just below 1 percent of potential GDP. However, preliminary data in the first quarter of 2014 suggest that real GDP growth has decelerated on the back of: (i) weak external demand, especially from China; (ii) negative wealth effects for consumers and weaker investor confidence following the February devaluation and possibly developments in Russia and Ukraine; and (iii) slower production in the mining sector. At the same time, the devaluation has been fueling inflation despite some price controls. In May, headline CPI inflation reached 6.9 percent year-on-year (up from 4.8 percent at end-2013). Staff uses various methods to calculate the output gap, but estimates remain rough given rapid structural transformation. Page 6 The external position weakened in 2013, although it improved in 2014: Q1 and vulnerabilities are limited by large buffers. The current account turned into a small deficit in 2013, from a surplus averaging over 2 percent of GDP in the preceding three years. The decline was mainly driven by a sharp fall in non-oil exports (mostly metals and grains). Foreign direct investment inflows slowed sharply in 2013 as large investment projects, mostly related to the Kashagan oil field, came to an end. This contributed to a fall in official reserves, by US$3.6 billion to US$24.7 billion (about 4½ months of imports). Preliminary 2014: Q1 data showed a sharp improvement in the current account, as imports compressed by US$4 billion (due to slowing demand and some temporary factors) and exports grew by less than US$1 billion (mostly due to oil exports from last year’s output). As of end-April, official reserves recovered last year’s losses, reaching just over US$28 billion, and are considered adequate based on the IMF’s reserve adequacy metric. Moreover, the country’s overall international investment position, including the assets in the national oil fund (NFRK), has been on an increasing path. The banking sector recovery continued, while vulnerabilities remain due to elevated NPLs (Figures 2 and 3). Banks’ profits have continued to improve over the past year, albeit gradually, helped by rapid growth in consumer lending, with the return on assets ratio for the sector (excluding troubled BTA and Alliance banks) rising to 1.8 percent in 2013 (from 1.3 percent in 2012). The financial system remains saddled with a large stock of NPLs, at about 32 percent, most of which is concentrated in three of the seven largest banks. The system’s aggregate capital adequacy ratio (CAR) has stabilized at around 17 percent, with the Tier I capital ratio at around 13 percent, following the external debt restructuring and state-funded recapitalization of BTA. The presence of foreign-owned banks in Kazakhstan continued to decline, with the sale of HSBC subsidiary to Halyk bank expected to be completed by end-year. FX Deposits and Loans Increasing retail funding and reduced market borrowings in recent years have improved the profile of banks’ funding, although the dollarization of deposits has sharply increased recently. Wholesale funding (bond and cross-border interbank borrowings) has declined from its pre-crisis peak of 50 percent to 20 percent of the banking system’ total liabilities at end-2013. Owing to the continued deposit growth of both household and corporate clients and modest overall lending growth, the loan-to-deposit ratios for both domestic and foreign currency have improved in recent years. However, the high dependence of big banks on large corporate deposits poses concentration risks. Also, while dependence on foreign FX loans to total loans FX deposits to total deposits Jan-13 Mar-13 May-13 Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and IMF staff estimates. Sep-13 Nov-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 Mar-14 See the Selected Issues Paper entitled “External Sector Assessment” for further analysis of the external sector position. A debt sustainability analysis suggests that external debt remains within a safe threshold. Page 7 currency denominated wholesale funding has declined markedly, exchange rate-induced credit risk remains high, and the recent sharp increase in the dollarization of bank deposits (from about 30 percent to around 50 percent of total deposits, in part due to the devaluation) has complicated the management of tenge liquidity. Amid tightening tenge liquidity and volatile money market interest rates, the official refinancing rate remained unchanged, while the NBK deposit rate was raised. The liquidity tightening was exacerbated by the gradual withdrawal of pension funds from the money market (due to the unification of pension funds) and speculative pressures on the tenge/USD exchange rate. In the absence of effective central bank instruments for managing liquidity, including limited use of refinancing loans or credit auctions, volatility in money market interest rates remained high, particularly around quarterly tax reporting periods. Despite an unchanged refinancing rate (policy rate), money market interest rates have trended higher, at times exceeding the refinancing rate by a large margin (Figures 4 and 5). The authorities increased the NBK deposit rate by 225 basis points to 2.75 percent, hence narrowing the interest rate corridor. Although overnight and seven-day money market rates have declined significantly recently, banks’ longer-term tenge funding is scarce, in part due to the rapid increase in the dollarization of time deposits in recent months. To help alleviate this problem, the NBK has announced the offering of up to US$10 billion in one-year foreign-currency swap operations with banks, with an implied interest rate of 3 percent (beginning July 1). Fiscal balances improved significantly in 2013. The overall fiscal surplus widened to 5.2 percent of GDP in 2013, from 4.5 percent of GDP in 2012, as total spending declined by 1.5 percent of GDP compared to 2012 (Figure 6). The reduction of expenditures was due to both lower current (especially wages and goods and services) and capital spending relative to GDP. Meanwhile, non-oil tax revenues increased by 0.5 percent of GDP, reversing the declining trend of the past few years, largely on account of strong VAT receipts. As a result, the non-oil deficit declined to 7 percent of GDP (from 8.9 percent), compared to an estimated sustainable level of 6 percent of GDP. In response to the devaluation and slowing growth, the 2014 budget was amended in February and additional off-budget spending was announced. Public wages and social benefits were increased on average by 10 percent (effective April) to mitigate the negative effects of the devaluation on real incomes. In addition, a one trillion tenge (US$5.4 billion, or 2½ percent of GDP) package from NFRK was deployed to serve multiple objectives over a period of two years. Specifically, out of the 500 billion tenge assigned for the current year half was allocated to capitalizing the Problem Loan Fund (PLF) and the other half to onlending (via commercial banks) to SMEs and other priority sectors. On the revenue side, the oil export customs duty was hiked by 30 percent. The sustainable level of non-oil deficit was estimated by staff using a Permanent Income Hypothesis annuity framework to be 7.5 percent of non-oil GDP, which is equivalent to 6 percent of total GDP. Page 8 In recent months, the government has elevated the priority of the structural reform agenda. In particular, it has actively engaged with international development partners to accelerate structural reforms, with a focus on improving the investment climate and fostering balanced regional development. In this context, the government has recently signed partnership agreements with the ADB and EBRD to support the development of SMEs and the non-oil private sector. In conjunction with financing of projects and with the aim of supporting lending to SMEs, the NBK has signed repurchasing (repo) and foreign-currency swap arrangements with the EBRD. The government also recently signed a loan agreement with the World Bank to modernize the agricultural sector. While Kazakhstan’s economic growth continued to be comparatively inclusive, recent efforts to further reduce income inequality have been relatively weak. Kazakhstan is engaged in regional and global economic integration. The newly launched EEU will formally come into effect in January 2015, with Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia as members. Compared to the existing Eurasian Customs Union, established in 2010 with a common external import tariff, the EEU envisages the free transit of goods, services, capital, and labor. At the same time, while the EEU suggests closer economic integration with a number of CIS economies, the government is also extending collaboration with China and the OECD and aims to finalize WTO accession this year. The swap arrangement is on similar terms offered to commercial banks. Page 9 Box 1. Kazakhstan: Assessment of Exchange Rate and External Competitiveness While the exchange rate and official reserves were under pressure prior to the devaluation, the tenge did not appear overly uncompetitive. The CPI-based real effective exchange rate (REER) was slightly above its long-run average before falling about 10 percent below the average following the devaluation. Based on a CGER-type methodology, the exchange rate appears to have been moderately overvalued at end-2013. The macroeconomic balance approach suggests that the real exchange rate was overvalued by about 3 percent (i.e., the exchange rate adjustment required to bring the underlying current account to a level consistent with its norm). The equilibrium REER approach, which pins the deviation of the REER from its estimated equilibrium level, suggests that the REER was overvalued by around 6 percent. Under the external sustainability approach, the current account norm was estimated at 2.1 percent of GDP, which implied an overvaluation of the tenge by about 4 percent. Real Effective Exchange Rate (Index 2000=100) Jan-06 Jan-08 Jan-10 Jan-12 Jan-14 Note: Dotted line represents average for 2006–13. Source: National Bank of Kazakhstan. Methodologies to Assess Real Exchange Rate Misalignment Macroeconomic Balance Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate External Sustainability Underlying CA (Percent of GDP) CA Norm (Percent of GDP) Estimated over(+)/ under(-) valuation Sources: Kazahkstani authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. 1/ Based on projections for 2019. 2/ Based on estimates for net oil exporters of " Are Middle Eastern Current Account Imbalances Excessive " WP/11/195. 3/ NFRK assets included. The norm is the adjusted current account balance needed to stabilize the 2019 NFA position. Other indicators, furthermore, suggest that Kazakhstan has been gaining competitiveness in recent years. The global market penetration of Kazakh exports, measured by Kazakh non-oil exports’ share of total world non-oil exports, has been improving, while the terms-of-trade has been broadly stable. At the same time, labor productivity has been growing faster than compensation, which has led to gradually declining unit labor costs. Non-oil Export Competitiveness KAZ non-oil exports (percent)1/ Non-oil terms of trade (index, RHS) 1/ Share of world non-oil exports. Source: IMF staff calculations. Labor Cost and Productivity Labor productivity Average compensation Unit labor cost Source: IMF staff calculations. Page 10