Staff and the authorities broadly concurred on the need to bolster financial sector resilience. Staff noted the progress made in halting the surge in uncollateralized consumer loans seen in recent years. However, three banks have capital below the regulatory minimum and banks’ balance sheets appear to be highly sensitive to shocks. Supervision should be strengthened and corrective actions be taken for the undercapitalized banks to bring their capital above the regulatory minimum. Furthermore, staff urged the authorities to shore up system strength by developing plans to bring capital up to shock resilient levels and improve governance and risk management to help reduce risks. There was agreement that exchange rate risk remains a concern for the banking system, especially given corporate sector exposure. Further, credit concentration remains high. Staff recommended introducing higher risk weights or exposure caps on corporate lending; reducing (or prohibiting) FX lending to unhedged borrowers; and tightening net open position (NOP) limits to mitigate exchange rate risk (Box 3 and Annex VIII). The authorities are considering raising risk weights on loans denominated in foreign currency to help reduce banks’ exposure to indirect foreign currency risk. However, they consider the current limit on the NOP to be sufficient in minimizing on-balance sheet currency mismatches and do not see the need to limit or prohibit lending to unhedged borrowers as this, in their view, will curtail lending. Staff shared the concern about the need to avoid undermining an already weak lending environment but stressed the consequences of excessive lending to unhedged borrowers. Staff also urged the authorities to enhance the quality of data on corporate and household balance sheets to allow for a more informed assessment of balance-sheet vulnerabilities. The authorities agreed to further assess vulnerabilities and argued that they are monitoring bank soundness. Page 21 There was agreement that further reduction of NPLs, especially of the newly merged KKB-BTA entity, is a necessary condition to improving banking sector soundness. Staff welcomed the efforts underway to reduce the level of system NPLs, including the efforts to achieve the 10 percent ceiling by end-2015. But it expressed concern that NPL provisioning may be overstated because it relies on underlying loan collateral that is overstated—mainly real estate that has not yet recovered from the 2009 bubble bust—and is not regularly revalued. Staff also welcomed the refocus of NPL resolution at the merged KKB-BTA entity, which accounts for 70 percent of the universe of NPLs and about 25 percent of banking system assets. In this regard, staff advised that the authorities develop a broad strategy to address the factors that resulted in weaknesses in these banks, including conducting an asset quality review (AQR) of the merged bank. The strategy should address the restructuring of the bank to ensure long-term viability and how any capital needs identified by the AQR will be addressed. Regulatory and supervisory standards should also be improved, and consideration should be given to sequencing of reforms with the AQR, and the specific standards against which the banks will be assessed. Staff welcomed progress made in implementing FSAP recommendations. It urged for further progress in adopting risk-based assessment tools and supervision, which remains oriented toward compliance. The NBK prefers to maintain the current supervisory approach for the time being. The authorities plan to continue making progress toward finalizing legislative amendments in insurance, pensions, and the securities market. Box 3. Macroprudential Policies in Kazakhstan Reducing exchange rate risk: Exchange rate risk remains one of the largest risks for the banking sector. FX risks are especially elevated in the corporate sector—the largest borrowers from the banking system—where leverage and the net open FX position to equity are very high. This sector has also experienced a significant slowdown in activity and is associated with already high NPLs to the banking system. To help limit risks emanating from high exposure to the corporate sector, the NBK should consider introducing risk weights or exposure caps for corporate exposures. This will help the banking system withstand corporate credit losses by building capital buffers (see IMF Staff Guidance on Macroprudential Policy). Risk weights can help build buffers by affecting the supply of credit indirectly while FX exposure caps curtail the supply of credit directly. Reducing FX lending to borrowers whose earnings are not in FX should also be considered. This can be done through higher risk weights on such exposures. Tighter net open position limits are recommended to help reduce exchange rate risk. Reducing credit risk: Even with concentration limits, credit concentration remains a significant risk to financial stability. Though concentrated large exposures have fallen from levels during the global financial crisis, at 208 percent of capital, they remain large. In 2014, the construction sector received the largest share of new corporate sector credit (24 percent) while it also had the largest share of new NPLs (41 percent, rising from 15 percent the previous year). The NBK should restrict bank exposures to single counterparties or groups of connected counterparties. Proper implementation and enforcement of macroprudential tools is critical. Inconsistent implementation of macroprudential measures, as has been in the past, could add to regulatory uncertainty and result in ineffective incentive structures and a loss in confidence in the domestic financial system. Page 22