The central objective of fiscal policy is to maintain gross public debt below Kenya’s strategic ceiling (40 percent of GDP in present value (PV) terms), consistent with the EAMU convergence criterion (50 percent of GDP in PV terms). After the initial boost in project spending in FY2014/15, the pace of deficit reduction is consistent with meeting the EAMU convergence criteria by 2021 (ceiling on fiscal deficit including grants of 3 percent of GDP). In the near term, fiscal policy focuses on rebalancing current and development expenditure and increasing fiscal space for social programs, while facing challenges emerging from the ongoing devolution. The government’s FY2014/15 budget aims at containing recurrent expenditure and at allocating additional resources to development spending, social programs and security upgrades. The authorities are of the view, shared by staff, that fiscal discipline will provide an orderly framework for a successful and sustainable devolution. In the medium term, fiscal consolidation would help contain external imbalances, while bringing down the net present value of public debt closer to the government’s medium-term target. Debt is expected to rise in percent of GDP in the near term mainly because of the Eurobond placement and the large loan from China to finance the Standard Gauge Railway. However, debt remains sustainable and resilient to standard shocks (See Debt Sustainability Analysis Annex). The government plans to set up a sinking fund to build up resources for the eventual repayment of the Eurobond. The 2014/15 budget incorporates important revenue measures. These measures include (a) a revision of the Excise and Income Tax Acts (with LEG technical assistance), (b) higher duties on iron and steel products, (c) improved tax administration, especially in the case of VAT (by implementing LEG and FAD recommendations), and (d) amendments to the Income Tax Act to address tax avoidance by multinationals. Expected higher revenue will also reflect the full-year effects of VAT reforms introduced in September 2013, as well as the impact of adopted measures to Page 17 incorporate landlords into the tax base. The authorities expect the measures to yield about 1.3 percent of GDP in 2014/15. Staff supports these efforts to widen the tax base and considers the expected yields reasonable. A hiring freeze for this fiscal year and the start of a rationalization process aim at containing the wage bill. The general government wage bill has been rising in recent years, on account of higher-than-projected wage spending by counties and increases in the central government wage bill. Staff noted that the rising wage bill is crowding out priority infrastructure spending (See Figure 4). The authorities agreed and emphasized that the planned payroll audits would help identify potential sources of savings, and that streamlining allowances would reduce the observed disparities in gross pay between the private and public sector. The authorities also noted that, based on the findings of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, the government had launched a process of staff rationalization that will also encompass county governments, to be based on a wage grid that allows comparability with private sector wages. These reforms will be implemented gradually over time, but with a clear timetable of implementation, and in the context of a social dialogue to ensure that they are not reversed. Some specific tax reduction measures with a rather limited impact on revenue were also introduced, such as exempting imports of inputs for the processing and preservation of seeds, and for the generation of wind and solar energy. The 2013/14 initial Budget envisaged a lower central government wage bill on account of cost savings related to the staff that were devolved to counties. However, this was more than offset by salary increases and additional recruitment at the central government level in the course of the year. Page 18 Figure 4. The General Government Wage Bill in Kenya General government wages are rising in Kenya… …and are limiting the fiscal space for priority infrastructure spending… General goverment wage bill in percent of GDP Central goverment Subnational governments Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff …leading to a crowding out over time. Central government wage bill and development Spending, in percent of total expenditure Central government wage bill, annual change d v D c Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff estimates. …and this is mainly due to allowances, even after accounting for socio-economic characteristics of workers. Wage differentials relative to the private sector In percent of average private wages in 2012 Civil Service Parastatals Constitutional offices Subnational governments General goverment wages and domestically financed development in percent of domestic revenues General government wages Domestically financed development Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff Wages are higher in the public sector and the wage gap has been widening in recent years… Annual average earnings per employee in Kenya, 2008-2013 in Kenyan Shillings Private sector Public sector Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff estimates. Streamlining allowances and tightening eligibility are key priorities to gradually reduce the gap between public and private sector pays. Type of allowances by basic salary scale, 2010 In percent of total allowances A (Lowest) B (Highest) Average Other Special salary Leave travel Responsibility Extraneous Transport Housing Basic salary Gross salary (incl. allowances) 1/ Excludes informal sector wages. Source: Salaries and Remunerations Commission report (2013) and KIPPRA (2013) Source: Salaries and Remunerations Commission (SRC) Page 19 Sub-Saharan Africa Kenya Poverty and Social Indicators Most Recent Estimate (latest year available, 2006-2012) Urban Population (percent of total population) Life Expectancy at birth (years) Infant Mortality (per 1000 live births) Child malnutrition (percent of children under 5) Access to an improved water source (percent of total population) Literacy (percent of population age 15) Gross primary enrollment (percent of school age population) Male Female Source: World Bank: Kenya--Country Partnership Strategy FY2014-18. The authorities consider poverty reduction a key priority . Despite Kenya’s generally better social indicators relative to Sub-Saharan Africa’s averages (see Text Table), and notwithstanding the progress made in recent years towards reducing poverty, significant challenges remain. To this end, the 2014/15 budget accomodates additional resources for social programs that support inclusive growth. Specifically, the budget allocation for social programs was increased by about 11 percent in real terms, to finance well-targeted cash transfer programs benefiting the elderly, the disabled, and the orphans. Given the considerable differences across counties (see Box 2), staff shares the view that devolution provides an important opportunity to help alleviate poverty and inequalty, through social and development programs at the county level. The authorities give high priority to accelerating development expenditure. The initiation of large projects is to be complemented by improved absorption capacity, especially in geo-thermal power generation, and by a recomposition of counties’ spending to increase the share of development spending. The new Public Private Partnership framework will be fully in place this fiscal year after the forthcoming introduction of regulations and the implementation of the framework to assess contigent liabilities, under preparation with support from the World Bank. The introduction of the TSA will contribute to more efficient cash and debt management . This was significantly complicated in 2013/14 by the fast rollout of devolution and by delays in the issuance of the Eurobond relative to original plans. Staff highlighted the importance of putting in place an effective TSA ensuring a cash management system with clear accountability, closely coordinated with debt management functions. The authorities recognize the cash management challenges and are keen on addressing them.Other budget measures aiming at improving efficiency include the introduction of the procurement module of the Integrated Financial Management and Information System (IFMIS) to help reduce the risk of inflated prices in public contracts, and the creation of the Digital Government Payment Gateway to link spending with service delivery online. The government has identified emerging challenges in the devolution process. The Controller of the Budget has recommended counties to: (a) make efforts to boost their own revenue collection; (b) put in place all budget execution systems; (c) have annual financial statements audited; (d) empower county assemblies; (e) settle payroll management problems between counties and central government, and (f) fully use IFMIS. Staff recommended, and the authorities agreed, to introduce other measures including (a) adequately staffing the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Department to make it fully operational; (b) enhancing accountability using the PFM framework; (c) revising the revenue allocation formula to give more weight to fiscal performance and accountability; and, (d) properly identifying and verifying county assets and liabilities that were inherited from former local authorities. Additionally, the authorities reiterated their commitment to Page 20 enforce the procedures for controlling borrowing by counties. These include the requirement for counties to obtain government-approved guarantees channelled through the Debt Management Department of the National Treasury and the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council, for which clear procedures will be established. The medium-term budget policy statement includes an assessment of specific fiscal risks. It analyzes fiscal sensitivity to changes in macroeconomic assumptions and identifies risks and mitigating policies related to public-private partnerships, financial sector stability and, possible droughts. In this regard, staff stressed the importance of capturing institutional risks, especially related to devolution (see Box 4). The authorities agreed and noted that they also aim at addressing contingent liabilities risk emanating from government-owned entities by implementing a comprehensive reform that reduces the number of entities (from close to 300 to 187) and introduces a new structure for their operations. To this end, two institutions are to be created: the Government Investment Corporation in charge of commercial entities and the National and County Agencies Oversight Office in charge of other agencies. To avoid new fiscal risks, staff noted these institutions’ financial operations should be fully incorporated into the budget. Box 4 Monitoring and Managing Fiscal Risks in Kenya Debt Profiles in Kenya under DSA assumptions and the EAMU Debt Limit (in percent of GDP) Main fiscal risks in Kenya include the following: Macroeconomic shocks. A prolonged decline in the baseline projections of economic growth under adverse macro-conditions based on historical data would worsen debt dynamics, but the probability that the PV of gross debt in percent of GDP over the next 10 years would exceed the 50 percent EAMU ceiling during 2021/2023 remains low (5 percent). Oil and gas discoveries. The fiscal position could deteriorate if government expenditures were to increase on account of expectations for high oil and gas revenues, which do not eventually materialize. The current medium-term budget envelope does not include potential revenues from these sources. Liabilities of sub-national governments. The nature and magnitude of existing debt of previous local authorities has yet to be verified, and is being disputed by some counties, which entails a risk for the central government. Some counties, such as Nairobi, have inherited some relatively large pending bills that − if not resolved − may pose risks to fiscal sustainability going forward. New borrowing by counties can only take place with a guarantee by the central government. The National Treasury is in the process of developing guidelines on county borrowing, and establishing a database of county financial information to assess the fiscal capacity of counties and their debt sustainability. Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). Although the PPP Act was approved only in 2013, some PPPs were introduced before its approval, mostly in the energy sector. In addition, a list of 47 national-priority PPP projects have already been identified in various sectors including health, transport, electricity and ports. All contingent liabilities arising from existing and new PPPs need to be assessed by the Department of Debt Management of the National Treasury. An assessment framework will be established with technical assistance from the World Bank. Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff estimates Staff projections 50line Page 21 Box 4. Monitoring and Managing Fiscal Risks in Kenya (concluded) Contingent liabilities. Contingent liabilities in Kenya beyond those from PPPs represent an additional fiscal risk. They include guaranteed loans to various public entities that have reached KSh43.5bn (1 percent of GDP), of which 15 percent have been called to date. State corporations. Transfers to SOEs reached KSh354.3bn (8 percent of GDP) in 2013/14, of which 66 percent for development spending. The national government is in the process of reforming parastatals and other government-owned agencies, including by changing its organizational structure and privatizing some public enterprises. New laws should not create dual budgets during this process. Wage bill challenges. Public wages are high and have been rising in recent years, crowding out social and infrastructure spending. Wage setting by counties could magnify this problem. The government has embarked on a comprehensive rationalization of the payroll. The government has initiated institutional and legal reforms for extractive industries. The Extractive Industry Tax Regime and a new Mining Bill, incorporating inputs from FAD and LEG technical assistance, are already on the Parliament’s agenda. Recent oil and gas discoveries have improved prospects for their commercial exploitation (see Box 5). Staff noted that some initiatives require careful design before being introduced: (a) the planned Sovereign Wealth Fund proposed by the Task Force on Parastatal Reform appears premature as long as the fiscal position is projected to remain in deficit, and its eventual introduction would require that provisions are fully consistent with transparent management rules and resources fully integrated into the budget; and (b) the terms of sharing of revenues from natural resource exploitation between the central government and counties should be decided once the volume and expected timespan for the exploitation of available resources are known. The authorities recognize the validity of these concerns. They underscored the importance of safeguarding most natural resource revenues for development purposes, while balancing the need for infrastructure and social spending at the local level to ensure equitable sharing of natural wealth. Page 22 Box 5. Managing Natural Resources Wealth Recent discoveries have showcased Kenya’s oil, gas and mining potential. Tullow, one of the main investors in oil fields in Kenya, estimates reserves to be well above the 600 millions of barrels of oil equivalent (mboe), comparable to Equatorial Guinea and the Republic of Congo. If this is confirmed, it could bring Kenya’s external current account to surplus soon after exploitation starts. Morgan Stanley estimates that the country could become self-sufficient in oil production within 3-5 years. Overall, 23 international oil companies are conducting exploration activities in all 44 blocks currently licensed. Companies have been drilling 15 exploration wells between March 2012 and June 2014, an average drilling rate of about 7 wells per year (compared to one every two years in the past). Crude oil has been found in 7 wells (Tullow Oil with Africa Oil as Joint Venture Partner), and natural gas and oil were found in onshore and offshore blocks (Apache and British Gas Group). The government plans to undertake reforms of the legal and regulatory framework for natural resources exploitation to enable Kenya to manage its oil and gas resources in a prudent manner. It is in the process of redesigning the framework for oil exploration, the model for production sharing contracts, and the model for terms for natural gas contracts, with FAD and LEG technical assistance. In particular, the petroleum regulatory and fiscal regime dates from 1986 and is in need of modernization. Also, the production- sharing scheme for oil does not reflect properly costs, prices, and production volumes, and needs to be revised. New production-sharing terms for gas need to be specified. For the medium term, a full gas-specific regulatory framework is needed. The government has also rolled out the Kenya Petroleum Technical Assistance Program (KEPTAP) with World Bank support, to build capacity across the public sector in a number of areas such as geotechnical data acquisition, and implementation of environmental, social and health and safety standards.