Monetary policy has been effective in keeping inflation expectations in check, despite food and energy price shocks in recent months. Monetary operations have kept money markets liquid despite complications stemming from government’s cash management problems partly related to devolution. Monetary policy has been consistent with broadly stable inflation expectations. Recent CBK surveys and a stable yield curve suggest that inflation expectations remain contained despite recent price shocks. However, headline inflation has breached the upper band of the target range in recent months and core inflation has been trending up. In addition, credit growth has risen above 20 percent for the last few months, increasing the risk that domestic demand pressures could combine with new price shocks to fuel inflation expectations. The CBK regards the pick up in credit growth as a healthy sign of strengthening of the real economy, especially in the manufacturing sector. Even so, staff recommends that the CBK stands ready to tighten monetary policy to keep inflation expectations anchored around the mid-point of the target band. 10 year 15 year 20 year 25 year 30 year Source: Bloomberg. Yield Curve 3 month 6 month 1 year 2 year 5 year Page 23 Broad Money Growth Private Credit Growth v v v v v Loan/Deposit Ratio (RHS) Policy rate Repo Interbank Central Bank and Interbank Interest rates Monetary operations have been successful in maintaining interbank rates close to the CBK policy rate despite government’s cash management deficiencies. The introduction of the TSA provides an opportunity to upgrade cash management by separating Treasury responsibilities from central bank operations, allowing the central bank to focus on managing operations consistent with its monetary policy framework. Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff estimates. The CBK continues working towards modernizing its monetary policy framework. A draft Central Bank Act (prepared with LEG technical assistance) will be discussed in Parliament in the current fiscal year. The current draft makes achieving and maintaining domestic stability in the general level of prices the overriding objective of monetary policy, and eliminates ambiguities regarding other objectives (financial stability and supporting the economic policy of the government). The CBK’s analytical framework has improved significantly as Kenya’s forecasting model has evolved quickly into a practical guide for monetary policy Further improvements prior to the eventual adoption of inflation targeting would include entrenching the forecasting and policy analysis framework into the processes and structure of the CBK, including establishing a forecasting unit at the Research Department, and committing to maintain CBK financing of government operations at a minimum, including by using the existing overdraft strictly to address temporary shortfalls. Capital inflows, especially to the stock market, have continued, attracted by a stable macroeconomic environment and a promising regional outlook. These inflows have contributed to stability in the market-determined exchange rate, with the CBK largely staying out of the foreign exchange market other than to build reserves gradually in line with its reserve cover target. The authorities estimate that these inflows are consistent with a minor real exchange rate overvaluation of about 5 percent. Standard Fund approaches show moderate, albeit a bit larger, deviations from fundamentals. However, the flexibility of the exchange rate and uncertainties surrounding the balance of payments data raise doubts about the possibility of a large departure from fundamentals (see External Stability assessment). The share of foreign investors in the stock exchange’s annual US$2 billion turnover has remained slightly above 50 percent, while foreign inflows to the bond market have increased but remain modest partly because of macro-prudential regulations limiting the term for currency swaps by non-residents to one year or more. Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff estimates. c O c O c O Page 24 Figure 5. Exchange Rate and International Reserves Kenya's nominal exchange rate has been stable since end-2011; the real effective exchange rate has gradually appreciated. The authorities have taken opportunities to build a reserve buffer, while leaving the exchange rate largely market-determined. Kenya: Effective Exchange Rate (Index 2005 = 100) Nominal EER Real EER Reserve assets (in months of imports) Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections. The authorities’ recent introduction of a reference rate for floating interest rate bank facilities aims at increasing transparency in credit markets . Following the recommendation of a task force on measures to reduce the cost of borrowing, the government introduced the Kenya Bank Reference Rate (KBRR) to allow customers to better compare lending rates across banks. The KBRR is defined as the 60-day average of the CBK policy rate and the 90-day T-bill rate, and is set for 6 months unless market conditions change significantly. Staff noted, however, that its design may lead to undesirable side effects. In particular, the use of the policy rate in the computation of the KBRR would put an additional burden on monetary policy decisions as the public could perceive that lending rates are set by the CBK. Moreover, fixing the reference rate for floating rate loans for six months would paradoxically act against transparency, as banks would be required to adjust the risk premium for the same borrowers as market conditions change during the six-month period.