The outlook is favorable. Rising domestic and foreign investment are expected to boost economic activity in the short term. The government has embarked on large-scale projects with large impact on domestic value added, including the construction of the Mombasa-Nairobi railway, geothermal plants, irrigation projects, and new oil pipelines. A pickup in private investment explains high credit growth, especially to manufacturing and SMEs. GDP growth is projected to reach 5.8 percent in FY2014/15 from 5.0 percent in the previous year. Over the medium term, public and private investments are expected to rise further providing an additional boost to economic growth. Drivers of growth underlying baseline projections include: (a) improved business conditions owing to the removal of bottlenecks by rising infrastructure investment in energy and transportation; (b) the expansion of the EAC market thanks to decisive steps towards regional integration; (c) reduced social strife as a result of devolution; (d) a more dynamic SME sector thanks to financial inclusion; (e) higher agricultural productivity and reduced medium-term vulnerability of agricultural production to weather shocks reflecting the implementation of large size irrigation projects. A boost in investor confidence following the successful Eurobond issuance could further improve the outlook. An acceleration of regional integration beyond baseline assumptions, marked improvements in security conditions, and possible new discoveries raising oil, gas and mining potential, could have a large impact on investors’ sentiment. Nevertheless, the Kenyan economy remains vulnerable to risks affecting the external and fiscal positions (see Risk Assessment Matrix). Near-term risks include the potential further deterioration of security conditions, new weather-related shocks following poor rains, and/or additional difficulties in implementing devolution that could complicate PFM. Vulnerability to weather-related shocks would remain high if infrastructure investments in geothermal energy and irrigation do not progress as planned. Rising private medium-term foreign currency liabilities could also increase corporate sector vulnerability to sharp movements in the exchange rate. Protracted slow growth in advanced and emerging economies may also constrain remittances and foreign demand for Kenyan exports. On the other hand, vulnerability to capital flow reversals appears limited; excluding the Eurobond, portfolio inflows have been mostly equity-based. Page 15 Risk Kenya: Risk Assessment Matrix, September 2014 Potential Deviations from Baseline Potential Impact Recommended Policy Response Maintain exchange rate flexibility. Use external buffer. Guard against second-round effects on inflation.  Use targeted cash transfers to vulnerable groups and reprioritize spending. Continue infrastructure spending (irrigation and geothermal). Reprioritize fiscal spending to accommodate security needs. Maintain fiscal discipline. Adhere to PFM Act provisions. High Past shock triggered 2009 disbursement under the Rapid- Access Component of the Exogenous Shocks Facility High Hits to tourism/exports, FDI; risk of reversal of portfolio inflows Medium Transitional devolution risks and potential medium- term challenges Domestic and regional Return of drought conditions The frequency of droughts has increased in Kenya in recent times , increasing the risk of weather-related shocks. Relative Likelihood Medium Deterioration in security situation Medium Terrorist activity could escalate, especially in the area bordering Somalia. Implementation risk from devolution Medium Delays in addressing transitional problems because of political considerations could complicate public finance management further. Global Side-effects from global financial conditions: Surges in global financial market volatility triggered by geopolitical tensions or revised market expectations on UMP exit/emerging market fundamentals. Distortions from protracted period of low interest rates continue to build: excess leverage, especially for corporates; delays in fiscal and structural reforms Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies: Advanced economies: Lower-than- anticipated potential growth and persistently low inflation due to a failure to fully address legacies of the financial crisis, leading to secular stagnation. Emerging markets: Maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth. Growth slowdown in China: Continued buildup and eventual unwinding of excess capacity, eventually resulting in a sharp growth slowdown and large financial and fiscal losses (medium-term) Regional geopolitical risks (financial flows, commodity prices, and supply chains) Heightened geopolitical risks in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices, with negative spillovers to the global economy. High Medium Medium Medium Maintain exchange rate flexibility. Strengthen financial sector supervision. High Medium Accelerate reforms to address structural weaknesses affecting competitiveness. High Low Medium Low Improve business environment to diversify sources of FDI. High High Kenya is currently a net fuel importer, though recent discoveries suggest potential for future energy exports Maintain exchange rate flexibility.  Use external buffer.  Guard against second-round effects on inflation. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff's subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 16