Financial policies have facilitated financial inclusion and supported the development of capital markets. Prudential supervision needs to adapt to challenges arising from this expansion, as reflected in high credit growth, the incorporation of new users of financial services, and the growing operations of Kenyan banks abroad. Kenya’s impressive record on financial sector development may entail new risks in an environment of high credit growth. Staff noted that rapid financial deepening, while welcome, may raise risks for financial stability. The authorities concurred that credit growth had accelerated sharply in lending to manufacturing, real estate, telecommunications, business services and individuals. They noted, however, that to a large extent, this acceleration on credit growth is explained by an upward shift in credit demand consistent with the initiation of new projects. On the other hand, NPLs have increased only moderately, especially in sectors affected by external shocks: agriculture (bad weather), tourism (lower arrivals), and construction (delays in payments to contractors). The Banking Supervision Department closely monitors these risks, and regards the impact of rising NPLs on banks’ financial statements as largely manageable. Page 25 Regional Performance Return on Assets Non-performing Loans to Gross Loans Kenya South Africa Nigeria Ghana Regulatory Capital Ratio Tanzania Rwanda Sources: IMF Staff Capital requirements have increased as market and operational risks are incorporated into the prudential framework. Systemic banks have been moving ahead of new regulations, increasing capital through capital injections or bond issuance. They also have been adopting internal capital adequacy assessment processes in line with CBK regulations introduced in 2013. Despite higher capitalization, Kenyan banks have shown higher profitability than their peers in other SSA countries. Proactive inclusion policies have been effective. The CBK recently introduced upgraded credit bureau regulations to facilitate the use of borrowers’ information following a review of recent experience. Also, a new Microfinance Act allows microfinance institutions to expand their scope of operations and extends CBK’s prompt corrective action capabilities to the supervision of microfinance institutions. The CBK also introduced payments system regulations for the provision of electronic retail transfers, with reference to relevant Anti-Money Laundering (AML) requirements to guide the operations of mobile payment service providers. The authorities concur with the view that cross-border expansion of Kenyan banks has been largely driven by a follow-your-customer strategy in the region. In addition, opportunities have opened in markets showing higher potential (South Sudan), while high penetration in Kenya limits the scope for further expansion. In order to address challenges in this area, the CBK has established three supervisory colleges to conduct joint assessments of the most important Kenyan financial groups. Initial discussions on crisis management and banking resolution coordination are already taking place with other regional supervisors. However, the authorities recognize that differences in capacity between home and host supervisors, especially those from high risk jurisdictions, which may translate into information quality problems and delays that would place a greater burden of vigilance on the home supervisors to ensure that risks are contained (See Box 6). The CBK has also introduced guidelines on non-operating holding companies to simplify organization structures and strengthen capital requirements at the financial group level. Page 26 Box 6. Cross-Border Activities of Kenyan Banks Branches of Kenyan banks in EAC Kenyan banks have expanded throughout East Africa, becoming dominant players in some markets. Kenya Commercial Bank, Kenya’s leading financial institutions, was the first Kenyan bank expanding to Tanzania in 1997. Today, eleven Kenyan banks with 288 branches operate in the East Africa, including South Sudan. Kenyan banks have entered East African markets mainly through subsidiaries. Kenyan banks are currently exploring opportunities in countries out of East Africa including DR Congo, Ethiopia, Malawi, Somalia, and Zambia. Uganda Tanzania Rwanda Burundi South Sudan Source: Central Bank of Kenya Kenyan Banks activities in EAC and South Sudan (in million USD, 2013) Cross-border expansion of Kenyan banks has been driven by market considerations. Following customers is a strong motive for Kenyan banks serving the regional corporate sector, in sectors such as agricultural commodities, manufactured products, and retail trade. Risk diversification and greater profit opportunities in unexplored markets (South Sudan) also provide opportunities to banks serving the retail sector. Transnational Kenyan bank assets have increased by 35 percent annually on average since 2011. Cross-border activities of Kenyan banks account for 10-12 percent of their banking operations in terms of assets, loans, and deposits. Eight subsidiaries in four countries registered losses, mainly banks at the initial stages of expansion in markets showing intermediate penetration, such as Uganda. Total Assets Gross Loans Gross Deposits Burundi Rwanda Uganda Tanzania South Sudan EAC Total Source: Central Bank of Kenya Kenyan banks are becoming systemically important in the region. East African banking systems other than Kenya’s are less developed and capitalized, which gives a competitive advantage to Kenyan banks. Kenyan banks are dominant in South Sudan with 45 percent of banking assets, and in Rwanda with 28 percent, a high share compared with South African and Nigerian banks, operating in 25 and 9 countries respectively, with an average share of 10 percent of assets each in host markets. Kenyan Banks' Shares in Host Economies' Financial System (in percent, 2012) CBK continues its efforts to establish strong relationships with regional regulators to enhance surveillance of Kenya’s transnational banks. The CBK has set up supervisory colleges for Kenya Commercial Bank, Equity Bank, and Diamond Trust to conduct joint inspections, and plans to establish 2 more supervisory colleges in 2014. The CBK has also signed Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with regulators in EAC countries, South Africa, Nigeria, and Mauritius to promote supervisory cooperation. Burundi Uganda Source: EAC authorities and IMF staff. Gross Deposits South Sudan Gross Loans Tanzania Total Assets Rwanda Page 27 Supported by reforms, capital markets activity is picking up driven by both foreign and domestic investors. Stock market capitalization increased by 25 percent in the year up to March 2014 because of higher valuation, to an equivalent of 40 percent of GDP, with trading driven by foreign investors. The much larger secondary market for government securities continues being driven by domestic investors, with institutional investors largely buying to hold. Recent reforms would continue to support the expansion of capital markets: The recently released capital market master plan will encourage infrastructure financing and the use of derivatives; the recently concluded process of demutualization of the stock exchange will facilitate the entry of new players to the stock exchange; the planned unification of financial regulators under the Financial Service Authority intends to facilitate coordination to assess cross-over risks; and the automation of over-the-counter trading of treasury bills would attract new investors to the government securities market (Figure 6). Kenya was removed from the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) watch list in June The FATF considered that recent legal and regulatory reforms and the establishment of an operational Financial Reporting Center merited the removal of Kenya from the list of countries subject to a monitoring process aimed at addressing AML/CFT deficiencies. The authorities are encouraged to continue their efforts in effectively implementing the AML/CFT framework to facilitate the government’s plans to establish Nairobi as a robust international financial center. Page 28 Figure 6. Kenya: Capital Market Indicators Stock market capitalization reached a record high in March 2014 With corporate investors holding a large share Share in stock market capitalization (Percent of GDP) Stock market capitalization Mar-14 Stocks trading turnover Stock trading is growing, but it is still way below government securities volume. Billions of Kenya Shillings Mar-14 Stocks trading turnover Secondary government securities market turnover Bonds are the dominant form of securities in the market… Stock of Government Securities, April 2014 Percent of GDP Foreign investors share Corporate investors share Individual and other investors share With trading dominated by foreign investors…. Share in Stock Trading, Jan-Mar 2014 Foreign investors share Corporate investors share Individual and other investors share And institutional investors are almost as important as banks…. Share in government security holdings Banks Insurance companies Pension funds State-owned companies Foreign investors (estimate) Other Bonds T-bills Total Government Securities Sources: Capital Markets Authority and Central Bank of Kenya. Page 29