Non-agriculture growth has remained robust, but agriculture has stayed subdued because of poor rains. Manufacturing, transport, and communications supported non-agriculture growth of 5.1 percent in January-March 2014, compared with 2.0 percent for agriculture in the same period (Figure 1) However, security concerns following terrorist attacks and threats have hit tourism. Weather-related food price hikes and higher electricity rates pushed headline inflation above the upper bound of the inflation target range in recent months (7.7 percent in July; 8.4 percent in August 2014). However, current inflation rates still reflects the one-off impact of higher VAT rates introduced in September 2013. Monetary policy has remained focused on the inflation target (5 ± 2.5 percent). The central bank has kept the policy rate (CBR) unchanged at 8.5 percent since May 2013 consistent with broadly stable inflation expectations. However, the potential impact of the recent spike in food and energy prices and rapid credit growth on inflation expectations remains a concern. Money market interest rates have remained close to the CBR despite the impact on interest rate volatility of the government’s cash management problems. Page 6 CPI (%y/y) Core inflation (%y/y) ¹ Figure 1. GDP Growth and Inflation Annualized Quarterly GDP Growth (percent, y-o-y) 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Real GDP Growth Non-Agricultural Agriculture Inflation Rates Inflation target range Excludes food and fuels. Source: Kenyan authorities and staff projections. The relatively high external current account deficit (7.7 percent in 2013/14) reflects strong capital-goods imports and a decline in agricultural exports (Figure 2). Sizable imports of equipment for oil exploration, largely self-financed, respond to an improved outlook for commercial exploitation of hydrocarbons, with a mute impact on the exchange rate. Service exports to the rest of the East African Community (EAC) region, in particular transportation services, have continued accelerating. Figure 2. External Current Account and FDI Kenya's wide current account deficit reflects high capital imports. Official BOP statistics underreport financing from FDI and portfolio inflows. Current Account (Percent of GDP, fiscal years) Current account deficit Capital imports FDI inflows (Percent of GDP) BOP statistics Foreign investment survey Portfolio inflows (Percent of GDP) BOP statistics Foreign investment survey Source: Kenyan authorities and staff projections Page 7 Kenya successfully tapped international capital markets with a debut US$2.0 billion Eurobond. Investors’ confidence translated into favorable terms (see Box 1). Of the proceeds, US$600 million were used to repay a syndicated loan contracted in 2012 and the remaining will substitute for domestic financing of energy and infrastructure projects. In addition, the government signed a loan with China in May 2014 for the construction of the Mombasa-Nairobi standard gauge railway (US$3.6bn), expected to start in October 2014 and to be implemented in around 5 years. Box 1. Kenya’s Debut Eurobond Sale Kenya successfully issued its debut sovereign bond at the end of June. The US$2.0bn issuance was more than four times oversubscribed, with a strong response by foreign investors reflecting Kenya’s good debt management practices. Demand from US investors was dominant with a share of 68 percent of total placement, followed by British investors with 25 percent (see charts below for more details). To spread out rollover risk, the Eurobond was issued in two tranches: a five-year $500 million bond at a yield of 5.875 percent, and a 10-year $1.5 billion bond at 6.875 percent. Sources: Kenyan Authorities and staff projections The contract comprises two loans: a 15-year US$2 billion loan from Eximbank China at Libor plus 3.6 percent, and a 20-year US$1.6 billion loan from the Chinese government at 2 percent. The government will repay these obligations with resources from Kenya Railways dividends and proceeds from the 1.5 percent railway levy on imports already in place. Page 8 Box 1. Kenya’s Debut Eurobond Sale (concluded) The favorable terms of Kenya’s first-ever Eurobond, the largest so far in Sub-Saharan Africa, reflects the unique position of Kenya relative to other frontier markets: (a) Nairobi is a recognized hub in an expanding EAC regional market; (b) the issuance was justified on the basis of new infrastructure projects in energy, transport, and agriculture that aim at supporting growth in the medium term; (c) sound policies, a strong tax base and an active market for government securities reflect a fiscal policy framework largely independent of grants; (d) a conscientious preparation included making difficult decisions such as adapting legislation and assuming minor liabilities previously in litigation. Following issuance, the bond yield in the secondary market has declined below comparable securities such as Zambia’s and Ghana’s (see chart below). c d Y (B+) Reference¹ Zambia (22) Rwanda (23) Ghana (17) Zambia (24) Kenya (24) Senegal (21) Zambia (24) (Yield at issuance) Kenya (24) (Yield at issuance) Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations. Reference is the average yield of the following B+ rating countries: Vietnam, Venezuela, and Egypt with identical maturity. According to the Eurobond prospectus, “The Agency Agreements, the Deeds of Covenant and the Notes (including any non-contractual obligations arising from or in connection with any of them) are governed by, and will be construed in accordance with, English law.” Page 9 The fiscal deficit in 2013/14 remained unchanged from the previous year. This reflects higher revenue offset by sizeable transfers to counties and a larger-than-envisaged wage bill. On the other hand, capacity constraints faced by counties during the first year of devolution resulted in low execution rates of their development budget. Consequently, the general government fiscal balance is more favorable than that of the central government in 2013/14. Fiscal Aggregates (Percent of GDP) Overall fiscal balance (excl. grants) Revenues excluding grants (RHS) 2003/04 2005/06 2007/08 2009/10 2011/12 2013/14 Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff Devolution was rolled out during FY2013/14 at a fast-track pace (Box 2; Annex I). The government established the new counties in line with the 2010 Constitution, and introduced a reporting framework on budget execution by counties through detailed quarterly reports published by the Office of the Controller of the Budget. However, this fast-track approach has introduced strains in government’s cash management, inducing interest rate volatility. Moreover, it complicated teething problems (common to devolution episodes), and the enforcement of the public financial management (PFM) framework. Other challenges have also emerged and —if left unaddressed— could negatively affect fiscal sustainability in the medium term, including wage and payroll issues, debt inherited from previous local authorities, and unfavorable spending composition. The authorities recognize these challenges, and agree with staff’s concerns. In particular, they are of the view that revamping the cash management framework and staffing the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Department (which would support capacity building at the county level), are crucial steps to mitigate the risks involved. Staff estimates of the general government fiscal balance are based on county fiscal outturns for the first three quarters. Page 10 Box 2. Devolution And Poverty in Kenya The ongoing roll out of devolution in line with the 2010 constitution provides an important vehicle to reduce poverty across the counties while fostering improvements in the delivery of key services. The redistributive impact of fiscal policies at the local level will hinge on fiscal policies that will be put in place by the 47 newly formed counties and on the efficiency and accountability in the use of devolved resources. While the share of Kenya’s population living in poverty decreased in recent years, considerable differences among counties remain. Kenya’s 2014 Economic Survey shows a decline in poverty rate from 46.6 percent in 2005/06 to 45.2 percent in 2009, with a larger decline in urban areas. The urban poverty ratio in 2009 is estimated to be 33.5 percent (about 3.9 million individuals), while rural poverty ratio is 50.5 percent, with about 13.1 million individuals living below the poverty line. In line with the 2010 Constitution, central government transfers to counties have increased significantly as part of the devolution process. The new revenue sharing arrangement (involving no less than 15 percent of national revenues) intends to increase per capita transfers to poorer counties (located in Northern, Eastern and Coastal parts of Kenya) that previously receiving less provision of public services. The process is expected to empower county governments to improve the delivery of key services, including education and health, and invest in much needed social and infrastructure spending. A recent World Bank report estimates a further reduction in Kenya’s poverty rate to 39 percent in 2012/13 (see World Bank’s “Kenya—Country Assistance Strategy FY2014-18.” Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections. Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections. County poverty and urbanization, 2009 b f Poverty rate R² = 0.23 Page 11 Box 2. Devolution and Poverty in Kenya (concluded) Over time, devolution is expected to help reduce inequality across counties. Reducing poverty will depend on the efficient use of large central government transfers at the county level, with appropriate accountability for spending allocations and outcomes. Efforts to raise own revenues at the local level will further increase room for higher social and infrastructure spending. Total available resources to counties in percent of total central government expenditures Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections. Kenyan banks are expanding by raising domestic credit, providing access to new borrowers, and increasing operations beyond Kenyan borders. Banks remain sound and profitable despite a moderate increase in the non-performing loans (NPL)-to-total loans ratio to 5.6 percent in May 2014 (from 4.6 percent a year before). A pick up in credit growth has been increasingly funded externally, mainly because of a more intensive use of medium-term mostly concessional foreign currency lines for SME project financing, and increased credit limits by international banks to their subsidiaries. Financial inclusion continues progressing (Figure 3) with mobile-banking loans and deposits driven by M-Shwari (7 million customers in its first year of operations) and higher SME access to credit (Box 3). Page 12 Figure 3. Financial Inclusion in Kenya Kenya has a strong record on financial inclusion, helped by the rapid growth of mobile banking. Formal Prudential Formal Non-prudential Formal Registered Informal Excluded South Africa 2012 Kenya 2013 Rwanda 2012 Uganda 2009 Namibia 2011 Bostwana 2009 Zimbabwe 2011 Nigeria 2012 Ghana 2010 Malawi 2008 Tanzania 2009 Zambia 2009 Burundi 2012 Mozambique 2009 Formal Informal Excluded Annualized Mobile Phone Payments (equivalent in percent of GDP) Source: Central Bank of Kenya and FinAccess. Page 13 Box 3. Impact of Mobile Banking and Financial Inclusion on Welfare M-Pesa was introduced in 2007 as a means to transfer money via mobile phones. M-Pesa users deposit money into a “cell phone account”, and use SMS technology for transfers and “on demand” payments. Thanks to its use of low-cost technology, overall transaction costs have declined as bills can be paid remotely. Even more importantly, the poor have benefitted the most: M-Pesa reaches 84 percent of population earning less than US$2 a day. Financial access has increased substantially thanks to M-Pesa: The number of micro accounts in formal financial institutions (deposit accounts below US$1,200) has increased more than 10 times over the past 10 years. AGO RWA v x d Lower transaction costs, higher financial access, and continuous innovation, with many products using the mobile payment platform already in place, have an impact on welfare: M-Shwari, a deposit-lending facility tailored to the poor, has 7 million active customers in over a year of operations. Kenyan farmers benefit from schemes to acquire equipment, like water pumps, with repayments being made through M-Pesa; M-Kopa allows the use of solar panels in areas not served by the power grid, with repayments in small installments; small scale health care management systems are able to track procedures, lab tests, drug inventories, via mobile phone devices. The IMF April 2014 SSA Regional Economic Outlook finds a strong relationship between financial access and improvement in Human Development Indicators (see right-hand chart). Kenya also stands out among the best performers in SSA in access to credit by SMEs together with Botswana and Rwanda, according to the World Bank Enterprise Surveys (see bottom left chart). Access to credit by SMEs increased to 36 percent in 2013 from 25 percent six years before. The Surveys also show that Kenyan SMEs are more competitive, innovative and more labor intensive than average SSA countries and LICs (see bottom right chart). Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections. Financial Access Performance UGA LBR ZMB v d H MOZ KEN BDI MLI MDG SWZ LSO SEN NER CMR BEN GHA GAB TZA MWI Firms with a bank loan/line of credit Exporters With international certification Own website Average number of full time workers Small (5-19) Medium (20-99) Large (100 +) Kenya SSA LICS Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections Sources: Kenyan authorities and IMF staff projections Page 14