I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance General: Swaziland is assessed as “Category B” with regards to data adequacy for surveillance Purposes (data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance). Staff’s analysis is mainly affected by shortcomings in the national accounts and fiscal sector. Real sector statistics: Swaziland’s GDP is broadly adequate for surveillance. The Central Statistical Office (CSO) has been working to compile a new benchmark for 2011 based on contemporary data from household and business surveys. This data has been used for the 2015 Article IV consultation and is expected to be published by the end of 2015. Shortcomings remain with regards to the treatment of Southern African Customs Union (SACU) revenue. Although the SACU group meeting at end-2012 resulted in a common understanding among technicians from the statistical offices, the treatment of SACU revenue in national accounts has yet to be agreed by member commissions. CSO publishes labor market statistics with long delays. The most recent unemployment data is for 2010 and the 2013 numbers are only expected to be released by end–2015. For 2016, the authorities are planning to conduct the third labor force survey (the first was conducted in 2007). The consumer price index was significantly revised in May 2007 in the context of the GDDS initiative, incorporating improvements in compilation methodology, market basket coverage, flexibility for introducing new pricing outlets and new varieties of products, and enhanced processing capabilities. Four new geographical indices, as well as a national index, with updated market basket weights, are now available. Monthly consumer price data are published by CSO with a one-month lag. Monetary and financial statistics: Although some progress was achieved in the reporting of data on the other depository corporations (ODCs), quality problems remained, particularly in the areas of coverage, classification, and sectorization. The CBS started to include the Swaziland Building Society into the monetary data backdated to December 2006. However, the credit and savings cooperatives, representing about 8 percent of assets of the commercial banks, remain outside the deposit corporations’ survey. External sector statistics : Quarterly balance of payments statistics are compiled by the CBS according to a methodology consistent with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5) . However, shortcomings in the timeliness and availability of trade data impart a certain degree of uncertainty to external sector statistics and surveillance. The errors and omissions term is sizable and further actions are required to improve the accuracy and reliability of external sector data. Participant in the General Data Dissemination No data ROSC is available. System (GDDS) since February 11, 2003. II. Data Standards and Quality III. Reporting to STA The CBS reports monetary and financial statistics to STA regularly, although the timeliness of data could be improved. Balance of payments data are published in International Financial Statistics (IFS) and in the Balance of Payments Yearbook. Page 61 Swaziland: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance (As of November 1, 2015) Exchange Rates International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities Reserve/Base Money Broad Money Central Bank Balance Sheet Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System Interest Rates Consumer Price Index Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government Stocks of Central Government and Central Government- Guaranteed Debt External Current Account Balance Exports and Imports of Goods and Services GDP/GNP Gross External Debt International Investment Position Date of latest observation Date received Sep 14 Sep 10 Reporting Publication Frequency of Data W A 2/ 3/ Any reserve assets that are pledged of otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short- term liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means, as well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means. Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes, and bonds. Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing Including currency and maturity composition. Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents Daily (D), weekly (W), monthly (M), quarterly (Q), annually (A), irregular (I); and not available (NA). Page 62