Swaziland’s economic performance has improved since the fiscal crisis of 2010–11, underpinned by the recovery of revenues from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). Driven mainly by communication, manufacturing, and construction (as a result of large capital spending), real GDP growth in 2013 is estimated at 2¾ percent, recovering from ‒ ½ percent in 2011. Several indicators suggest the return of business confidence; commercial bank credit to the private sector is growing strongly, and the risk premium on T-bills continues to decline (Figure 1). Meanwhile, inflation has slightly risen, reaching 5.3 percent in April 2014, owing to increases in food and some administered prices (e.g., electricity and fuel). Improved SACU revenue since 2012/13 reduced the pressure on fiscal and external balances . The SACU revenue recovered from about 9 percent of GDP in 2010/11- 2011/12 to over 18–20 percent of GDP since Fiscal Revenues by Type (Percent of GDP) With the recovery of SACU revenue, fiscal balances improved significantly in recent years. A surplus of 4½ percent of GDP was recorded in 2012/13. In 2013/14, though spending pressure increased owing to the adjustment of wages and a revival of capital expenditures (after two years of stagnation), a small surplus (¼ percent of GDP) was recorded, partly aided by enhanced domestic revenue collection efforts (e.g., enhanced efficiency in VAT collection, and strengthened auditing and compliance). Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. SACU revenue Domestic revenues Grants The external current account turned from a deficit of 8¼ percent of GDP in 2011 to a surplus of 3¾ percent in 2012 and is estimated to have reached a surplus of 6 percent in 2013. This outcome was driven mainly by an increase in the SACU revenue and robust growth in exports (e.g., coal and iron ore). International reserves have reached 3¾ months of imports by March 2014, recovering from the low level of 2 months at end-March 2012. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 6 Staff analysis suggests that Swaziland’s real effective exchange rate is moderately overvalued. The lilangeni has depreciated in real effective terms in line with the South African rand since 2011. While different estimation approaches give mixed results, the overall assessment points to a moderate overvaluation (Appendix 1). Financial Sector Assets by Industry (2012) (Percent of the total financial sector assets) According to the financial sector soundness indicators, commercial banks are generally sound and liquid, and their asset quality has recently improved (Table 9), while financial system risks remain in nonbank financial institutions (NBFI) . The banking sector appears well capitalized, with the capital adequacy ratio of the banks reaching 24 percent of risk-weighted assets. The asset quality of banks has improved with the nonperforming loan ratio falling to 6¾ percent at end–2013 from 8¾ percent at end- 2012. The NBFIs— including pension funds, insurance companies, collective investment schemes, and savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs)—account for about two- third of the financial sector (in terms of asset). Given that supervisory surveillance has not yet been fully extended to these institutions, some risks remain in the institutions. Collective investment schemes Insurance and Pension Funds Credit Institutions Central Bank Commercial Banks Savings and Credit Coops Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates.