Lesotho’s financial sector is dominated by the banking system, which as a whole appears quite sound (see Table 6). There are four commercial banks, three of which are subsidiaries of South African banks and account for over 95 percent of total loans and deposits. The fourth bank, the Lesotho Post Bank, is government-owned and has long faced solvency Page 17 issues. For the system as a whole, nonperforming loans are small (3.8 percent of total loans as of end-2013), much of which was covered by banks’ provisions. Financial intermediation is still limited in Lesotho, especially on the credit side (below 21 percent of GDP), even though lending received a substantial boost by the passage of the Land Act in 2012, which allowed residents to use their property as collateral for bank loans. The nonbank financial system continues to be dominated by pension plans and insurance companies, with assets amounting to 17 percent and 14½ percent of GDP, respectively, as of end-2012. The principal challenges facing these nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) are: (i) only about ¼ of wage earners participate in the pension plans, and these are mostly public sector employees; and (ii) the regulatory framework and supervision of the insurance sector are weak. Expanding the coverage of pension plans could generate a valuable source of long-term savings available to finance investment. For the insurance sector, there has been some progress with oversight in recent years. First, two small insurance companies that were insolvent have been absorbed by larger companies. Also, the new Insurance Bill was approved by parliament in mid-May 2014. The bill is a major improvement over the previous Insurance Act, which dates back to 1975 and is marked by excessive rigidities. However, the new bill does not cover insurance intermediaries—agencies and brokers—despite evidence of inappropriate and risky business practices. The authorities are preparing implementing regulations and amendments, including coverage of intermediaries. Also, training is needed to strengthen supervision of the industry. Better access to finance, sound financial intermediation and financial sector deepening would support private sector development. Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to strengthen banking regulation and supervision, launch a credit bureau in June 2014, and step up work on developing microfinance institutions. In line with Fund TA, staff recommended to finalize regulations supporting the implementation of the 2012 Financial Institutions Act (FIA); strengthen on- and off-site supervision; and gradually adopt pillar II of the Basel II capital accords. Given the dominant role of South Africa’s banks in Lesotho, it is important to strengthen cross-border supervision by enhancing coordination with the South Africa Reserve Bank, including the updating of the memorandum of understanding for cooperation and information sharing. In addition, the CBL needs to formulate a training curriculum for staff, especially new employees, that among other things builds capacity in risk-based supervision and to pursue a Other NBFIs include licensed and informal moneylenders, burial societies, asset managers, and savings and credits cooperatives (SACCOs). Page 18 human resources policy that would increase retention of high-performers, including career advancement. The approval of the Financial Sector Development Strategy (FSDS)—an important milestone in financial sector development—needs to be followed by its expedient implementation. To this end, staff recommended (i) to conduct a strategic review of the Post Bank considering options of continued stand-alone operation, seeking a strategic partner, or winding down operations; (ii) develop the interbank market and the CBL’s capacity for liquidity management; and (iii) take steps to establish a yield curve, including issuance of treasury bills and bonds of various maturities. Authorities’ views The authorities noted that strengthening financial sector supervision and the implementation of the FSDS are major priorities. They acknowledged that the completion of financial regulation facilitating the implementation of the FIA has been delayed, due to the low capacity of the Drafting Office. They expect that approval by parliament of the Insurance Bill would strengthen the regulatory framework for the insurance industry and noted that they have been strengthening the regulatory framework for pension funds. The CBL has been closely monitoring non-performing loans and the risks remain contained, since banks are cautious in their lending and maintain high loan-loss provisions.