Based on status-quo policies (baseline scenario), sluggish growth performance is expected to continue, while Swaziland would remain vulnerable to exogenous shocks . In the near term, growth is expected to remain low (at about 2 percent per annum), reflecting low private sector investment. Furthermore, the prospective decline in the SACU revenue and increases in public sector wages—as envisaged under the government’s medium-term fiscal framework—would translate into large fiscal deficits and external imbalances. With potential crowding out of the credit to the private sector (owing to large financing needs of the government), growth would gradually decline to below 2 percent over the medium term. Capital inflows would remain low, international reserves would fall to 3 months of imports, and the debt-to-GDP ratio would steadily increase to 30 percent. Should SACU revenues fall significantly (as in 2010–11), its impact on the economy could be even larger (compared with the previous crisis), given that Swaziland would be less resilient to the shocks owing to reduced policy space. Swaziland is a monarchy, where the King holds the executive authority, which may be exercised either directly or through the Cabinet or a Minister. Parliamentary elections are held every five years, following which the King appoints cabinet members, 20 out of 30 senators, and 10 out of 65 members of the lower house. The SACU revenues will remain high in 2014/15 (19 percent of GDP), but medium-term prospects are uncertain. The authorities expect that the revenue would stabilize around their historical average of 17 percent of GDP. Page 8 Staff Medium-Term Projections (Baseline Scenario) (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 Est. GDP growth (annual change) Consumer price (end of period, annual change) Broad money (annual change) Credits to private sector (annual change) Fiscal balance Fiscal balance (excluding SACU revenue) Total revenue Domestic revenue of which SACU revenues External grants Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Capital expenditure Current account balance (including grants) Gross international reserves (month of imports) Total debt External debt Domestic debt Sources: Swazi authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Prel. The main near-term risks are associated with the uncertain external environment (developments in South Africa, in particular) and the high volatility of the SACU revenue (see the risk assessment matrix (RAM)) . The Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS) would have to raise its discount rate if the South African Reserve Bank hikes its policy rate further (as expected by the market). If South Africa’s growth weakens and/or international capital flows to South Africa significantly decline, adverse outward spillovers from the country may rise—possibly channeled through lower SACU revenue and trade and financial flows. Furthermore, uncertain prospects for the fate of preferential trade agreements—the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPA) with the EU and the African Growth and Opportunities Act (AGOA) with the U.S.—would affect production and investment in the textile and sugar sectors. During Swaziland’s annual review for AGOA eligibility in December 2013, the U.S. Government determined that Swaziland failed to satisfy the AGOA eligibility requirements due to violations of worker rights. Though the deadline was extended to May 15, 2014 for the Swaziland Government to satisfy five conditions, Swaziland failed to satisfy these conditions. The authorities are currently making efforts to meet the conditions by end-year, with a view to renewing the AGOA eligibility. Should Swaziland lose its eligibility from 2015, although the trade and growth impacts would likely be moderate (the GDP share of textile industry is about 3 percent), it could have large employment and social impacts. The EU and the Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Group of States (ACP) are committed to signing EPAs between the EU and regional groups of ACP countries, rather than bilaterally. While the current interim EPA is set to expire in October 2014, Swaziland is currently negotiating the EPA as part of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) group. Swaziland largely benefits from the EPA for its sugar exports to the EU (accounting for about half of its sugar exports and 9 percent of the total exports). A loss of preferential access to the EU market could have large (continued) Page 9 Staff Medium-Term Projections (Reform Scenario) (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) GDP growth (annual change) Consumer price (end of period, annual change) Broad money (annual change) Credits to private sector (annual change) Fiscal balance Fiscal balance (excluding SACU revenue) Total revenue Domestic revenue SACU revenues External grants Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Capital expenditure Current account balance (including grants) Gross international reserves (month of imports) Total debt External debt Domestic debt Sources: Swazi authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 Prel. Est. Enhanced reform efforts, combined with prudent fiscal policy, would improve Swaziland’s growth potential and strengthen its resilience to shocks. The reform scenario envisages structural reforms to stimulate private sector-led growth and a prudent fiscal policy (with the fiscal deficits of less than 2 percent of GDP over the medium-term) to secure fiscal and external sustainability. The impacts of enhanced revenue mobilization efforts are cautiously estimated under this scenario, which implies possible room for further adjustment by greater revenue mobilization (in case the risk of a SACU revenue fall should materialize). Current account balance would be stronger than the baseline scenario, and capital inflows would be higher. International reserves would exceed five months of imports over the medium term, and public debt would remain below 25 percent of GDP. Swaziland would be then better positioned to cope with another SACU revenue shock. Increased capital spending (e.g., to meet critical infrastructure needs), following through project appraisal and selection, would help to raise Swaziland’s growth potential. Furthermore, with enhanced efforts to improve business climate and financial intermediation, private investment is expected to increase, and GDP growth would reach 4 percent.