Swaziland continues to face serious development challenges, including high unemployment, poverty, and the prevalence of HIV/AIDS (Figure 2). Unemployment (particularly for youth) stays high. The high prevalence of HIV/AIDS (at about 26 percent for adults aged 15–49) has significantly lowered life expectancy (UNAIDS, 2012). Although there has been some progress in The analysis is based on the status quo scenario. Swaziland continues to maintain an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval under Article VIII arising from a 50 percent limit on the provision for advance payments for the import of capital goods in excess of 10 million emalangeni. The authorities are taking steps to strengthen the surveillance of NBFIs. Large SACCOs are being assessed, and the rest is expected to be also assessed soon. Based on technical assistance from the IMF, the authorities plan to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory frameworks for NBFIs as well as building capacity for both off-site and on- site supervision. The overall unemployment rate stood at 28.5 percent in 2010, while the youth unemployment reached 52.4 percent. No newer figures are available, but indications are that unemployment stays high. Page 7 poverty reduction, an estimated 63 percent of the population still lives below the national poverty line in 2010 (down from 69 percent in 2001). This level is generally higher than other countries at the same income level (Figure 2), suggesting that there is room to enhance the inclusiveness of growth. Protracted weak growth performance contributed to the lack of progress in social developments . Though growth rebounded after the crisis, Swaziland has long suffered from sluggish growth performance, with average real GDP growth over 2004–13 at about two percent per year. This modest growth—less than half of the level of its neighboring countries (Botswana, Lesotho, and Namibia)—is also associated with high unemployment and limited progress in social developments (with widespread poverty and high inequality). The new government has indicated its intention to address significant social and development challenges . Following parliamentary elections in September 2013, a new administration was formed. The prime minister was reappointed, and the minister of finance and the central bank governor switched their posts. The new minister of finance stated in his 2014/15 budget speech that the government would focus on invigorating economic growth, creating employment opportunities, and accelerating public sector reforms.