Building cushion to respond to shocks The experience of the 2010 ‒ 11 fiscal crisis underlines Swaziland’s high vulnerability to shocks because of its heavy reliance on the highly volatile SACU revenue . The significant fall in the SACU revenue (by 10 percent of GDP) during the crisis led to large fiscal and current account deficits. Since the authorities’ consolidation efforts (largely through reduced capital spending) could not fully accommodate the shock, they ran large fiscal deficits in 2010–11, with financing from the drawdown of government deposits and accumulation of debt, which eventually led to a decline in international reserves. SACU Revenues (Percent of GDP, fiscal revenues, and imports) Ratio to GDP Ratio to fiscal revenues Ratio to imports of goods and services Staff emphasized the need to strengthen the economy’s resilience to exogenous shocks, through securing a sufficient international reserve cushion and maintaining debt sustainability Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. To respond to exogenous shocks (such as a significant fall in the SACU revenue), international reserves should be further increased to five to seven months of imports over the medium-term (Appendix 2). Though this reserve target may stand at the higher end of traditional reserves adequacy estimates, this level of reserves should be secured, in light of Swaziland’s high vulnerability to shocks, as reflected by the severity of the recent crisis experience. Public debt should be maintained below 30 percent of GDP, to create sufficient buffer to address future shocks. Though the public debt stood at a modest level (17.2 percent of GDP) at end–2013, gross financing needs stay high (Appendix 3). To ensure debt sustainability, a prudent fiscal policy, together with debt management strategies, should be implemented. International reserves stood at 4 months of imports, or 24 percent of GDP at end–2009. Yet, the government had to cut spending markedly during 2010 ‒ 11 when the SACU revenues declined substantially, and reserve coverage dropped to 2.3 months of imports at the end of 2011. Page 11 The strategy should incorporate the debt from public enterprises and all relevant risks. Specifically, the projected increase in gross financing needs is a source of concern, as it could raise interest rate and rollover risks; with possible financing constraints due to the small size of Swaziland’s financial sector. The authorities concurred with staff on the need to strengthen resilience to shocks, by building sufficient international reserves and maintaining modest debt distress. On international reserves, the authorities agreed with the proposed level of 5–7 months of imports, noting that it is in line with CBS’s internal target of 6 months as set under the Southern African Development Community (SADC)’s macroeconomic convergence criteria. On debt limit, they broadly agreed with staff’s assessment, while setting 35 percent of GDP as the absolute ceiling of public debt. Taking into account the potential rollover risks, they expressed their intention to take advantage of the current favorable domestic liquidity conditions to better manage the term structure of financing. Maintaining a prudent fiscal stance, while meeting critical social and development needs Given the desirability of maintaining the exchange rate peg (to maintain price stability and facilitate capital and current transactions with South Africa), Swaziland will have to rely on fiscal adjustment and structural reforms to accumulate international reserves. Following two consecutive years of the fiscal surplus, the 2014/15 fiscal framework envisages an overall deficit of 1 percent of GDP. Over the medium-term, however, the deficits are expected to increase to 5 percent of GDP, owing to the prospective decline in SACU revenue, the scheduled review of public sector wages, and planned increase in capital spending. In light of already high public sector wages (the compensation of employees increased from 10 percent of GDP in 2000/01 to 14¼ percent in 2013/14), the minister alerted in his budget speech that “ the level of government’s wage bill has reached unsustainable levels ”. The last review of the public sector wages took place in 2004, through which the overall compensation of employees increased by 24 percent in 2005/06 from the previous year. The 2014/15 capital budget covers the ongoing projects (including the completion of a new international airport and road construction) and some new projects (the construction of a hotel and convention centre), with a view to boosting the tourism industry. Page 12 Fiscal Balance (Percent of GDP) 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 Est Total revenues Total revenues (excl. grant) Domestic revenues SACU revenues Grant Total expenditures Expenses Nonfinancial assets Overall fiscal balance Overall fiscal balance (excl. SACU rev.) Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. 1. Based on the status quo policy (no new fiscal adjustment measure is incorporated). 2. Commitment basis. Staff pointed to the importance of maintaining a prudent fiscal target (to secure a sufficient buffer for shocks), while safeguarding critical social spending and growth- promoting capital expenditures With the increasing spending pressures and a prospective decline in the SACU revenue over the medium term, Swaziland’s international reserves would stay significantly below the adequate level. A prudent fiscal policy stance is necessary going forward, with a fiscal deficit ceiling of 2 percent of GDP over the medium term, to help maintain adequate international reserves and ensure debt sustainability. To achieve the target, the following policy measures are called for: Improving revenue administration . The Swaziland Revenue Authority (SRA) should continue to expand taxpayer’s registration, increase compliance and service delivery, enhance self- assessment, and strengthen VAT collections. Furthermore, the cost of tax exemptions should be reassessed to eliminate those whose benefits are not commensurate to the cost. Rationalizing recurrent expenditures (focusing on spending on goods and services and compensation of employees). The authorities should identify possible savings in non-priority spending, while safeguarding critical social expenditures. Recent increases in compensation of employees, as well as the scheduled salary review, raise a concern as they could squeeze out critical social and capital expenditures (Box 1). To this end, the staff shared the minister’s concern about the level of government’s wage bill and argued that, to contain further increase, public sector wage bills should be kept constant in real terms (e.g., by containing Under the 2014/15 budget, the education sector received the highest allocation (17 percent) of the total budget, to provide universal primary education and advanced skills training. Page 13 salary increases and pursuing public sector reforms) and new hiring should be limited to critical areas (e.g., education and health). Compensation of Employees of Sub-Saharan African Countries (Percent of GDP, average of 2011–2013) h L d z w w b b Z b w B h G f h d V C q b z b L g w b Z E P C d h y K d B z T B v g h E h y h T b G d ô C g T F k B B G b G C g d d é T g d h C G d g U d w R G q E f b R g C L g C b R f C Sources: Country authorities and IMF staff estimates. Effectively implementing planned public sector reforms (including the payroll and skill audits) To contain the wage bills, the staff supported the government’s plan for public sector reforms (including payroll audits and the staff inspection function). These reforms should be implemented promptly and effectively, if needed, with technical assistance by Swaziland’s international partners. Strengthening public financial management (PFM) . The enactment and effective implementation of the PFM Bill are critical to strengthen PFM and macroeconomic analysis. Furthermore, in line with the authorities’ PFM action plan, key reform measures include (i) preparing a coherent medium-term fiscal and expenditure framework; (ii) improving cash management; and (iii) strengthening commitment control to prevent arrears. It is important to enhance fiscal reporting and transparency (posting the budget outturn on the website is a good step forward), while effectively addressing the issues identified in the auditor general’s reports. Reconciliation exercises should also be conducted on regular basis. Furthermore, To assist the rationalization process, a set of spending reviews (driven by a medium term expenditure framework)—with ranking key priority policies and service delivery outcomes and outputs, and identifying opportunities for prioritizing resource allocation and reducing manpower costs—should be undertaken. The 2012/13 Auditor General’s report found that the consolidated financial statements did not present fairly the financial position of the government. The report specifically identified: i) the lack of working relations between the Internal Audit and Auditor General’s office, ii) failure to submit audited financial statements by 14 out of 39 public (continued) Page 14 in light of Swaziland’s weakness in public investment management (relative to other countries), thorough project selection and appraisal and programming are essential to ensure high efficiency of public investment. For this purpose, a high-level appraisal committee—equipped with sufficient capacities—may help to improve the quality of projects. Public Investment Management Index NAM SA SWZ LSO ) g ( G Better Public investment management index Sources: Dabla-Norris et. al. (2011) and the World Bank. Sample: 68 middle and low income countries. The authorities generally agreed with maintaining a prudent fiscal policy stance, while reiterating the need to secure critical social and development spending They affirmed their intention to maintain a prudent fiscal policy, noting that the fiscal deficit ceiling of 2 percent of GDP would be achievable, while safeguarding critical social and development spending. They therefore expected that fiscal outcome would turn out to be better than envisaged in the current medium-term fiscal framework. Nevertheless, they saw the upcoming review of public sector wages as a challenge. Such spending pressures are expected to be partially offset by the ongoing efforts for public sector reforms (in particular through payroll audits). As part of the effort to strengthen PFM, the authorities planned to implement the PFM action plan more rigorously, with assistance from Swaziland’s international partners. enterprises for the past two years, and iii) the lack of reconciliation between ministries and the Accountant General’s office. All the domestically-financed capital projects are appraised by the Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, based on the planning officer’s manual. Page 15 Box 1. Public Sector Wage Increases and Planned Public Sector Reforms Swaziland’s public wage bill has steadily increased over the last three decades, reaching 14 percent of GDP in 2013/14. This level is exceptionally high among Sub- Saharan African countries. The wage bill accounts for about 40 percent of total expenditures, limiting fiscal policy flexibility. Thus, fiscal consolidation was often conducted by significantly reducing capital expenditures (as in 2010–11). The increase in nominal wage bill is largely explained by the increase in the average per head wage (largely as a result of periodic salary reviews, cost of living adjustments, and notch increases) and the increasing number of government employees. For the last ten years, the total wage bill expanded by 176 percent, while the per head wage increased by 116 percent. The pace of increase in the per head wage far exceeded inflation, and even higher than nominal GDP per capita. Fiscal Spending by Type (Percent of GDP) Compensation of employees Nonwage recurrent spending Capital expenditures Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. Total Wages and Wages Per Head (2004/05=100) Wages Per Head and CPI (2004/05=100) Total wages and salaries The number of government employees Wages and salaries (per head) Wages and salaries (per head) Nominal GDP (per capita) CPI (cumulative) Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. The authorities plan to step up efforts for public sector reforms, including: (i) Intensifying the staff inspection function (ii) Monitoring and managing wage bills (iii) Fully implementing payroll audit (iv) Preparing strategic plans by every ministry (v) Introducing performance management systems Page 16 In view of the high volatility and uncertainty of the SACU revenue, a fiscal framework to better manage this uncertainty is worth exploring. The authorities are exploring the option of implementing a revenue rule that would only incorporate into the budget their estimated steady state level of SACU revenue (17 percent of GDP, the historical average) with any additional SACU revenue saved in a stabilization fund (to be used when the revenue is lower than the average). In the staff’s view, a credible fiscal rule could help ensure fiscal and external sustainability and mitigate the adverse impacts of exogenous shocks on the economy. For the rule to be successful, however, it would be important to complete the groundwork before its introduction (Box 2). Specifically such a framework (i) would require strong PFM (e.g., fiscal monitoring, transparency, internal and external audit) and (ii) should be compatible with a sustainable macroeconomic framework. In terms of a stabilization fund, it would be important to (i) ensure its full transparency and accountability and (ii) implement strict regulation/rule for its use. The authorities expressed their intention to carefully explore such a framework; initially by anchoring the fiscal policy with a medium-term international reserve target of 5 ‒ 7 months of imports, while exploring a fiscal rule or a stabilization fund with enhancing efforts to strengthen PFM or complete the groundwork, assisted by the IMF technical assistance. Page 17 Box 2. Groundwork for Successful Fiscal Rules Following the fiscal crisis, the authorities are exploring different fiscal policy frameworks to better manage the high volatility of SACU revenue. Specifically, they envisage a revenue rule that would only incorporate into the budget their estimated steady state level of SACU revenue of 17 percent of GDP (the historical average) with any additional SACU revenue saved in a stabilization fund. A fiscal rule is worth considering, in view of successful experiences in some resource-rich countries with similar challenges to manage highly volatile revenues. A credible fiscal rule could help to manage the high volatility of SACU revenue. The staff’s preliminary analysis suggests that, compared with the status quo, a fiscal rule which targets a non-SACU fiscal deficit of 17 percent (similar in spirit with the authorities’ plan), if implemented effectively, may work better to ensure fiscal and external sustainability and mitigate the adverse impacts of exogenous shocks on growth. If a non-SACU deficit target of 17 percent of GDP had been introduced in 2008/09, expenditures would have been more stable... Estimated Expenditures under the Fiscal Rule …leading to additional saving before the crisis and allowing higher spending during the crisis .Cumulative fiscal imbalances would be mitigated over the medium term. Estimated Fiscal Balances under the Fiscal Rule Fiscal revenues Actual fiscal expenditures Estimated expenditures (under the fiscal rule) Cumulative balances Cumulative balances (under the fiscal rule) Estimated fiscal balances (under the fiscal rule) Actual fiscal balances Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. Sources: Swazi authorities and IMF staff estimates. For a fiscal rule to work effectively, however, adequate PFM systems are prerequisites. Specifically it is important to have: (1) reliable data as well as a minimum technical forecasting capacity (to predict budgetary aggregates with sufficient accuracy); (2) comprehensive budget reporting systems (to produce in-year and timely end-year reports); (3) effective internal and external audit systems (to ensure that public resource utilization is fully accounted for); and (4) publication of fiscal data (to allow external monitoring of the rule). The stabilization fund—which may be seen as a convenient way to set aside surges in revenues— would also call for strong PFM. In particular it is important to (i) create the fund within the budget; (ii) ensure its full transparency and accountability, and (iii) implement strict regulation/rule for its use. __________________________________________ IMF, 2012, “Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries”. IMF and World Bank, “Options of Fiscal Rules to Manage High Volatility of SACU revenues”, forthcoming. IMF, 2009, “Fiscal Rules—Anchoring Expectations for Sustainable Fiscal Finance,” www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2009/121609.pdf. Page 18