Stability Lesotho’s SACU revenues are expected to fall by about 12 percentage points of GDP between 2014/15 and 2016/17, with much of this drop expected to be long lasting. After falling by 3½ percentage points of GDP in 2015/16 (to just over 25 percent of GDP), they are projected to plunge another 8½ percentage points to about 16½ percent of GDP the following year. Although a modest rebound is expected in 2017/18, SACU revenues are projected to remain relatively low (below 20 percent of GDP) over the foreseeable future, largely due to the slowdown in import growth in South Africa, which is the main determinant of the size of the SACU revenue pool. The government’s latest budget projections envisage a modest fiscal consolidation of only a 3 percentage points of GDP over the medium term, implying that additional measures to raise domestic tax and non-tax revenues and curb government spending will be necessary to close a substantial gap. Indeed, considering that government spending has been budgeted to expand in the current year—to over 63 percent of GDP, with the wage bill alone rising to 23 percent of GDP—the task of adjusting the fiscal stance will require a strong reversal of expenditure trends. To reduce the shock to the economy and to allow time for much needed structural reforms, Lesotho’s fiscal adjustment could be spread over the next 2-3 years; however, a significant first step would be needed to establish credibility. In the baseline scenario, the path for additional fiscal measures—that is, measures beyond the modest consolidation already reflected SACU revenues have fallen from R 7.0 billion in 2014/15 to R 6.6 billion in 2015/16 and R 4.5 billion in 2016/17. The allocation in 2016/17 is derived from the projected base revenue of R 5.5 billion and a negative correction of R 1.0 billion for actual collections in 2014/15 that were lower than projected. In addition to South Africa’s lower imports, Lesotho’s base revenue projection was reduced by a permanent correction (R 0.6 billion) which removes fuel levies from the SACU revenue pool. Page 15 in the government’s recent budget projections (Text Table 1)—call for adjustments on the order of 3, 3½, and ½ percentage points of GDP in 2016/17, 2017/18, and 2018/19, respectively. Given that domestic revenue collections are already quite high relative to GDP, a larger share (about two- thirds) of the adjustment could come from expenditure measures, particularly by containing the wage bill. Other possible measures include better targeting of social transfers; phasing-out transfers for tuition loans and reforming financial management of the National Manpower Development Secretariat; raising fuel levies; enacting the new mining taxation regime; and broadening coverage of the corporate income tax. With the proposed adjustment, the overall fiscal deficit is projected to widen considerably in 2016/17 (to about 7½ percent of GDP, from just over 3 percent of GDP in 2015/16), before returning to near zero in 2017/18, and beyond. A combination of domestic borrowing and a drawdown of government deposits at the CBL could be used to finance the deficits, while still preserving debt sustainability and reserve adequacy (Annexes 1 and 2). Gross international reserves are projected to fall during the adjustment period, but then stabilize at about 5–5½ months of imports beginning in 2018/19. Text Table 1. Possible Fiscal Measures (2016–19) Measure Maintain wage bill in nominal terms; restrain new hiring (allow hiring in critical areas only) Estimated Annual Fiscal Savings In millions In percent of Maloti of GDP Payroll audit and eliminate irregularities (“ghost” positions) 390-1285* 1.3-4.3* Reduce cost on international and domestic travel, including prioritizing international training and workshops Reduce transfers and ensure self-sufficiency of the National Manpower Development Secretariat (NMDS) through strong enforcement of student loan recovery Increase fuel taxes (in line with recent increase in South Africa) Revision of fees, penalties, and charges Reform of the social transfer system to better target the poor Strengthening tax and customs administrations __________________________________ * Estimate by World Bank staff. Structural reforms—notably, to address the government payroll and the budget process—would be critical for a successful fiscal adjustment with protection for vulnerable segments of the population. Severe weaknesses in public service administration have contributed to the high government wage bill, while poor public financial management has added to the under execution of the capital budget and poor delivery of public services. To overcome capacity issues and enable much needed progress on the structural agenda, the government should work closely Page 16 with development partners and technical assistance experts. In particular, the World Bank’s project for the modernization of government aims to help clean up and efficiently manage the government payroll and improve the allocation of human resources, using biometric identification for civil servants, improved control systems, and, over time, a functional review of government agencies. To strengthen social protection, while also generating fiscal savings, income transfers and subsidies could be targeted more effectively. Several development partners provide technical assistance for the action plan for the comprehensive PFM reform, the implementation of which has received a boost from the new ministerial-level steering committee and PFM coordinator. With respect to the wage bill, actions—such as identifying and eliminating “ghost” workers through payroll audits— could generate considerable fiscal savings (1.3-4.3 percent of GDP a year) in the near term. However, in the event that fiscal savings take more time to materialize, the authorities could impose a temporary ceiling to contain the wage bill. Within such a cap, there could be discretion on staffing and wage rate decisions. PFM reforms are also urgently needed to strengthen budget execution and monitoring. In line with past recommendations, professional positions in the Cash Management Unit (CMU) of the Office of the Accountant General (AcG) need to be filled with qualified staff. Full reconciliation of all government bank accounts on a regular basis, including accounts in commercial banks, is a basic prerequisite to establish accountability. A strategy could then be formulated to finally make proper use of the Treasury Single Account at the CBL. Efforts also need to be stepped up in the areas of medium-term planning and budgeting, which are necessary components for a rules-based approach to fiscal policy. Authorities’ views There was broad agreement to undertake the necessary fiscal adjustment in steps, as recommended by Fund staff. The authorities prefer to rely predominantly on spending cuts to achieve fiscal adjustment, particularly focusing on the wage bill and expenditures on goods and services. With technical support from the World Bank, payroll audits in a few pilot ministries—along with steps to strengthen personnel management—could begin in early 2016/17. Procurement procedures will be reviewed with a view to reduce the cost of supplies, while also outsourcing more services with the potential for fiscal savings. In addition, measures to be incorporated in the budget proposal for 2016/17 include: Zero adjustment for inflation in government wages and no new hiring, except for key positions (such as, qualified accountants); Increases in non-tax revenues (fees, charges, and penalties); and Increase in fuel taxes. Negotiations on the World Bank’s social protection project, which focuses on this issue, are at an advanced stage. Estimate by World Bank staff. Page 17 On PFM reform, the authorities emphasized that the elevated status of the steering committee is a demonstration of their intentions to make good progress on the action plan going forward. It was noted that without improved PFM systems it would be difficult to implement a major fiscal adjustment.