Inclusiveness With the government in need of significant fiscal adjustment, Lesotho must rely on private sector-led growth to generate employment opportunities and improve inclusiveness. However, transforming from a heavy dependence on government to a more private sector-led economy will be a lengthy and challenging process. Moreover, Lesotho’s international competitiveness is in a precarious position, which suggests that achieving greater export growth will also be a challenge. The NSDP, which was adopted essentially by all political parties in 2012, provides a viable roadmap to more dynamic private sector growth, but implementation has been sketchy at best. In particular, the NSDP identifies manufacturing, tourism, information and communications technology (ICT), and commercial agriculture as sectors with strong potential job creation. Discussions with the authorities and representatives of the business community focused on identifying near-term measures—within the government’s budget limitations—that could have an immediate impact on unemployment pressures during the fiscal adjustment. As suggested by the business community, there are a number of relatively low-cost near-term actions that could help eliminate some obstacles to doing business. For example, operating government-leased factory shells on a commercial basis would lead to more effective use of this resource. Currently, there is a waiting list of potentially job creating businesses seeking these facilities, while some existing tenants have become dormant and fallen into arrears on their rent. Other suggestions include exploring options for private industrial parks; providing internationally accepted standards certification services for both agricultural and manufacturing products; encouraging wage contracts (such as, piece-rate wages) that enhance competitiveness; and supporting development of market-demanded skills, including through extension services. Following up on pilot projects under the NSDP—notably, extension services and standards certification for commercial fruit orchards—could lead to rapid private sector development in these areas. Diversifying exports and targeting the sub-region may also be necessary, especially in light of recent trade developments that will likely cut into Lesotho’s current favored position. To support longer- term growth and inclusiveness, step up implementation of the NSDP, particularly by strengthening planning and execution of government’s capital budget, not only for much needed infrastructure, With financing from the European Union (EU), the Fund will provide a resident advisor to the AcG’s office. The EU is also providing four more long-term experts to support PFM reform. For a discussion of international competitiveness, see Annex 3. The recent agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership will give some highly competitive Asian countries access to the US market for textiles. Page 18 but also for pilot projects and follow-up support in priority sectors. In general, greater engagement by government with the business community and development partners would help to identify productive measures. Authorities’ views While a number of initiatives are already underway, the authorities agreed that further progress is needed to invigorate the private sector. The Lesotho National Development Corporation (LNDC) is courting suppliers to South African industries to establish plants in Lesotho, in order to diversify export markets more towards the sub-region and to build upon Lesotho’s natural comparative advantages. They noted that a recent investment in Lesotho by a supplier to South Africa’s auto industry is encouraging. The LNDC also just completed construction of several more factory shells and saw scope for managing existing shells more effectively. Government officials emphasized that in addition to strengthening planning and execution of the capital budget, curbing recurrent spending could provide fiscal space to increase spending on infrastructure. They also plan to hold a long-delayed “Jobs Summit” to focus attention on employment issues and relevant policy actions. To help spur entrepreneurship, they have begun to identify public services that could be outsourced to the private sector at a savings to the budget. Transparency and competitive bidding procedures would be critical to the success of this initiative. As noted in the 2015/16 budget speech, the authorities also aim to explore opportunities for privatization and divesture of government’s equity positions.