The weak growth performance for the last decade has been associated with low private sector developments and the apparent low growth impact of fiscal spending . This weak growth performance, particularly with low private sector development, is also associated with high unemployment and limited progress in poverty reduction. In the past decades, the government pursued expansionary fiscal policies, while trend growth has continually decelerated . The government increased spending from about 18 percent of GDP in 1980s to 32 percent in 2000s, though growth averaged about 8 percent in the early 1980s and thereafter it has continually decreased to about 2 percent for the last ten years. Furthermore, the increasing number of public enterprises (from 28 in 2007 to 45 in 2014) raises concerns on public sector efficiency and the lack of competitiveness. Private sector development has been depressed, as shown by the slow pace of capital accumulation (Figure 4) While middle-income countries and sub-Saharan countries have gradually increased their fixed capital formation since 2000, Swaziland experienced a sharp decline in investment, reaching less than half the level (in terms of GDP) from the early 2000s. This is caused by a significant decline in private-sector investment, suggesting the stagnation of the sector over a long period. There have also been little new FDI inflows in recent years. There is a risk that Swaziland may be trapped in a “vicious cycle,” with sluggish growth prospects leading to low private investment (which adversely affects productivity growth and industrial diversification) and this further reducing the growth potential. Swaziland Commercial Bank Credit to Private sector (Percent of GDP) Financial intermediation has been contained . Though commercial banks’ credit to the private sector is recently growing, its level (relative to GDP) is still relatively low, compared with other countries in the region. The nonbanking sector (mainly pension and insurance sectors) has grown significantly in recent years. To facilitate financial intermediation and promote private sector development and inclusive growth, the CBS has recently embarked on the preparation of the Financial Sector Strategy, with technical assistances from the IMF and the World Bank. To effectively implement the Strategy, a comprehensive Sources: Country authorities and IMF staff estimates. Middle income countries Sub-Saharan Africa Lesotho Namibia Botswana Page 19 Financial Sector Development Implementation Plan, with a prioritized time-bound sequence of actions, will be prepared. The authorities expressed concerns about the weak growth performance, although their previous efforts, through several strategies, have thus far not been fruitful . The Economic Recovery Strategy (ERS), for example, rightly identified several structural weaknesses (including unfavorable business environment and low efficiency in public expenditure) as constraints to growth and laid out a set of measures to address them. Nevertheless, growth has remained well below the ERS’s target of “at least 5 percent”. Notwithstanding some progress under these strategies, the implementation of reform has been generally slow. The new minister of finance stated in his 2014/15 budget speech that the government would focus on invigorating economic growth, creating employment opportunities, and accelerating public sector reforms. Staff highlighted the needs to address sluggish growth performance, through effective implementation of structural policy measures. To raise potential growth (and then to enhance employment and reduce poverty and inequality), it is essential to improve the efficiency of the public sector and promote private sector-led, inclusive growth, through wide-ranging structural reforms. Improvement in Swaziland’s competitiveness, through these reforms, is also called for, given an appreciated real exchange rate. Improve the efficiency of public spending (Appendix 4). To raise the growth impact of public spending, it is essential to strengthen PFM and public investment management (e.g., project appraisal and evaluation), introduce program-based budgeting (with implementing a program classification as a first step), and allocate higher weight to capital expenditures. Improved efficiency of public spending could also lead to creating fiscal space for critical social spending and investment to promote inclusive growth. Expenditures for such fiscal space, following careful assessments (e.g., MTEF-driven spending reviews, project appraisals), should focus on the areas to help achieve the government’s objectives of promoting growth and creating jobs. Furthermore, in light of the recent pace of increase in public enterprises, staff also pointed to the need to review the status of public enterprises and revisit the Privatization Road Map. To raise growth, the World Bank suggested the following policy measures in its recent report (“Institutions, Governance and Growth: Identifying Constraints to Growth in Swaziland”): (i) enhancing the business environment (e.g., by improving and standardizing time period and procedures for company registration and ameliorating investor protection); (ii) enhancing public sector efficiency (e.g., by controlling recurrent expenditures and the public wage bill, increasing the efficiency and performance of public enterprises, providing more predictable and transparent regulatory systems, and accelerating the pace of implementation of reforms); and (iii) implementing the land reform (e.g., by assessing the current land management framework and building consensus around a unifying vision of land governance —a first step already identified in the Draft Land Policy of 2009, alleviating coordination problems faced by smallholders and providing better enforcement and dispute resolution mechanisms for commercial investors). Based on the Privatization Policy (approved by cabinet in 2006), the privatization roadmap was formulated in 2007, which, however, has not been fully implemented. Page 20 Promote private sector developments (Appendix 5). Staff suggests the authorities’ to (i) accelerate the improvement of the business climate (e.g., on starting a business and enforcing contracts), (ii) accelerate planned land management reforms (e.g., to finalize and implement the draft Land Policy), and (iii) strengthen anti-corruption efforts, including by mobilizing the anti-money laundering framework. Effective implementation of a set of comprehensive structural measures is called for to break the vicious circle of sluggish growth and low private investment . Private sector-led growth, with these structural reforms, would benefit broad segments of the population, helping to reduce inequality and enhance employment. Enhance financial intermediation with proper regulatory oversight. To facilitate private sector development, the staff also argued for further enhancement of financial intermediation (particularly for the access to credit by small and medium enterprises), while ensuring financial sector stability. To this end, the staff also advised the Financial Services Regulatory Authority (FSRA) to further step up its efforts to strengthen the supervision and regulation for nonbank financial institutions (including the implementations of legal frameworks for the regulations for insurance companies and capital market institutions). Despite the relatively small size of the SACCOs (with the total asset accounting for 1½ percent of the total financial sector assets), strengthening supervision and regulation of the sector is important to ensure confidence in the financial sector. Furthermore, as some of the pension funds and insurance companies are granting loans, close monitoring of their risks associated with such activities (e.g., credit risk) is also warranted. The authorities, recognizing these challenges, generally agreed with the staff’s suggestions. Acknowledging the importance of efficient and effective public spending, they plan to (i) further develop internal audit to eliminate wastage and corruption and (ii) to introduce performance budgeting. To ensure progress in improving business climate, the government has re- launched the Investor Roadmap in 2012. In terms of privatization, the authorities explained that the increase in public enterprises reflects the needs to establish regulatory authorities for some industries, while agreeing to revisit the privatization policy and the rationalization of current public enterprises. On financial intermediation, the authorities acknowledged that there was room to enhance the access to credit, particularly for small and medium enterprises. To this end, they expected their current efforts (to formulate a financial sector strategy, with technical assistance from the IMF and the World Bank) to help enhance financial sector developments and access to credit. The authorities, however, expressed difficulty in undertaking land reforms pending wider consultations, largely due to the complexity of the land management issues. In terms of nonbank financial institutions (specifically SACCOs), the authorities acknowledged the needs to strengthen The FSRA Act came into force in June 2010. It is now operational with the appointment of key staffs and the issuance of a set of core regulations. Most of the Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) have been licensed, and large SACCOs are being assessed, with corrective actions being taken, based on recommendations by the IMF TA. The assessments will eventually cover all SACCOs. The FSRA, however, still faces operational challenges, owing to its weak capacity and resource constraints. Page 21 supervisory oversight, and the newly-established FSRA plans to expand the coverage of its supervisory assessments for all financial sectors, while building capacity for off-site and on-site supervision and implementing regulatory frameworks for all nonbank financial institutions.