Indicators suggest that Lesotho’s banking system overall is adequately capitalized, liquid, and profitable (Table 8), although one bank continues to face difficulties. Three of the sector’s four banks are subsidiaries of large South African banks. They account for over 90 percent of total assets and deposits and have been highly profitable. The fourth bank, the government-owned Lesotho Post Bank (LPB), which was established to primarily serve rural areas and the unbanked, has typically incurred losses. For the system as a whole, growth in credit to the private sector has slowed considerably following a surge in 2012. Although nonperforming loans (NPLs) increased after the surge, they remained relatively low as a share of total loans and have largely been provisioned for. The nonbank financial sector is a mixed picture, with some pension funds and insurance companies holding substantial assets and generating profits, while other smaller scale institutions have struggled. Some aspects of the insurance sector—notably brokerage services—have eluded regulatory oversight, which is a potential source of risk. In addition, maintaining the CBL’s supervisory capacity of banks and nonbanks has been a challenge, particularly with staff turnover. Looking ahead, there could be risks to the banking system stemming from fiscal adjustment. That is, although an empirical analysis of macro-financial linkages suggest only a small The 2012 Land Act allowed land to be used as collateral, which led to a surge in credit. Page 19 correlation between economic growth and credit to the private sector, two important areas for commercial bank lending are personal loans and construction. With government being a major employer and source of construction contracts—especially for projects financed by development partners—the anticipated cutbacks in government spending during the fiscal adjustment could weigh heavily on banks’ loan portfolios. Beyond highlighting potential risks to the banking system, policy discussions focused on steps to address constraints on access to credit. The CBL’s has continued to make progress on implementing the FSDS, while building capacity for supervision and financial stability reporting has been noteworthy. Ongoing efforts to broaden the use of the new credit reference bureau, establish a collateral registry, and solidify the role of commercial courts to settle credit matters should help to reduce the risk premium in lending rates and improve access to credit for creditworthy borrowers. In addition, given the high profits of the foreign-owned banks, exploring ways to generate greater competition—such as inviting other banks to enter the market—to lower lending rates may be warranted. Building supervisory capacity for both banks and nonbanks, particularly with the implementation of Basle II principles, as well as implementation of new regulations for the insurance sector, would help to reduce risks to the financial system. In addition, the CBL’s continued active engagement with South African banking supervisors, who oversee the parent banks of subsidiaries in Lesotho, is critical, given the extensive cross-border networks of these banks. With a view toward shoring up the LPB, a sizeable component of the loan portfolio that is driven by government policy initiatives, which should be transparent and explicitly reflected in the government budget. Also, alternative options for management and operations of the LPB should be explored. Authorities’ views The CBL has been proactive on both financial sector supervision and development, and remains dedicated to the implementation of the FSDS. Further technical assistance for capacity building in both supervision and financial stability reporting would be welcomed. On the financial soundness of the LPB, the bank’s income statement has begun to improve—recently recording its first profit. It was emphasized by banking supervision that the government, as owner of the LPB, would need to take the lead role in operational and managerial reforms. Moreover, while the banking system is generally sound, banking supervision would remain vigilant to monitor macrofinancial risks arising from a major fiscal adjustment—such as a possible deterioration of quality on loans to government contractors. See Annex 4: Development of Macro-Financial Risks and Conditions. The Fund has provided technical assistance I these areas. Page 20