The Lesotho economy performed well in recent years, despite being hit by a severe balance of payments and fiscal shock and periods of adverse weather conditions for agriculture. Since fiscal year 2010/11 (April-March), real GDP growth averaged just over 5 percent a year—driven by large scale investments in the mining and water sectors—while annual inflation fluctuated between 3½ and 6 percent (Tables 1-6 and Figures 1–3). An ample stock of official international reserves, together with a large fiscal adjustment initiated in 2010/11, was critical to this positive outturn, as revenue from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU)—which is also Lesotho’s main source of foreign exchange—fell by more than half (to about 15 percent of GDP a year in 2010/11 and 2011/12). The Lesotho loti’s hard peg to the South African rand remained secure throughout this crisis, but a large share of international reserves was consumed in the process. Maintaining a relatively tight fiscal stance then allowed for a rapid replenishment of international reserves, when SACU revenues recovered in 2012/13. This adjustment effort was supported by the Fund with a three-year arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF), which was successfully concluded in September 2013 (Box 1). Fiscal performance slipped in 2013/14, but official gross international reserves still inched higher (to 4.8 months of imports for the following year). The deterioration of the fiscal performance was largely the result of a dip in SACU revenues (relative to GDP) and a shortfall in domestic tax revenues, while recurrent expenditure rose slightly (to over 45 percent of GDP), led by increased spending on wages. The overall fiscal balance fell into deficit (more than 1 percent of GDP), after recording a significant surplus the year before. The core SACU fiscal deficit, which helps to gauge the underlying fiscal stance, also widened (by over 2½ percentage points of GDP to nearly 8½ percent of GDP). Although capital spending subsided, mainly reflecting poor project implementation, external borrowing remained elevated in 2013/14, which facilitated the increase in reserves. The authorities are investigating the unexpected tax revenue shortfall. The ongoing restructuring of the Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA) may have temporarily disrupted collections, which fell by a percentage point of GDP relative to the previous year and were well below budget expectations. Core SACU revenues is a construct that represents the stable component of SACU revenues. They are defined as the minimum annual amount of revenues received (15 percent of GDP) over the past 20 years. The core SACU fiscal deficit excludes the volatile (non-core) component of SACU revenues, as well as spending on projects financed by external borrowing. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 6 Box 1. IMF Policy Advice in the 2012 Article IV Consultation and Program Outcome Lesotho’s previous Article IV consultation was completed on April 12, 2012, in conjunction with the combined second and third review of its program supported by a three-year arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF). Since then, the authorities achieved progress in the following areas recommended by staff: Macroeconomic stability was enhanced by rebuilding international reserves and strengthening debt sustainability; notably, a substantial fiscal surplus was achieved in 2012/13. Domestic arrears were audited and largely eliminated; a time-bound plan for capacity building was adopted, and the front office revenue receipting system was implemented. Despite fiscal adjustment various social programs were safeguarded (such as, school-feeding, old-age pensions, and the HIV/AIDS program), although there remain questions about their effectiveness at protecting the most vulnerable. The Financial Institutions Act, which strengthened the regulatory and supervisory frameworks for banks and non-banks, was enacted. However, there have also been some setbacks: Under execution of the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP). Public financial management—specifically cash management and the integrated financial management and information system (IFMIS)—remains weak. Private sector development continues to be hampered by a difficult business environment, as manifested by long delays in issuing construction permits, limited access to finance, difficult property registration, obstacles to cross-border trade, and weak enforcement of contracts. The supervisory capacity of the Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL) needs further improvement. The 2012 Article IV consultation provided a basis for the policy agenda for the latter part of the ECF-supported program. The sixth and final review of the program was completed on September 9, 2013. Over the course of the program all but two quantitative performance criteria (PC) were met—early in the program, net international reserves fell slightly short of the target; also, a nonconcessional external loan was contracted. As indicated above, progress on the structural agenda was mixed. Out of 19 structural benchmarks, 7 were implemented as programmed, 10 with delays, and two—the monthly reconciliation of all Treasury accounts and submission to Parliament of the amendments of the Loans and Guarantees Act—remain outstanding. Despite robust economic growth, unemployment remains high and poverty is widespread, particularly in rural areas. Moreover, several indicators point to worrisome conditions, such as the low quality of primary and secondary education and a high incidence of HIV/AIDS, which has had a devastating impact on life expectancy (Table 7). While there has been progress on reducing infant, child, and maternal mortality rates in recent years, they are still high relative to the more distant past. Poor implementation of the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP), which was officially launched in 2012, has weakened the fight against poverty. In Life expectancy in Lesotho remains low at 46 years of age, reflecting a 23 percent incidence of HIV/AIDS. Page 7 addition, low capacity has impaired planning and implementation of government investment projects intended to support more inclusive growth. Meanwhile, the public sector wage bill (relative to GDP) is the highest in sub-Saharan Africa, partly due to political pressures to expand employment. Given that Lesotho had episodes of difficult political transition prior to 2012, the NSDP places a high priority on strengthening the democratic process. In this context the peaceful transfer of power to a coalition government following the elections in May 2012 was an important milestone. Moreover, the government has made progress in fighting corruption and strengthening governance, as evidenced by Lesotho’s moving up to the 55 th place out of 177 countries in the Corruption Perception Index by Transparency International. To further reduce corruption the government has emphasized compliance with public service regulations that require senior officials to declare their assets. In addition, to improve accountability, the government has been introducing performance contracts for cabinet ministers. However, with only a slim (one-seat) majority in the National Assembly, there is some fragility in the coalition government, which adds to the challenge of policy making. In late March 2014, the National Assembly was adjourned indefinitely following the submission by the opposition of a no- confidence motion against the Prime Minister and coalition government. L s h S w z il d N B s w S h A f Z w C V d L G h z q A Z N S ã T é & P í E C s B un d w B C ô d I v K y T z S y h ll s E h S T s B k F s G T h G C oo G B ss C A f R d s li S rr L G C D R f C h d N U d C R li f R w d E q G Source: Country authorities, IMF staff calculations Average Government Wage Bill of Sub-Saharan African Countries, 2009-14 (Percent of GDP ) Page 8