The underlying strength of the Lesotho economy is expected to support robust growth over the medium term. After dipping to 4 percent in 2014/15, real GDP growth is projected to pick up to 5–5½ percent a year over the medium term, driven by projected strong expansions in construction, mining, and private sector services. In particular, construction is expected to receive a major boost from large infrastructure projects—most notably, the second phase of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP-2) and a large mining project is expected to begin production. At the same time, inflation is projected to remain moderate, in line with that of South Africa. However, over the medium term, the economy is likely to become more vulnerable to risks. In particular, based on the recently approved government budget for 2014/15 and the authorities’ fiscal projections, persistent government deficits would consume existing buffers and contribute to a rundown in official international reserves. Tax revenues are projected to grow only slightly over the medium term, while government employee compensation is projected to remain at about 20 percent of GDP. In addition, SACU revenues are projected to steadily decline during this period, contributing to an increasing overall fiscal deficit. With net external financing projected to hold steady at 3–3½ percent of GDP a year, the government would eventually start drawing down on its deposits in the CBL. Correspondingly, official international reserves are projected to decline to about 4 months of the following year’s imports over the medium term. Staff’s risk assessment identified the possibility of a sudden and permanent drop in SACU revenues as a serious potential threat to the Lesotho economy (Table 8). While the likelihood of a collapse in SACU revenues is considered to be low-to-medium in the near term, recent experience has shown that the impact can be severe, especially if a drop in revenues is prolonged or permanent. Staff also explored the impact of the possible expiration of Lesotho’s trade preferences under the United States’ African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and Investment in LHWP-2 is expected to total USD 1½–2 billion (or roughly 75–100 percent of today’s GDP) over several years. Following a roughly USD 250 million investment, the expansion of the Liqhobong diamond mine is expected to begin production within the upcoming year. These activities are conservatively projected to raise GDP growth about 1 percentage point above Lesotho’s long-term average growth trend of 4½ percent a year over the latter half of this decade. Page 9 spillover effects from a possible prolonged growth slowdown in South Africa and other emerging markets.