Over the past several years, Lesotho achieved solid economic growth with only moderate inflation; however, this growth lacked inclusiveness and poverty has remained widespread (Figure 1 and Tables 1–5). Real GDP growth averaged about 4½ percent a year from 2010 to 2014, led by the mining and construction sectors. Since 2012, annual inflation has been less than 6 percent, anchored by the loti’s parity with the South African rand under the Common Monetary Area (CMA). Despite this performance, unemployment rates have remained high, especially among the youth, and the incidence of poverty (57 percent of the total population) is virtually unchanged from a decade ago (Table 6). Moreover, most health, education, and social indicators have shown little or no improvement, even with considerable government spending in these areas (about 30 percent of GDP in recent years), suggesting some severe shortcomings in the delivery of public services. To finance large government expenditures, Lesotho relies heavily on revenues from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), but these revenues are highly volatile. Even after deep spending cuts during the fiscal crisis in 2010/11 and 2011/12—when SACU revenues plummeted to about 15 percent of GDP and the overall fiscal deficit jumped to more than 10 percent of GDP—government expenditures have totaled about 60 percent of GDP or more every year. In addition, spending has become increasingly slanted toward recurrent expenditures, with the government wage bill increasing to 21½ percent of GDP in 2014/15—the highest in sub-Saharan Africa. A rebound in SACU revenues in 2012/13–2014/15 (to an average of 29 percent of GDP a year), together with consistently strong domestic tax and non-tax collections, enabled the government to achieve a more balanced overall fiscal stance in recent years, including a small surplus in 2014/15. This fiscal stance supported the accumulation of government deposits at the Based on data from 2011. The authorities plan to conduct a new household survey in 2016. Fiscal year is April–March. Page 10 Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL) and the rebuilding of official international reserves (to 6.3 months of imports of goods and services as of end-2014/15). Government’s capital spending, however, has fallen in recent years, mainly because of a drop-off in grants from development partners (by several percentage points of GDP) and, most recently, an under execution of the capital budget. Spillovers from slower growth in neighboring South Africa have begun to weigh on the Lesotho economy. Diminished employment opportunities for migrant workers, particularly in the mining sector, have reduced remittances and consumers’ purchasing power at home. Also, with a lag, SACU revenues depend on South Africa’s collection of import duties, which fell considerably short of expectations in 2014/15. South Africa is also an important source of private sector investment in Lesotho, which also appears to have fallen. However, beyond water transfers, Lesotho’s principal export markets (diamonds, textiles) lie outside the sub-region and are not strongly affected by economic developments in South Africa. Finally, Lesotho’s financial system has close linkages with South Africa and under the CMA, South Africa’s monetary and exchange rate policies have a direct impact on Lesotho. Most years, several of Lesotho’s financial institutions have accumulated assets in South Africa leading to a net outflow of financial resources. Recent political and security developments have weakened implementation of economic policies and the investment climate. Lesotho’s first coalition government, which came into power in 2012, collapsed in 2014 amidst much turmoil, including the suspension of parliament and conflict among the security services. Despite early elections in February 2015 and a smooth transition to a new coalition government, tensions once again escalated a few months later, particularly within the army. In addition, opposition party leaders fled the country. Implementation of Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan 2012/13-2016/17 (NSDP) has stagnated in this environment, while disruptions in parliamentary procedures have delayed a number of legislative proposals. Business investment has slowed and, most recently, some development partners have expressed concerns that political and security developments could dampen their economic support for Lesotho. Lesotho’s relations with the Fund In September 2013, Lesotho successfully completed a three-year program supported by the Fund’s Extended Credit Facility (ECF); the previous Article IV consultation was concluded on June 4, 2014 (Box 1). Under the ECF, Lesotho achieved fiscal consolidation and rebuilt fiscal buffers and international reserves. The authorities also elaborated the Financial Sector Development Strategy (FSDS), which was adopted in early 2014. Although implementation of the FSDS has progressed, in other areas, the structural agenda has largely stalled. Bills for public debt and aid management, public sector audit, anti-money laundering, and a new fiscal regime for the The conclusion of Lesotho’s compact with the U.S. Government’s Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) was an important factor in the drop-off in grants and lower capital expenditures. The Southern African Development Community (SADC) established a Commission of Inquiry to investigate these security issues. The Commission’s report has yet to be made public. Page 11 mining sector are still awaiting consideration by parliament. Implementation of the public financial management (PFM) action plan has also been limited, although the recent establishment of a ministerial-level steering committee could help PFM reform regain momentum. Box 1. Implementation of Fund Advice Key Recommendations Implementation Status Create fiscal space to scale up public investment under NSDP, including by containing recurrent expenditures—in particular, the government wage bill. Implementation of the NSDP has stalled, while the wage bill has continued to grow (to 23 percent of GDP in 2015/16 budget). The capital budget continues to be under executed. Maintain international reserves at an adequate level (5 months of the following year’s imports). Fiscal surplus in 2014/15 enabled an accumulation of reserves (to over 6 months of imports). Over the medium term, move toward a rules-based approach to fiscal policy to reduce vulnerability to volatile SACU revenue. The authorities continue to discuss a rules-based approach to fiscal policy. Progress is needed on public financial management (PFM) reform, especially medium-term budgeting. Step up efforts to strengthen public financial management framework and improve planning, appraisal, and implementation of public investment projects. Strengthen banking supervision and begin implementation of Financial Sector Development Strategy. PFM steering committee was recently elevated to the ministerial level and a new PFM reform coordinator was put in place. However, only limited progress has been achieved in strengthening the cash management unit and reconciling government’s bank accounts. Project preparation and execution is still weak and undermines implementation of capital expenditure. The CBL is building supervisory capacity and continues to strengthen coordination with South Africa’s banking supervision. Credit information bureau is operational, a collateral registry is being developed, and insurance regulations have been prepared.