Sector Development A sustained structural reform effort will be needed to support the growth strategy. Staff recommended stepping up structural reforms promoting international competitiveness and private sector development, in collaboration with the World Bank, in the context of the Second Growth and Competitiveness Development Policy Grant (Box 3). This work should aim at addressing the shortcomings of the business environment by drafting the Business Registration Bill and accompanying regulations; regulations for the Industrial Licensing Bill; streamlining the construction permit system within the Maseru City Council; modernizing the Insolvency Proclamation to facilitate debt enforcement collective creditor recovery; and further strengthening anti-corruption efforts. The FSDS is a comprehensive plan that covers financial inclusion and literacy, creditors’ rights, the strengthening of institutions, financial innovations and payments systems, resource mobilization, as well as strategies to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory frameworks for banking, insurance, and pensions. The FSDS benefitted from extensive World Bank and Fund TA. Page 19 Box 3. External Stability Assessment: Exchange Rate and Competitiveness External sustainability - undervalued by about 5 percent. Equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER) - undervalued by about 16 percent. Macroeconomic balance - the real exchange rate is in line with equilibrium. Staff’s exchange rate assessment exercise suggests that the Lesotho loti is broadly in line with medium term fundamentals (Appendix 2). The approaches used yielded the following results: In view of data weaknesses, staff finds the macroeconomic balance approach to be the most reliable. Results from the ERER approach are skewed towards undervaluation by Lesotho’s high levels of government consumption (due in part to large SACU revenue transfers) and remittance inflows. Recent surveys indicate that Lesotho has a poor environment for private sector growth and place it among the world’s less competitive countries. The World Bank’s 2014 Doing Business Report ranks Lesotho 136th (out of 185), identifying major problems in all important stages of business—obtaining construction permits, access to land and electricity, registering property, access to credit, trading across borders, and enforcing contracts. The 2013-14 Global Competitiveness Index (WEF) places Lesotho in 123 rd place (out of 148), citing among the greatest problems access to finance, inadequate infrastructure, inefficient government bureaucracy. Areas where Lesotho has made progress in recent years include streamlining procedures for property registration and business licenses. For example, the number of days to start a business was reduced to 29 days (from 73 days). Ongoing initiatives to improve the business climate include implementing the Land Act, Land Administration Act, and the Companies Act. These acts will facilitate land access, including through subleases, and reduce the time needed to obtain a construction permit (currently 330 days). The authorities are also seeking to simplify cross-border trade. The authorities are setting up a credit reference bureau and instituting the national ID system, which are critical for increasing access to financing. Authorities’ views The authorities acknowledged impediments to doing business, such as relatively high costs, border controls, a narrow production base, and the dominant role of the government in the economy. Moreover, structural issues, including cumbersome regulation and legislation have made Lesotho less attractive for domestic and foreign investment, hindering Ease of Doing Business Rank Starting a Business Dealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity Registering PropertyGetting Credit Protecting Investors Paying TaxesTrading Across Borders Enforcing Contracts Resolving Insolvency World Bank's Doing Business Rankings 2014 Lesotho Swaziland Cabo Verde Namibia Seychelles Botswana South Africa Mauritius Page 20 the transfer of knowledge and skills. The implementation of the NSDP, according to the authorities, would help closing infrastructure gaps and improving labor skills, potentially strengthening Lesotho’s international competitiveness and expanding economy’s capacity. The authorities plan to continue collaborating with the World Bank on improving business environment.