Climate change and natural disasters are macro critical for Kiribati. Kiribati’s land area consists almost entirely of low elevation coral atolls and with limited fresh water supply, making it vulnerable to sea level rise. Although the probability of natural disaster occurrences in Kiribati is less than 10 percent, half the regional average of around 20 percent, the cost tends to be large relative to the size of the economy: the 2015 Budget included one-off expenditures—mainly for Cyclone Pam related damages—equivalent to around 4 percent of GDP. Staff’s analysis of potential growth suggests that growth is likely to be 0.1 percent lower than the historical average of 1.8 percent over the long run due to climate change (Box 3). Staff support the authorities’ efforts to improve Kiribati’s climate change resiliency, including through more explicit recognition of adaption costs. The authorities’ adaption approach is embedded in the Kiribati Joint Implementation Plan for Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management 2014–23 (KJIP) that seeks to integrate climate change and disaster risk sensitivities and impacts across sectors, identify measures to reduce vulnerabilities and coordinate priorities for action. The 2016-19 Kiribati Development Plan (KDP) also identifies climate change as one of the key priority areas, in line with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In support of this approach, staff recommend that the budget include an explicit provision for climate change adaption costs and that outturns be monitored. The allocation would cover coastal protection, damage repairing, and soil desalinization, and should amount to around 2 percent of GDP annually over the medium term. Tracking of spending on climate change adaptation would help ensure adequate provision of resources, and would help in seeking donor funding for climate change projects. Additional room within the budget envelope is also needed to accommodate maintenance costs of the newly constructed infrastructure (about 0.5 percent of GDP). The cash reserve buffer as outlined above can enhance Kiribati’s ex-ante readiness to respond to natural disasters, backstopped by the RERF as a last-resort measure. Authorities’ Views The authorities were open to identifying climate change adaption cost in the budget, noting that current adaption projects, largely financed by development partners, were probably already at or above 2 percent of GDP. They also agreed that budget plans need to consider the infrastructure maintenance cost. They noted the challenges of catalyzing external climate change financing sources, including capacity constraints to meeting the access requirements. Page 17 Box 3. Kiribati: The Growth Impact of Climate Change Given Kiribati’s susceptibility to climate change and natural disasters, staff’s analysis of the baseline should explicitly reflect their long run impact. To the extent that the historical average growth already captures the average impact of periodical natural disasters , the key question is how to quantify the growth impact of climate change. AsDB (2013) estimated that climate change is likely to have significant impact on agriculture, fisheries, tourism, environment protection and health, costing the Pacific 0.5– 2.5 percent of GDP by 2050. Applying these sectoral impact on the level of GDP to Kiribati’s long run growth path, staff estimate that the average growth rate is likely to be 0.1 percent lower than the historical average of 1.8 percent, with the adverse impact of climate change on agriculture, fishing and tourism industries offsetting stronger growth in the service sector. While the largest component of GDP is the government sector, agriculture and fishing has the second largest share of economic activity. Due to higher incidences of climate related disasters, the output from the primary sector is declining and its share in total GDP has declined from one third in the 1990s to around 25 percent. An alarming issue is seawater intrusion from storm surges and high tides. This increases the saline content in soil (also a source of potable water for the people of Kiribati). The mining and quarrying industry is also affected by this. As arable and resource rich land depletes by rising sea waters, other sources of income generating activites are sought putting more strain on other sectors of the economy. Performance of other industries that are related to agriculture and fishing, and tourism, such as real estate, and wholesale and retail trade can be negatively affected. However, stronger aggregate demand places upward pressure on output thereby negating some, if not all of the unwanted spillovers. Cabezon et al (IMF WP/12/125) showed that during 1980-2014, trend growth was 0.7 percentage point lower than it would have been without natural disasters in the Pacific region. The Economics of Climate Change in the Pacific, AsDB 2013.