Main policy challenges in the fiscal area include the implementation of the planned reforms to improve fiscal outcomes and fiscal frameworks. Ensuring the sustainability of the RERF needs to remain among the main objectives. The government continued to make improvements into its public financial management framework. It has strengthened the process for debt and guarantees approval and substantially reduced the exposure to SOE guarantees. For 2014, the government incorporated into the budget the subsidies called community service obligations (CSOs) in the amount of 1.7 percent of GDP to account more transparently for SOE-related budget costs. Next year, with the planned national elections, spending restraint will become even more important. The VAT has been introduced on April 1 as planned. The initial implementation phase is expected to involve some challenges. The required documentation for submitting VAT returns may yield additional revenue benefits through strengthening compliance. In this regard, the authorities are encouraged to continue to make the relevant technological investment and training to allow for an easing into this transitionary phase. Fiscal adjustment should continue with the excess revenues from fishing license fees saved in the medium-term while maintaining essential expenditures and investments in infrastructure, health, and education at sufficient levels. The report considers two main scenarios given the uncertainty and volatility of fishing licenses (see Box 2 for details). Following the framework of the 2013 Article IV report the baseline (or lower fishing license fees) scenario assumes a conservative path for fishing license fees, which would return to the levels of about 22 percent of GDP for 2014. This scenario also corresponds with the authorities’ budget assumptions and incorporates their current commitment to reforms, with estimated fiscal consolidation of more than 10 percent of GDP by 2019 and additional adjustment in the longer term. Despite significant consolidation effort, the RERF per capita balance continues to decline. Stabilization of the RERF in this case would require a challenging further fiscal adjustment. The stabilization of the RERF per capita value around 2023 would require narrowing the current fiscal balance to about 3½ percent of GDP. In addition stronger fiscal adjustment would lead to lower GDP growth compared to the baseline scenario. The higher fishing license fees scenario assumes that these fees will remain high at close to 2012–13 levels. This outcome, if it materializes, would largely eliminate the need for additional fiscal consolidation to stabilize the RERF above the level assumed in the baseline. However, it would be important to save these windfall license fees to strengthen RERF balances, rather than to finance additional spending. Stronger RERF balances would sustain a higher long-term current fiscal deficit of about 4½ percent of GDP in the longer run. Further improving budgeting mechanisms around generation and use of sustainable fishing license fees are important . License fees have been volatile and are currently difficult to project with confidence. To strengthen budget planning and cash management, improvements in the Page 8 timely exchange of information about the performance of the various components of fishing license revenues between key ministries and the Ministry of Finance would be important. Restructuring the copra subsidy scheme and improving operational efficiency at the Public Utilities Board (PUB) remain outstanding issues to reduce fiscal costs. The government plans to make further steps towards enhancing revenue collections by introducing more modern meter equipment and improving operations of the PUB with the assistance of the World Bank. Box 2. Kiribati: Ensuring Fiscal Sustainability Real RERF per capita (In 2006 A$, RHS) Current fiscal balance (In percent of GDP, LHS) The baseline scenario assumes conservative fishing license Baseline Scenario: Current Deficit and RERF Balance (In percent of GDP) (In 2006 Australian dollars)  revenues and incorporates the authorities’ current commitments to reform. It takes into account the recent introduction of value added and excise taxes, and assumes that current expenditures will grow more slowly than nominal GDP in the medium and longer term. This scenario also incorporates donor budget support of A$25 million under the reform program in 2014–16. Under this scenario, the current fiscal deficit will be reduced from 22 ⅔ percent of GDP in 2014 to 11.8 percent of GDP in 2019 and stabilize at this level in the longer run. The RERF drawdown would be reduced from 14½ percent of GDP to 11.8 percent of GDP correspondingly. Despite the significant narrowing of the current fiscal deficit by more than 10 percent of GDP, the RERF per capita value does not stabilize and declines by more than 40 percent by 2030 compared to the projected 2014 level. Baseline RERF Stabilizing Scenario: Current Deficit and RERF Balance  The baseline stabilizing RERF per capita value scenario (In percent of GDP) (In 2006 Australian dollars) incorporates additional fiscal measures to stabilize the RERF per capita values by 2023–24 at about A$3,900 in constant terms. Under this scenario, the current fiscal deficit has to narrow significantly to about 3.8 percent of GDP on average in 2023–30. Such stabilization will be difficult to achieve. It requires narrowing the current fiscal deficit by more than 8 percent of GDP in the long run.  capita value scenario, assumes higher fishing license fees revenues and also some fiscal measures to stabilize RERF per capita values by 2023–24, at about A$4,500 in constant terms. Owing to the high fishing license revenue, the required fiscal consolidation scale to stabilize the RERF balance is smaller than the baseline scenario, with the current fiscal deficit narrowing to 4.2 percent of GDP in the long run.  Under all of the above scenarios, Kiribati is projected to remain at high risk of external debt distress . This reflects a projected from grant to debt financing for large infrastructure needs (Supplement I). High Fishing License Fees and RERF Stabilizing Scenario: Current Deficit and RERF Balance (In pecent of GDP) (In 2006 Australian dollars) The high fishing license fees and stabilizing RERF per Current fiscal balance (In percent of GDP, LHS) Real RERF per capita (In 2006 A$, RHS) Current fiscal balance (In percent of GDP, LHS) Real RERF per capita (In 2006 A$, RHS) The government’s financing plans include mainly project and budget support grant financing in the near term. Over the medium-term the government is also expected to access the concessional financing on IDA like terms (for details see Box 1 of the DSA Annex). The policy of avoiding non-concessional debt financing of the recurrent budget should continue. Page 9 Box 3. Linkages Between the Government Sector and Growth and Fiscal Multipliers in Kiribati Due to small size and diseconomies of scale in Kiribati, the government sector plays a significant role for growth and employment prospects. In 2013, total government current spending accounted close to 60 percent of GDP, and government sector for more than 28 percent of GDP. Government employees represented 21.5 percent of total employment and 42 percent of formal employment. Therefore, evaluating the impact of fiscal policies on growth and the overall economy is critical for the design of macroeconomic policies. This box briefly presents a practical framework that incorporates the two-way linkages between government spending and real GDP growth and allows estimating the impact of fiscal policy on the economy, including through evaluating fiscal multipliers. In this framework, GDP on the production side is conceptually divided into government GDP and private GDP. The government GDP mainly consists of wages of public employees; the private sector follows an augmented Cobb-Douglas production function. The impact of government sector on GDP is evaluated through the influence of government taxation and spending which critically depends on consumption, saving and investment decisions by the government, domestic residents, and foreigners, and on their shares of spending on domestic versus imported goods. The parameters are calibrated, with estimation procedures taking into data limitations. We simulated different scenarios, including nominal wage shock and public expenditure shock scenarios. Then we calculated the corresponding fiscal multipliers under each scenario. The fiscal multipliers are defined as the ratio of a change in GDP output ( ∆ Y ) to a discretionary change in government spending ( ∆ G ). Here GDP is in real terms, so the multiplier means the effect of a $1 increase in spending on the real GDP level. Regarding the time frame, we focus on the impact multipliers, which are defined as ∆ Y(t)/ ∆ G(t), where t denotes the year fiscal multipliers are examined. The simulation results show that different spending shocks have different multipliers. As the shares of imported goods and services in household consumption and government expenditure are high in Kiribati, the stimulus effects of expansionary fiscal policy on domestic GDP are limited, and fiscal multipliers are relatively lower compared with economies with more developed domestic industries. Under a positive nominal public wage shock, the impact multiplier is 0.44, while the multiplier under a positive public expenditure is 0.47 , which implies that expansionary fiscal policy’s stimulus effect on GDP growth is limited in Kiribati. Combining the above calculated fiscal multipliers with budgeted current and development expenditure data, this framework also allows us to better project GDP growths, which is 3.0 in 2014 and 2.7 in 2015, as shown in the SEI table. For more details, please see the book chapter: “Growth and Fiscal Multipliers in Small States – the Case of Pacific Island Countries”, forthcoming. It is worth noting that development expenditure’s impact multiplier is even lower (our estimate is 0.05–0.1, as most development expenditures are spent on imported goods and services in Kiribati). However, if development expenditure can increase productivity, the long-term fiscal multiplier would be higher. Impact Multipliers in Kiribati Negative Expenditure Spending Shock Positive Nominal Wage Negative Nominal Wage Positive Expenditure Spending Shock Spending Shock Spending Shock Page 10 Box 4. Regional Arrangement for Fishing License Fees Fishing license fees are a major source of revenue for several microstates in the Pacific (in particular Kiribati, Micronesia, Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu). Since 2011, fishing license revenue has increased significantly, at an average rate above 30 percent during 2011–13. A large share of this increment is attributed to the implementation of minimum fishing license fees under the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA). The PNA is a regional agreement among member countries’ to coordinate the management of marine resources. The Agreement was initially established in 1982 among eight Pacific island countries , although it took several years until it reached its current form. This agreement sought to strengthen the bargaining power of license-issuing countries and regional control to address illegal fishing. Selected Members of the Nauru Agreement:Fishing License Fees Revenues (Year-on-year percent change) (In percent of revenue excl. grants) Parties of Nauru Agreement: Vessel Fishing Day Price (In U.S. dollars) b K v c h b K v c h Note: Includes countries heavily dependent on fishing license fees. Sources: IMF, Asian-Pacific Small States Monitor, April, 2014. Price before PNA minimun price PNA minimun price Sources: PNA and Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency. In 2007, PNA members introduced a new mechanism, the vessel day scheme (VDS), to increase the PICs’ bargaining power and ensure sustainability of its marine resources. Instead of only setting a limit on the number of vessels in the region as was done previously, the new scheme also limited the total number of fishing days (limits both number of days and number vessels). Under the VDS, Nauru Agreement members jointly consented to allocate a fixed number of transferable fishing days for their combined Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs), apportioned to members according to the individual sizes of their EEZs and historical catch. The fishing companies pay a flat fee per vessel per day with adjustment for the size of the vessel. The PNA members further strengthened the VDS in 2011 by introducing a minimum fee for fishing per vessel day. The minimum fee was set at US$5,000 effective in 2012 and raised to US$6,000 effective January 2014. In addition, the current practice includes revisions of total fishing days for the combined EEZs of the parties and annual revisions of the VDS minimum prices. Sources: IMF, Asia & Pacific Small States Monitor April 2014; and PNA and Pacific Island Forum Fisheries Agency. The members of the Nauru Agreement are: Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Tuvalu. Large vessels pay a price of 1.5 times the standard fee. Page 11