RESILIENCE TO SHOCKS The key policy challenge is to manage the intergenerational benefits of Kiribati’s large sovereign wealth fund against a background of uncertainty about future fishing license fees and spending pressures to address important infrastructure and social needs and prepare for the adverse consequences of climate change. Spending growth should be reduced from historic levels, public investments largely grant-financed, and structural fiscal reforms accelerated. The medium-term fiscal outlook appears more favorable in the context of higher expectations for fishing license fees, but downside risks are significant. The baseline for the main fiscal revenue—fishing license fees—has been revised upwards. The large increase in this source of revenue in the past years can be attributed to the recent changes adopted under the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA): effective in 2012, the PNA introduced a US$5,000 minimum fee for fishing per vessel day, subsequently increased to US$6,000 in 2014 and to US$8,000 in 2015. If member countries manage to enforce the agreement, this could lead to a lasting increase in revenues. Staff considers such enforcement as the baseline scenario, and annual fishing license fees are accordingly projected to be around 40 percent of GDP on average over 2015–20, up from an average of about 24 percent of GDP over the past decades, but below outturns averaging more than 50 percent of GDP in 2013–14. Because these revenues are inherently uncertain (fishing stock and prices are volatile, including the risk of overfishing), lower fishing license fees represent a plausible and high impact downside risk. Staff accordingly discussed fiscal policy approaches that would be sustainable in the event that license fees revert to the past historical average (Box 3). In addition, spending pressures are increasing. First, additional infrastructure and other spending will be needed to mitigate the effects of climate change, such as drought, loss of potable ground water, and rising sea levels. Climate change related costs are highly uncertain but are assumed to be at around 3½ percent of GDP per annum (Box 2). Second, room needs to be made See ‘“Enhancing Macroeconomic Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the Small States of the Pacific”, Ezequiel Cabezon, Leni Hunter, Patrizia Tumbarello, Kazuaki Washimi and Yiqun Wu, WP/15/125”, Chapter 2, for a more thorough discussion on revenue volatility and policy options for managing it in small developing states. Page 13 within the budget envelope to accommodate future maintenance costs of the newly constructed infrastructure, which are expected to be only partly covered by user charges. Taken together, these pressures could require additional budgetary expenditures amounting to around 4 percent of GDP per annum (largely for capital maintenance and recurrent climate-change-related costs), and the continuation of high donors’ support for capital spending. Box 2. The Key Challenge of Adapting to Climate Change Climate change poses a major threat to Kiribati and could lead to significant fiscal pressures. The rise in the sea levels has both a structural and a cyclical component. The structural component is related to climate change and while still moderate, it is on track to become much more significant as Kiribati’s average height above sea level is only around 2 meters and climate model simulations estimate that sea level could increase by 24 cm by 2050 and 61 cm by 2100 compared to the 1985–2005 average This trend is compounded by the medium term cyclical impact of predominance of El Niño, putting upward pressure on sea levels and causing larger and more frequent high tide levels (the current cycle could continue for another 10–20 years). The main impact of climate change will be through rising sea levels, but also warmer average temperatures and more frequent and severe storms. This would lead to permanent erosion of the shoreline and loss of land, frequent inundation, lower biodiversity, lower agricultural production, and water resource and food security issues. Waves and unprecedented flooding already caused severe and costly destruction earlier this year. Higher temperatures and wider flooded areas could increase the spread of vector borne diseases such as dengue fever. While the fiscal costs are uncertain, they are likely to be substantial. Coastal protection costs alone are estimated be in the region of 1 percent of GDP per annum. These estimates can be seen as a floor: they exclude any transition costs, as well as the potential cost of inefficiencies in adaptation responses. Additional expenditures will be needed to adapt to climate variability, such as repairing damages arising from more frequent extreme weather events, or those associated with adjustments in response to the salinization of agricultural land. The annual adaptation costs could be in the range of ½ to 1½ percent of GDP (medium emissions scenario) and as high as 2½ percent of GDP in the worst case scenario. Overall, climate change related costs could reach 3½ percent per year, and possibly more in worst case scenarios. Given Kiribati’s fiscal constraints, this would require more donor funding towards these needs, including from the new Green Climate Fund. High emission scenario. See “Climate Variability, Extremes and Change in the Western Tropical Pacific: New Science and Updated Country Reports 2014.” Nicholls and Tol, 2006, “Impacts and Responses to Sea-Level Rise: A Global Analysis of the SRSS Scenarios over the Twenty-first Century,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , Vol. 363, pp. 1073–1095. “The Economics of Climate Change in the Pacific,” Asian Development Bank, 2013 and “Enhancing Macroeconomic Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the Small States of the Pacific,” Ezequiel Cabezon, Leni Hunter, Patrizia Tumbarello, Kazuaki Washimi and Yiqun Wu. Page 14 Against this backdrop, continued fiscal prudence is required to preserve fiscal sustainability and maintain resilience to shocks. Given that the (RERF) is the main mechanism to save wealth for future generations and a buffer against shocks, staff policy advice focused on strengthening its role as an anchor for fiscal sustainability: Preserving wealth. Returns on RERF investments are an important source of income for Kiribati. For intergenerational equity, they should be distributed proportionally to the growing population, ensuring constant real per capita budget drawdowns over time. From this perspective, the sustainable level of drawdown is estimated at about 3–4 percent of GDP (the wide range reflects uncertainty surrounding projected investment returns and population growth). Given the downside risks to fishing license fees, staff recommended that expenditure plans be framed around a more conservative fiscal stance, aiming at a RERF drawdown averaging about ½ percent of GDP over 2016-2020. This would help accumulate savings when fish license fees remain strong, while limiting the RERF drawdown in the event that they would disappoint. Expenditure rule. The RERF drawdown of ½ percent of GDP annually would be consistent with recurrent expenditure growth of 1.5 percent per annum over the next 5 years, assuming fishing licenses fees remain robust. This would result in a gradual reduction in real per capita spending, but leave sufficient room to cover pressing expenditure needs (see below). If license fees remain strong, real per capita RERF balances would rise, implicitly saving for future generations part of the fishing revenues and providing a buffer against higher climate-change-related costs. With greater confidence about the durability of fishing license fees, the sustainable rate of spending could be revisited, perhaps leading to faster spending growth beyond the 5-years horizon. With lower fishing revenues—closer to the historical average—RERF per capita balances would initially fall, but later stabilize, guaranteeing that the proposed expenditure path is sustainable, although with smaller buffers (Box 3). This approach to fiscal sustainability would also require that capital spending be primarily grant-financed. Stabilization. For the RERF to perform its dual role, the policy of budget transfers and withdrawals should be more transparent, systematic and symmetric around the proposed expenditure path. Staff recommended saving a substantial part of the revenues in the RERF when license fees are above average to allow for a sustainable drawdown when they fall below the average. Given more volatile weather patterns, staff also recommended maintaining a larger cash buffer—equivalent to around two months of budget expenditures (around AUD20 million)—in light of volatility of revenue and in case of emergency needs. A part of the cash balance from the 2014 budget surplus could be used for this purpose, with the rest transferred to the RERF. To date, only AUD 10 million out of the record 2014 fiscal surplus of around AUD 50 million was transferred to the RERF. Last year, the authorities purchased 20 square kilometers of land in Fiji in 2014, for around AUD 9 million drawn down from the RERF, so the net savings in the RERF was very small. The aim of the purchase was to improve food security through agriculture and fish farming projects and eventually for potential resettlement if rising sea levels threaten to submerge parts of Kiribati. Page 15 Box 3. Managing Volatility of Fishing License Fees and Ensuring Fiscal Sustainability The RERF has been managed well relative to peers, but recent developments have jeopardized its sustainability. The RERF was capitalized with revenues from phosphates until reserves were exhausted in 1979 and, in the early decades, with fiscal surpluses. But the sharp increase in current expenditures—from an average of 48 percent of GDP in 1991–2000 to 58 percent in 2010– 14—resulted in large deficits financed by drawdowns from the RERF, which stopped only when fishing revenue increased in 2013 (even though regular spending has largely been contained since 2011, regularizing SOE subsidies and clearing overdrafts kept the deficit high). The global financial crisis also caused significant capital losses. As a consequence, the current per capita value of the RERF is down to around AUD 5,400 (in 2006 dollars) from around AUD 9,300 in 2000. Staff simulations indicate than targeting an annual expenditure growth of 1½ percent in the medium term would restore sustainability. Staff analyzes two scenarios for revenues from fishing license fees: (i) a baseline where they stay high (AUD 100 Million on average over 2015–35); (ii) a decrease to an average of AUD 63 million, consistent with the historical average of around 24 percent of GDP since 1991: The historical pace of spending (‘historical path’—nominal expenditure growth of 5.5 percent per annum) would be unsustainable, leading to a depletion of the RERF in about 20 years, even in the higher fishing revenue scenario. Expenditure growth of 1½ percent per year would ensure sustainability in both scenarios. Under the lower revenue scenario, it would stabilize the RERF around AUD 4,000 in real per capita terms by 2035. In the higher revenue scenario, this path would increase RERF real per capita balances to around AUD 6,000, effectively saving part of the fishing revenue windfall, and therefore further improving intergenerational equity. This would allow for higher sustainable transfers to the budget, helping stabilize real per capita expenditures in the long term. Fishing revenues are likely to remain volatile, and long-term policy commitments should be guided by indicators that are not affected by such volatility. While the proposed expenditure path is a viable anchor, complementary indicators could include the recurrent non-fish balance (i.e. the current fiscal balance excluding fishing revenues). The proposed expenditure path would be consistent with maintaining the recurrent non-fish deficit at below 35 percent of GDP. Improved management of the RERF is critical for the success of the adjustment. The disappointing financial performance of the RERF in the past several years highlighted that investment policy and strategic asset allocation were not aligned with the long term objectives and Tuvalu Kiribati Palau Marshall Islands Micronesia Timor-Leste Tonga Cross-Country Comparison: Sovereign Wealth Fund Values Sources: Authorities data and IMF staff calculations Historical path -Higher fishing Historical path -Lower Fishing Active policies -Lower Fishing Active policies -Higher Fishing Real Per-capita RERF Balance -Simulations (In Australian dollars, 2006 prices)Source: IMF Staff estimates. Page 16 nature of the fund. With ongoing assistance from the World Bank, the Cabinet of Ministers recently approved reforms that are in the process of being implemented. The current phase is focusing on the appointment of new asset manager(s), which is advancing well. In the context of reforming the fund investment mandate, staff also discussed the idea of better articulating the saving and stabilization roles of the RERF and making these objectives explicit in formulating the optimal investment strategy of the fund. The recommended fiscal path has sufficient room to accommodate new spending needs, but it will require the continuation of efforts on several fronts. The 2015 budget includes one-off expenditures—mainly for weather-related damages—equivalent to around 4 percent of GDP. Staff projections assume that costs of a similar magnitude (covering both climate- change-related spending and the maintenance of new capital assets) will become permanent. There is sufficient room for this in the overall budget envelope provided that other recurrent spending remains contained. This requires the continuation of the current wage policy (allowing for a ‘wage drift’ from the automatic promotion process, but no additional wage increases) and maintaining subsidies to SOEs at the current nominal level (by exploiting efficiency gains from the restructuring of the energy sector and the copra sector, for which Technical Assistance is underway). To avoid expenditure surprises and enhance fiscal discipline budget, contingencies for unexpected expenditures should be provided within the envelope consistent with the recommended path. The authorities’ prudent debt management and policy of avoiding non-concessional debt financing of the recurrent budget should also continue. Given moderate growth prospects, the scope for external borrowing—even from IFIs at concessional terms—remains limited (DSA Annex). Improving tax compliance and collection is also an essential element of the strategy. After staying broadly stable at around 19 percent of GDP in the two decades leading to 2007, tax revenues started declining in 2008 and had dropped to about 14 percent of GDP in 2014. The VAT was introduced in 2014 as a key element of the fiscal reforms. The implementation of the tax has been successful, as revenues are in line with expectations. This, together with efforts to improve compliance and strengthen SOE efficiency, would allow for the tax ratio to gradually increase to 17 percent in the next five years. However, recent policy proposals—such as widening the already broad list of exemptions to essential services—would undermine tax collection. It would also increase tax administration and compliance costs for businesses. To guard against this risk, further exemptions should be avoided, and consideration should be given to phasing out existing exemptions and replacing them with targeted support for low income households and direct transfer payments. If exemptions are to be maintained, the list should be short and narrowly defined. The authorities remain committed to secure a sustainable fiscal position. They acknowledged that given the volatility of fishing license fees, they cannot count on fees staying at their 2014 level for an extended period. Reflecting these concerns, spending in 2014 and 2015 budgets had remained contained, notwithstanding increases that were due to more transparent budgeting, one-off spending, and natural disasters. They have the intention to maintain spending Page 17 discipline in the future, and are considering additional transfers to the RERF, as well as maintaining a larger cash buffer and investing part of the surplus in alternative safe financial assets given the transition in RERF asset management. They also pointed out the trade-off between the need to strengthen the RERF and the immediate infrastructure and social needs of Kiribati, and in this context they welcomed staff advice to allocate additional resources to climate-change-related and maintenance expenditures. Regarding tax policy, the authorities were concerned about the negative public perception of the impact of VAT on prices, which led to the proposal to exempt essential services from the tax, but the authorities remain committed not to undermine the tax.