Important progress is being made in creating conditions for private sector growth, but more needs to be done. In addition to progress in improving the physical infrastructure through donor-funded projects, the authorities have successfully privatized the telecommunication company. Improvement in telecommunication can lower transaction costs and foster private sector activity in a number of areas. Most importantly, it could promote the development of mobile banking, where Kiribati is currently lagging behind other small states in the Pacific. It could also facilitate the delivery of government services and the payment of taxes, fees and bills via electronic and mobile devices. In this context, consideration could be given to initiatives that may further support investment in these areas utilizing donors’ funding. The government is also making efforts to promote competition in the airline industry. Enhancing competition could make Kiribati more accessible by reducing transportation costs, and promote tourism. Going forward, improving business climate, in particular through further streamlining business registration processes and facilitating private usage of government-owned land, is critical to fostering private sector growth (see Box 4). Supporting policies should continue to focus on building human capital and better utilizing marine resources. The recent expansion of the Marine Training Center will help raise teaching standards for fishermen to internationally-recognized levels. This is an important achievement given improved employment prospects abroad and also in the context of government efforts to develop the domestic fishing industry. In this context, the expansion of joint projects with Kiribati Fishing Limited—if well-managed—may boost employment, exports and domestic activity. Developing other domestic resources—such as agriculture production— should also be encouraged particularly if government support is limited and if it facilitates a gradual reduction in copra subsidies. As donor-funded infrastructure projects are completed, shifting the focus to maintenance of infrastructure could also promote private sector growth and employment by outsourcing this activity to microenterprise units. Page 18 Box 4. Growth and Investment Climate High costs related to geographic isolation and small size are formidable barriers to growth. The remoteness, dispersion, and small population lead to a lack of scale and high transportation costs, constraining private sector development, Accordingly, the private sector in Kiribati remains small and is concentrated in fisheries, retail trade, copra, and tourism. While the Chamber of Commerce estimates that there are some 2,000 businesses, only 2 employ over 200 people. The public sector dominates the economy: recurrent budget expenditures are close to 60 percent of GDP and SOE revenues are about 40 percent of GDP. Overall, the public sector represents nearly 80 percent of jobs in the formal sector. Only 20 percent of the labor force is employed in the formal sector, and the unemployment rate exceeds 30 percent. While overcoming physical constraints is difficult, a more enabling business environment would support private sector growth. Insufficient infrastructure—including in communication systems—weak business climate, and limited financial intermediation are key obstacles to be removed. Kiribati’s investment climate ranks 134 th out of 189 economies globally and th out of 11 within the Pacific region in the World Bank’s 2015 Doing Business Report Its ranking has fallen each year since 2010, although primarily as a result of lack of improvements rather than worsening in the country’s regulatory regime. Starting a business, for example, takes 31 days, against the regional average of 26 days and the regional best practice of 9 days. Land sales are prohibited except between Kiribati citizens and are only allowed after the consent of the Land Court, which applies strict eligibility criteria. It takes on average 153 days to register a property and almost a year to settle a contract dispute. Getting credit is costly and a large proportion of the population remains outside the formal banking system. Businesses are also subject to price controls that cover a wide range of goods and are subject to irregular revisions issued by the Minister of Commerce. Prepared by Mizuho Kida, World Bank. The absence of changes in absolute scores in most of the ten dimensions studied in the Report and small changes in the distance to frontier (DTF) scores over time support this assessment. k w A Pacific Island Countries, average Doing Business, 2015 (Ranking, scale 1 -189 with lower number means more conducive regulatory environment) Sources: World Bank, Doing Business Reports 2016 ; and IMF staff calculations Cross-Country Comparison: Ease of Doing Business Ranking Sources: World Bank, Doing Business Reports 2016 and 2015. Page 19 Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with priorities identified by staff to foster private sector growth. They reiterated that continued development of the fishing sector is key to improve growth and employment. They are also committed to reducing communication and transportation costs, not only internationally but also between Tarawa and outer islands, but pointed to difficulties in developing viable alternatives for international air transport links.