SOE reforms are important for creating space and a level playing field for private commercial operation and employment. The authorities have made commendable progress in SOE reforms through the adoption of the SOE Act in 2013, closure of underperforming SOEs, and measures to commercialize and improve operational efficiency (Box 4). Nonetheless, the costs of basic utilities—electricity, water and sanitation—remains high by regional standards, and improving the delivery of public utilities services is a key priority. Box 4. Kiribati: Progress in SOE Reforms and Future Priorities The SOEs serve a vital role in the Kiribati economy. Kiribati has sixteen active SOEs involved in a range of commercial activities including utilities, transport, communication and finance. In 2014 the SOEs represented 18 percent of the total capital stock of the country and contributed 12 percent to GDP. Kiribati’s SOE portfolio also achieved an average return on equity (ROE) of 3.8 percent and return on assets (ROA) of 2.9 percent for 2010–14, making the country a top performer in the region over that period. The authorities have made substantial progress in improving SOE performance and reducing large and ad hoc subsidies. Most notable reforms include the reduction in operational SOEs from twenty-five to currently sixteen by 2016, the merger of the two SOEs in the copra sector, and the privatization of the telecom company. The government also plans to further reduce the number of SOEs to twelve over the next five years. Considerations should be given to improve the compliance of the Community Service Obligations (CSO) policy. The lack of adequate compensation for CSOs has led to a flat trend in portfolio profitability in SOEs. While the SOE Act requires CSOs to be properly documented, and a price agreed with the government, it does not stipulate that the price allow SOEs to fully recover costs, including the cost of capital. Seven SOEs lodged CSO claims totaling $7 million for the 2014 financial year. Despite government allocating $4.5 million in the 2014 budget to fund CSOs, by October 2015 only $0.9 million had been paid. Inadequate funding and low utilization have hindered the government’s efforts to improve SOE performance and service delivery. In this regard, regular learning events and briefings for government officials and senior civil servants will ensure that there is ongoing political and bureaucratic support for the CSO policy Prepared by Lai Tora, AsDB. Maintaining the momentum of SOE reforms is also important to contain the risk of contingent spillovers to the budget. The lack of funding for community service obligations (CSOs)—non-commercial services “purchased” by the government from the SOEs—remains a major issue undermining SOE performances. Although the budget recognized the subsidy to SOEs of A$5 million, it can fall short to cover the full cost of the CSOs based on previous years’ experience. The financing gap for SOEs to breakeven may widen even further due to rising commodity prices. Against this background, the authorities should consider strengthening the commercial mandate of the SOEs and consolidating SOE ownership responsibility under a single minister for both the Page 19 operational goals of SOEs and their financial management. Continued divestment and outsourcing of SOE activities to the private sector will also help improve efficiency and strengthen public finances. Authorities’ Views The authorities reiterated their commitment to continuing SOE reforms with an aim to further reducing the number of SOEs while improving SOE performance and financial returns. They noted that the recent merger of the two SOEs in the copra sector would generate savings, partly offsetting the increased spending on copra subsidy.