Growth remained strong at 3½ percent in 2015, thanks to the record high fishing revenue. Donor-financed infrastructure investment and reconstruction in the aftermath of cyclone Pam further supported growth. Inflation remained contained at around 0.5 percent owing to low food and commodity prices, in line with the global trends. High fishing revenue contributed to a recurrent fiscal balance of almost 50 percent of GDP in 2015, more than offsetting the increase in government recurrent spending of 13 percent. Public debt increased from less than 10 percent of GDP in 2014 to 23 percent of GDP at the end of 2015 owing to the commencement of the Bonriki International Airport repair and upgrade project, financed by development partner concessional loans. The current account surplus reached 40 percent of GDP in 2015, with fishing revenue more than offsetting elevated imports related to donor financed projects. Seamen’s remittances also recovered somewhat after years of decline with the slowdown in global trade (text chart). Reflecting developments in the Australian dollar, the exchange rate has depreciated in real effective H H Seamen'sRemittances (In millions of USD) Source: South Pacific MarineServices, Kiribati. Page 10 terms to below the historical average. Nonetheless, competitiveness remains hindered by structural factors (Box 1). A new government took office in March 2016 following the general and presidential elections. Mr. Taneti Maamau, a former finance secretary and candidate of the Tobwann Kiribati Party, became the country’s fifth president since its independence in 1979. The new government pledged to pursue a more even distribution of sovereign wealth between the current and future generations, implying an increase in current spending and less savings into the RERF. The 2016 budget passed in May envisaged an increase in recurrent spending by 9 percent, mostly due to increased subsidies and grants including a doubling of the copra subsidy program Growth is projected to moderate to around 3 percent in 2016 as several large infrastructure projects come to completion and fishing revenue is projected to decline sharply. Inflation is expected to remain low at around 1.5 percent in 2016, while picking up to around 2.5 percent over the medium term, in line with trading partner inflation and international food and fuel price dynamics (the bulk of Kiribati’s consumer price basket comprises imported items). With the expected fall in fishing license fees, the current account is expected to reverse to a deficit of 7 percent of GDP in 2016 and to converge to a near balanced position over the medium term. Risks to the outlook are on the downside (Annex I). Changing climate cycle could increase uncertainty for fishing revenue over the medium term, as the VDS has not been tested in a low revenue environment for Kiribati since its implementation. Global financial market turmoil can feed into the domestic economy through the exposure to foreign assets of the RERF and the Kiribati Provident Fund (KPF), the country’s two main savings vehicles. Given Kiribati’s high reliance on imported goods, commodity price shocks and volatility in the Australian dollar could swing imports in ways hard to accommodate. Without a central bank, fiscal policy is the only macroeconomic policy lever and buffer against such shocks. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment of Kiribati’s economic outlook. They pointed out that fishing revenue could be highly volatile with risks on both sides. They felt that it was appropriate to aim for a modest increase in public spending on subsidies, education, and health for long run economic and social returns. They also noted that the recent increase in copra subsidies was important to support more inclusive growth, including by providing income opportunities in the outer islands, and could help reduce health care costs due to overcrowding on Tarawa. They acknowledged Kiribati’s vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change related shocks and were mindful of the need to maintain buffers against such shocks. Copra subsidies serve mainly as a livelihood subsidy to support inhabitants of outer islands. Previous Article IV consultations have concluded that, without job creation on the outer islands, alternative social transfer schemes are unlikely to reduce the cost in a significant way. Page 11 Box 1. Kiribati: External Competitiveness and Exchange Rate Assessment Kiribati’s real effective exchange rate (REER) continued to depreciate for much of 2015 and remains below its historical average after stabilizing since the beginning of the year. The REER has closely tracked changes in the Australian dollar circulating as the legal tender. Nonetheless, the real exchange rate has limited effect on Kiribati’s current account developments. With a small and narrow export base (copra, fish and seaweed), receipts are dominated by fishing license fees, donor flows and RERF investment returns, all largely driven by exogenous factors. Kiribati is also heavily reliant on imported goods, and consequently sensitive to swings in global commodity prices. An assessment based on EBA-lite methodologies would therefore not be meaningful nor feasible due to data limitations. Beyond the exogenous factors, Kiribati’s competitiveness hinges on continued efforts to boost private sector development and addressing long-standing structural impediments. Lack of scale, high transportation costs and infrastructure deficits remain key structural challenges. Kiribati also continues to lag Pacific island countries on average under several of the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business rankings. Securing grant instead of loan financing for development investment remains critical for containing risks to external sustainability. The use of Australian dollar as the legal tender remains appropriate. It provides a strong nominal anchor given close trade and financial linkages with Australia (high share of RERF assets are invested in Australian markets) and limited capacity to run an independent monetary institution. Kiribati has accepted the obligations under Article VIII of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions.