Kiribati is a small and fragile state. The country faces development challenges due to its geographical disadvantage and vulnerability to climate change. With a population of roughly 120,000 sharing a territory of 33 remote islands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers of ocean, lack of scale and high transportation cost limit production opportunities. Growth averaged around 1.8 percent in 1998-2014, compared to the average growth of 2.1 percent in other small island states in the Pacific. With the lowest income per capita in the region, about a fifth of the population lives below the basic needs poverty line and access to clean water and sanitation remains restricted for many. Long-run prospects are further clouded by sea level rise—low elevation of the atolls (1.8 meters on average) make them particularly vulnerable to coastal erosion and groundwater contamination. Extreme remoteness and large dispersion underpin the high cost of public service delivery in Kiribati. The public sector dominates the economy (text chart), while private sector activity—mostly fishery, subsistence agriculture and retail trade—remains limited. Weaknesses in infrastructure (text chart), business climate and financial intermediation pose further development obstacles. Limited job opportunities in the private sector, coupled with the fast growing labor force, has led to a high youth unemployment rate at around 50 percent. Fishing license fees and development partner assistance contribute the bulk of Kiribati’s income. The Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund (RERF), Kiribati’s sovereign wealth fund, serves as the primary vehicle for intergenerational saving. Revenue from fishing license fees are historically volatile, but regional cooperation through the introduction of the Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) and favorable weather conditions have significantly improved its performance in recent years (text chart). As the fishing license fees are collected in the U.S. dollar, the strengthening of the dollar According to the 2010 census. The VDS, established under the eight-country Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) in 2012, limits the number of days that fishing vessels are licensed to fish in PNA waters and sets the minimum fee for the VDS days ($8,000 for 2015–16). The majority of Kiribati’s fishing license fees are subject to the scheme, but it also has separate bilateral and multilateral agreements with other countries, including the European Union and the United States. The latter two agreements formed roughly 10 percent of Kiribati’s total revenue from fishing agreements in 2014. il il nd nd ppp Page 9 vis-a-vis the Australian dollar (A$), Kiribati’s legal tender, also contributed to higher fees. The strong revenue in 2015, nearly 100 percent of GDP (A$220 million), halted a prolonged period of relying on drawdowns from the RERF to finance the budget deficit (text chart). Nonetheless, following lower receipts in early-2016, the authorities forecast the license revenue to halve to around A$100 million in 2016, in line with the historical average of the last seven years, leading to a decline in real gross national income (GNI) of about 20 percent following several years of strong growth. Donor grants amounted to nearly 50 percent of GDP in 2015, the highest in the Pacific region (Figure 1).