The recent credit expansion has been driven by personal loans, largely from public financial institutions (PFIs). The financial system is composed of one commercial bank (a joint-venture between ANZ and the Government of Kiribati), the Development Bank of Kiribati (DBK), the Kiribati Provident Fund (KPF—the national pension plan), an insurance company, and a few credit unions. The recent increase in personal loans was mainly triggered by increased lending from PFIs: KPF small loans scheme (SLS) and personal loans from DBK. The rise in personal loans have boosted short term consumption and retail activity, but the boom may be short-lived given still limited growth prospects, and increasing risks to the financial sector. Financial system development is an essential element of the growth strategy, but PFIs should not expand into commercial ventures. The increase in the DBK personal loan portfolio is not consistent with its development bank mandate, and staff recommended against its further commercialization by expanding into deposit taking, in particular given the poor track record of loan collection (NPLs in the DBK remain high at around 20 percent in 2014) and without supervisory and regulatory frameworks in the country. In the same vein, the KPF should not allocate a larger share of its investment portfolio to commercial real estate, as Outstanding deposits Outstanding loans Outstanding SME deposits Outstanding SME loans Loan to deposit ratio (RHS) Commercial Banks Outstanding Deposits and Loans (In percent of GDP)Sources: IMF Financial Acess Survey and staff calculations. Kiribati: Outstanding Banking Loans, 2012-14 201220132014(e) 40.246.954.1Households9.421.427.0 22.125.127.0Households5.211.413.51/ KPF's small loan scheme: data is estimated.Source: Kiribati authorities and IMF staff calculations.(In percent of GDP) Page 21 this creates high risks for participants in the system. Liquidity in the commercial bank (ANZ) has been ample after the repayment of public sector overdrafts, which creates room for lending to the private sector. Facilitating private sector access to credit would therefore be best achieved by removing structural impediments: improving financial education, land access procedures, dispute resolution mechanism, recovery processes and financial reporting. The authorities agreed that some of these plans were risky and noted that Cabinet approval was required for any substantial change in the activities of public financial institutions.