Recent economic performance has been strong. With the strengthening of the vessel day scheme, fishing license fees have been on the rise in the last three years, reaching a record-high 68 percent of GDP in 2014 (compared to the past average of about 20 percent). Donor-financed infrastructure projects (mainly in the road, port, and aviation sectors) have also reached unprecedented levels (45 percent of GDP in 2014). This, together with a pick-up in credit to Progress is monitored by the Economic Reform Task Force, which is comprised of Government officials, the IMF, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank (AsDB), the EU, and Australia and New Zealand development partners. Page 10 households, boosted GDP growth, which was around 4 percent in 2014. Growth is projected at about 3 percent in 2015, driven by stepped-up infrastructure projects feeding through into activity in the retail sector, as well as reconstruction activity after the extreme weather damages earlier in the year. Inflation remains subdued, underpinned by lower food and commodity prices. The current account turned positive in 2014 on account of the high fishing license fees, but is expected to revert to a deficit in 2015. High imports related to donors’ projects—largely matched by external grants—are projected to offset gains from lower oil prices, estimated at around 5 percent of GDP in 2015. Remittances have decreased in recent years, but they should pick-up as employment overseas increases back to past levels after the implementation of additional employment schemes. Reflecting developments in the Australian dollar, the exchange rate has depreciated in real effective terms to below the historical average, but the effect on the current account is expected to be limited as trade dynamics are dominated by structural factors (Box 1). Fishing license fees should remain high in 2015. On the one hand, fishing license fees revenues have been very strong during the first four months of 2015, exceeding their level during the first four months of 2014. On the other hand, the Phoenix Island Protected Area (PIPA) has been temporarily closed to protect the stock of fish, and the significant drop in tuna price since the beginning of the year should have a negative impact on revenues going forward. On balance, staff anticipates that fishing revenues should remain high in 2015, although below the 2014 peak. Against this backdrop, the recurrent fiscal balance is expected to be positive in 2015 for the third consecutive year . The recurrent balance turned positive in 2013, further strengthened in 2014, and should remain in surplus in 2015. The improvement was mainly driven by record high fishing license fees. Recurrent expenditures increased by nearly 13 percent in 2014 and a further 5 percent in 2015 (per supplementary budget), but wages and salaries have remained under control. The increase in expenditures in 2014 reflected bringing on budget the previously non-transparent support to the state-owned power company (equivalent to around 3½ percent of GDP) and a one- off transfer to clear the debt of one large SOE (worth around 4 percent of GDP), both following previous staff recommendations. The increase in 2015 expenditures was largely the result of weather Current account balance Imports Fishing license Remittances Current Account Balance Source: Kiribati Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Total expenditures growth (RHS) Fishing licenses growth (RHS) Real GDP growth Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Sources: Kiribati Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 11 damage-related costs. Notwithstanding the rollout of the VAT in April 2014, tax revenues have yet to pick up, reflecting challenges in tax compliance and collection. Box 1. External Competitiveness and Exchange Rate Assessment The real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciated over last two years and is now below its historical average. This mainly reflects the weakening of the Australian dollar, which circulates as legal tender in Kiribati. Nevertheless, competitiveness continues to be hampered by high transportation costs, lack of scale and remoteness as discussed in this report. This makes structural reforms to improve the business climate and growth opportunities critically important for competitiveness. Precise CGER-like estimates of exchange rate alignment are neither feasible – given data limitations – nor meaningful for Kiribati: the REER plays a limited role in current account developments, which are mostly driven by exogenous factors (fishing license fees and donor flows on the one hand, and global commodity prices on the other hand). The use of the Australian dollar as the official currency remains appropriate . Kiribati needs a strong nominal anchor and does not have institutional capacity to conduct its own monetary policy. The choice of the Australian dollar is dictated by strong trade and financial linkages (investment of a large share of RERF assets in Australian markets). The Australian dollar circulates as legal tender. Kiribati has accepted the obligations under Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Kiribati, 10-year average Kiribati, 20-year average Australia Other PIC averageSources: IMF, Information Notice System APDCORE ; and IMF staff calculations. Real Effective Exchange Rate (Index, 2010 = 100) Tax Fees and charges Fishing licenses Wages and salaries Subsidies to SOEs Other current expenditure Revenue and Expenditure (In percent of GDP)Sources: Kiribati Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. RERF drawdowns Other financing sources Recurrent budget balance Fiscal Balance and Financing Sources: Kiribati Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 12 The medium-term outlook is more uncertain and will be mostly driven by the realized level of future fishing license fees. The fishing license fees are expected to stay higher than their historical level but fall from their 2014 peak. These revenues remain highly volatile and subject to downside risks. Furthermore, donors’ activity is projected to diminish with the completion of large infrastructure projects. This will reduce growth in the medium term and, if the discipline is not maintained, could again expose fiscal pressures. Furthermore, the extent of the recent damages caused by Cyclone Pam and high tidal waves underscore the risks and the economic and social costs related to climate change. Finally, returns on RERF and other financial assets could also be affected by global risks. A protracted period of slower global growth and low inflation could compress both equity returns and bond yields for several years (RAM Annex).