Kiribati is one of the most remote and geographically dispersed small states in the world. Its territory comprises 33 islands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers of ocean and a population of about 100,000. High transportation and communication costs, together with weak infrastructure and poor investment climate, are key obstacles to development. Extreme poverty is low, at around 5 percent, but 22 percent of the population lives below the basic needs poverty line. Climate change presents significant challenges given the low elevation of the land and rising sea levels. Kiribati’s economy is supported by revenues from the sovereign wealth fund, fishing license fees and donors’ aids. The sovereign wealth fund (RERF) was established in 1956 to save proceeds from mining phosphate deposits before they were exhausted in 1979 and for fiscal stabilization. Its balance declined from 565 percent of GDP in 2006 to 365 percent last year due to higher than sustainable drawdowns (to finance deficits stemming largely from weak tax compliance and increasing subsidies to SOEs) but also because of capital losses during the Global Financial Crisis. Fishing license fees have been volatile, but their management has improved due to a regional agreement to charge higher fees and limit the total number of fishing days and the number of vessels (‘Nauru Agreement’). The country relies on foreign aid to finance its large development needs. The key policy challenge is to continue to manage these resources wisely, while overcoming obstacles to private sector growth To this end, the authorities have embarked on an ambitious macroeconomic reform program supported by the IMF (through provision of technical assistance) and other development partners. The Economic Reform Plan intends to restore fiscal sustainability through improvements in revenue performance and containing public expenditure, while safeguarding vital public services and infrastructure investments. Significant progress has been made following the previous Fund advice, including in the area of debt management (costly overdraft debt has been cleared and non-concessional borrowing eliminated), tax reforms (implementation of the VAT last year), asset management of the RERF, and SOE performance. But more progress is needed in fiscal reforms to fully secure sustainability and improve resilience to shocks, and in structural reforms to support private sector growth.