The private sector in Kiribati remains small, limited by its market size, poor connectivity and high transport costs. Since the combined cost impact of smallness and distance effectively undermine competitiveness, private sector activities that have grown in Kiribati are concentrated around imports distribution/retailing; meeting the demands for the public sector and associated projects; fishery related activities, and niche tourism. Proceeds from access to Kiribati’s fishing waters and seamen remittances continue to be a large part of the country’s national income. Despite the positively high fishing license fee receipts in the recent past, the value of fish caught in Kiribati waters far exceeds fishing license fees and total Kiribati GDP. Kiribati must continue to encourage investment in onshore marine processing of its fish resources in order to fully realize its fisheries industry’s potential. Recently, Kiribati seamen employment has been flat, as technological improvements to ships and high transport costs have cut into the demand for seafarers. Page 12 Staff Views Reducing high unemployment should be among priorities. According to the 2010 Census, the unemployment rate exceeds 30 percent. Given the ample challenge of creating jobs and raising economic growth, facilitating the mobility of Kiribati workers under existing arrangements can be further strengthened. Temporary migration programs for low-skill labor are quite attractive for PIC workers who are skilled at agriculture and fisheries and lack the professional qualifications to permanently migrate. The government has rightly encouraged training in technical areas for which there is external demand at its various education institutes. Exploiting opportunities and addressing constraints within existing areas of advantage are vital. Ongoing infrastructure projects and the consequent demand and inflow of foreign workers have been met by growth in the retail and accommodation sectors, apart from greater awareness for Kiribati’s niche-tourism potential. With the completion of these projects, improvements to public service delivery should also encourage confidence and increased private sector activity. On constraints, seamen recruitment and fishing industry stakeholders have raised the issue of high airfares and air freight charges as an unnecessary additional cost to doing business. With its vast marine resources, developing fisheries further appears to be most promising. Kiribati’s marine resources are quite significant that rents can be gained in spite of the inherent high cost structures. Government’s planned development of Christmas Island, with a particular focus on fisheries, should raise job opportunities and help promote increased private sector activities. Even so, government is encouraged to continue to carefully analyze offers for joint ventures in developing its marine resources and promptly address concerns about the difficulties local fishermen face in accessing formal funding, if locals are to meaningfully participate in this key industry. Calling for modification, including increasing quotas, to existing regional seasonal worker schemes may be beneficial. The assistance of regional governments is being sought to increase opportunities to work abroad, including increasing country quotas through seasonal worker schemes. Going forward, the authorities are encouraged to find avenues for directing graduates from its local educational institutions to some modified system of the seasonal worker scheme offered by both Australia and New Zealand in order to increase job opportunities and sustain growth and macroeconomic stability into the medium term. Ongoing infrastructure projects should support private business growth, outside of improving the business climate. Improvements to strategic infrastructure such as the port and roads, and planned airport works should partly improve ease of doing business and cost competitiveness. In addition, government is advised to scale back red tape associated with the need for multiple business permits from town councils and various government agencies. Page 13 Authorities’ Views The authorities acknowledged the benefits of supporting the private sector and viable industries. The government noted that with the exit of SOEs from certain wholesaling/retailing roles, the private sector promptly took over those functions, indicative of the willingness to do business. Improvements to telecommunications should also encourage other private sector entrants. Government continues to support labor migration. Workers’ remittances have been a dependable source of foreign exchange and income for Kiribati. However, the authorities are aware of other regional governments’ concerns for making jobs available first to their citizens given the uncertain global economic environment.