Smallness, remoteness and climate change risks combine to impede growth and fiscal sustainability in Kiribati (Figure 1). Given its narrow production and export base, Kiribati continues to heavily rely on fishing license fees revenues, official transfers and workers’ remittances to finance its structural trade deficit. There has been some pick-up in private sector activity with the commencement of key donor funded projects, even though the public sector still dominates the economy. Climate change risks provide further challenges for the country’s already limited infrastructure and administrative resources. Fiscal outcomes have been dominated by volatile fishing license revenues, which have been unusually high in the last two years (Figure 2). Government cleared its expensive commercial debt in 2012, which have helped with containing previously large spending outlays. Problematic SOEs and overruns on copra subsidy payments have continued to be a drag on the budget. On the revenue side, non-compliance dented government’s tax revenue collections, even as high fishing license fees allowed the government to bolster the value of the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund (RERF) in 2013. The high financing demands placed on the country’s sovereign wealth fund (SWF) via large and excessive current fiscal deficits over the years have significantly reduced the RERF real per capita value which is now significantly below its 2000 level. Government’s reform program to address the country’s fiscal and structural challenges continues, with the support of the donor community. Key reforms to public financial management, tax systems, SOEs and the private sector are ongoing, in line with IMF advice. Significant progress has been made in SOE reform and work is underway to implement the recently- approved fisheries policy, and improve cash and debt management. Based on this reform progress, the World Bank has provided budget support for 2014 and further donor budget support is envisaged based on the continued progress of the reform agenda. The reforms are consistent with the IMF advice provided during the previous Article IV consultations and staff visits. The IMF has been actively involved in all relevant aspects of the government-led reform program in coordination with the World Bank, AsDB, AusAid and other development partners The Fund has provided macroeconomic, fiscal, and debt sustainability assessments and projections. The Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund (RERF) is a sovereign wealth fund established in 1956 and capitalized using phosphate mining proceeds before phosphate deposits were exhausted in 1979. It is one of the main sources of fiscal income and budget financing for Kiribati. Staff conducted Article IV consultation and a staff visit in 2013. Both missions were conducted jointly with the World Bank and AsDB teams. The main recommendations of the consultation and the staff visit included: conducting a medium-term fiscal adjustment to ensure fiscal sustainability and to preserve the value of the RERF; continuing the structural reform agenda, including reform of the SOEs; executing authorities plan to strengthen the tax revenue, including through the introduction of the value added tax (VAT); streamlining inefficient subsidies; carrying on measures to promote private sector development through improving the business climate and infrastructure, and facilitating the development of the marine sector. The authorities advanced on most fronts as discussed in this staff report. Some areas, such as reforms of copra subsidies and public utilities remain to be addressed fully. Page 5 IMF experts from headquarters and PFTAC have provided TA in the area of public financial management, management of the RERF and the Kiribati Pension Fund (KPF), national accounts, government finance, and external statistics.