Background Formal financial sector lending remains limited. The country’s weak property rights and investor protection regimes preclude credit expansion. Between the country’s only commercial bank and the Development Bank of Kiribati (DBK), accessing credit is relatively expensive. In addition, high spreads have kept lending profitable. Since government cleared much of its commercial borrowing in 2012, household credit has risen to largely take up that slack. Credit expansion to the agriculture, forestry and fisheries and construction sectors have been brisk, in particular after reducing public sector bank borrowing since 2010. The Kiribati Provident Fund’s (KPF) small loans scheme (SLS) continues to grow Increased demand for credit has seen the SLS expand to around A$11 million. While the KPF’s overseas investment income performed resiliently last year, the Fund must be watchful of nonperforming loans. Kiribati: Outstanding Banking Loans, 2007 － Staff’s Views Further improving the accessibility of land may create new opportunities for viable credit. Given its small size, lending opportunities for financial industry players are quite thin. Hence, developing Kiribati’s land market, by strengthening dispute resolution mechanisms and improving its land registry should assist with banks’ collateral recovery. DBK ANZ Government, SOE and other Private sector Households Total Loans DBK ANZ Government, SOE and other Private sector Households Total Loans (In millions of Australian dollars) Source: Data provided by the Kiribati authorities. Capacity constraints mean that operational and lending standards and risk management strategies must be tightened. In the absence of a financial system regulator, the country’s nonbank financial institutions often have relatively high NPLs and low-asset quality, contributing to financial risks. For the KPF in particular, returning to a positive funding position is A member may borrow up to 35 percent of accrued balances for a maximum two years. Page 14 important for its long term sustainability as a pension fund as most retirees take lump-sum withdrawals. The KPF also must monitor vigilantly its financing of physical assets acquisition by SOEs, given the past poor financial track record of SOEs. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with staff views. Since the country’s economic base will hardly support additional market players, the authorities recognize that addressing current impediments to increased financial intermediation and strengthening lending practices and investment strategies will help ensure financial system stability.