Continued investment in business climate and infrastructure remain the key pillars for private sector growth and employment. Despite the substantial progress in improving physical infrastructure and connectivity, transportation needs still remain considerable while additional room for infrastructure spending within the budget envelope is needed. Promoting air transportation and shipping services could facilitate development of tourism as well as support recent private sector efforts to develop fishing and agricultural industries, while thorough feasibility analyses are needed to assess the economic benefits against the cost. Efforts to improve physical infrastructure should also go hand in hand with improving business climate, in particular through further streamlining of business licensing process by improving land registration. Human resource development is one the key priorities of the government’s structural reform agenda. The authorities have launched a new strategic plan for the education sector, developed in collaboration with Kiribati’s development partners, focusing on improving the quality of teaching, refining the curriculum and improving related infrastructure. Staff welcome the authorities’ focus on improving the quality of education and training. Given the growth potential in the fishing industry, building human capital especially through vocational and technical training would help Kiribati better utilize its marine resources. Further development in other domestic sectors including tourism and routine infrastructure maintenance would also offer employment possibilities. Finally, international labor mobility presents a substantial opportunity for overcoming geographical constraints to employment. Improving workforce skills and strengthening institutional framework could help increase Kiribati’s participation in the overseas seasonal work schemes. Authorities’ Views The authorities vigorously agreed on the importance of further improving infrastructure and the business climate for private sector development. They placed high priority on promoting air transportation and shipping services and agreed that the costs and benefits of any investment in this area would need to be carefully assessed. Here they noted the importance of development partner support to get multiple viewpoints and to make informed decisions. They emphasized challenges remaining in land registration given the customary land ownership system. They also saw ongoing efforts to improve educational outcomes as a key stepping stone for promoting private sector growth, including through intensive community involvement to ensure that graduating students are better suited to workforce demands. Page 20