In 2013, the economy experienced its third year of consecutive economic growth on account of donor projects and increased private sector activity. Construction activities related to the sea-port and private sector projects drove last year’s growth outcome. Consumer and business confidence has improved with the commencement of the road project in 2014 and the anticipated positive spillover to the retail, wholesale and service-related sectors. Increased spending related to the donor projects is expected to raise inflation to about 2.5 percent in 2014, after a subdued 2013 outturn of 0.8 percent, due to moderate commodity prices. Kiribati’s external position, while in deficit, continues to be sustained by a steady flow of official capital transfers and recently also by high fishing license fees. While the trade balance deteriorated slightly as a result of increased import demand associated with the donor infrastructure projects in 2013, positive balances in the income and transfers categories kept the current account deficit similar to 2012 levels. Moderate commodity prices also helped contain spending on imports. Notably, higher-than-expected fishing license revenues allowed the government to shore up the value of the RERF and favorable yields for Australian assets ensured steady income flows on Kiribati’s SWF. Food and Fuel Imports and Prices Fuel imports (percent of GDP; RHS) Food imports (percent of GDP; RHS) Commodity food price index (2005 = 100) Commodity fuel price index (2005 = 100) Sources: IMF WEO; and staff calculations. International Price Index and Domestic Price Index on Selected Items: Rice and Sugar (Index, 2006=100) Kiribati World Rice Sugar Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System, Kiribati National Statistical Office and IMF Staff Estimates. Recent and planned key improvements to infrastructure should strengthen the growth momentum into the medium term. Apart from creating jobs, the growth dividend to ongoing infrastructure projects includes improving the climate for increased investment and business activities. Risks to the near–term outlook are balanced (see risk assessment matrix). While the positive impact of domestic public works may be larger than presently envisaged, a further softening in the external environment and volatile commodity prices present downside risks to growth. In addition, Page 6 volatile fishing licenses represent a real risk to stability of fiscal revenues. In the long term, the country’s vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters presents risks to growth prospects. Box 1. Kiribati: Seamen Employment and Remittances Seafaring provides an important source of employment and remittances for Kiribati, which both having exhibited clear downward trends in recent years While remaining sizable, employment fell sharply during the global financial crisis. As of December 2013, there were about 1008 Kiribati seamen on board, compared to 1452 in 2006. Over the period, seamen remittances fell by about 4 percent of GDP, and stood at 6 percent of GDP in 2013. The depreciation of the U.S. dollars over the past few years has also had a negative impact on the Australian dollar value of seamen remittances (see the figure below). Seamen's remittances (Index, 2006=100, RHS) Baltic Dry Index (LHS) Seamen on Board (SPMS, index, 2006=100, RHS) Kiribati: Seamen's Remittances The recovery in world trade from the global crisis did not produce a corresponding recovery in seamen employment for a number of structural reasons . The shipping industry continues to suffer from low profitability and overcapacity. In addition, the increasing size of ships and automation of ship operations have reduced the demand for seamen. Kiribati: Seamen's Remittances and changes Other factors Exchange rate effect Seamen's remittances (A$, in millions, RHS) USD per AUD, right scale Kiribati seamen are trained in the Kiribati Marine Training Center, which is considered one of the best vocational training institutes in the region Nevertheless, seamen from Kiribati have become less competitive compared with those from the South and South-east Asian countries because of higher transport costs and longer visa processing times. Addressing these obstacles would help maintain the seamen profession as an important source of employment, training, and national income.