With the economy facing major structural headwinds, a comprehensive set of policies is key to reinvigorating long-run growth and fostering inclusion . Structural measures are needed in a number of areas, including corporate restructuring, labor market reform, and productivity enhancement. Fiscal policy can play a complementary role, to incentivize these reforms and to cushion their near-term impact. In addition, social safety nets should be strengthened, both to address inequality and poverty, and also to boost consumption-led growth and contribute to rebalancing. Given long-term fiscal pressures, enhanced social spending would eventually need to be paid for with revenue increases (or cuts in other expenditure), and the authorities could commit to this, and thus ensure debt sustainability, by introducing a set of formal fiscal rules. Corporate restructuring The authorities have made substantial progress on corporate restructuring. A three- track approach has been devised, covering: (1) shipbuilding and shipping; (2) more routine cases of individual distressed firms across the economy; and (3) the overcapacity sectors of steel, petrochemicals, and construction. In early June, the government announced broad plans for Track 1, along with measures to recapitalize two policy banks that could face losses as firms are restructured. (See Box 2.) The authorities also announced their intention to further improve policy lending (including the banks’ capacity to handle corporate restructuring), which staff see as key to helping avoid future problems. In addition, to minimize the impact of corporate restructuring on employment and the regional economy, the government on June 30 designated the shipbuilding industry as a sector that would require special support. Tracks 2 and 3 may proceed with minimal government involvement, with the latter aided by the recently passed “one-shot” law, which streamlines procedures and offers tax incentives for mergers and acquisitions. Staff commended the authorities for their focus on corporate restructuring and urged that it proceed expeditiously. Speedy implementation of the strategy, including not only financial but also operational restructuring of distressed firms, combined with social spending to help affected workers is critical. Staff’s empirical analysis suggests that resolving the debt overhang could meaningfully boost investment and stimulate hiring, and a review of the international evidence suggests that corporate restructuring is associated with higher GDP growth afterward, and that swift, decisive action is vital. The authorities’ preemptive action to safeguard the capital position of the policy banks is also welcome and should be done with adequate fiscal support. Recapitalization of policy banks is the responsibility of the fiscal authorities, although procedural constraints have also implied a short-term role for the BOK in providing bridge financing. Staff see this involvement as consistent with the BOK’s mandate for price and financial stability, but to ensure continued monetary independence and fiscal accountability, the exposure should be unwound—i.e., either As of June 2015, specialized banks, including Korea EXIM, KDB, and other public banks, accounted for almost half of the credit supplied to large firms with an ICR below one for a prolonged period. Page 17 repaid from fiscal resources or sold through markets—as soon as possible, and the government should back up its intention to support an early exit of the BOK by providing sufficient resources for recapitalization in the budget. At the same time, the financial supervisory authorities should continue to monitor commercial banks’ exposure to vulnerable sectors, and continue to require banks to maintain sufficient loan loss reserves. Box 2. The Authorities’ Plan for Shoring up the Capital of Policy Banks The state-owned policy banks Korea EXIM and KDB are the main creditor banks for many of the firms in the five vulnerable sectors identified by government . Their lending to the shipbuilding and shipping industries amounted to KRW 58 trillion (around 3½ percent of GDP) as of March 2016. The banks are currently adequately capitalized, but the government estimates that KRW 5 to 8 trillion in additional capital would be required for them to continue meeting Basel III requirements after some loans are written down in the process of corporate restructuring. Recapitalization would safeguard financial system stability and ensure that the banks remain able to fulfill their policy functions. The government will provide KRW 1 trillion of in-kind, Tier 1 capital (shares in state-owned enterprises) to Korea EXIM in 2016. It also plans to provide additional Tier 1 capital to Korea EXIM and KDB through the 2017 budget. And in case of systemic financial risk, the government and the BOK, which has a 12.4 percent ownership stake in Korea EXIM, may also consider additional direct capital injections into that bank. Separately, a Policy Bank Recapitalization Fund of up to KRW 11 trillion has been set up under the management of the Korea Asset Management Company (KAMCO). The fund will be financed by KRW 1 trillion in loans from the Industrial Bank of Korea (IBK, another policy bank), on behalf of the government, as well as up to KRW 10 trillion in loans from the BOK. The BOK’s exposure will enjoy two levels of credit protection, since it will be senior to KAMCO’s junior tranche, and since it will be insured by the Korea Credit Guarantee Fund (KODIT), which is in turn fully backed by the government. The BOK’s loans will be of short tenor (one year or less, as per the Bank of Korea Act), but the BOK can lend again. The fund, which was launched on July 1, will purchase policy banks’ Tier 1 or Tier 2 contingent convertible (CoCo) bonds, on a capital-call basis . The pattern of use of the fund will depend on the extent and speed of corporate restructuring, in addition to the credit condition of the vulnerable industries. The fund will be in operation through end-2017. This date may be changed during the end-year review of the fund, but in any case the government has expressed its support for early redemption of the BOK loans. ——— The BOK can lend only to banks, and its contribution to the fund will thus be channeled via the IBK. The IBK’s own contribution will be channeled via KAMCO to benefit from favorable risk weighting. Page 18 Labor markets Labor market reforms are another key priority. The September 2015 Tripartite Agreement between unions, employers and the government contained many important reforms but later lost support from some key actors. A package of labor laws, based on the Tripartite Agreement, is now stalled in the National Assembly. The government remains committed to labor-market reform and has issued policy guidance to employers to promote the “wage-peak” system, emphasize performance-based assessment, and clarify conditions for dismissal. Key priorities are as follows: Addressing labor market duality. Market segmentation results in youth unemployment, inequality, and insufficient investment in training. A priority is to dampen firms’ incentives to hire non-regular workers by: (i) fostering cooperative labor relations; (ii) expanding benefits for non-regular workers; and (iii) reducing labor-market rigidities by introducing performance-based assessment and clear conditions for dismissal. In addition, broadening access to training for non-regular workers will foster productivity. Boosting labor force participation. Addressing labor market duality will help improve female job participation and increase birth rates, but further measures are also needed— these could include providing well-targeted support for childcare, facilitating flexible work arrangements, improving work-life balance, enhancing job search and training support, and addressing gender-based job inequalities. Productivity Boosting productivity in the service sector and among SMEs is another area of focus. Korea’s regulatory environment for upstream service sectors (e.g., electricity, gas, and rail) is very stringent in international comparison. Staff estimates suggest that if this regulatory burden were to diminish and reach the OECD frontier by 2025, it could boost TFP growth by about ¼ percentage point each year. Significant productivity gains can also be achieved by promoting competition and deregulation in healthcare, education, and professional services. As for the SMEs, government policy should prioritize fostering growth and innovation, rather than shielding less competitive firms. Staff analysis suggests that Korea is one of the countries most exposed to China's rebalancing. Korea may need to move further up the value chain, develop sectors that benefit from increased consumption in China, and enhance its traded services sectors, and as all that happens, the SME sector will also need to respond dynamically. Against this backdrop, the government recently announced a three-pronged strategy to strengthen the service sector. The plan includes: (i) promoting synergies between services and manufacturing; (ii) revamping infrastructure oriented toward services; and (iii) nurturing new businesses, notably in healthcare and tourism. To this end, the government will provide greater tax benefits and other financial support and will also embark upon deregulation to promote competition. The overall objective is to ensure that public policy supports both manufacturing and services in an equitable fashion, and the authorities aim, in this way, to promote the creation of 250,000 new jobs in the service sector, and to increase the sector’s share of the economy from 60 percent currently to 65 percent by 2020. Page 19 Complementary fiscal policy Fiscal support should be mobilized to incentivize and cushion any adverse impacts of structural reforms. Additional, well-targeted subsidies for children and for childcare, for instance, could stem declining fertility and improve labor force participation. Fiscal incentives could perhaps be designed to make Korea’s substantial R&D activity more effective, complementing the authorities’ efforts to promote a “creative economy.” (See Box 3.) And fiscal support, including unemployment insurance benefits, retraining opportunities, and job-search facilities, could assist workers affected by corporate restructuring or labor market reforms—this would allow more equitable outcomes and increase the likelihood of developing consensus for structural reforms. Box 3. Developing the “Creative Economy” In the face of declining growth, the government is implementing a strategy to develop Korea’s “creative economy.” The export-led growth model was a good match in a world of expanding trade, but some rebalancing may now be needed. The Korean authorities are seeking to foster innovation and create new firms and decent jobs. The intention is to transform the economy by creating a virtuous business eco- system that facilitates the emergence of new industries and promotes higher-value added in existing industries. The government hopes that these efforts will raise total factor productivity, reduce savings, and boost private investment. A wide range of measures have been introduced, including Centers for Creative Economy and Innovation . The government has set up 17 Centers for Creative Economy and Innovation (CCEIs) nationwide, which provide close support to start-up entrepreneurs. The centers serve as R&D clusters and provide customized support matching each venture’s growth stages, all the way up to expansion into global markets. The government also aims to develop the Pangyo Creative Economy Valley as a Korean version of the Silicon Valley. Start-ups and venture capital . The government has facilitated firms’ access to venture capital and IPOs, enhanced “cooperative competition” between large firms and SMEs, and strengthened the regulatory environment for the protection of intellectual property (IP) rights by creating a market for trading IP (i.e., a stock exchange for small firms). New markets and industries . The government has tried to create new markets and industries through the fusion of science, technology and ICT, notably in biomedical sectors, nanomaterials, and renewable energy. The government has also promoted M&A activity, including by revising laws on private equity. Source: Government of Korea; Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning. The government sees these efforts as bearing fruit. The number of start-ups exceeded 30,000 for the first time in 2015, and new start-up investment reached an unprecedented level. The innovation centers are operating in full swing throughout the nation, and a total of KRW 176.6 billion of investment for 1,050 startups has been secured, with 7,044 cases of test product support carried out as of May 2016. Page 20 In addition, a carefully targeted expansion of social expenditure, sustained over the medium term, could yield multiple benefits. Increasing social spending would directly reduce relative poverty among vulnerable groups such as the elderly, nearly half of whom are poor. It could also—by increasing those groups’ disposable income and reducing households’ need for precautionary savings—boost consumption-led growth and reduce the economy’s reliance on volatile external demand. It could contribute to financial stability by reducing retirees’ borrowing to open small businesses. And it would give the authorities more room to rationalize support to SMEs, thus boosting labor productivity. Staff see scope for increases in the basic income as well as the national pension, among other programs. Additional spending to strengthen the public education system would also be desirable. To preserve sustainability, revenue increases will be needed in the long term to pay for expanded social spending, and fiscal rules could help ensure that these materialize . Increasing revenues too early would, by reducing household disposable income, undercut the desired boost to consumption and growth. But given the long-run fiscal challenges facing Korea, it is clear that compensatory measures will be needed eventually. Increases in social contributions would be a natural place to focus, and tax measures could also be considered—at just 21 percent of GDP, Korea’s revenue burden is currently one of the lowest in the OECD. A set of fiscal rules could help make the authorities’ commitment to future measures more credible. (See Box 4.) Authorities’ views The authorities vigorously agreed on the importance of structural reforms to boost growth, foster inclusion, and rebalance the economy. They noted that corporate restructuring would move ahead quickly and that the unemployment fund would provide sufficient coverage for affected workers. They agreed that fiscal policy would play the lead role in policy bank recapitalization and viewed BOK involvement as fully consistent with its mandate, noting that such involvement would be as part of a contingency plan. Going beyond corporate restructuring, they emphasized that the government had laid out a broad reform agenda that includes: (i) labor-market reform; (ii) reforms in state-owned enterprises (SOEs); (iii) measures to improve Korea’s already impressive educational system; and (iv) financial sector reforms, focused on deregulation and technological innovation. In aid of all of these, the government has emphasized OECD Economic Surveys: Korea 2016. Improving the quality of schools and access to public afterschool tutoring would reduce Korean households’ private spending on education, which, at 38 total spending, is nearly double the OECD average. In this context, a faster pace of increases in the retirement age could also be considered. Automatic adjustment mechanisms could also be envisaged, whereby the authorities would commit to introducing a particular revenue measure if the debt, or the deficit, breached a certain threshold. Box 6 in the 2015 Article IV Consultation staff report discusses Korea’s taxes in international comparison and suggests some areas for reform—viz., streamlining tax expenditures, including deductions and exemptions under the personal income tax and corporate income tax; reducing income shifting, and the resultant loss of tax revenue, caused by differing personal, corporate, and capital gains tax rates; and moving property taxes away from transaction-specific levies and more toward recurrent taxes on property owned. Increasing the VAT rate from the current 10 percent—one of the lowest in the world—to the OECD average of 18 percent could, for instance, yield 3¾ percent of GDP in extra revenues. Similarly, reducing the unusually large standard deduction under the personal income tax could generate 3¼ percent of GDP in revenues. There may also be room to raise the CIT rate. Page 21 the need to improve the services sector, and it has implemented a strategy to develop the “creative economy.” Box 4. Toward a Rule-Based Fiscal Framework The Korean authorities are deeply committed to fiscal prudence, and their budget formulation and execution are generally very sound. Against this background, it is no surprise that the general government debt-GDP ratio is only about one-third of the OECD average. Korea’s current fiscal framework, however, faces two main challenges: Countercylical policy. Supplementary budgets can be introduced only under very specific, and quite limited, circumstances (e.g., war, natural disaster, or a recession). While this usefully guards against repeated revisions to the original budget, it may also at times hamper policymakers’ ability to conduct countercyclical short-term fiscal policy. Long-term anchor. While the authorities’ commitment to long-term fiscal sustainability is well understood, and they have laid out scenarios in which consolidation efforts keep debt around 40 percent of GDP in the long run, there is no formal anchor in place. A rule-based fiscal framework could address these challenges. Fiscal rules have been increasingly used around the world—only 5 countries had one in 1990, but nearly 80 did by 2012 (Schaechter et al., 2012) —and Korea may benefit as well. This topic is currently under discussion in Korea, and a proposal may be submitted in the near future. Staff intend to do further work in this area, drawing on recent Fund analysis and including consideration of the appropriate design and escape clauses. One possibility would be to introduce a pair of rules: structural budget balance rule would provide a framework for countercyclical fiscal policy, though it could also introduce some communication difficulties, given the uncertainty in estimating the output gap. This could be combined with a debt ceiling —this would anchor public debt at a prudent level while allowing policymakers the flexibility to choose the tax and spending mix. Some public discussion would be required to pin down the appropriate debt level—it may be that 40 percent of GDP over the long run is too conservative, especially considering the multiple benefits of additional social spending, as described above, including the aim of rebalancing the economy. ___________ Indeed, formal econometric analysis suggests that there is room to enhance the degree of countercyclicality of fiscal policy. See Égert, B. (2010), “Fiscal Policy Reaction to the Cycle in the OECD: Pro- or Counter-cyclical?” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 763, OECD Publishing. Schaechter, A., Kinda, T., Budina, N., and Weber, A., 2012. “Fiscal Rules in Response to the Crisis—Toward the “Next- Generation” Rules. A New Dataset,” IMF Working Paper, WP/12/187. See, for example, IMF (2016), “Flexible Fiscal Rules and Countercyclical Fiscal Policy,” IMF Working Paper, WP/16/8, and also IMF (2009), “Fiscal Rules—Anchoring Expectations for Sustainable Public Finances,” IMF Staff Paper. The authorities were open to staff’s fiscal policy recommendations but stressed the importance of preserving long-run sustainability. They were in full agreement on the need for fiscal policy to support structural reforms. They also agreed on the benefits of a stronger social safety net, but they noted that social spending was already on a rising trajectory, and they were wary of introducing new entitlements. Their strategy for dealing with rising social spending is first to look for possible increases in pension and healthcare contributions from those who would be enjoying larger benefits, next to seek savings through discretionary expenditure reform, and only then to consider increased taxation, which they do not envisage for the time being. Fiscal rules have been under discussion in Korea, and the authorities welcomed staff’s further analysis of the topic. Page 22