Overview. Although potential output growth is poised to slow, Korea’s financial fundamentals as proxied by the health of aggregate private and public sector balance sheets and capital and external buffers are relatively sound which limits sources of short-run systemic risk. At the same time vulnerabilities remain and the structure of private debt markets could be strengthened. Banks' External Short-term Funding (Debt ratio to banks' liabilities in percent) Financial sector structure and soundness. The resilience of the Korean financial system has increased since 2008 and near-term vulnerabilities are limited. Banks remain well capitalized with the capital adequacy ratio at around 15 percent as of June 2014, and their funding and liquidity conditions are stable. The banking sector’s profitability improved somewhat in 2014 driven by lower provisions and impairment losses, although the return on assets is still below the historical average. The aggregate bank non-performing loan (NPL) ratio increased in 2013, albeit from a low level, driven by a rise in NPLs to large companies in the shipbuilding and construction sectors, but since then banks’ asset quality has improved somewhat with the decline in new bad loans and the write-offs and sales of old loans. Growth in the non-bank financial institutions has slowed considerably and their profitability continues to weaken, in part from low interest rates and the strengthening of regulations. Banks’ short-term external debt increased in 2014 although it remains well below the pre-crisis levels, and the sizes of their foreign currency and maturity mismatches continue to decline. However, Korean banks still rely heavily on offshore funding, and a tightening of global financial conditions could lead to funding pressures (text figure). Sources: CEIC Data Company; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ External short-term debt includes domestic banks and foreign banks. Commercial and specialized banks Commercial banks An FSAP was conducted alongside the 2013 Article IV Consultation. Page 7 Household balance sheets. Overall household debt as a share of income has been rising steadily over the last decade but unlike the experience of many other countries leading up to the global financial crisis, this has recently been on the back of relatively stable house prices, with cautious consumer spending keeping household leverage low and stable and the sector’s aggregate net worth comparable to that in many other advanced economies (text figures and Box 1)—rather than reflecting increased borrowing for consumption the rise in debt has been matched by a corresponding increase in household financial assets and may be related to structural factors affecting balance sheet composition, including more retirees and the prevalence of Korea’s unique chonsei rental market. While pockets of vulnerability exist, the relatively strong aggregate balance sheet and banks’ solid capital buffers suggest that in the absence of large macroeconomic shocks the rise in household debt does not pose a systemic near-term threat to the financial sector or the macroeconomy. Housing finance. At the same time the structure of household debt could be strengthened. Reflecting Korea’s relatively young and rapidly growing mortgage market (text figure), a large share of houses are financed short-term either in the form of chonsei rental deposits or the rolling over of floating-rate interest-only mortgage loans with short maturities and bullet repayments. One key challenge will be to facilitate the transition by households and financial institutions toward a more stable, long-term structure (paragraph 27). Corporate balance sheets. While aggregate corporate leverage is relatively modest, many financial soundness indicators have weakened recently and the sector is highly segmented with some growing pockets of vulnerability (Box 2). In particular corporate income and profits have become increasingly concentrated in the top-ranked firms whereas troubled sectors with high leverage and nonviable SMEs requiring public support remain. While capital buffers and adequate provisioning limit direct risks to the banking sector, the need by many firms to shore up their balance sheets is likely to constrain corporate investment. Public finances. Korea’s practice of maintaining a cautious fiscal stance, motivated by the need to preserve investor confidence alongside the country’s open capital account and to deal with uncertain future costs related to demographics and possible reunification with North Korea, has kept government debt below 40 percent of GDP. At the same time the public sector is exposed to contingent liabilities related to loan guarantees estimated at around 10 percent of GDP. SOE gross debt amounts to nearly 30 percent of GDP, but the bulk is held by profitable enterprises and backed by substantial assets. Household survey data suggest that about one third of the low-income, older, and self-employed households have high debt servicing burdens. Page 8 Box 1. Household Debt Household balance sheet developments in Korea over the last decade are unique in several ways. As in many other advanced countries, measures of debt-to-income increased steadily in the pre-crisis period. However, this ratio has continued to increase post-2008, in stark contrast to other countries that experienced a long period of household deleveraging following the sharp decline in house prices. Likewise, measured household leverage in Korea has remained low and stable throughout, whereas other countries saw a sharp buildup of financial (non-housing) leverage and a subsequent fall. In fact, Korean households have accumulated more liquid financial assets than debt since 2002, and household net debt (gross debt minus currency, deposits, and financial security holdings) as a share of income has decreased. Another unique feature of the rise in household debt is that it has continued despite the recent falloff of house price growth (text figure). Rather than reflecting increased borrowing for consumption, this seems to be related to several structural factors affecting household balance sheet composition. Household Debt and House Prices (In percent) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Real house price series are the nominal price series deflated by the consumer price index. 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Real house price (RHS) 1/ Household debt to GDP Housing sales price index Chonsei deposit price index Monthly rental price index Reflecting Korea’s relatively young mortgage market, a large share (about 75 percent) of houses are financed by short term interest only loans, allowing households to accumulate equity in other types of assets instead of paying down mortgage principals. To strengthen the structure of household debt, the government has recently launched a loan conversion program with an aim of increasing the share of fixed-rate and amortizing loans from currently less than 25 percent to 40 percent by 2017. The process of conversion may have the transitory impact of increasing household debt repayment even if it does not affect household net worth. While the aggregate household balance sheet is relatively stable and rising debt does not pose near-term systemic risks, pockets of vulnerability exist. Previous staff analyses indicate that the share of debt at risk in total household debt is particularly high for certain types of households, namely, older, lower-income and self-employed households. To the extent that these households have relatively higher marginal propensities to consume or are more likely to be liquidity constrained, an increase in household debt service due to higher debt levels and/or higher interest rates may have a negative impact on consumption. Sources: Kookmin Bank, Statistics of Korea. First, Korea’s baby boom generation has begun to retire. As the pension replacement rate remains relatively low, retirees often purchase small businesses, in part financed by bank borrowing, to provide retirement income. The share of household debt held by households in their fifties and older has increased by more than 10 percent in the last decade and may continue to rise as population ages (text figure). Second, Korea’s unique chonsei rental system, in which the tenant loans the deposit (a large share of the property’s value, often borrowed from a bank) interest- free to the landlord and lives rent-free, may also lead to higher gross household debt than would otherwise be the case. Chonsei currently accounts for almost half of Korea’s rental housing market. In recent years its prices have risen sharply against the declining real house prices and chonsei -related loans have almost doubled since 2009 (text figure). Change in Household Debt Distribution (In percent) 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s 70s Source: Korea Development Institute. Seoul Metropolitan House Sales and Rental Prices Index (2007. 12=100) Page 9 Box 2. Corporate Balance Sheets and the Implications for Investment Korea’s growth momentum has weakened since 2010 partly driven by sluggish corporate investment. Although the sector’s aggregate balance sheet does not raise alarms, financial soundness appears to have weakened in the past few years partly due to slowing growth—the growth rate of corporate sales declined from around 17 percent in 2010 to slightly negative in the first half of 2014, the first time corporate sales registered a contraction since the global financial crisis. Corporate income and profits have also become more concentrated in the top-ranked firms. The decline in corporate growth and rising concentration of income have affected the sector’s financial soundness. For firms with high leverage and low profitability and liquidity, their need to shore up their balance sheets will constrain investment. Profitability . Listed companies’ operating income-to-sales ratios declined from about 7 percent in 2010 to 5 percent in 2013, even below the levels during the global financial crisis (text figure). Liquidity . While the top ten firms’ cash flow position remains favorable, other firms’ capacity to repay short- term borrowings and cover interest expenses have weakened, with their cash flow coverage ratio declining to below 30 percent by the first half of 2013. The liquidity risk has increased particularly in the shipping, ship building and construction sectors with several large firms defaulting on their debt. The average annual corporate bill default rate reached 0.19 in 2014, the highest level since 2001. Leverage. Although some firms carried out debt reduction in response to the deterioration in growth and profitability, the sector’s overall debt burden worsened through the first half of 2013 for both large enterprises and SMEs. The proportion of firms with a debt ratio above 200 percent increased steadily since 2010, reaching 15.5 percent in 2013, before moderating slightly in 2014. Corporate Profitability and Liquidity Ratios (In percent) Operating income-to-sales ratios Cash flow covergae ratios of firms outside top 10 (RHS) Source: The Bank of Korea. Note: The cash flow coverage ratio for 2013 is for the first half of the year. Corporate Borrowing-to-Total Assets Ratios (In percent, by company size) Large Enterprises SMEs End-2010 End-2011 End-2012 End-June 2013 Source: The Bank of Korea Financial Stability Report October 2013. Compared to some other Asian economies, Korea has a relatively high concentration of corporate debt in firms with high leverage, low profitability, low solvency, and low liquidity—almost 20 percent of corporate debt is owed by firms with negative profitability (the second highest in Asia), about 20 percent by firms with an interest rate coverage ratio less than one (Asia’s highest), and 40 percent by firms with a current ratio below one (fourth highest). As such, Korea has a relatively large segment of its corporate sector that is vulnerable to interest and profitability shocks. Staff analysis using annual firm level data that covers 2,200 Korean firms in 1995–2013 quantifies the link between corporate balance sheets and corporate investment in Korea, with regression results showing that high leverage, low cash flow and low liquidity all have significant negative impacts in this period. _____________________________ IMF Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific , April 2014. Page 10 Reserve Reserve metric (100 pct) Reserve metric (150 pct) Reserve and Reserve Metric (In billions of USD) External buffers. Korea has built and maintained substantial external buffers since the global financial crisis which could help limit the impact of renewed financial volatility, including a reduced and now modest level of short-term external debt, a positive and growing net foreign asset position, and a stock of international reserves which—based on measures of adequacy—should be sufficient to buffer against a range of possible external shocks (text figure).