Long-run growth trends. Korea’s economic performance has been on a declining trend after decades of robust and sustained growth. Potential output decreased from around 7 percent during 1990–97 to 4¾ percent during 2000-07, and has been running at about 3½–4 percent since then. While this rate still exceeds that of many of Korea’s peers, prosperity has been concentrated within the highly competitive export-oriented conglomerates employing a small share of the population, whereas household income growth and service sector productivity have been sluggish. Going forward population aging will be a major drag on potential growth—on current trends the working age population is projected to peak in 2016 and Korea is expected to become one of the oldest countries in the OECD by 2050 with the dependency ratio increasing rapidly (text figures). Even reaching the staff’s projection for potential growth of 3¾ percent will require total factor productivity playing a larger role than at present. Real Output Growth (In percent) output growth historical average (2004-2014) Projections Sources: CEIC Data Company; and IMF staff estimates. Export-led growth. Exports are at the center of these trends, accounting for both the period of rapid growth and the slowdown. Korea’s gross exports have risen steadily since the early 2000s and currently exceed 50 percent of GDP, significantly higher than the OECD average (text figure). This growth was driven in large part by the emergence of Korea’s flagship companies to world-class status and accompanied by a sizeable gain in global market share. It is unlikely however that Korea can continue to rely on this growth model going forward—indeed, Korea’s market share has been at a standstill since 2011 with continued gains in electronics offset by stable or falling shares for other leading export products. Korea’s future prosperity will therefore depend on success in fostering more broad-based productivity growth. Share of Export (In percent of GDP) Germany Source: OECD. Korea OECD Japan Page 6