Korea has had a remarkable track record of economic performance. One of thirteen success stories identified by the Commission on Growth and Development (2008) , Korea embarked on, and adhered to, a government-guided export-promotion strategy that delivered average growth in excess of 7 percent for nearly fifty years. Per capita income surged from 5 percent of that of the United States in 1960 to around 55 percent by the time of the global financial crisis. Within two generations, Korea vaulted into the OECD, its goods and services became known around the globe, and its national corporate champions entered the ranks of the world’s most recognized companies. At the same time, the fruits of this success were widely shared. Land reform in the 1950s, low-cost education opportunities, a dynamic business environment, and high social mobility helped facilitate an egalitarian development path, and social indicators have long been impressive. OECD Countries - GDP Growth and PPP per capita income (1980-2007) Growth, however, has now declined, and income convergence may slow in the face of structural headwinds. The economy has suffered a series of exogenous shocks since the global financial crisis, but underlying growth prospects also appear to have weakened. Staff estimate that potential growth has dropped from 7 percent in the early 1990s to below 3 percent now. At this rate, Korea may find it difficult to move quickly to the OECD income frontier. Moreover, Korea faces serious structural challenges, many of which will imply a further decline in potential growth. These include: Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook PPP per capita (in percent of US PPP per capita) OECD Countries h w G P D G Demographics. With one of the lowest birth rates in the world, Korea is also one of the world’s most rapidly aging societies, and fiscal outlays are expected to rise sharply. The fraction of the population that is of working age is projected to peak in 2017 and decline rapidly thereafter, depressing potential employment and growth. The overall population is expected to start declining after 2025, with negative implications for domestic demand. Export dependence. Korea’s economic success came on the back of exports, but that heavy reliance may now be a liability in a world of slowing trade. With exports exceeding 50 percent of GDP—one of the highest shares among advanced economies—Korea is heavily exposed to spillovers, particularly from China, its largest trading partner. China’s slowing growth, rebalancing toward domestic demand, and moving up the value chain will all affect Korea substantially. The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development, Commission on Growth and Development (2008). Population aging is one way in which Korea resembles Japan. Annex V draws out further parallels. See Annex VI, which develops a trade model that attempts to quantify Korea’s vulnerability to spillovers from China. Also see Chapter 3 of the Spring 2016 APD REO, “China’s Evolving Trade with Advanced Upstream Economies and Page 9 Sectoral weaknesses and corporate vulnerabilities. Some of the heavy industrial sectors that underpinned Korea’s past growth—for instance, shipbuilding, shipping, steel, and petrochemicals—are now facing bleak prospects globally given the trade slowdown and competition from China. As in other countries, excess capacity in these sectors may need to be shed. While Korean corporates overall appear relatively healthy, there are a number of firms in these particular sectors that are struggling and will need to be restructured. Labor-market issues. Korea’s problem of a declining working-age population is compounded by labor-force participation rates, particularly for females, that are below the OECD average. In addition, the highly segmented labor market is distorted and inefficient— employers’ easy access to “non-regular” labor not only promotes inequality among workers but also leads to under-investment in firm-based training; separately, the heavily seniority- based compensation system leads firms to push older, more skilled workers into early retirement, to the detriment of overall labor productivity. Lagging productivity. Labor productivity is particularly low in the service sector—much lower than in peer economies, and only half that of manufacturing—reflecting in part regulatory barriers to competition. Productivity is also disappointing among SMEs—just one-third of what it is among large enterprises (and down from one-half in the late 1980s). Insufficient social protection. Korea has rapidly traversed from emerging- to advanced- economy status and has not yet built a comprehensive social safety net. The Basic Livelihood Security Program (BLSP), introduced in 2000, provides cash and in-kind benefits to the most vulnerable but is substantially less generous than the OECD average. The National Pension System (NPS) currently covers about one-third of the elderly, and the OECD reports that pension benefits were only around one-quarter of the average wage in 2015. These inadequacies boost private-sector precautionary savings and depress consumption and growth. They also may have contributed to increasing household debt: many retirees borrow to open (risky) small businesses, in an attempt to supplement their incomes. Total social spending amounts to just 10 percent of GDP, less than half the OECD average, and while population aging will drive this up sharply over the long run, social spending will remain relatively low for the next twenty years, with multiple adverse consequences. Rising household debt. This represents both a short-term vulnerability, with possible risks to financial stability, and a structural issue, insofar as high debt can depress households’ propensity to consume and dampen medium-term growth. Commodity Exporters” as well as Chapter 2 of the same publication, “Navigating the Transition: Trade and Financial Spillovers from China.” Annex VII presents some stress tests of Korean corporates and, using Korean data, estimates the positive effect that restructuring can have on employment and investment. Annex VIII analyzes the international evidence and finds that corporate restructuring episodes are associated with increased growth in the future. OECD Economic Surveys: Korea 2016. OECD Economic Surveys: Korea 2016. Annex IX provides a detailed look at these issues. Page 10 Income inequality and poverty are also issues of concern. Korea’s Gini coefficient had fallen to among the lowest in the world in the mid-1990s and then rose somewhat in the wake of the Asian crisis. While the Gini coefficient remains near the OECD average today, the gap between the richest and poorest quintiles is now slightly higher than average. Moreover, social mobility, traditionally achieved through education and entrepreneurship, is not as strong as in the past—only 20 percent of households were able to move to a higher income bracket between 2011 and 2014, while a similarly sized share slid into a lower bracket. Finally, relative poverty rates, particularly among the elderly, are among the highest in the OECD. Low public debt affords policymakers room to respond to some of these challenges, although Korea faces fiscal pressures in the long run. With debt just 38 percent of GDP now, and on a downward trajectory over the next decade or two, Korea has substantially more fiscal space than most OECD comparators. Over the longer term, however, fiscal pressures mount. The authorities’ conservative baseline projections show debt reaching 60 percent of GDP by 2060 on account of population aging, but slowing growth and the potential costs of possible future reunification with North Korea could push debt far higher than this. The authorities place high priority on fiscal consolidation, which could keep debt around 40 percent of GDP in the long run. Against this background, the Article IV discussions focused on the structural and fiscal reforms needed to boost growth and make it more inclusive. Korea may not reprise the sustained, very rapid growth it achieved in decades past, but sensible, well-targeted reforms can help the country to lean against the many headwinds that it faces, improve potential growth, and spur job creation. As described below, a comprehensive package of structural reforms, backed by the judicious use of Korea’s fiscal space, is needed to boost growth and improve welfare. Such policies will also likely contribute to a gradual rebalancing of the economy, which will increase Korea’s resilience and also make the global economy safer. It may be challenging to develop consensus for these reforms, even with fiscal support, but they are needed for Korea to realize its full potential. Status quo policies will not suffice. Policies also need to be calibrated carefully to provide short-term support to the economy while addressing risks. Given the weak conjuncture and downside risks, recently announced fiscal support and monetary easing were appropriate, and the fiscal package should be finalized and implemented as soon as possible. In addition, going forward, the macro policy stance should remain supportive. Prudential regulations should be tightened, and also harmonized across banks and nonbanks, to contain risks from household debt. The exchange rate should continue to be allowed to move flexibly, with intervention limited to addressing disorderly market conditions. Economic policymaking may be challenging given the current political environment. In the April general election, the ruling Saenuri party lost its plurality in the National Assembly. Given Korea’s presidential system, President Park will remain in power until her (single) term ends in OECD Economic Surveys: Korea 2016. See Annex I. Ministry of Strategy and Finance, “2060 Long-Term Fiscal Outlook Report,” December 4, 2015. Page 11 February 2018, but with the legislature now led by the opposition parties, the passage of economic reforms may be complicated.