Activity has been sluggish since 2012. The economy has been buffeted by shocks—the Sewol ferry accident in 2014, the outbreak of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) in mid- 2015, and the global trade slowdown more recently—in response to which the authorities proactively provided monetary and fiscal support, including policy rate cuts, a supplementary budget and tax cuts in 2015, and frontloading of expenditure plus a recently announced fiscal package for 2016. Activity started to pick up in the second half of last year but slowed again in the first quarter, reflecting the expiry of the consumption tax cut (which was later extended), weaker fixed investment, and a payback in inventory accumulation, which had made strong contributions to growth in 2015. The most recent high-frequency data have been mixed, while the output gap remains negative (around 1½ percent of potential GDP). The weak external environment has weighed heavily on Korea. As in many other regional economies, nominal exports fell sharply during 2015 and early 2016, with the largest declines seen in exports to Asian partners and emerging markets in other regions. Export volumes held up somewhat better but have declined this year. Reflecting Korea’s integration in global supply chains, the decline in exports led to a decline in imported parts as well, and given soft domestic demand and low commodity prices, overall imports fell even more sharply than exports did, pushing the current account surplus to a record-high 7¾ percent of GDP in 2015. (See Box 1.) At the same time, Korea experienced portfolio outflows in the aftermath of the “RMB tantrum,” in anticipation of Fed “lift-off,” and, to a lesser extent, following Brexit. After two years of appreciation, the real effective exchange rate began to weaken, and the authorities appear to have sold foreign-exchange reserves during several months over the past year. Financial conditions generally remain stable, despite substantial volatility in capital flows at times. Brexit led to initial sharp losses in Korean equities and the value of the won, but these were largely reversed in the following week, amid continued uncertainty in global markets. Low oil prices caused the current account surplus to swell by around 2 percent of GDP, with some of this expected to reverse in the future, but there was little positive impact on growth, possibly because weak prices partly reflected weak global demand, which was a negative for Korea. Page 12 Box 1. Korea’s External Position Korea has one of the world’s largest current account surpluses relative to GDP. Heavy investment kept the current account in deficit during most of Korea’s rapid growth phase, and it was only after the Asian crisis that the current account balance reliably turned to surplus. During 1999-2009, it averaged 1½ percent of GDP, but since the global financial crisis, it has risen sharply, reaching 7¾ percent in 2015. A similar outturn is expected this year. Korea’s net international investment position (NIIP) turned positive for the first time in 2014 and reached 14½ percent of GDP in 2015. There are explanations for part of the current account surplus. Given the weak conjuncture, it is natural both that household saving would rise and that investment would decline. Large changes in terms of trade— particularly related to the oil price—have also played a significant role in widening the surplus. Korea’s demographics—its rapidly aging population, and the many citizens in prime saving years—are another factor, as is the objective of saving for possible future reunification costs. Finally, it is important to correct for certain balance-of-payments accounting practices in BPM6—in particular, retained earnings that accrue to foreign owners of Korean capital will eventually have to be paid out, and this justifies part of the saving implied by the current account surplus. Nonetheless, a current account gap remains. After adjusting for all of the above factors, the current account surplus appears to be on the order of 3 percent of GDP larger than justified by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. The current account gap is a symptom of underlying imbalances, which can be addressed through policies. The gap implies that the economy is saving too much and investing too little, to the detriment of Korea’s own welfare. Appropriate structural and fiscal policies can boost consumption and growth, improve productivity, and stimulate corporate investment, all of which will lead to a stronger economy in which households share more equitably in economic outcomes. At the same time, the economy will rebalance somewhat away from volatile external demand (but not completely, as Korea is a small, open economy). The current account surplus will decline, and Korea’s stock of net foreign assets will continue to grow, albeit somewhat more slowly. All of this will also make the global economy more resilient, which again will be to Korea’s benefit. ________________________ A comprehensive external sector assessment is provided in Annex II. Reflecting economic slack and low oil prices, inflation has been subdued. Headline CPI inflation dropped, by early 2015, to its lowest levels since mid-1999 and even now hovers around 1 percent, well below the Bank of Korea’s (BOK’s) target, which was recently reduced from a range of 2½–3½ percent to 2 percent. Core inflation has been more robust, with some moderation in early 2016, reflecting the dissipation of the impact of the 2015 cigarette-excise hike. Output Gap Versus Credit Gap While the real economy has lagged, the credit cycle appears to be more advanced. Total private credit is only slightly above trend, given sluggish corporate borrowing. Credit growth to the household sector, however, reached 11 percent y/y in 2015 on the back of earlier rate cuts and a loosening of macroprudential measures. About one-third of this credit has come from non-bank financial institutions ) m f v ( g C T hailand Australia H ong Kong SAR Singapore China I ndonesia Malaysia T aiwan Province hilippines of China New Zealand I ndia Sources: BIS; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff calculations. Output gap (in percent of potential) Page 13 (NBFIs), such as insurance companies, mutual credit cooperatives, savings banks, and securities companies. The growth of nonbank household credit has accelerated and may continue doing so as banks’ lending standards tighten. The financial system remains resilient . Financial soundness indicators—capital adequacy, liquidity, and asset quality of both banks and NBFIs—are relatively strong on a point-in-time basis, but they may weaken as banks realize losses on exposures to firms affected by the economic slowdown; indeed, the banking sector’s NPL ratio ticked up to 1.9 percent in March 2016. Bank credit growth has weakened recently and could slow further given elevated credit risk in the corporate sector. In addition, bank profitability is very low by international standards, possibly on account of banks’ policy responsibilities, as well as the low nominal interest rate environment. The government recently implemented the Basel Committee’s recommendations on additional capital requirements for domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs) and countercyclical capital buffers (which were set at zero initially). Total Assets (pct GDP) Commercial banks Insurance companies Mutual credit coops Securities companies Credit-spec. financial co's Savings banks Return on Asset Assets growth, p.a Subtandard assets ratio Capital ratio Minimum capital req't Regulatory framework n/a 8 to 14 2 to 5 7 to 8 6 to 7 Basel III Risk-based standard Basel I; tax exempt interest Net capital ratio Adjusted capital ratio Basel I Source: Bank of Korea FSR 2016H1, IMF staff calculations. 1/: 8 (Basel minimum) + 1 (D-SIB by 2019) + 2.5 (CConsB by 2019) + 2.5 (CCyB as conditions permit) = 14 Household debt surged last year. Debt reached 163 percent of net disposable income— above the OECD average of 131 percent. Some key drivers have been: (i) population aging; (ii) a sustained rise in chonsei prices; and (iii) the recovery in housing prices. Against this background, the authorities announced more stringent bank screening of loan applications, a faster restructuring of the mortgage market toward amortizing and fixed-rate loans, and tighter LTV limits on nonbanks’ nonresidential mortgages. The authorities are also considering asking banks to monitor a comprehensive debt-service ratio (DSR) for borrowers. Following the announcement of these Insurance companies in Korea can—unusually, in international comparison—make direct loans to households, including both mortgages and loans collateralized by the value of insurance policies. Corporate restructuring could also pose a risk, but commercial banks’ exposure to vulnerable sectors is relatively limited, and loan loss reserves are adequate, with a coverage ratio of more than 145 percent, as of March 2016. As discussed in Annex IX, many of the elderly borrow once retired so as to open small businesses with which to supplement their old-age income. Under the chonsei rental system, two years of rent are typically paid with an upfront deposit, which is often borrowed from a bank. Landlords have steadily been demanding higher deposits in recent years on account of lower interest rates. House prices have been rising in the Seoul metropolitan area, while prices in other regions have weakened after increasingly rapidly over the past few years. Overall, house prices do not seem overvalued according to the usual affordability metrics, as discussed further in Annex IX. Page 14 measures, which are under gradual implementation, the growth of household bank mortgages began to moderate—as did house prices—though other household loans continued to grow rapidly. House Price Inflation (year-on-year growth, percent) Seoul Total Sources: Haver. Pockets of vulnerability persist in the corporate sector. Aggregate corporate leverage is moderate, with nearly 90 percent of companies having a debt-to-equity ratio of less than 2. But the financial soundness of firms in certain export-oriented industries, as well as construction, has deteriorated as sales have slumped. The share of vulnerable firms—those with an interest-coverage ratio below 1.5—has been high since the global financial crisis and rose beyond 35 percent last year. Stress tests suggest that a 1 percent slowdown in external demand would reduce Korean corporates’ earnings growth by up to 1¼ percent, with serious implications for corporate investment and economic growth.