Fiscal policy Given the weak conjuncture and downside risks, staff urged additional fiscal stimulus, as the primary instrument to bolster aggregate demand . The authorities’ plans to ensure full execution of the budget and to provide off-budget stimulus of KRW 6.5 trillion (close to ½ percent of GDP) appeared helpful but not sufficient, especially since the frontloading of budget spending in the first half of the year implied at least some fiscal tightening during the rest of 2016, which would hinder the recovery. Staff suggested that Korea is one of the few Asian economies with both the need and the space for fiscal stimulus. A package of about 1 percent of GDP—ideally implemented as a supplementary budget—would be similar to the 2015 stimulus and likely sufficient to boost growth toward the authorities’ target of 3 percent, without threatening debt sustainability. As Korea already has well developed infrastructure, stimulus spending could instead focus on targeted transfers to the most vulnerable (and most likely to spend). Tax measures could also be considered. Selected Asia: Fiscal Space Selected Asia: Need for Demand Support Y B m v G Y ) g v ( Indonesia India Vietnam New Zealand Australia Hong Kong SAR Philippines Malaysia China Thailand Taiwan POC Singapore Germany c B u c c u C Italy United States (248,-0.02) ) D G f c ( Thailand Australia Singapore Taiwan POC Hong Kong SAR China Philippines Malaysia Indonesia New Zealand India Vietnam General Government Gross Debt (percent of GDP, 2015) Output Gap Sources: IMF WEO database; and IMF staff calculations. Sources: IMF WEO database; and IMF staff calculations. On June 28, the authorities announced a fiscal package of more than KRW 20 trillion (1¼ percent of GDP) to support the economy and employment. This will include a KRW 10 trillion supplementary budget, as well as spending through other channels, such as the SOEs. While the supplementary budget is still being formulated, the overall package will feature a broad mix of measures including: larger unemployment benefits; economic support, via public infrastructure spending and other measures, of the regions most affected by corporate restructuring; an increased tax deduction for housing rent; and tax incentives for the replacement of old diesel cars and for the purchase of highly energy-efficient home appliances, to name just a few elements. These measures are placed in the context of a broader government economic strategy, including an effort to develop 11 new growth engines for the economy. Staff estimate that the fiscal package will boost GDP by around 0.3 percent, spread over 2016 and 2017. While the government expects that these Multipliers are on the order of 0.3—low, given the economy’s extreme openness. (See Fiscal Expenditure and Macroeconomic Policy , Korea Institute for Public Finance, March 2013.) The KRW 6.5 trillion in SOE spending announced earlier in the year is part of the package. This is already built into the forecast. Page 23 measures will largely be paid for by revenue overperformance (and thus will not require additional borrowing), this nonetheless represents discretionary stimulus to the economy. Monetary policy Staff also recommended monetary easing, and following the BOK’s recent rate cut, a continued supportive stance appears to be appropriate. Monetary policy may not by itself provide strong stimulus—it could create negative wealth effects for deposit holders, it could raise chonsei prices and thus reduce renters’ disposable income, and it will not address structural factors behind weak investment and exports. Nonetheless, staff saw a case for coordinated fiscal and monetary easing, to send a strong signal and boost confidence. Risks to household debt could be addressed via a tightening of macroprudential policy, and risks of capital outflows were seen as manageable. After keeping the policy interest rate at 1.5 percent for almost a year, the BOK cut the rate by 25 basis points on June 9, just after the Article IV mission. In light of the weak conjuncture and downside risks, the BOK should maintain a supportive stance. Macroprudential and external sector policies Further measures are needed to address macrofinancial risks: Household debt. The authorities have responded to the rapid growth of household debt with several measures, but the DTI cap of 60 percent remains high in international comparison and should gradually be tightened toward 30 to 50 percent. The DTI cap should also be extended to apply to other types of household debt (including so-called “group loans” ); the planned monitoring of a debt-service ratio is a welcome step in this direction. These measures should reduce financial risks and, by reducing household debt, also help consumption and growth. Nonbank credit. While nonbank lending to households is smaller than bank lending and grew at a slower rate in 2015, it has accelerated this year. This deserves close monitoring, not only because of the risks nonbank credit has posed in other countries (and indeed, in Korea as well, during the past), but also because, in Korea’s highly tiered financial system, nonbanks cater to less creditworthy customers and thus face elevated risks. Staff recommended the continued harmonization of prudential regulations across banks and nonbanks. This includes insurance companies, which engage in direct lending to policyholders but may have limited expertise in assessing credit risk, as well as savings banks and mutual credit cooperatives, which have looser capital requirements than commercial banks, and whose lending is often used by households to finance risky small businesses. Institutional framework. As recommended in the 2013 FSAP, separating macroprudential policymaking from crisis management would increase transparency and accountability among the relevant agencies and ensure greater independence. Landlords tend to ask for increased chonsei deposits when rates fall in order to keep their interest income up. These are taken by a group of prospective apartment buyers and guaranteed by developers and public credit guarantee corporations. Page 24 The planned easing of measures aimed at curbing capital inflows is appropriate. the global financial crisis, the authorities introduced macroprudential tools and capital flow management measures to contain exposure to liquidity risk and foreign-exchange risk. These included a ceiling on banks’ loan-to-deposit ratio, a leverage cap on banks’ foreign exchange derivatives positions, and a levy on foreign exchange funding. The government expanded the application of the macroprudential stability levy to NBFIs in 2015 while narrowing the application to short-term FX borrowing. These measures were successful in increasing financial sector resilience by limiting exposure to liquidity risk, reducing maturity mismatches caused by short-term FX borrowing, and more generally lengthening the maturity of the financial sector’s FX borrowing. Recently the authorities announced a relaxation of some of these measures, including raising the leverage cap and allowing for a lower bank levy in case of sudden capital outflows. These are appropriate given that the pressure of capital inflows has declined as the interest differential has narrowed. The exchange rate should continue to be allowed to move flexibly, with intervention remaining limited to addressing disorderly market conditions. A flexible exchange rate will help the economy to weather external shocks, a role that can be supported with appropriate macroprudential measures, such as the planned FX liquidity coverage ratio. Staff also suggested that publishing data on intervention, with an appropriate lag, as in most advanced economies, could be considered. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that macro policies should be supportive. While they believed that earlier announced fiscal measures (such as expenditure frontloading and SOE spending) would provide more support than staff acknowledged, they were nonetheless open to further stimulus and later announced a package, to guard against the possible negative impacts of corporate restructuring, difficult external conditions, and the end of the earlier consumption tax cut. As for monetary policy, the authorities emphasized the importance of considering the timing of possible Fed tightening, as well as the risks of capital outflows and of growing household debt. Nonetheless, given the weak conjuncture, the BOK eased on June 9. There was also broad agreement on staff’s other short-term policy recommendations. The authorities agreed on the need to monitor the growth of household debt closely and expected it to moderate in the future as a result of recent measures. They also agreed on the need to harmonize requirements across banks and nonbanks to contain nonbank credit growth. They did not, however, see the need to change the current institutional framework for macroprudential policy and crisis management. On external sector policy, the authorities noted that exchange rate flexibility The authorities plan to introduce a foreign-currency liquidity coverage ratio (FX LCR) in 2017. While the regulation has not been issued yet, the intention is to require commercial banks to hold at least 60 percent of their foreign- exchange debt in high-quality liquid assets to withstand a 30-day net cash outflow in case of systemic risk. (The required ratio increases gradually to 80 percent by 2019.) Foreign bank branches are exempted. Basel III suggests that an FX LCR can be a useful monitoring tool. Basel III also requires implementation of a general LCR, which Korea implemented in 2015. Page 25 would continue. While they continued to have concerns that publication of intervention data could lead to speculative moves in the markets, this remains under consideration, in the context of negotiating trade agreements.