Output growth. The growth momentum that had been building since early 2013 has stalled reflecting a continued high savings rate and low investment on the back of sluggish wage growth and falling performance in some major manufacturing industries, and closing the output gap remains elusive. A key turning point was the April 2014 Sewol ferry accident which had a surprisingly large and persistent impact on consumer and investor sentiment as it led to protracted political turmoil more broadly. Recent external developments may have also played an indirect role, with news of slowdowns in China, Japan, and the EU weighing on sentiment. Reflecting this, GDP growth in 2014, although positive at 3¼ percent, fell below potential for the third straight year. Sources: CEIC Data Company; and IMF staff estimates. Inflation. Headline inflation has fallen to about ½ percent, well below the Bank of Korea’s (BOK) target range, in part because of lower oil prices (text figures). The BOK has cut the policy rate several times since August 2014—with the most recent move in March bringing the rate to an historic low of 1¾ percent—citing concerns of a larger-than-expected output gap, low inflation pressure, fragile sentiment, and more recently the need to take pre-emptive action against downside risks. Nominal wage growth data are volatile but show a generally declining trend. Page 11 Exchange rate. The won has been on a gradual, appreciating trending since 2012 on a measured, trade-weighted basis, although this masks important movements in cross rates—in particular, the won continues its climb against the yen, Japan being Korea’s main export market competitor, but has weakened against the U.S. dollar in the last several months (text figures). Nevertheless, we continue to assess the exchange rate as being undervalued. After increasing in the first half of 2014, official foreign exchange reserves (including the BOK’s forward position) have declined modestly in U.S. dollar terms reflecting valuation losses related to shifts in the relative exchange rates of the major reserve currencies (paragraph 33). Balance of payments. Despite the real appreciation the current account surplus has increased sharply since 2011, reaching 6¼ percent of GDP in 2014, on the back of lower global oil prices and weak domestic demand (text figures). Oil imports alone fell from 8½ percent of GDP in 2011 to 6¾ percent last year, although the net windfall from lower oil prices is estimated to be somewhat lower as many of Korea’s export prices (for petroleum products, shipbuilding, and others) tend to move in tandem. Substantially lower domestic investment which generally has a high import component has also played an important role. The counterpart to the higher surplus has mainly been Korea’s oil balance (accounting for exports of petroleum products) is about 3 percent of GDP. The 40 percent decline in oil prices assumed in the baseline for 2015 leads to a first round oil windfall of 1¼ percent of GDP. Historical trends suggest that spillovers to non-oil exports would reduce this windfall by about ¼ - ½ percentage points of GDP. Page 12 an increase in corporate retained earnings held abroad. Other capital account developments including portfolio flows have been broadly stable. Recent policy initiatives. Recognizing the challenging growth environment, the authorities put in place a number of measures to spur economic recovery in addition to loosening the monetary policy stance. These include: Direct budget stimulus—about ½ percent of GDP in additional spending in 2014 focused on financial support for home buyers and renters. This was followed by the 2015 budget which allowed for a more broad-based increase including for social spending. Increased support for policy-based lending—this includes a capital injection to the Korean Development Bank to support new growth source projects, including those centered on intellectual property, through lending as well as diverse forms of hybrid captial. Ad hoc tax measures to incentivize firms to allocate idle cash to wages, dividends, or investments. Measures to try to revive a housing market that has been in a multi-year slump including legislation to unwind major regulatory roadblocks for housing reconstruction projects which had been previously introduced to curb house price inflation and speculative demand. In the wake of these measures, together with some unwinding of the earlier tightening of mortgage lending restrictions (paragraph 26), there have been some preliminary signs of a pickup in house prices and transactions volumes. The policy reorientation also entails stronger expenditure growth over the medium term with the timing of the planned deficit reduction pushed back relative to last year’s budget (text figure). This will lift the projected public debt profile only modestly, with debt now expected to peak at 37 percent of GDP. In addition the authorities have put in place or aim to launch a number of initiatives to address structural challenges (paragraphs 37 and 39).