Financial sector reforms. The 2013 FSAP found the near-term vulnerabilities of the Korean financial sector to be limited (paragraph 4), and while banks’ vulnerabilities to corporate and household exposures appear contained in the near term, further economic weakness could impair the soundness of both sectors. Staff urged progress in addressing the high priority recommendations of the FSAP to further strengthen financial stability analysis and supervision, develop financial market infrastructure, and reform the institutional framework to separate macroprudential policy making from crisis management with the aim of increasing transparency and accountability among the various agencies responsible for economic and financial market policies and ensuring greater political independence (Appendix III). Although the authorities have initiated a number of measures in line with these recommendations, they were reluctant to adopt those requiring more fundamental institutional changes. Page 19 Macroprudential tools and capital flow management measures. The Korean authorities have a number of tools which they have used with the aim of containing the build-up of systemic vulnerabilities. These include: Limits on mortgage lending, including loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-to-income (DTI) ratios, which were introduced in the last decade in response to sharp increases in house price growth. These have been adjusted several times since then as financial stability risks related to housing market conditions change but are currently significantly tighter than when introduced. In line with this policy, the authorities in mid-2014 took a modest step toward unwinding the earlier tightening of these ratios given banks’ strong balance sheet position. This step may have also contributed to the recent slowdown in housing-related lending growth by non-bank financial institutions. Measures to contain liquidity and foreign exchange vulnerabilities which were introduced when the Lehman collapse exposed the volatile funding structure of the Korean banking system. These include a ceiling on banks’ loan-to-deposit ratio, a leverage cap on banks’ foreign exchange derivatives positions, and a levy on foreign exchange funding. The FSAP determined that together these measures succeeded in increasing financial sector resilience by reducing exposure to liquidity shocks, reducing maturity mismatches caused by short- term foreign exchange borrowing to finance derivatives purchases, and more generally lengthening the maturity of the financial sector’s foreign exchange borrowing, and we continue to assess these measures as appropriately aimed at addressing systemic financial sector stability. Mortgage financing. To facilitate the transition toward a more stable, long-term structure the government recently launched a loan conversion program with the aim of increasing the share of fixed-rate and amortizing loans from currently less than 25 percent to 40 percent by 2017. Staff emphasized that this is best accomplished by further developing the market and regulatory infrastructure that would, through market-based incentives, encourage households and banks to move in this direction. The program involves the provision of new long-term fixed-rate loans funded by the Korea Housing Finance Corporation (KHFC) through their issuing mortgage-backed securities (MBS). The KHFC securitizes all loans brought to its balance sheet before the close of the same day which should limit its exposure to credit risks of the long-term amortizing products. Securities are The levy will be expanded to cover non-bank financial institutions and its structure streamlined starting from July The costs and benefits of these measures will need to be assessed on an ongoing basis, and they should not substitute for any warranted macroeconomic adjustment. At present, we regard them as effective regulatory tools available for containing risks to systemic financial stability related to the financial sector’s foreign exchange transactions and balance sheet positions. In current circumstances their removal would increase the risk of a rebuilding of banks’ liquidity and maturity mismatches related to short-term foreign exchange borrowing and hedging activities. The share of KHFC mortgage loans in total mortgage lending by deposit-taking institutions and public financial institutions rose steadily from around 4½ percent at the end of 2011 to around 8 percent as of end-August 2014. Page 20 generally purchased by pension funds looking to match their long-term liabilities. While the program is in its early stages, it is important that its execution be tightly focused on the objective of deepening the market for long-term mortgages and increasing the resilience of housing finance. Authorities’ views. The authorities viewed the financial sector as currently sound with banks and non-bank financial institutions having maintained improved asset quality and satisfactory capital adequacy. They expect that the recently launched mortgage loan conversion program will enhance the structure of the mortgage market, and given the already high demand of the program, are confident that they will meet the government’s target for increasing the share of fixed-rate and amortizing loans. The authorities acknowledged that the low corporate profitability in some ailing sectors could affect financial institutions’ balance sheets, but noted that recent progress in debt restructuring and lower oil prices have brought about improvements in their leverage ratios and operating balances, and the authorities will push for further progress in restructuring going forward. With respect to the 2013 FSAP key recommendations the authorities have implemented various measures to further strengthen financial stability analysis and supervision and financial market infrastructure. They emphasized the important role their macro-prudential policy framework plays in containing systemic risks to financial stability, and viewed the regulatory limits on the financial sector’s foreign exchange exposure as a key source of Korea’s increased resilience to external market volatility. However, they do not see the need to establish, as recommended by the FSAP, two distinct committees with separate mandates on macroprudential policy and crisis management, viewing the current institutional framework adequate for safeguarding financial stability.