Outlook. The Korean economy is at crossroads where macroeconomic trends over the coming quarters could have implications well beyond the near term. We currently project output growth for 2015 in a range centered at around 3 percent, where exceeding this midpoint will require a rebound in aggregate demand this year. Recent policy initiatives may succeed in bringing this The baseline, which is broadly consistent with the BOK’s recent downward revision of its 2015 growth forecast to 3.1 percent and the first quarter growth outturn, assumes some gain in growth momentum beginning in the second quarter in part from a modest increase in construction investment and consumption related to the recent easing of monetary and fiscal policy and lower fuel prices. The inflation forecast assumes some base effect increase related to a gradual unwinding of downward supply-side price pressures. Page 13 about although it is still too early to gauge their full impact. A rebound in the construction sector, while not yet apparent, could be a possible contributing factor to domestic demand. Inflation is projected to be in the 1–1½ percent range, depending on the one-off impacts of lower oil prices and the recent increase in administered tobacco prices. An increase in underlying inflation, currently hovering around 1 percent, would likely require higher wage growth or a nominal depreciation of the won. Near-term risks and uncertainties. The outlook will depend on a number of uncertain factors (Appendix I). Domestically, households’ concerns about future house price and wage growth could continue to weigh on consumption, and business sentiment will remain closely linked to how firms view the external environment, the prospects for a rebound in private consumption, and the future growth potential of the economy. Externally, Korea’s highly open economy exposes it to both positive and negative global cross-currents. Specifically: Partner country growth—although growth momentum in the U.S. may be building, the outlooks for China (Korea’s main export market), the EU, and Japan remain a concern (text figure). A persistently weak yen—Korean export volumes have held up so far, but signs suggest weakening prospects, with Korean market share beginning to decline in some industries. Profits and stock prices for the key exporting firms have taken a protracted hit, resulting in downward price pressure on input-providing domestic SMEs (text figure). The recent shift in market expectations that the yen will remain weak for some time could eventually lead to more off-shoring, lower investment in domestic capacity and R&D, and reduced export proceeds. The ultimate effect on Korea’s growth outlook is difficult to quantify, as staff analysis suggests that the weak export volume response the short run could mask a more fundamental shift in relative competitiveness which would take some time to materialize (Box 3). At the same time, the strong dollar could provide some buffer. Page 14 Box 3. Impact of the Weaker Yen on Korea’s Exports Following the Bank of Japan’s launch of its asset purchase program (QQE) in August 2011 the yen has depreciated against the U.S. dollar by over 35 percent and by about 40 percent against the won. More than prices and volumes, the effect has been largely felt in the profit margins of Korean and Japanese exporters. This is in line with historical episodes and econometric analysis which shows a long lag before exports respond to shifts in won-yen cross rates. Price pass-through. The pass-through of the weaker yen and won to export prices has been timid so far—both Korea and Japan have decreased export prices modestly but this is likely to reflect factors other than exchange rate movements, including the drop in oil prices and the continued trend decline in global prices of electronic products. Price cuts by Japan’s exporters have been somewhat higher than Korea’s in key sectors where product similarity is high (metal, electronics, and transportation equipment). Volume response. Export volumes have also been slow to respond. Japan’s real export volumes continued to decline until late 2012 before a sharp rebound since late 2014 helped recoup the bulk of the loss. Korea’s real exports have largely traced a trend similar to the one before the global financial crisis. Profit margins. With the limited volume and price response, exchange rate movements have been mostly reflected in higher profits for Japanese exporters and lower for Korean firms. One striking example is the behavior of profit ratios of car makers—since the first quarter of 2012 Hyundai Motors’ operating margin decreased by around 20 percent while Toyota’s increased by over 60 percent (figures). Hyundai Operating Margin (RHS) KRW/USD Toyota Operating Margin (RHS) JPY/USD Market share. After rising significantly, Korean exporters’ market share has stalled since 2011 with continued gains in three leading export destinations—China, ASEAN, and the United States—offset by broad-based slippages elsewhere. At the same time Japan endured sharp losses across all markets. In terms of product space, Korea has continued to expand its market share in electronics offsetting flat or declining shares in other leading export items, while Japan’s market share declined across a broad range of products (figures, next page). Short- and long-run export responsiveness. The limited price pass-through and high correlation between profit margin and exchange rate movements are in line with exporters’ historical behavior where they are slow to change prices in the short-run but do so over time as exchange rate shocks become locked in. This may be related to a range of structural factors for both countries’ key export industries (such as electronics and automobiles) including the importance of branding, product cycles, global supply chains, and offshoring of production. In these industries the impact of persistent exchange rate movements is likely to be felt through lagged adjustment in pricing as well as non-pricing decisions such as where to invest new capacity, the level of R&D investment, and others. This is supported by staff’s econometric analysis, which finds a low short-run exchange rate elasticity for both countries and across products, with the elasticities increasing over the longer-run. All of this suggests that the muted price and volume response so far to the sustained weakness of the yen may mask a more fundamental shift in the relative competitiveness of Japanese and Korean exporters. _____________________________ 1 “Should Korea Worry about a Permanently Weak Yen?” by Jack Ree, Gee Hee Hong, Seoeun (Thelma) Choi, IMF Working Paper, forthcoming. Page 15 Box 3. Impact of the Weaker Yen on Korea’s Exports (Concluded) Won's exchange rate and profits (won per dollar, percent) Yen's exchange rate and profits (yen per dollar, percent) KRW/USD Operating earning to sales ratio (Korea) 1/ Source: Bank of Korea. 1/ Listed companies. Global Market Share Change Drive by Region Korea vs. Japan (Percent contribution) Korea (2008-14) Korea (2011-14) Japan (2008-14) Japan (2011-14) K H Sources: IMF Direction of Trade; and IMF staff estimates. H W JPY/USD Operating earning to sales ratio (Japan) 1/ Source: Ministry of Finance, Korea. 1/ Listed companies. Global Market Share Change Driver by Product Korea vs. Japan (Percent contribution) Korea (2008-13) Korea (2011-13) Japan (2008-2013) Japan (2011-2013) v O v P O P O Sources: UNCTAD; and IMF staff estimates. z O f f Lower oil prices—as one of the world’s largest importers of oil products Korea is clearly benefiting from lower prices, but it may take some time before this translates into growth. The most significant channel would be through an increase in global purchasing power and corresponding demand for Korean exports, which could in turn lead to firms to invest in new capacity, while the impact on domestic consumption is likely to be relatively modest. At the same time persistently lower prices could reduce already low inflation expectations. Exposure to global financial risks—Korea has been less affected than many emerging markets to financial turmoil over the last two years and its relatively strong fundamentals and solid external buffers have led markets to view the country as a “bounded safe haven” where minor shocks to global markets, possibly related to an unwinding of U.S. quantitative easing, could lead to capital inflows. At the same time an open capital account exposes it to the risk of a sudden reversal of capital flows which would likely be accompanied by a fall in asset prices affecting business sentiment and lead to tighter financial conditions for corporates and banks. Allowing the won to respond flexibly would provide a key buffer. Risks of a downside growth and inflation scenario. In this environment there is a risk that a self-reinforcing downside dynamic could take hold where falling inflation expectations keep consumer spending suppressed, which coupled with perceived weak external prospects, leads firms Page 16 to withhold investments and decrease hiring (Appendix I). Ultimately these expectations could become self-fulfilling and result in significantly slower nominal and real growth relative to the recovery assumed in the baseline scenario. The growth consequences of a downside scenario could be protracted. As seen in many other economies, the expectation of low or negative inflation once entrenched can be very difficult to break and can have long-lasting negative effects on household, corporate, and public sector balance sheets. Many of the reforms needed to shore up potential output over the longer term could be more costly and difficult to implement in an environment of weak economic growth. The likelihood of this scenario may not be high but the costs could be significant. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed with staff that the near-term outlook was subject to uncertainties and risks. Although they recognize that the recovery in domestic demand has yet to take hold, they expected growth to pick up from the second quarter of this year as a result of the lagged effect of the stimulus policies put in place so far including the series of policy rate cuts and the expected dividend from lower oil prices. They remain mindful of the possibility that a weaker- than-expected global environment and continued household and investor pessimism could lead to stagnating or falling nominal and real growth, but at the time of the mission they considered the likelihood of this scenario to be low. Regarding external risks, they viewed capital flows related to an orderly tightening by the U.S. Fed as manageable but remained mindful of the risk that there may be bouts of disruptive financial market volatility. At the same time they recognized that Korea’s strong fundamentals—positive growth, current account surpluses, low debt, and solid reserve buffers— make it more resilient to these risks than many other countries with open capital accounts, and viewed the flexible exchange rate as a key shock absorber.