Staff continue to forecast a modest recovery. Broadly in line with Consensus, staff forecast growth to tick up to 2.7 percent this year and 3.0 percent in 2017, with inflation remaining subdued and the output gap closing only by 2021. The anticipated pickup in activity is based on growing private consumption, a stronger housing market, and the impact of fiscal and monetary easing. On the other hand, export prospects will likely remain difficult. Sluggish exports and heightened uncertainty will weigh on fixed investment, and stockbuilding will continue to be a drag. Credit is expected to continue to grow, partly reflecting the impact of interest rate cuts, but at a slower pace consistent with the tightening of See Annex VII for detail of these stress tests, as well as the 2015 Article IV Consultation for Korea, which analyzed the impact of weaker corporate balance sheets on investment. Annex IV describes how policy recommendations from the last Article IV Consultation were taken up. Page 15 macroprudential measures, the narrowing of the credit gap, and the envisaged moderation in construction investment after 2017. Risks are to the downside. A number of factors could lead to weaker outcomes than indicated in the baseline forecast: Domestic risks. Private consumption has been weak for several years, and the assumed rebound may not materialize, particularly given the drag from household debt. Corporate restructuring, while essential for the longer term, could lead to higher unemployment and weaken consumption (although strong social safety nets would minimize this effect). Corporate restructuring could also have an adverse short-term impact on banks’ balance sheets, hampering their ability to extend credit and causing them to tighten lending standards. External risks Korea is one of the countries most heavily exposed to China, and a hard landing there, or a significant slowdown beyond WEO projections, would depress Korea’s exports further. A faster-than-expected move by China up the value chain could also generate more competition for Korea. On the other hand, rebalancing toward consumption could raise Chinese demand for a wide array of Korean goods and services, including cultural products. (See Annex VI.) Finally, tighter or more volatile global financial conditions—particularly following Brexit—could lead to capital outflows, falling asset prices, and rising funding costs, with adverse effects on activity. Authorities’ views The authorities had a slightly more optimistic forecast than staff, while acknowledging that growth momentum is weaker than desired. They agreed that household debt can be a drag on consumption and growth but also suggested that the increase in household saving over the past few years partly reflects rising life expectancy. They were less concerned about the unwinding of expenditure frontloading since revenue overperformance would allow the budget to be executed according to plan. They suggested that their efforts to increase budget execution rates, along with the carryover from last year’s stimulus, as well as the planned new stimulus, would help to support growth. They noted that risks from corporate restructuring could be contained, as budget provisions for unemployment benefits would cover affected workers, while arrangements were being made to ensure that creditor banks remain well capitalized (see below). While they were closely monitoring possible spillovers from China, they felt that Korea’s position in global value chains and diversified export base could help mitigate these risks. Instead, they saw the possibility of disruptive global market conditions as the main risk to the forecast. Brexit was not seen as likely to have a substantial impact on Korea, given that direct trade and financial linkages between Korea and the U.K. are limited; the authorities, however, noted that medium- and long-term risks could exist during the U.K.’s exit negotiation process. Finally, they suggested that higher oil prices could benefit Korean exports by boosting demand in oil-exporting nations. See the risk assessment matrix in Annex III for further details. Page 16