Overview. Going forward macroeconomic policy decisions will need to be taken before it becomes clear how effective the measures to stimulate demand already in place prove to be, and whether the stalled growth momentum and weak inflation has shifted or become entrenched. If the global outlook improves, for example, or the housing market gains momentum, it may turn out that the monetary, fiscal, and other policy measures already taken prove more than sufficient. But if consumer or investor caution is allowed to deepen, then additional measures at the margin might not have much power to change the psychology from pessimistic to optimistic. While recognizing that the current uncertainties make policy fine-tuning very challenging, staff argued that the high costs if the downside scenario materializes warrant a more pro-active use of available policy tools than would be called for in a normal cyclical environment, and that the risks of doing too little too late outweigh the risks of doing too much. The lack of clear signs of a recovery of domestic demand would call for additional use of the authorities’ fiscal and monetary space. The primary aim would be to send a signal strong enough to shift confidence, which would be aided by a broad-based set of policy actions that are bold rather than incremental. Measures already taken. While the full impact remains to be seen, the measures have not had a material impact on confidence suggesting they may fall short of what is needed. Prospects for Page 17 recent policy rate cuts to stimulate demand will depend in part on whether they spur households and firms to take on more leverage to consume and invest, and together with steps to deregulate housing investment, lead to a recovery in the housing market sufficient to change savings behavior. While there have been pockets of increased housing market activity recently, the decline in expectations of future price and wage growth may blunt the impact of recent cuts on real interest rates. The budget measures to stimulate demand are relatively modest and the impact of the steps aimed at unlocking idle corporate cash is difficult to predict. Monetary policy. There is scope for monetary policy to take pre-emptive action against downside risks. In an environment where households and firms hold excess cash and postpone spending on the self-reinforcing expectation that wages, prices, and house price growth may continue to be weak, policy rate cuts can help shift incentives away from cash hoarding toward more consumption and investment. The longer expectations become entrenched however, the more policy rates would need to be cut to break this dynamic. With the space to cut limited by the zero lower bound, waiting to see if additional rate cuts are called for runs the risk of reducing their effectiveness if ultimately needed. Concerns about their short run impact on household debt ratios may be counterproductive if withholding monetary stimulus results in weaker nominal income growth, and are better addressed by the government’s macro-prudential policy tools for mortgage lending standards (paragraph 26). Fiscal policy. The government’s expansionary fiscal policy in the 2015 budget is a step in the right direction for supporting aggregate demand in the near term, and the revised medium-term deficit path is consistent with utilizing fiscal space when needed while preserving longer-term fiscal sustainability. Relatively modest public debt allows the authorities the flexibility to take additional measures if needed to ensure the budget’s planned spending program is carried out in the event that weaker-than-expected nominal GDP growth results in revenue falling short of this year’s target. Budget support should be broadened where there is scope for temporary measures to boost employment and household incomes in a way that does not run counter to needed structural reforms and longer run fiscal sustainability. The government’s efforts to expand policy-based lending with budget support would be most cost-effective for both stimulating demand and increasing productivity if priority is given to the most commercially viable enterprises, including by refocusing public support for SMEs, and in a way that preserves the financial sector’s profitability and capital buffers. Structural reforms. The reforms discussed in paragraphs 36–38 should be undertaken as quickly as feasible independent of the near-term macroeconomic outlook. But while most of the reforms will take some time to yield direct growth benefits, maintaining their momentum could have benefits in the near term by shoring up confidence in the economy’s long run potential. Authorities’ views. The authorities viewed revitalizing the economy as a key near term priority and stood ready to take additional policy actions when needed if growth momentum does not show signs of picking up soon. At the same time Korea’s strong dependence on global economic developments and its underlying structural factors make this task more challenging. In particular: Page 18 The BOK recognized that there is still space for further monetary easing if needed, but highlighted a number of considerations. Headline inflation has been pushed down in part by supply side factors including low oil prices, and with survey data showing inflation expectations anchored in the mid-2 percent range it would not be prudent to over-react to inflation falling below target. Also, they argued that many of the factors driving weak demand—low wage growth, consumer and investor caution—reflect not so much cyclical factors as structural rigidities which will need to be addressed through longer-run reforms and will limit the effectiveness of monetary easing on its own. Overall, monetary policy would need to strike a balance between growth and stability, and the bank would need to remain mindful of the possible impact of monetary easing on household debt. The Ministry of Strategy and Finance emphasized the role that fiscal policy has been and will continue to play in supporting demand within the boundaries of maintaining fiscal soundness, including through direct budget spending and expanded and refocused policy lending efforts. Unlike many countries with sizeable infrastructure needs, Korea has no clear areas where there is broad-based support for ramping up public spending in the short run. They highlighted slower than initially-projected nominal output growth as a key reason for the budget revenue shortfalls over the last several years, and that achieving the nominal growth target will be important for meeting the revenue target and addressing the increased social spending needs. The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment that household debt does not pose imminent risks and would like to see debt levels stabilize gradually while avoiding a forced deleveraging which could have adverse impact on growth. The authorities were in broad- based agreement that concerns about household debt would be better addressed through the government’s existing tools for setting mortgage lending standards, and that a coordinated approach to monetary and macro-prudential policy would be needed.