Overview. While Korea has built up large external buffers and does not currently face external sustainability issues, the country’s ability to continue growing through a heavy reliance on gaining export market share is increasingly limited while also leaving the economy more exposed to external shocks. This means achieving more balanced, sustainable long-run growth depends on success in closing the large productivity gaps in the non-traded sector, which would be accompanied by a reduced role for net exports as a source of demand-side growth. The current account. The current account in part reflects where Korea is in that process and where it needs to go. In this regard Korea’s underlying current account surplus—even after allowing for the transitory effects of the windfall from lower oil prices which is expected to continue to put upward pressure on the surplus in the near term—is larger than would be consistent with the country’s economic and policy fundamentals. This gap reflects a number of factors including precautionary savings related to a relatively weak social safety net (Box 4). Policies to address imbalances. An active policy approach to boost near-term aggregate demand and longer-run productivity will also help reduce external imbalances, reinforcing their importance in bringing about a more stable, resilient, and durable structure to the economy. In particular: Page 21 Structural policies. Staff scenario analysis suggests that a 0.3 percentage point increase in non-traded sector productivity would increase long-run potential output growth by 0.2 percentage points, and for a given real exchange rate would result in a reduction in the current account surplus of around 1 percent of GDP. Fiscal policy. The government’s more expansionary fiscal policy stance, both this year and over the medium term, could help narrow imbalances, all the more so if coupled with an expanded social safety net that reduces the need for precautionary savings. Exchange rate flexibility. Even with some closing of the productivity gap, won appreciation over time will likely be needed to bring about a reduction in external imbalances to levels consistent with Korea’s fundamentals. Medium-term current account prospects. Korea faces a number of trends that will affect the current account and how it responds to price changes in uncertain ways, making it difficult to pin down the size of Korea’s external gap. Korea’s unique demographics trends where the expected rapid transition from a relatively young to an old society will take place against the background of what has been a substantial increase in life expectancy might produce a pattern of higher aggregate household savings now that unwinds over time. Whether the oil dividend is saved or spent will depend on how durable households and firms perceive it to be. How the current account will respond to past and future exchange rate movements, including the relationship between the won and yen, is a key uncertainty—staff analysis suggests that Korean export volumes have become highly inelastic to exchange rate movements in the short run, pushing the adjustment into the longer term where forecasting is particularly difficult (Box 3). The longer-run export prospects will also be affected by a number of uncertain structural developments such as product innovation and evolution and entry into the market by newer competitors in China and elsewhere. Exchange rate and foreign exchange reserve policies. Maintaining a flexible exchange rate is essential both as a buffer against external shocks and to facilitate adjustment toward domestic sources of growth and thereby reduce external imbalances, and the won should remain market determined with intervention limited to smoothing excess volatility. The quantity of reserves has increased steadily since the sharp decline in 2008 but has been broadly stable (at around 130 percent) as a share of the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric during most of this period. Lacking published data, foreign exchange intervention proxies based on changes in stocks or balance of payments data point to periods of net purchases, albeit at levels below those in the first half of 2014, although these proxies should be treated as suggestive given their high degree of uncertainty. The recent large shifts in cross rates for the major reserve currencies add a high degree of uncertainty to constructed proxies using published data on stocks of reserves in U.S. dollar terms, where estimates of valuation losses are highly sensitive to assumptions about the currency composition of reserves. Our models suggest cumulative intervention since mid-2014 of anywhere from zero to modest net purchases. Page 22 Box 4. External Stability Assessment Foreign asset and liability position and trajectory. Korea’s net international investment position (NIIP) increased from -2.9 percent of GDP in 2013 to 5.8 percent in 2014. This position is expected to strengthen further as the current account is in strong surplus. The net external debt position was -16.7 percent of GDP in 2014. Banks’ short term external debt remains below the pre-crisis levels, and the risks of currency mismatch are limited as the bulk of the short term external debt is matched with forward hedging activities mainly by exporters. The NIIP position and dynamics present little risk to external sustainability. Current account. Drawing on various approaches including the IMF’s model-based External Balance Assessment (EBA) regression exercise (after adjusting the results to account for various Korea-specific factors), staff assesses the cyclically-adjusted current account surplus in 2014 to be in the range of 2½ to 5 percent above the level consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies. A part of this gap could be accounted for by relatively low public social spending in Korea and the fiscal policy gaps of other countries. 2014 Current account gap (% of GDP) 2½ to 5 2014 REER gap (%) -13 to -5 Staff assessment EBA regression estimation gap of which policy gaps of which residual cyclically adjusted current account norm External sustainability (ES) approach estimation gap 0.1 (REER index) -13.8 (REER level) Real exchange rate Based on the assessed current account gap and considering other EBA-related regression estimates, the measured, trade weighted real exchange rate (REER) for 2014 is assessed as weaker than the level consistent with fundamentals and desired policies. By precisely how much is subject to uncertainty, particularly given both the difficulty in predicting when and by how much Korea’s exports will respond to exchange rate movements (paragraph 32 and Box 3), as well as the diversity of estimates produced by the EBA’s exchange rate regression models. Applying a plausible range of elasticities to the current account gap produces a range for the exchange rate gap of 5–13 percent. Capital and financial accounts: flows and policy measures. With an increase in net portfolio outflows and a decrease in net banking outflows (about 1¾ percent of GDP for both) offsetting each other, the overall net capital flow deficit remained at 5 percent of GDP. A proposed technical change to an existing bank levy, predicted to take effect later in 2015, does not substantially alter the macroprudential policy setting. Overall, Korea’s net and gross flows appear sustainable. FX intervention and reserves level. Korea has a floating exchange rate. The quantity of reserves has been broadly stable as a share of the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric during most of period since 2008. Intervention should be limited to smoothing excessive volatility. The stock of reserves should be sufficient to buffer against a range of possible external shocks. Based on the above information staff assesses that Korea’s external position in 2014 was substantially stronger than that implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. Developments as of March, 2015, point to a somewhat stronger external position in 2015. ______________________ Staff’s assessment is based on an EBA model which has recently been modified to incorporate changes in the treatment of demographic explanatory variables, which relative to the previous model results in an increase in Korea’s estimated current account gap through a corresponding increase in the unexplained residual. Staff interprets this as indicative of the existence of important country specific factors that are not fully captured by the model’s variables and cyclical adjustments. After adjusting for these factors, the recent methodological changes to the EBA model do not materially alter staff’s assessment of the current account gap. Staff used the assessed current account gap and applied a range elasticities, both EBA-based and staff’s own calculations, as well as information on the REER gap itself coming from the EBA’s exchange rate models. EBA exchange rate estimates vary widely, with the “index model” showing a positive gap of 0.1 percent and the “level model” a negative gap of 13.8 percent. Staff assessment is based on the IMF’s framework for assessing reserve adequacy, and accounts for Korea’s deepening financial markets. Page 23 Authorities’ views. While agreeing that a narrowing of the current account surplus from its current level would be desirable, and expected as the economy recovers and temporary factors recede, the authorities emphasized that the surplus appears unrelated to a weak exchange rate boosting export competitiveness—indeed, the increase has taken place despite the substantial appreciation of the won in real terms since 2012 and appeared to be driven mostly by the sharp fall in oil prices, weak domestic demand, and changes in demographics. They continue to view the IMF’s econometric approaches used in informing the staff’s external sector assessment as suffering from a number of methodological and data shortcomings which prevent them from fully capturing key country specific factors such as past experiences of foreign exchange liquidity crises, the speed of population aging, and trade elasticities. While they did not view the exchange rate as undervalued, they agreed that a flexible exchange rate could play a role in reducing external imbalances, but put more emphasis on the role of boosting near-term growth and productivity-enhancing structural reforms in bringing about this transition. In this context they reiterated their policy of allowing the exchange rate to be freely determined in the market with intervention limited to smoothing operations to counter any large fluctuations in flows.