The banking sector remains healthy . Kosovo banks are generally well-capitalized, liquid, and profitable. The system’s capital adequacy ratio (18.2 percent) is among the highest in the region, with all banks, both domestic and foreign, above the regulatory minimum. Banks’ aggregate liquid assets cover roughly 41 percent of short-term liabilities, a key consideration in a euroized economy. Profitability has improved and is adequate despite only moderate economic growth. In 2014, all banks were profitable, with overall return on equity of about 20 percent. NPLs are somewhat elevated at 8.4 percent of total loans but stable and fully provisioned. Staff welcomed progress made on strengthening banking supervision . In particular, the CBK has moved steadily toward risk-based supervision, a key recommendation of the 2012 FSAP (Annex VI). With help from Fund technical assistance, the CBK has strengthened the depth of its off- site monitoring and analysis, developed an on-site examination model, and tested the new framework at two systemic banks, with plans to roll the new framework out to all banks by the end of 2015. Still, staff recommended that the CBK continue to train its supervisors and deepen its analytic and supervisory capacity, including by further refining supervision manuals and procedures, extending supervision to cover risks on a consolidated basis as applicable, and assessing prudential ratios. Separately, bank supervision will also benefit from memoranda of understanding for the exchange of information signed with home supervisors, a key step given that Kosovo’s banking sector is 90 percent foreign-owned by assets. Banks' Liquidity (Percent of deposits, as of Dec. 2014) The authorities have also made efforts to strengthen the emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) framework . With the CBK lacking the ability to issue its own currency, its ELA reserves are critical. Staff estimates that current levels of ELA reserves are more than ample; together with the banks’ own resources, the system could withstand a very severe run on deposits (Annex II). Still, staff welcomed the central bank’s proactive efforts to seek letters of comfort from parent banks stating that parents would work with their subsidiaries in the event of a crisis. In addition, the draft ELA regulation that would govern conditions, processes, and modalities of any emergency assistance provided to banks is generally in line with best practice. 1/ Only foreign subsidiaries and domestically-owned banks. So urce: staff calculations. Own funds ELA funds Foreign Subs Domestic Banks In addition, the authorities are working on a new draft legislation to make AML/CFT issues a component of CBK supervision. Page 12 Despite these gains, more is needed to bolster Kosovo’ crisis management framework A Crisis Prevention Council (CPC) comprised of the CBK Governor, Finance Minister, and the Chair of the Parliament Budget Committee has been recently established to discuss financial stability issues in Kosovo and to ensure better coordination in the event of crisis. These are important steps, but staff called for full operationalization of the CPC. In particular, the council should have formal meetings at regular intervals, rather than meet informally and on an ad-hoc basis as is the case now. In addition, the council should include the Deposit Insurance Fund of Kosovo (DIFK). Western Balkans Credit Depth (credit/GDP, Q314; MNE 2013, HRV 2012) The main challenge facing the financial system is better access to credit to support growth . Despite banks’ healthy liquidity ratios, Kosovo has the lowest level of credit penetration (33 percent credit-to-GDP) in the Western Balkans. This is partly a function of demand— many potential borrowers do not see investment opportunities or an attractive investment environment in Kosovo—but structural factors are also holding back lending. Difficult debt collection procedures, uncertain court processes, and high informality have influenced conservative lending stances and led to both high interest rate spreads (currently about 850 bps) and high collateral requirements. In this context, banks are overly focused on short-term trade financing and personal loans to government employees rather than loans to private enterprises than could help to grow a more dynamic economy. MKD MNE UVK ALB SRB BIH HRV Tackling this challenge will require a multi-pronged effort . Recent improvements to collateral recovery enforcement through the introduction of private bailiffs should help and are welcome, as are plans to develop more effective NPL recovery and write-off procedures. However, with the current backlog of bank cases stretching up to five years, more work is needed to make court proceedings more efficient, specialized, and timely. Efforts are ongoing, but they are at their early stages and will take time to bear fruit. In addition, legal system improvements are needed to provide more confidence in the rule of law in Kosovo (discussed below). A still-developing microfinance sector could also more efficiently support credit to households and SMEs. Authorities’ Views The authorities shared the staff assessment on the health of the banks, and appreciated Fund advice and technical assistance in improving CBK supervision and the ELA framework . They expect the draft regulation on the latter to be passed soon. The CBK considers its transition to risk-based supervision a success and that its new staffing level is sufficient. The authorities agree on the need to further develop their macroprudential oversight capacity and have plans to do so, but see the CPC’s current informal setup as sufficient to exchange views and, if necessary, coordinate between Kosovo’s financial authorities. Page 13 The CBK agreed that bank lending needs to deepen to support Kosovo’s development In this vein, they saw the constraints squarely on the side of high informality levels and a slow judiciary, rather than on the banks’ side. They expect the introduction of private bailiffs to have a positive effect in the clearing of bad loans, and hence in giving banks confidence to lend more freely. In their view, private bailiffs were needed because the process of reforming the judiciary from within, to which they are committed, will naturally take time to bear fruit.