The limited progress in raising incomes and improving labor market outcomes is disappointing . With GDP per capita currently at €3,000, the income gap with the EU remains very large and is closing slowly, while that with EU candidate countries has widened. In addition, labor market outcomes are among the most disappointing in Europe, with unemployment at 30 percent despite extremely low labor participation, particularly among women and the young. In these conditions, it is perhaps unsurprising that so many have emigrated to EU countries in recent months. Kosovo GDP per capita as ratio of EU countries and EU Candidate Countries average Labor Market Indicators (percent) Total Women Youth (15-24) Unemployment Rate Source: National authorities. Employment Rate Kosovo/EU-28 average Kosovo/Candidates Sources: World Economic Outlook; national authorities. CZE SVN POL EST LVA ROM SVK BGR Staff argued that domestic costs are too high given current productivity levels . Strong remittance inflows, close to 20 percent of GDP, have pushed reservation wages beyond levels that domestic productivity can sustain. In fact, Kosovo wages adjusted for productivity are among the highest in the region, not helped by large, ad hoc wage increases in the public sector. In addition, remittances (as well as widespread donor presence) have tended to stimulate consumption and investment biased towards non-tradables. This bias can be clearly seen in the data (Figure 4): in Kosovo, more than 80 percent of FDI is directed towards non-tradables, manufacturing accounts for less than 12 percent of GDP, and the trade deficit last year exceeded 30 percent of GDP. All in all, staff believes Kosovo suffers Labor Force Participation Rates vs. Remittance Inflows, 2013 Inflow of remittances, percent of GDP f b L HUN HRV ALB SRB MKD UVK LTU BIH Page 14 from a significant real exchange rate overvaluation, on the order of 15–20 percent (text box). In this context, wage restraint in the public sector is important: with the general government providing one in four jobs in the formal sector, containing wage costs will have a direct positive impact on overall competitiveness. The fact that the public sector now offers both greater job security and higher wages than the private sector makes it very hard for firms to attract talent. A credible energy pricing policy can help address energy constraints that have become a growing impediment on development . Kosovo currently relies on two old and unreliable electricity power plants, and the system is operating with no redundancy. Electricity imports can help fill temporary gaps, which is why the planned transmission line to/from Albania is important. However, imports are not a long-term fix given their higher cost and constraints i n the country-to- country transmission lines. Hence, the country is faced with the urgent need to build a new power plant. With no space in the budget to accommodate its construction (estimated cost: 20 percent of GDP), credible commitments that future tariffs will be set at high enough levels to satisfy the return on investment are critical to attract foreign private investment. Doing Business Indicators (Distance to frontier score) To raise medium-term prospects, the weak business environment and rule of law will need to be bolstered . The World Bank’s overall Doing Business Indicator, which is now close to the Western Balkans average, has improved in several areas, e.g., construction permits, but deteriorated in others. But de jure improvements need to be matched by progress on the ground that economic actors can feel. It is particularly worrisome that perceptions of corruption remain widespread. In this context, staff was encouraged by the adoption of the new public sector procurement law, which follows international best practice, as well as the soon to follow e-procurement. Still, the challenge will be in the implementation of the law, and the ability to prosecute those who break it. Improvements in the AML/CFT framework, notably by further strengthening the Financial Intelligence Unit, which has increased its activity, will also help combat corruption. The anti- corruption and AML/CFT assessments conducted as part of the Project against Economic Crime in Kosovo (PECK) are welcome and the authorities are encouraged to undergo a comprehensive AML/CFT assessment against the revised 2012 FATF standard. Kosovo: 2010 – DB2010 DB2013 DB2015 Page 15 Box 2. External Sector Assessment Given lack of competitiveness, a narrow export base, and concomitant dependence on imports, the trade and current account deficits are expected to remain at a high level . The narrow export base and large imports, including energy and machineries, are key drivers of the large trade imbalances (a deficit exceeding 30 percent of GDP). Over the medium term, the current account deficit is expected to narrow slightly on account of lower import growth and growing remittance inflows, but will remain high at 10.5 percent of GDP in 2020. The assessment of the real exchange rate points to significant overvaluation . The two CGER methodologies used in Kosovo’s case, the macroeconomic balance the external sustainability, find very similar results, even if these should be interpreted with caution given limited data availability. In the medium term, the results of the above-mentioned methodologies can be summarized as follows: The macroeconomic balance approach points to an overvalued real exchange rate of 15 percent. The external stability approach also indicates an overvaluation of about 18 percent, assuming a stabilizing medium-term positive net foreign liabilities position in the range of 3 percent of GDP. Of note, the current account norm estimated for Albania, the closest comparator, is very close to that found here for Kosovo. Other indicators support the view of a significant competitiveness gap . In particular, wages in the public sector now exceed those in the private sector, making it very hard for the latter to attract the talent it needs to compete. Similarly, the fact that some much FDI is driven not by foreign investors but by the Kosovar Diaspora gives it a clear non-tradable bias: more than 80 percent of FDI is currently going to low- productivity non-tradables such as construction and domestic services, rather than to potentially higher- productivity tradables. The fact that exports have been falling as a share of GDP (despite their low absolute level) is, in itself, a clear and direct indication that Kosovo has a competitiveness problem. Real Exchange Rate Assessment (percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Macroeconomic Balance External Stability Approach Approach +15 +18 CA Norm Underlying CA projection /1 Current Account Gap Real Exchange Rate Estimated overvaluation (+) in percent Lack of data also precludes estimation of the equilibrium exchange rate method. Page 16 Firm Survey Percentage of respondents indicating gifts/payments or other benefits to parliamentarians to gain advantages have "moderate " "major " or "decisive" impact Percentage of respondents indicating gifts/payments or other benefits to government officials to gain advantages have "moderate " "major " or "decisive" impact Percentage of respondents indicating gifts/payments or other benefits to local government officials to gain advantages have "moderate " "major " or "decisive" impact MDA UKR UVK ARM KAZ TJK RUS TUR CZE SVK ALB LTU SRB POL BGR HRV HUN ROM LVA KGZ BIH BLR MNE MKD AZE EST SVN GEO UZB MDA UKR UVK ARM KAZ TJK RUS TUR CZE SVK ALB LTU SRB POL BGR HRV HUN ROM LVA KGZ BIH BLR MNE MKD AZE EST SVN GEO UZB Source: World Bank. MDA UKR UVK ARM KAZ TJK RUS TUR CZE SVK ALB LTU SRB POL BGR HRV HUN ROM LVA KGZ BIH BLR MNE MKD AZE EST SVN GEO UZB Raising access and quality of education is another urgent priority, particularly in light of low employment . Currently, Kosovo spends less on education than its peers, and a disproportionately large share of the spending goes to wages. While there is a quality deficit at all educational levels, consensus among experts puts the focus on improving access to and quality in pre-primary and primary education. Similarly, curricula in vocational programs are seen as un- aligned to market needs, and the programs disconnected from the business world. Authorities views The authorities broadly agreed with the staff assessment . They currently lack estimates of real exchange rate overvaluation, and felt these were very useful to benchmark the competitiveness gap. In this light, they concurred that public sector wage restraint is needed not just for fiscal sustainability but for competitiveness purposes. The authorities are confident of progress in the energy sector . In their view, the transmission line to Albania will bring significant benefits, as Kosovo and Albania are not synchronized in terms of peak energy needs and hence are natural “partners” for an electricity market. At the same time, they acknowledged that electricity imports are not a full substitute for the new power plant, and that the bidding for this plant is facing some hurdles. Nonetheless, they are working very closely with the World Bank and are confident of a breakthrough in negotiations. Tackling corruption is one of their key priorities . They see the new procurement law as a major step forward, as the government is the number one purchaser and economic actor in the country. Current work to improve the debarment process for those who break procurement laws will Page 17 aid in the implementation, and work is ongoing to implement e-procurement. Finally, they admitted to gaps in their judiciary, but felt that tremendous progress had been achieved in the seven years since independence in close cooperation with the EU’s rule of law mission.