The budget situation has deteriorated . Before the June elections, the government awarded a 25 percent increase in public sector wages and social pensions, promised new benefits for war veterans and prisoners of war, and signed a generous collective agreement on labor relations. Combined, these measures have triggered a sharp increase in current spending, and the authorities managed to contain last year’s fiscal deficit excluding PAK spending at 2.4 percent of GDP only thanks to a 2 percent of GDP under-spending of the capital budget. Staff warned that this year’s deficit will be significantly higher than budgeted . Given the long time needed to form the new government, parliament decided to approve a “technical” budget that had been prepared by the caretaking administration several months prior. The problem is that this budget relies on overly optimistic revenue assumptions. Assuming more realistic revenue outcomes, and given the full year effect of the pre-electoral promises together with the expected ramp up in spending on the new route to Macedonia, the deficit could reach 3.5 percent of GDP this year. In fact, the deficit would have been higher were it not for recent decisions to increase excise rates on a number of goods and to hold off on filling some open vacancies in the public sector, both of which staff support. Fiscal deficits are expected to remain elevated in the medium term . Under the baseline scenario, the deficit is projected to steadily increase and reach 4.7 percent of GDP in 2020. This is because there are a number of one-off revenues that are expected to taper off after 2016, while net interest payments may increase as debt is accumulated. Under this baseline, public debt would steadily creep up to over 30 percent of GDP by 2020 (Annex IV). Moreover, this baseline scenario includes a number of risks (possibly up to 1 − 1½ percent of GDP), including potentially higher-than- budgeted costs of implementing the collective agreement, uncertainty over the final bill of the war veterans package, erosion in tax bases from trade agreements and, last but not least, the possibility that the transformation of Kosovo’s Security Forces into Armed Forces would trigger additional spending. This is GDP as forecasted in the 2014 budget, which is what counts for the fiscal rule. The outturn was above the fiscal rule’s 2 percent limit but within the ex-post margin allowed by the rule. Note that the deficit was slightly higher when measured in percent GDP as forecasted by Fund staff. The road connecting Pristina with the Albania border was finalized in 2013 at a cost of some 20 percent of GDP. Usage so far has been below predictions. Construction on the road connecting Pristina to the Macedonia border started in 2014 and is expected to be completed in 2017–18, at a cost of some 12 percent of GDP. This road is thought to be more economically useful, given that much of Kosovo’s trade happens with Skopje. Page 8 Beyond deficits, staff drew attention to the worsened composition of the budget Given large pre-electoral packages before the 2011 and 2014 elections, current spending is expected to increase by 4.3 percentage points of GDP in 2010–15, mostly due to the wage bill (2.7 percentage point of GDP) and pensions (1.7 percentage points of GDP). Since independence, public sector wages have more than doubled, vastly outpacing productivity, private sector wages, or public wages in other Western Balkan countries. To accommodate this sharp increase in current spending, capital spending has been substantially cut over the same period (4 percentage point of GDP), despite Kosovo’s urgent development needs. Moreover, education spending has remained low compared to peers and is in fact on a declining path. Trends in Average Public and Private Sector quarterly wages (Euros) Average Private Sector Wages Average Public Sector Wages 2002Q4 2004Q2 2005Q4 2007Q2 2008Q4 2010Q2 2011Q4 2013Q2 2014Q4 1/ 2014 data on private sector wages is preliminary. Capital Spending (percent of GDP) Staff recommended a gradual consolidation path to preserve the credibility of the -3.5% -3.7% -2.5% -0.7% fiscal rule and safeguard low public debt . Should the deficit this year exceed the 2 percent limit (see above), the fiscal rule would require that deficits over 2015–18 average 2 percent. Staff thus urged the authorities to consolidate gradually so as to preserve the credibility of the rule. At the same time, staff emphasized that the quality of adjustment is equally important: consolidation should focus on arresting unsustainable trends in current expenditure (including via a Overall balance (excluding PAK) before measures Increase the excise rate on gasoline from EUR 0.385/lt. to EUR 0.445/lt. in 2015 Increase property tax rate (to 0.5% on average) in 2016 Increase VAT from 16% to 18% & refrain from other changes Total revenue measures (by year) Tripling rather than quintupling agricultural subsidies in 2015 Freeze spending on goods and services Freeze public wage bill Freeze subsidies and transfers Total spending measures (by year) Total increase of the balance after measures Overall balance (excluding PAK) after measures The main elements of the fiscal rule are: (i) the headline deficit excluding both spending of the privatization agency as well as spending from own source revenues carried-forward shall not exceed 2 percent of GDP (as forecasted in the budget); (ii) any excessive deficit should be corrected within the next 3 years, so that the average deficit over the four-year period equals 2 percent; and (iii) provided Treasury cash balances including funds for bank emergency liquidity assistance are above 4.5 percent of GDP, the government may use privatization funds to finance capital projects above the 2 percent deficit ceiling. Page 9 continued freeze of public wages and benefits in 2015–16 ) while preserving the budget for priority areas such as infrastructure, education, and health. Given Kosovo’s generally low tax rates, staff also saw merit in a uniform increase in the VAT rate. Instead, the government is planning to introduce differentiated VAT rates as well as zero rate exemptions on some goods: these are not only distortionary, they also mean a missed opportunity to raise needed tax revenue. More broadly, staff recommended the introduction of a rules-based framework to guide public wage decisions . A rule that caps growth in the public wage bill relative to some well- defined macro-indicator(s) could be a useful complement to the fiscal rule, helping to prevent the large discretionary jumps in wages seen in recent years. Staff analysis (Box 1 and Annex III) shows that such a rule would have delivered significantly more modest and sustainable increases than those actually observed. While such rules have disadvantages, notably their rigidity and potential pro-cyclicality, staff argued that these are outweighed by the positives in a country like Kosovo. At the same time, staff argued that a public wage rule should not be seen as a substitute for the long delayed reform of the civil service. Sources of funding should be diversified by tapping international markets . The shallow domestic market could be stretched if it were to finance a deficit of 3.5 percent of GDP this year. In this context, staff recommended that, in addition to gradual fiscal adjustment, Kosovo seek external market financing. While Kosovo has never borrowed from external markets, and would thus need to go through the process of obtaining a credit rating, the country’s still low public debt should serve it in good stead, notably given significant global liquidity. External funding could in fact help not only to finance the deficit, but to rebuild fiscal buffers to bring them back to prudent levels. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly concurred with staff’s assessment . They agreed that, on current policies, the 2015 deficit is likely to be around 3½ percent of GDP, and that there are risks that could drive the deficit even higher. In addition, they shared the view that the composition of the budget has worsened significantly. To redress unsustainable trends in public wages, the authorities are considering a reform of public wage determination processes along the lines recommended by staff. On VAT, the authorities felt that lower rates and exemptions on some products are needed to stimulate investment in growth sectors. Should the need for additional revenue arise, they would consider raising the main rate to 19 percent. The 2015 budget already freezes wages/benefits in nominal terms. A renewed freeze in 2016 would be justified considering the 25 percent jump in 2014. Of note, the equally large increases in public wages in 2011 were followed by nominal freezes in both 2012 and 2013, under Fund-supported programs. Reserves for pure fiscal financing are currently below levels staff would consider prudent (see Annex II). Page 10 Box 1. Wage and Indexation Mechanism In Kosovo, increases in public sector wages have been excessively large for political reasons, resulting in adverse economic consequences . In this context, a rule that caps growth of the public sector wage bill relative to some transparent macroeconomic indicator could have significant advantages. In Kosovo’s case, there are at least four possibilities for rules-based mechanisms: (i) wages could be tied to inflation to account for changes in cost of living; (ii) wages could be tied to real GDP as an imperfect proxy of labor productivity; (iii) wages could be tied to nominal GDP growth as a proxy for changes in the cost of living and labor productivity; and (iv) wages could be changed based on the current formula used for the adjustment of the minimum salary. Simulations of the proposed rule- based mechanisms show that, had such a rule been in place in 2009– 2014, growth in the public sector wage bill would have been much lower than actually observed . Despite the drawbacks of such rules, such as their pro-cyclicality, the benefits from restraining public wage growth as observed in Kosovo would have more than compensated. Actual vs. simulated increases of the public wage bill under alternative rules-based mechanisms Actual (index, 2009= 100) CPI-capped (index, 2009= 100) Real growth-capped (index, 2009= 100) Nominal growth-capped (index, 2009= 100) Minimum wage formula-capped (index, 2009= 100) Source: Kosovo authorities; and IMF staff estimates. At the same time, they felt the fiscal rule does not give enough recognition to Kosovo’s development needs . The authorities expressed their strong commitment to macro-fiscal stability, pointing to the freeze in wages at 2014 levels and the recent increase in excise taxes. More generally, they committed to finding additional savings, so as to bring deficits back in line with the fiscal rule. However, they feel the fiscal rule’s 2 percent deficit ceiling is too tight for a country like Kosovo with high development needs and very low public debt. In addition, they see provisions in the fiscal rule that allow for privatization proceeds to finance capital spending above the 2 percent deficit ceiling provided cash buffers are prudent as being of limited use. This is because they inherited a deficit above 2 percent as well as low cash buffers, so the clause cannot be activated. More generally, usable privatization receipts are now slightly above 1 percent of GDP, not enough to finance needed development projects. In this context, they expressed interest in working together with the Fund to expand the investment clause in the fiscal rule, so as to allow for IFI-financed growth-enhancing projects alongside those financed with (limited) privatization receipts. The authorities welcomed advice to broaden financing sources . They concurred that Kosovo’s low public debt levels should help it obtain market financing on reasonable terms, and will See Annex I “Containing the Public Wage Bill and Transfers in Kosovo.” Adjustments of the minimum wage are based on a fairly complex algorithm that was introduced during the last program, with a view to balance social considerations and the need to preserve competitiveness. Page 11 seek advice on how to proceed along these lines. However, they saw significant untapped potential from IFI financing, and are initiating discussions with the various IFIs to deepen cooperation.