Kosovo enters 2015 with a stable government . A six-month political stalemate following the inconclusive June 2014 elections ended with the formation of a grand coalition . The government holds a comfortable majority in parliament, and past experience has shown that such coalitions can be stable and conducive to effective policy-making. Since the 2013 Article IV consultation, some progress has been made in normalizing international relations . At present, the Republic of Kosovo has been recognized by 108 UN member states and 23 EU member states. Under the EU-sponsored dialogue, there has been progress in normalizing relations with Serbia. However, lack of full international recognition remains an obstacle to greater political integration and economic development. Kosovo is a potential EU candidate and a Stabilization Association Agreement (SAA)—the first step toward official candidature—could be signed this year or next. Despite political uncertainty last year, economic performance has remained resilient . In 2014, GDP growth is estimated at about 2¾ percent, somewhat lower than in 2013 but still near Kosovo’s five-year average of 3.5 percent (the highest in the Western Balkans). Steady remittances helped, as witnessed by consumption growing at close to 4 percent. This year, growth in Germany— the main Diaspora country—the full-year impact of large wage increases granted before last year’s elections (see below), and a ramp up in highway construction should again support growth of circa 3 percent, despite a gradual, multi-year pullback from the donor sector as Kosovo graduates from acute nation-building needs. As in other countries in the region, low energy prices and ties to developments in the euro area have pushed inflation into negative territory (-0.3 percent y/y in March). Modest inflation is expected for the year as a whole, at best. K b Real GDP Growth (2009-14 average) d g b C Source: World Economic Outlook. Price Indices (end of period) (Year-on-year percent change) CPI:Headline CPI:Food CPI:Energy The trade and current accounts remain in large deficit, but financing is stable and reserves are ample . Given the narrow productive base, most consumption and investment goods are imported, fueling a very high trade deficit (about 30 percent of GDP). Financing sources are relatively stable and generally non-debt creating, with the main contribution coming from remittances, official transfers, and FDI—the last is also largely associated with the Diaspora. Gross Page 6 international reserves of some 18 percent of GDP are ample relative to a conservative variant of the Fund’s adequacy metric, which suggests reserve buffers equivalent to 12 percent of GDP (Annex II). Medium-term growth prospects appear insufficient to significantly lift incomes and improve labor outcomes . Barring reforms, medium-term economic growth will remain dependent on the same remittance-based model and would not be expected to exceed the recent 3.5 percent average. With income per capita of €3,000, one of the lowest in Europe, higher growth is needed to accelerate convergence towards the Western Balkans average. Higher growth would also be needed to generate jobs in the context of very high unemployment (30 percent), very low employment (40 percent), and fast population growth. Risks to the short-term outlook remain evenly balanced (Annex III). Upside risk in the next 12 months: stronger impact on consumption from last year’s public wage increase. The impact on consumption of the large wage increase last year, which has been modest so far, could surprise positively now that uncertainty related to the political stalemate is resolved. Downside risks in the next 12 months: renewed emigration and possible disruptions to electricity supply. A recent emigration wave, facilitated by easier border entry into Serbia and reflective of a lack of hope among segments of the population, has now calmed down but could begin anew, as it unpredictably did six months ago. Separately, further breakdowns in the two old power plants would result in new electricity cuts and possibly higher tariffs to pay for imports. In the medium term, the risk of a “new mediocre” in Europe would affect Kosovo via lower remittances from Diaspora countries as well as lower exports. On the upside, implementation of the government’s ambitious structural reform agenda could lift potential growth above the baseline. Exposure to regional risks. Intensification of Russia/Ukraine tensions will not have any direct impact, but may affect Kosovo indirectly via the Diaspora residing in high-income European countries. Similar indirect channels would apply with regards to developments in Greece. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared this assessment . In their view, growth could reach 4 percent this year, although they view any differences with staff’s forecast at this stage as within the range of uncertainty. They also agreed with the risks presented, although they are more sanguine about positive confidence effects in the short term coming from implementation of their reform agenda. They also see upside risks in the near term from the euro area, given euro depreciation, lower oil prices, and the impact from ECB’s quantitative easing. Looking towards the medium term, they remain concerned by modest growth prospects, agreeing that higher medium-term growth is needed to meaningfully lift incomes and provide jobs for many in society. In fact, they see Page 7 addressing infrastructure impediments and boosting the productive and export capacity of the economy as the number one economic challenge and priority facing the country.