Kuwait’s economic activity has picked up, supported by high oil prices and production, but challenges remain. Non-oil sector growth has been driven mainly by consumption growth, reflecting an increase in public wages and subsidies. The execution of the government’s Five Year Development Plan (DP) (2010–14) has been below target and public investment has stalled. Public investment remains lower than in other emerging market economies. Frequent changes in governments since 2006 partly delayed the implementation of some mega projects. Spending rigidities and increased reliance on oil revenues have highlighted fiscal risks. The authorities are preparing a new Development Plan (2015–19) that focuses on economic reform and the implementation of some long-stalled strategic mega projects. The government has taken measures to address some of the challenges, broadly in line with staff advice (Annex I). The cabinet has decided to eliminate diesel subsidies, reduced allowances for Kuwaitis travelling abroad for medical aid, and passed a law to cap end-of-service compensation. A departmental group in the Ministry of Finance is studying the rationalization of kerosene and electricity subsidies. The government has initiated public finance management reform with the help of the World Bank, and is working on an ambitious time schedule for its implementation. Parliament has recently passed a number of important laws, including on anti-corruption, promoting foreign investment, public-private partnerships, and privatization. The central bank is proactively maintaining banking system stability. Economic diversification is a policy priority. The growth model has so far relied on oil revenues to invest in public employment, health, education and infrastructure, and achieved rapid economic development. Transitioning to a more balanced private sector driven model that encourages firms to export requires significant progress in implementing structural reforms to improve the business environment, governance, and institutional and policy making frameworks; enhancing the skills of workers; encouraging entrepreneurship by developing the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) sector; and changing the incentive structure of firms to focus on the tradable sector by reviewing the competition policy law, government procurement procedures, reviewing barriers for entry of firms, fostering forward and backward linkages of private sector firms with state-owned enterprises. In addition, strengthening the incentives for employment of nationals in the private non-oil sectors would entail containing growth in public sector wages and jobs. Positive external spillovers from Kuwait are expected to continue. Kuwait has played an important role in maintaining stability of the global oil market and is embarking on an investment program to increase its capacity in crude oil. Kuwait is an important source of outward remittances, The objective of the Plan was to increase private sectors’ contribution to the economy, creating jobs and providing long-term investment opportunities. About $130 billion was to be implemented with private sector participation, including a variety of public-private partnerships in projects in oil, utilities, infrastructure and healthcare and education services sectors. Page 7 about $15 billion in 2013, and has provided important financial and humanitarian assistance to the Arab countries in transition and to Africa.