Staff and the authorities agreed that gradual and sustained fiscal adjustment should commence without delay . The government’s high financial buffers and ample borrowing space will enable it to comfortably finance the shortfall in the budget. Nevertheless, to maintain confidence in the economy, preserve buffers, and reduce fiscal risks, fiscal adjustment plans should be expeditiously formulated and communicated, and the adjustment initiated. At current policies in the baseline projections, the fiscal balance will diverge from the intergenerational equity level by 4 percent of GDP in 2015 and widen to about 11 percent by 2020. This will create an external current account gap of similar magnitude. Delays in adjustment would result in a worsening fiscal position that would require a larger adjustment in the future, especially if oil prices fall further. For instance, if long-term oil prices were to decrease by $10 below current levels in the medium term, the gap would rise to over 16 percent of GDP by 2020. In view of Kuwait’s large buffers, the authorities could choose a relatively long horizon over which fiscal adjustment may be undertaken to mitigate the impact on growth . An adjustment of 1 percent of GDP annually relative to the baseline over the medium term would be appropriate and feasible (see next sections) to close the fiscal gap over a cycle of 10 years under current oil price assumptions. Staff recommended to start the adjustment in 2016 and underscored the importance of not only a gradual and sustained pace of adjustment, but also sequencing the composition of fiscal consolidation to minimize its impact on growth. Staff and the authorities agreed that a gradual path would help manage fiscal risks from further oil price decline, as well as other social and political expectations. Staff and the authorities agreed that achieving fiscal sustainability will require measures to contain expenditure growth and increase non-oil revenues. The savings from these reforms, which include subsidy and wage reforms, and VAT and business profits tax, would be about Intergenerational equity level of the non-oil primary fiscal deficit is derived from the permanent income hypothesis which estimates a constant real per-capita annuity of the sum of discounted values of future oil revenue receipts and financial assets. The calculations are sensitive to assumptions on future oil prices, population growth, inflation, and discount rates. For further discussion, see Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries; IMF Policy Paper; 2012. Most studies, including those that focus on the GCC, find that the fiscal multiplier is larger for capital than current spending and that tax multipliers are usually found to be smaller than spending multipliers particularly in the longer- term. See, for example, Espinoza and Senhadji, 2011, and Cerisola et al., 2015. Kuwait: Deviation of Overall Balance from PIH, 2013–20 1/ Lower oil price Baseline Source:IMF staff calculations.1/ Difference between actual overall balance and level recommended by the Permanent Income Hypothesis (PIH). Page 19 1 percent of GDP in 2016 and increase to over 7 percent of GDP by 2020. Staff supports this proposed reform package and the projected size of adjustment as at it would bring the fiscal position closer to benchmark levels indicated by intergenerational equity considerations, without significant impact on growth. The proposed consolidation path is consistent with a broadly steady non-oil growth trajectory. The fiscal stance, measured as the non-oil balance in relation to non-oil GDP, would improve steadily by about 4.7 percentage points annually during 2016-20. Using estimates for the revenue and current spending multipliers, staff projects that the potential impact of the revenue reform could reduce non-oil growth by about 0.2 percent in 2020, while current spending reform will reduce growth by about 1 percent. The overall impact of both reforms will be around 1.2 percent by 2020 and fades out thereafter. However, other factors such as efficiency gains (which have not been included in the calculations) could offset the adverse impact on growth. In addition, these reforms would bring additional benefits; for example, containing public sector employment and future wage growth will support efforts to increase the employment of nationals in the private sector and diversification efforts. The government should take advantage of current low global energy prices to strengthen efforts to reform domestic energy prices. A gradual reform of energy pricing (with estimated fiscal/quasi-fiscal cost of 7.2 percent of GDP in 2015), accompanied by establishment of a social safety net and other mitigating measures and a well-designed communication strategy to get the buy-in of the middle class, would generate substantial savings. Staff’s analysis shows that in the longer-term, energy price reform would benefit growth by increasing efficiency in the economy and creating space for higher public and private investment (Box 3). One-off effects on inflation should be manageable. Productive activities more sensitive to energy costs, particularly the transport sector, Staff applied estimates of the multipliers that were recently used in an interdepartmental exercise to assess the impact of additional fiscal adjustment on real non-oil growth at the GCC level: 0.4 for revenue and 0.6 for current spending and assumed the multiplier impact is phased over three years. Kuwait: Expected Fiscal Saving from Proposed Fiscal Measures, 2015 – 201520162017201820192020Corporate tax 1/0.00.01.50.40.81.2VAT 2/0.00.00.01.51.51.5Subsidies 3/0.01.01.01.03.73.6Wage 4/0.0-0.10.20.50.81.0Transfers 5/0.0-0.5-0.4-0.4-0.4-0.3Total net saving0.00.42.33.06.47.0Overall balance (baseline scenario)2.82.14.35.35.14.2Overall fiscal balance (reform scenario)2.82.56.68.311.511.1Distance from PIH (baseline) 4.35.87.38.69.810.9Distance from PIH (reform) 4.35.45.05.63.43.9 Source: IMF staff calculations. 1\Assumed implementation date is fiscal year 2017/18 based on information from the authorities. Saving projected by IMF TA is KD 500-800 million. Saving assumed in table at 600 KD phased over three years.2\Based on estimates at the GCC level. Implementation is assumed to start in 2018/19 based on information from the authorities.3\Represents gasoline subsidies reform which is planned to start in 2016/17 and electricity which is projected by the authorities to start in 2018/19. Staff assumed that electricity tariff change will follow a graded system whereby small consumers will remain subsidized (saving will be half the current electricity subsidy bill).4\Assumes government introduces wage reform in 2016/17 with the initial cost of the rescaling salaries of KD 350 (projected by the consulting firm in charge of preparing the reform proposal) phased over two years. Saving will accrue as a result of capping wage increase to inflation rate. 5\Staff assumed that half of the saving from the gasoline subsidy removal will be transferred to protect low income groups. Impact of expenditure reform Impact of revenue reform Kuwait:Growth Impact of Fiscal Consolidation, 2015–20 (Percent of non-oil GDP) Source:IMF staff calculations. Baseline scenario Non-oilGDP growth Consolidation scenario Page 20 would be able to adjust to higher energy prices more easily if the reform is gradual. The government plans to introduce gasoline subsidy reforms by the end of this year. Reform of electricity and water subsidies will require legal changes, which the government expects to introduce to parliament by end-2015. Public wage reform should, among other things, cap annual salary increases at the inflation rate and contain expansion in the wage bill. The government is considering a reform to standardize the wage structure in the public sector and provide a framework to limit wage growth, effective FY 2016/17. The initial cost of salary alignments will be about KD350 million (0.9 percent of 2016-GDP), while the saving would be backloaded. The government plans to approve the new civil service law before end-2015 and spread out the initial cost over the next two years. The authorities agreed with staff’s suggestion that in designing the reform they should consider clauses to limit explicitly public employment growth and arbitrary increases in wages, and that they should should be mindful of the impact of such a rule on the formation of inflation expectations in the economy. Staff also suggested the inclusion of an escape clause to hold wage growth below inflation when macroeconomic circumstances warrant. Efforts to raise non-hydrocarbon revenue need to commence. Introducing a business profit tax (BPT) on the net profits of all companies operating in Kuwait and simplifying the current tax structure would potentially increase revenues by KD500–800 million (1.3 to 2.1 percent of 2016-GDP). The authorities indicated that they expect to introduce a draft BPT law in the next session of the parliament. Implementation of the value added tax (VAT), which is also being discussed at the GCC–level, could yield an additional 1–2 percent of non-oil GDP. With the GCC having recently approved a VAT framework, staff encouraged the authorities to move ahead expeditiously with its implementation. The authorities indicated that they prefer to move in unison with the rest of the GCC in introducing the VAT, but they would be prepared to move by themselves if the coordination process becomes excessively prolonged. Staff welcomed the government’s decision to move to top-down budgeting beginning FY 2016/17 and to a medium-term budgeting framework starting in fiscal year 2017/18. These reforms, besides providing better oversight and discipline to the budget planning and execution processes, would also build momentum to strengthen capital investment planning and prioritization towards high-growth sectors. Moreover, an overall Public Financial Management Committee, chaired by the Minister of Finance, has been established to guide and supervise public financial management reforms. A decision has also been made for full roll-out and implementation of the Government Financial Management Information System during FY 2016/17. Page 21 Box 3. Subsidy Reform in Kuwait: Long-Term Growth Benefits Outweigh Short-Term Inflation Costs Low domestic energy prices represent a significant cost for the Kuwaiti economy. Kuwait’s on-budget costs of low energy prices (including water) were about KD3.7 billion (7.6 percent of GDP) in 2014; 35 percent corresponds to petroleum products subsidies. The opportunity cost for selling energy products (gasoline, diesel, natural gas, and electricity) at prices below international prices is estimated at $12.7 billion (7.4 percent of GDP) in 2014; lower energy prices in 2015 reduce the estimated cost to $9.3 billion (7.2 percent of GDP). A number of countries in the MENA region have initiated energy price reforms. Qatar has increased gasoline prices; Bahrain and Saudi Arabia have increased electricity tariffs for industries; Kuwait has increased diesel and kerosene prices and is studying a proposal to increase electricity prices; Bahrain and Oman have increased natural gas prices for industrial users. Most recently the UAE introduced a pricing mechanism for setting fuel prices against an international benchmark. Among non-GCC energy exporters, Iran and Yemen, and among oil importers, Egypt, Jordan, Mauritania, Morocco, Sudan, and Tunisia, have initiated subsidy reforms. Among energy exporting countries outside the MENA region, Malaysia, and Nigeria are successful cases of energy price reforms. The increase in diesel price in January 2015 does not appear to have impacted headline inflation . While assessing the pass-through of diesel prices to headline inflation requires a more detailed and technical analysis, data as of May 2015 seems to suggest that the 100 percent diesel price increase in January 2015 has not had any significant impact on inflation so far. Transport prices did not increase in January, fell in March, and increased slightly in May (0.16 percent). Headline inflation during 2015 appears to follow the pattern observed during the second half of 2014. The inflation response to previous domestic price shocks also permits to anticipate a modest impact on domestic inflation if energy prices were raised in Kuwait. In particular, pass through from shocks to the CPI sub-indices to headline inflation appears moderate. Kuwait. Largest Monthly Inflation Shocks, 2005–15 Average Monthly Inflation 12 Months Before and After the Shock Source: IMF Staff Calculations Inflation shock defined as the 10 percent largest monthly inflation in each component of the CPI observed during 2005 -2015. Chart displays average of 10 percent largest values. Preliminary estimates suggest that in the long-term Kuwait could generate net permanent savings in the range of 1.6–2.2 percent of GDP even if consumers are fully compensated for price increases. The estimate reflects opportunity costs of 7.4 percent of GDP for subsidies on gasoline, diesel, electricity, and natural gas; price elasticity for energy consumption in the range of (-0.3, -0.5); and assumes that energy prices are aligned with US pre-tax gasoline prices. If net savings from the reform were invested, Kuwait GDP could further increase between 0.06 percent of GDP and 0.08 percent of GDP. To the extent consumers are less than fully compensated, the fiscal gains from energy price reform could be even larger. ____________________________ 1/ The estimated opportunity cost uses as reference, gasoline and diesel US pre-tax prices published by the IEA, Henry Hub gas prices, and average electricity tariff for all sectors published by the US EIA. 2/ Estimated net savings are equivalent to the deadweight loss —the loss for the society, from selling products in the domestic market at prices lower than world prices, which lead to consumption levels that are higher than what would be at world prices in the context of a demand that responds negatively to prices. P en 10time HeadlineTransport Page 22