Economic activity in the nonoil sector has continued to expand, albeit at a slower pace, reflecting the impact of lower oil prices. Nonhydrocarbon growth slowed from 5 percent to an estimated 3½ percent in 2015, as higher uncertainty weighed on consumption. Notwithstanding an improvement in project implementation under the five-year Development Plan (DP), available indicators point to a further modest softening in nonoil growth this year. However, with oil production recovering after three consecutive years of decline, overall growth is on track to reach about 3½ in 2016 (Figure 1). Inflation, which has been hovering at around 3 percent, is set for an uptick to about 3½ this year, reflecting the recent gasoline price increases. The drop in hydrocarbon production was mainly due to the temporary closure of a neutral zone oil field and technical factors. Q U CC z bubb nd bu W nd Page 10 Box 1. Kuwait’s Six-Pillar Reform Strategy In early 2016, the government announced a comprehensive reform strategy to underpin medium-term fiscal adjustment, encourage private sector development and diversification, and create jobs for the growing national labor force. The strategy is organized around six-pillars: Rationalizing government expenditure and increasing nonoil revenue to reduce the budget deficit over the medium term. The authorities plan to raise nonhydrocarbon revenue (by introducing a VAT and a business profit tax and raising the price of some government services) and curtail expenditure through rationalization of government agencies’ spending, further advancing subsidy reforms and reforming the pay structures. Modernizing the role of the state. The government is to refocus on ensuring a conducive regulatory and business environment and encouraging market forces. Promoting private sector development, through privatization of public enterprises, enhanced use of partnerships with the private sector, and support for small- and medium-sized enterprises. Encouraging citizens’ participation in privatized enterprises and PPP projects. Making the labor market and civil service more efficient. Initiatives in these areas will include reforms of public sector wages and performance evaluation systems and steps to improve labor force planning and upgrade skills through educational reforms (including enhanced vocational training). Promoting supporting legislative and institutional reforms to enhance public financial management, strengthen tax administration capacity, develop financial markets, and improve the business climate. Notwithstanding efforts to contain government spending, the fiscal and external accounts have deteriorated markedly . As a result of dwindling oil revenues, the authorities’ principal measure of the fiscal balance—which excludes mandatory transfers to the Future Generations Fund (FGF) and investment income and better reflects the government’s gross financing challenge— has swung into a large deficit (17½ percent of GDP in 2015/16). Even when including investment income and before transfers to the FGF, fiscal surpluses have vanished (text table). The underlying (nonoil) fiscal position has nevertheless improved over the past two years, reflecting a decline in the subsidy bill (Figure 2), non-recurrence of one-off spending, and efforts to curtail current expenditure. The composition of government expenditure has also improved somewhat in favor of growth-enhancing capital spending. The external current account surplus has declined significantly, reaching 5¼ percent of GDP in 2015, and is set to fall to 4½ percent in 2016. A minimum of 10 percent of total revenue is transferred annually to the FGF. Income on FGF investments (mainly foreign assets) is retained in the Fund. Page 11 Fiscal Developments 2014–17 While financing needs have thus far been met mainly by drawing down financial buffers, the government has also increased borrowing. The government deficit has been financed mainly through drawdowns of General Reserve Fund (GRF) assets. The issuance of domestic bonds has been stepped up this year, contributing to net financing of about KD 1.4 billion between April and mid-November—over half the targeted amount for FY 2016/17. The government has also announced its intention to tap international capital markets to raise up to KD 2.9 billion. The financial sector has remained sound and credit conditions favorable. As of June 2016, banks featured high capitalization (CAR of 17.9 percent), robust profitability (ROA of 1 percent), low nonperforming loans (ratio of 2.4 percent), and high loan-loss provisioning (206 percent coverage). Bank liquidity has been comfortable—after a modest decline last year, it has improved, supported by a recovery in deposits of government entities. Credit to the private sector has been increasing at a solid pace (about 6¾ percent year-over-year in September 2016, broadly in line with nominal GDP; Figure 4), driven mainly by installment loans. Installment loans are extended to households for repair and purchase of private homes. They are secured by salary assignments and present a lower risk profile. PP nu z illi illi z ill nu nu Page 12 Nevertheless, a few sectors to which banks have sizable exposures have shown some weakening. The real estate sector has been confronted with a further slowdown in the volume and the value of sales. Nonfinancial corporate earnings have continued to deteriorate, resulting in an increase in vulnerabilities in some sectors, particularly real estate (Annex II). Stock prices have registered broad-based declines since mid-2014 and have remained volatile. Banks’ exposure to Investment Companies (ICs) has been reduced to 3 percent of total assets on average, but the latter are exposed to real estate and local and regional equities.