The main challenge facing the country is to strengthen growth potential. Action would be needed, including boosting on infrastructure investment, improving the business environment and the functioning of product markets, and labor market reforms. The government’s new five-year Development Plan (DP, 2015–19) is scheduled to be placed before parliament shortly. Given underexecution of spending and delays in initiating and completing priority projects in the previous plan, the new plan attempts to set realistic targets that are consistent with the overall economic objectives and improve execution of the projects. Staff underscored the importance of monitoring and ensuring implementation of the DP to sustain investment and support non-oil growth over the medium term. The authorities explained that the new plan has indentified impediments to execution and is focusing on reforms to support governance in the private sector, long-term investment reform strategy, improve efficiency of public investment by eliminating procedural obstacles and improving public procedures services, improve business environment by fighting corruption and improving transparency and accountability in the public sector. Page 17 Efforts by the government to diversify the economy are paramount to reduce Kuwait’s dependence on oil and to generate private sector jobs for nationals. Although removing impediments in physical, legal, and business infrastructure is important, aligning incentives of firms and workers is the missing link in the diversification strategy (Figures 8–10). Improvements in the quality of education, and skill development; reducing distortions that lead to reliance on foreign labor, thereby increasing private sector employment opportunities for nationals (Figure 3); and implementing reforms that encourage tradable goods and services production are essential (Box 1). Developing SMEs, with the support of the KD 2 billion National Fund for SME Development, is important as a source of job creation for nationals, economic diversification, including promoting non-oil exports, and sustainable growth (Selected Issues Paper III). Figure 3. Labor Market Indicators As Kuwait advances its diversification agenda, banks will need to reorient business strategies towards maintaining a more diversified asset portfolio. They will also need to improve their capacity to assess credit risk. The lack of diversification contributes to sectoral concentrations in loan portfolios of both conventional and Islamic banks, particularly in real estate. Greater focus on improving the risk management of the growing Islamic banks’ segment becomes especially important as their business model is based on risk-sharing with clients. Developing domestic debt markets would bring important benefits, such as raising funding for the large infrastructure investment programs. Expediting the legal framework for the issuance of sukuk would help deepen this market. The Capital Markets Authority (CMA) is currently reviewing the draft law for sukuk issuance. Non-Kuwaiti employment contribution Kuwaiti employment contribution Total employment (annual growth, percent) Employment Growth and Contributions, 2004–12 (Annual, in percent) Sources: Country authorities;and IMF staff calculations. Expatriate, Private Expatriate, Public National, Private National, Public Employment by Sector and Nationality, 2012–13 (Millions) Page 18 Box 1. Kuwait–Diversification Efforts Have to Start Now Achieving a diversified export base and high export sophistication, which are major ingredients of sustainable growth, takes decades, and Kuwait with more than 95 percent of goods exports in oil, has to start this process now. The government should play a key role in skill development of nationals and actively increase incentives of firms to move into tradable production. Skill development should start at an early stage. The quality of early childhood education determines long-lasting outcomes and mainly works through positive effects on non-cognitive skills. More positive social behavior and improved academic motivation rather than higher IQs helped children obtain higher test scores later in life. Kuwait has a high gross pre-school enrollment rate, but lags behind in quality. Improving teacher quality, which is highly correlated with young students’ achievements, is paramount. Fostering a spirit of self-reliance and creativity is another element in the development strategy. Korea’s “Saemaul Undong” provides an example of a social program that succeeded in changing attitudes of citizens to support development. The main elements were first, to encourage communities to undertake small-scale projects to improve their surrounding environment, followed by the investment in income-generating projects and infrastructure. The government helped with funding and provided support in type of projects, leadership, accountability, regional/national coordination, and technical assistance. For Kuwait this means that they need to have a dialogue with the population on moving to a less distributive model of sharing the oil wealth, and which encourages private initiative. Successful diversification strategies in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Mexico have relied on policies to create linkages in the existing industries and foster new industries with an emphasis on competing in international markets and technological upgrade to climb the “quality ladder.” As was done in Korea, the key element in providing state support is a strong governance and accountability framework in which the top management is responsible for the funds they receive. Cross-country experience shows that subsidies to support exporters and taxes on firms in the non-tradables, access to financing and business support services through development banks and export promotion agencies, and the creation of special economic zones, industry clusters, research and development centers, and start-up incubators have been used to promote one goal to develop tradable sectors and encourage firms to export. “System integrators” in the form of large firms have been created or encouraged to spearhead the development of large tradable sectors such as automotive or shipbuilding. Taiwanese and Norwegian experiences provide interesting case studies in developing local firms and clusters. In 1980, a Taiwanese Venture Capital (VC) initiative provided financial incentives and tax credits to encourage firms to set up business in the newly created Science Park after failing to attract multinationals. Two funds were established and run by U.S.-educated Chinese, who were invited to relocate there. The venture proved successful and large banks, corporates, and even conservative family conglomerates started creating their own VC funds in information technology businesses. In Norway, in the 1970s, the government intervened directly in the procurements of oil operators to develop oil suppliers’ cluster and required foreign operators to develop the competencies of local suppliers. The government also imposed a minimum of 50 percent of research and development spending to develop an oil field to take place in Norwegian entities. The government continued to support the suppliers over the years to encourage firms to internationalize their activity. Eventually, the suppliers’ cluster became successful, spanning a large array of high value added industries. ___________________________________ For more details, see the presentations at the high-level conference on “Economic Development, Diversification, and the Role of the State”, held in Kuwait City on April 30-May 1, 2014 (http://www.imf.org/external/np/seminars/eng/2014/mcd/), and Reda Cherif and Fuad Hasanov, 2014, “Soaring of the Gulf Falcons: Diversification in the GCC Oil Exporters in Seven Propositions,” IMF Working Paper 14/177. Page 19