Investment in infrastructure projects will support non-oil growth in the medium term A number of contracts have been awarded since 2014 in the oil sectors to upgrade fuel and to increase refining capacity, and implementation is already underway in several key projects including in the power generation and health sectors. The decline in oil price is, however, weighing on confidence and could negatively affect private consumption and investment. Against this background, staff project non-oil GDP growth to be slightly lower in 2015–16 and thereafter increase to 4 percent over the medium term as the impact of large investments in 2015 takes effect. High government buffers, a strong and liquid banking system, and a profitable corporate sector, provide the enabling environment for growth. Kuwait’s credit cycle shows that credit growth is currently at its trend trajectory, mitigating concerns of a build-up of financial risks from excessive credit expansion. Average oil production is projected to increase by 2 percent a year in the medium term, consistent with the planned new investment to increase crude capacity. Overall, GDP growth will recover from 0.3 percent in 2015 to about 2.8 percent over the medium term. Average inflation is projected to increase to 3.4 percent in 2015 and will remain broadly stable at that level over the medium term, given limited global inflation. The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment and projections. Growth prospects will hinge on efficient implementation of the Development Plan 2015–19 (Risk Assessment Matrix). The authorities noted that the improved relationship of the administration with the parliament bodes well for the execution of the DP, which will also benefit from the new public private partnership (PPP) law. Implementation of projects in the Plan is under monthly monitoring at the cabinet level and periodic review by the parliament. Besides, the authorities are monitoring payments to contractors to ensure that contracts are executed without delays. Staff also noted potential risks to the authorities’ oil upstream and downstream expansion strategy in view of the recent loss of market share, global developments and potential transitioning of growth in China. The authorities anticipate a quick recovery of their market share through Although the credit/GDP ratio rose by 5 percentage points over the year ending 2015Q2, that mostly represented a recovery from weak credit growth in the past. As of end 2015Q2, the credit gap (deviation of credit/GDP ratio from its backward-looking estimated trend) was about 1.1 percentage points. The authorities have initiated an investment program to increase crude oil production capacity from 3 mbd to 4 mbd by 2020, and expand the capacity of their refineries and the petrochemicals complex. The investment program in the oil sector amounts to about KD27 billion during 2015–20 in upstream and downstream projects. Credit to GDP ratio Credit to GDP trend Growth in credit to GDP (rhs) Kuwait:Credit Cycle, 2009–15 (In percent) Page 13 diversification of export destinations in Africa and South America, and increased exports to Europe especially from clean refinery projects. Staff shared the authorities’ view that the peg to a basket remains appropriate for the Kuwaiti economy, as it continues to provide a nominal anchor. The authorities are fully committed to the current exchange rate regime. As of July 2015, the Kuwaiti dinar depreciated against the U.S. dollar by about 6.8 percent (y-o-y), whereas the nominal effective exchange rate appreciated by 3.1 percent during the same period. Staff’s external assessment suggests that under current policies, the current account is weaker than the level consistent with fundamentals by about 11 percent of GDP. Under appropriate fiscal policies, which would entail achieving larger fiscal surpluses, the gap would be closed over the medium term, and the current account balance would strengthen to a level that is in line with fundamentals (Appendix II). Over the longer term, as the economy diversifies, staff suggested that the benefits of exchange rate flexibility may increase, which the authorities acknowledged. The fiscal balance based on the authorities’ presentation is projected to remain in deficit over the medium term. Despite this accounting deficit, which will cumulatively reach KD26.2 billion (US$94 billion) and create financing needs of similar amount during 2015–20, the government will continue to accumulate fiscal buffers of $35 billion during 2015-20, as it adheres to the fiscal rule of transferring 10 percent of total revenue to the FGF and retaining investment income in the fund. The fiscal stance, measured by the non-oil primary balance as a share of non- oil GDP shows an improvement over the medium term in the baseline as spending growth is assumed to be contained to about 5 percent annually. The sharp fiscal consolidation in 2015 can be explained by the normalization of one-off spending in 2014 and a decline in the subsidy bill. Capital spending is budgeted to increase by The baseline for 2015-20 is based on the approved 2015 budget and announced policies by the authorities to contain the wage bill, cut non-essential spending, and includes saving in the subsidy bill as a result of the diesel reform in 2014 and the decline in international prices. The baseline also assumes that project implementation under the 2015-19 DP will improve compared to the previous plan. One off spending represents settling a delayed subsidy payment to the Kuwait Petroleum Company, aid to Egypt, and seed money for a new severance fund at the social security. Revenue (Authorities presentation) Revenue (IMF presentation) Expenditure Kuwait: Overall Balance under IMF and Authorities Presentations, 2011–20 Kuwait: Fiscal Stance(Non-oil Primary Balance) 2014–20 (Percent of Non-oil GDP) Page 14 over 20 percent this year reflecting the acceleration of mega projects implementation, and is projected to grow by 4 percent annually over the medium term. The authorities are considering debt financing of the budget deficit and are weighing the pros and cons of various options to determine the optimal mix. Drawdown from the General Reserve Fund (GRF), as was done in 2014/15, would be consistent with the GRF’s role as the Treasurer as well as the stabilization fund. There may also be merit in issuing domestic debt, which could help catalyze the development of a liquid local-currency debt market. However, any issuance of domestic debt would need to consider the cost of debt relative to the expected risk and return on the GRF, and more importantly, its impact on the central bank’s foreign exchange reserves, and the capacity of the banking system to absorb government debt without crowding out private credit. Depending on the rating and terms of borrowing, issuing foreign currency debt abroad could constitute an additional option that would not affect central bank reserves. Staff favored a mix of drawdown of buffers, and issuance of domestic and foreign debt to balance the tradeoffs between costs and benefits. The government has requested TA on public debt management, which staff supports. While banks have significant direct and indirect exposures to real estate and equity markets, their high capital and provisioning buffers should enable them to withstand shocks. Given the interlinkages in the financial system, abrupt changes in market conditions could pose a risk to the financial system and the economy during periods of stress. The upward trend in wholesale funding, although from a low base, and the geographical diversification of assets are being monitored by the CBK to limit potential spillover risks from the region. The CBK is proactively monitoring and mitigating risks with macroprudential tools. The corporate sector in Kuwait appears well positioned to weather shocks, including from the recent fall in oil prices, with most sectors displaying comfortable levels of debt servicing capacity as measured by the interest coverage ratio. Staff’s Real EstateEquityConsumer Loans and Credit Cards (Households) Direct Real Estate Loans9.2Investments0.82.3Installment Loans (Households)7.81.7Equity Purchase Loans2.8Total Direct17.85.11.7 Indirect Collaterals22.18.3Total39.913.41.7Total Assets 68.6Shareholders Equity8.6 Regulatory Capital7.6 Regulations Loan-To-Value (LTV) Ratio for residential property only: 50 percent for undeveloped land purchase, 60 percent for existing property purchase, 70 percent for construction use only. Maximum Installment loan value (all residential properties) is KWD 70,000 and these loans are also subject to a DSTI of 40% (and DSTI of 30% for retired persons).Lending to KSE Trading shares should not exceed 10% of total credit facilities portfolio extended to the resident customers, or 25% of the bank’s capital in its comprehensive concept, whichever is lower.Consumer loans are subject to a maximum amount of KWD 15,000 and a DSTI of 40% (and DSTI of 30% for retired persons).Sources: CBK; and IMF staff estimates. Kuwait: Major Exposures of Banking System (At end-June 2015, KD billions) Page 15 stress tests show limited but non-trivial aggregate risks to corporate profitability from interest rate shocks. Household investments in the local equity market would face adverse wealth effects from the decline in stock prices. ICs, by the nature of their business model, would face valuation losses from their investments in the local equity market. Stress tests conducted by staff suggest continued overall banking sector resilience. A few banks, however, turn out to be more sensitive than others and could require additional capital under severe stress scenarios (Box 1). Banks are subject to macroprudential regulation, particularly with regard to their real estate and equity market exposures. Staff and the authorities agreed that there is further scope to better identify and mitigate spillovers through the financial sector, and to continue to build buffers of the banking system. Although the probability of realization of large shocks is low, this calls for strengthening the resolution framework for banks, which is work-in- progress at the central bank. In addition, strengthening the macroprudential policy framework, and refining the early warning system and toolkit, would enable a more systematic assessment and prevention of systemic risk. In particular, focused attention on collation of real estate indicators is warranted to monitor property market risks. A sustained decline in oil prices presents a major downside risk to the medium-term outlook. Financial buffers could decline under adverse oil price scenarios. A lower oil price over the medium term ($10 below WEO projections) would shift the overall fiscal surplus into deficit starting in 2015 (under the IMF presentation), reaching 4.2 percent by 2020. If such an oil price shock is combined with an unchanged fiscal stance from 2014 (that is, the government does not tighten spending) the deficit would reach about 16 percent of GDP by 2020 resulting in a decline in financial buffers of around KD46 billion by 2020 (Figure 6). The authorities indicated their commitment to maintain capital spending in the budget and reduce inefficient current expenditure, to prevent stagnation of growth. If oil prices decline further, they would focus cuts on the current spending side. In 2014, 68 (out of 130) companies accounting for 66 percent of the debt had ICR > 1 (i.e., companies that generate operating profits larger than their interest payment commitments). A shock that increases the interest rate by 200 basis points (bps) reduces the number of firms with ICR > 1 to 57. A 500 bps interest shock reduces the number firms with ICR > 1 to 52; these companies hold 50 percent of total debt. Baseline Constant non-oil primary balance Constant non-oil primary balance with lower oil price Kuwait: Financial Buffers Managed by KIA, 2010–20 (KDbillions) Page 16 Box 1. Addressing Risks from Real Estate Exposures Through Macroprudential Policies The three key components of Kuwait’s real estate market are residential, investment and commercial real estate properties . Commercial real estate constituted the remaining share. During 2014, total deals worth KD4.3 billion were recorded in the real estate market, registering an annual average increase of 27 percent since 2009. The number of units sold also showed an average annual increase of 11 percent during the same period. Banks have significant direct exposure to real estate markets. The share of local banks’ loans to the real estate sector was 25 percent of total loans at end-July 2015. In addition, banks’ installment loans to households for purchase of homes constituted 28 percent of total loans. Furthermore, 40 percent of the total collateral of banks is tied to real estate, mainly in the commercial and investment segments The CBK has taken steps to address potential risks in the private residential real estate market. In the residential real estate segment, installment loans are limited by a debt-service to income ratio (DSTI) of 40 percent and a ceiling on loan amount of KD70,000 with a maximum tenor of 15 years. A capital risk weight of 100 percent also applies to installment loans. In November 2013, the CBK introduced limits on the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio for financing extended by banks, investment companies and finance companies to individuals to purchase or develop residential property. An LTV limit of 50 percent applies to the purchase of undeveloped land, 60 percent to the purchase of existing property and 70 percent to housing construction in residential areas. The new regulation, however, is not applicable to unsecured installment loans used to buy or renovate first homes. Effective December 2014, the CBK issued regulations to tighten the treatment of real estate collateral by phasing out credit mitigation by 10 percent annually yearly over 5 years. Other downside risks include regional geopolitical uncertainty that could impact growth prospects. Conflicts in the region could intensify further and worsen overall business confidence. Additionally, the removal of sanctions on Iran’s oil exports could add downward pressure to world oil prices, clouding the profitability of Kuwait’s investments being undertaken in the oil sector. The authorities were optimistic that continued investments in mega projects would help maintain confidence, crowd in private investments and preserve growth. 100%200720082009201020112012201320142015 (July) residential investment commercial Kuwait: Property Sales, 2007–15 (As share of total) 200720082009201020112012201320142015 (July) residential investment commercial Kuwait: Property Sales, 2007–15 (KD millions) Page 17 Box 2. Stress Testing the Kuwaiti Banking System to Oil-Macro Financial Shocks Staff’s macro-credit risk model suggests that some macroeconomic and bank- level variables are key determinants of NPL ratios in Kuwait. The analysis is based on 7 Kuwaiti banks (5 conventional and 2 Islamic), which account for 92 percent of total banking system assets, using a System GMM dynamic panel approach with year dummy variables to control for fixed effects and NPL data from the authorities. The analysis focuses on banks where sufficient data are available from 2000 to 2014. Results indicate that the NPL ratio exhibits strong auto-correlation, with non-oil private sector growth, real equity prices growth and real estate prices growth (investment) statistically significant and with the expected sign. To test banks’ resilience, moderate and severe stress scenarios combining real and financial shocks were considered. Staff’s sensitivity analysis is based on 2 scenarios from 2015 to 2017, characterizing moderate and severe deterioration in combined growth, equity and real estate prices, based on historical lows in Kuwait. Stress test results indicate that the banking system, overall, holds sufficient buffers to absorb losses under severe macro scenarios. Overall, the combined capital of banks in the sample would remain above the central bank’s regulatory prescribed minimum under the moderate scenario, with the NPL ratio rising to about 9.3 percent and a capital adequacy ratio at 16.7 percent two years after the shock. However, under a severe stress scenario, the capital of 5 out of 7 banks would fall below the prescribed regulatory minimum. The additional capital requirements of the 5 banks would amount to KD1.26 billion in 2016. At an aggregate level, the capital adequacy ratio would fall to 9.7 percent, below the regulatory minimum standard.