Kuwait is facing the oil price shock from a position of strength. The decline in oil prices has adversely affected Kuwait’s fiscal and current account balances and slowed growth in 2014/15. With high financial buffers—estimated by staff at about 320 percent of GDP at end-2014—and substantial borrowing space, the government intends to smooth the fiscal adjustment in response to the decline in oil prices, and continue to support growth through large investment spending. The authorities reduced current expenditure in 2015 including by partially abolishing diesel subsidies. They are committed to continuing with subsidy reforms, and introducing corporate tax and wage reforms, in a phased manner over the medium term. Status of Staff Recommendations Made in the 2014 Article IV Consultation Containing fiscal spending, in particular public wage bill, and reallocating spending toward capital. Public wage reform is under study. The government has reduced allowances for government travel and overseas health expenses. The DP (2015–19) has prioritized projects according to national priorities. The 2015/16 budget envisages an increase in capital expenditure. The government is embarking on public expenditure management reform with World Bank technical assistance (TA). Phased removal of energy and electricity subsidies. Introducing corporate tax for domestic companies. Strengthen budget framework. The government eliminated diesel and kerosene subsidies effective January 2015, and increased the price of aviation fuel. It is currently undertaking an impact study for gasoline subsidy reforms for phased implementation. The government is considering a proposal for business profits tax designed with the help of Fund TA. In line with the recommendations of the Fund and the World Bank TA, modernization of the tax administration system continues. The macro-fiscal unit is operational with the support of the Fund resident advisor. Fund TA has recommended a framework for establishing a fiscal rule that is currently being studied by the Ministry of Finance. Establish a more formal macroprudential framework and a coordinating mechanism to assess incipient risks. The CBK and other government agencies are working on establishing a framework to deal with crisis management. Expand and refine macroprudential toolkit, strengthen early warning system, and conduct macro stress tests of banks. Enhancing investment companies’ (ICs) resolution, developing needed tools to do it, and coordinating between CBK and CMA on ICs’ supervision. At the request of the authorities, Fund TA has focused on expanding the macroprudential toolkit. Further TA is envisaged to assist the central bank in enhancing systemic risk monitoring and developing a deposit insurance mechanism. The CBK is undertaking periodic macro stress tests of banks. Coordination exists between CBK and Capital Markets Authority (CMA), but there is no formal committee. Improving governance and auditing/reporting standards for investment companies. No change in the status regarding the implementation of the new corporate governance guidelines with effect from June 2016. Improving liquidity management framework and developing debt markets. Developing the non-oil tradable sector and supporting employment of nationals in the private sector. Modernizing restructuring resolution. Improving AML/CFT framework. The CBK is issuing Treasury Bills. The government is considering among other options, issuing domestic debt to finance the fiscal deficit . Bye-laws for foreign investment and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and on the new Direct Investment Promotion Law have been issued; the National Fund for SMEs Development was established last year. Bankruptcy law is still under preparation. Kuwait was removed from the FATF list of countries with strategic Anti Money laundering (AML)/Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT) deficiencies in February 2015. Page 10