The CBK has strengthened regulations to safeguard financial stability. Banks are under Basel III regulations for capital, including a framework for DSIBs, liquidity, and leverage. In the real estate sector, banks are subject to loan-to-value (LTV) ratio since November 2013, to a segment of individuals who purchase or develop residential property, besides debt-service-to-income ratio (DSTI) that already existed. Macroprudential tools can help mitigate potential risks posed by banks’ high exposures to the real estate sector. Some weakening of real estate activity appears underway in the commercial and investment segments, but the residential real estate segment reportedly remains firm. The latter is regulated by DSTI and maximum loan limits. While investment and commercial real estate financing is less regulated, rules regarding the treatment of real estate collateral, which encouraged this type of lending, are being phased out. The authorities agreed with staff’s views that that it is important to ensure that macroprudential policy measures are reviewed constantly to ensure that they do not exacerbate any property price correction, while preempting the buildup of excessive risks related to real estate exposures. In addition, heightened supervisory vigilance needs to be maintained to ensure that real estate exposures are appropriately classified and adequately provisioned. Staff encouraged the authorities to construct real estate indices and suggested that other indicators, such as both the average and distribution of LTV and DSTI ratios, be compiled to calibrate measures at different phases of the credit cycle. Given ICs’ interconnectedness to the rest of the financial system, close monitoring of their activities, strengthened regulatory oversight, and further consolidation to strengthen this sector are warranted. A formal macroprudential coordination mechanism encompassing nonbank financial institutions would facilitate more systematic identification of systemic risks. Key improvements would involve: (i) assigning a macroprudential policy mandate and a delineation of its powers; (ii) establishing a formal financial stability coordination committee headed by the central bank, comprised of all financial system regulators, including the capital markets authority, the insurance supervisor, and the Ministry of Finance; (iii) ensuring appropriate accountability mechanisms; and (iv) elevating to a legal requirement the exchange of information. Efforts to implement and further strengthen the AML/CFT and anticorruption frameworks in Kuwait are continuing. The decision by FATF in February 2015 to remove Kuwait from the list of countries subject to its monitoring process under its ongoing global AML/CFT compliance process and the issuance of the bylaws in March 2015 for the Anti Corruption Authority are welcome developments. Going forward, staff encouraged the authorities to build on these efforts, including through enhancing financial analysis and improving the quality of suspicious transaction reports, and continuing the effective implementation of the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1373 against terrorism financing. Page 23