Kuwait’s current near-term economic outlook is positive, but there are downside risks, from slow implementation of public investment priority projects. Non-oil GDP growth in Kuwait is expected to accelerate to 4.0 percent in 2015, and is projected to further increase gradually to 4.5–5.0 percent in the medium term in the baseline scenario, on the strength of public spending in infrastructure and the oil sector, private investment, and consumption. Inflation is projected to increase to 3.5 percent in 2015. A moderate increase in oil production is expected to further support overall growth. The external current account and fiscal surpluses are projected to remain high over the medium term, but on a declining trajectory, amid rising government spending and a gradual decline in projected oil prices. The authorities acknowledged that an enduring political agreement on the reform agenda is required to implement the DP and improve investment climate to achieve the projected baseline non-oil growth rates. They, however, noted that the relationship between government and parliament had improved, and legislations passed by the current parliament so far have exceeded any previous parliament’s performance over a full term. The government is moving forward in implementing major projects in the oil sector such as refineries and clean fuel, roads, port, and airport. However, there is continuing pressure from members of parliament to increase subsidies and wages and other benefits to Kuwaitis. Staff have lowered non-oil growth projections compared to last year, mainly reflecting the underexecution of projects under the DP, and any further shortfall in implementation of major projects would result in non-oil growth lower than currently forecast. A sustained decline in oil prices presents a major downside risk to the medium-term outlook (Risk Assessment Matrix below). Given the recent trends in current spending as well as the projected decline in oil prices in the baseline, government expenditure would exceed revenues, excluding investment income, by 2020, although the overall fiscal position will remain in surplus. The breakeven oil price—the price needed to balance the budget at current expenditure levels—has risen over the past few years and is estimated at $75 in 2014/15 (excluding investment income). Staff’s analysis, however, shows that a $20 decline in oil prices relative to the baseline would result in bringing the fiscal position (excluding investment income) to a sizable deficit in the medium term The production level is assumed at 2.925 million barrels a day in 2014. Transfers to the Futures Generations Fund are not considered in the calculations as they are treated as below-the-line transactions in fiscal accounts. Page 9 (Figure 2). While large fiscal buffers would allow the government to smooth public spending in the medium term in the event of a sustained oil price drop, this would come at the cost of lower savings for future generations. All these factors would adversely affect long-term fiscal sustainability. Capital spending plans in the near term should continue as envisaged, but it would require further consolidation in the medium-term, which would lead to slower growth. On the other hand, geopolitical risks and unrest in key oil exporting countries pose upside risks to Kuwait’s hydrocarbon production and prices. The government has recognized the importance of using the period of high surpluses to save more by containing current spending growth and increasing non-oil revenues. The authorities have embarked on a large investment program in the oil sector to increase production capacity for crude oil from 3 mbd to 4 mbd by 2020. They are also expanding the capacity of their refineries and the petrochemicals complex. Staff noted potential risks to this strategy in view of global developments regarding shale oil supply. The authorities did not anticipate any reduction in their market share arising from global shale supplies in the near-term because of supply outages in Iraq, Libya and Nigeria. In the medium- to long-term, according to the authorities, environmental concerns, the quality of crude, uncertainty regarding changes in US policy to permit crude shale oil exports, high depletion rate of shale, cost differential between new production and that in Kuwait, and improved global demand outlook, could constrain shale supplies and create space for Kuwait to increase its market share. Figure 2. Fiscal Outlook Oil price that balances budget (excluding investment income) Crude oil price Breakeven Oil Prices, 2003–19 (US$ per barrel) Oil revenues Total expenditure Oil Fiscal Revenues and Total Government Expenditure, 1980/81– (KD millions) External Balances Sensitive to Oil Prices, 2009–19 (External balance, percent of GDP) Upside scenarioDownside scenario Baseline scenario Fiscal Balances Sensitive to Oil Prices, 2009–19 (Overall fiscal balance, percent of GDP) Upside scenario Downside scenario Baseline scenario Baseline scenario, excld investmentincome Downside scenario, excld investment income Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Note: Upside/downside scenarios shows external/fiscal balance for the oil price up/down to $20 higher/lower than the forecasted oil price and upside/downside scenario is up to $20 higher/lower. Page 10 Surges in global financial market volatility would likely have limited effects on the banking system. Banks fund their assets mainly from domestic deposits. Banks have direct exposures to the cyclical real estate sector and equity (24 percent of total assets) in addition to collaterals, thus exposing them to a downturn in real estate and equity prices. The feedback effects among banks, nonbank financial institutions, the real estate sector, and the stock market may exacerbate the impact. The high capitalization and provisioning levels, however, provide substantial loss absorption capacity that has been validated by the central bank’s and credit rating agencies’ stress test results. The central bank is also proactively monitoring and mitigating concentration and other risks through the use of macroprudential tools, including limits on loan-to-value ratios, and mandating less well capitalized banks to raise capital. An abrupt change in global financial market conditions could however increase market and funding risks for investment companies (ICs), forcing further deleveraging of proprietary positions for some of them, as well as adversely affecting fiduciary assets. main threats of Risk economy if risk is realized Sustained decline in High Even though the government has energy prices, triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming-on-stream of excess capacity (medium-term) Fiscal and external revenues significant buffers, it should contain would fall, and private sector current expenditures and continue confidence is likely to decline. to increase buffers while oil prices are still high. If the risk of a sustained drop in oil prices materializes, some further consolidation in expenditure in the medium term, beyond that already suggested, would be required, which would affect non-oil economic activity. Develop a medium-term fiscal policy framework that is underpinned by a medium-term macroeconomic framework and a medium-term expenditure framework. Undertake substantial economic reforms in support of diversification to reduce oil dependence. The central bank’s stress tests based on a variety of micro and macro shocks show that the lowest after-shock capital adequacy ratio of an individual bank was 11 percent. Page 11 main threats of Risk economy if risk is realized Slow Resolve the political gridlock. implementation of the Development Plan (DP) Protracted political uncertainty could affect overall business confidence and the investment climate, and result in lower non- oil growth than projected. Delays in implementation of projects due to unrealistic plans or bureaucratic hurdles would result in cost overruns and further decline in Integrate the DP into a medium- term fiscal framework to ensure continued implementation. Monitor the implementation of capital expenditure. Implement measures to improve the efficiency of public investment, and strengthen anti- corruption efforts. efficiency of public investment. An abrupt change in High The banking system would likely global financial Surges in market volatility and remain sound as it is amply market volatility increased financial market capitalized and well provisioned. distortions could pose funding, Banks’ specific provisions would, market and credit risks for ICs however, need to increase, which and banks. ICs have large might tighten domestic lending to exposures to global and riskier borrowers, particularly in regional financial and real estate view of high real estate exposure of markets, and continue to be banks. dependent on foreign financing. Banks have limited wholesale funding and limited foreign assets in the form of bank deposits and investments. The Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) also has substantial foreign investments. Monitor the health of ICs and complete the restructuring of loss- making ICs. The impact on KIA’s assets is expected to be manageable. Establish a macroprudential framework and a coordinating mechanism to assess incipient systemic risks and adjust macroprudential policies as needed to limit risks to the financial system. Protracted period of High Same as (i) above slower growth in advanced and emerging economies Could lead to a decline in oil demand and prices. The economy remains highly dependent on oil for its fiscal (reflecting lower- and external revenues as well as Page 12 main threats of Risk economy if risk is realized than-anticipated potential growth) government spending. Geopolitical Low Complete the restructuring fragmentation that (Russia/ Could lead to higher oil prices process of loss-making ICs. erodes the globalization Ukraine) and production. Some effect on Establish a macroprudential trade due to the situation in Iraq framework and a coordinating process and fosters (Middle could materialize and some mechanism to assess incipient inefficiency, East) Kuwaiti-owned commercial risks and adjust macroprudential including sustained projects in Iraq may stall. The policies as needed to limit risks to tensions surrounding Russia/Ukraine and heightened risk of fragmentation/state failure in the Middle East disruptions in global financial the financial system. markets could lead to Prepare an action plan in case the temporary liquidity tightening impact from spillovers from Iraq, in banks, force further especially security disruptions and deleveraging of ICs, and reduce population displacement, credit growth of banks. But, materializes. banks have adequate buffers to withstand shocks. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly.