The accommodative monetary policy stance remains conducive to credit growth . Bank credit continues to grow, supported by deposit growth. The central bank is ensuring that current liquidity conditions are supportive of credit demand, and monetary operations continue to focus primarily on absorption of surplus liquidity through conventional and Islamic instruments. With low inflation and gradually increasing non-oil growth, the policy mix is growth-supportive and remains appropriate. Monetary policy in coming years is expected to tighten under the basket peg. Macroprudential policy tools are available to the central bank to mitigate potential financial stability risks, and they are currently on a neutral setting. Page 13 The peg to a basket provides a credible monetary anchor, while the overall external sector assessment points to stability. Staff share the authorities’ view that the peg to the basket is appropriate given the current structure of the Kuwaiti economy. Estimates from the macrobalance and equilibrium real exchange rate assessment methodologies show that the real exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals, while estimates from the external sustainability approach give inconclusive results (Appendix II). On balance, staff believe there is no compelling evidence that the exchange rate is misaligned. Various external indicators reinforce the stability of the external sector. Central bank reserves have remained stable in the range of about 6.5–8 months of imports over the past few years while the sovereign wealth fund (Kuwait Investment Authority) has an estimated $550 billion at end-2013. The availability of cheap migrant labor keeps labor costs down and inflation moderate. The real effective exchange rate has been stable. The overall fiscal stance is expansionary until FY 2015/16 as some expenditures (e.g. foreign aid and subsidies) were shifted from the last year to the current year. However, some consolidation is envisaged thereafter, and this is appropriate in the context of fiscal sustainability. Staff’s model-based analysis suggests that the government has the space to undertake more capital spending, while underlining the need to contain current spending growth (Selected Issues Paper I). This is in line with the authorities’ view, and staff projections incorporate higher capital spending. The draft new Development Plan (DP) (2015–19) envisages an annual average public investment of KD 6.3 billion ($22 billion) in water, power, transportation and oil sectors. This is based on the non-oil balance as percent of non-oil GDP, excluding pension recapitalization. The estimates are based on a finite-horizon precautionary saving-investment model, in which oil income uncertainty is taken into account and investment affects the growth path. If the Development Plan is implemented fully, public capital spending would probably be close to the model estimate. However, according to the model, investment should contribute to export growth, requiring initiatives to support the tradable sector development. Optimal investment Actual investmentSource: IMF staffcalculations. Optimal vs. Projected Investment Spending, 2014–19 (KD millions) Page 14 Staff and the authorities agreed that the implementation of the proposed measures to contain the non-oil deficit should commence in the near term, since delays would result in the widening of this deficit and require larger adjustment in the future. Staff’s calculations show that the non-oil primary deficit is projected to exceed the long-term sustainable level indicated by intergenerational equity considerations by about 5 percent of GDP by 2019 (12 percent of GDP if oil prices are 20 percent lower). The authorities agreed with staff that containing current spending growth and prioritizing capital spending would further strengthen the fiscal position and ensure fiscal sustainability. The need for medium- term fiscal restraint would be larger and more urgent in a scenario of lower oil prices. Staff and the authorities agreed that reduction in the non-oil fiscal deficit over the medium term can be obtained with a number of options: A gradual phasing-out of subsidies (9 percent of GDP), with a social safety net in place and other mitigating measures (e.g. cash transfers) and a well-designed communication strategy to get the buy-in of the middle class, would generate substantial savings. This would have to be implemented in a manner that would not increase inflationary pressures. Curtailing the increase in government jobs and keeping the growth in compensation constant in real terms would result in saving of 0.8 percent of GDP in 2015 and an average of about 1.5 percent of GDP per year in the medium term. A review of various transfers to enterprises and households, goods and services spending, and other current expenditures, about 15 percent of GDP, is warranted to rationalize spending and explore potential savings. Pension reform is a potential candidate for spending rationalization. Subjecting Kuwaiti companies to corporate tax and lowering the rate to 10 percent from 15 percent, abolishing the National Labor Support Tax and the tax for the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences, and making Zakat creditable against the corporate tax, has the potential to increase revenues by 1.8 percent of GDP. Implementation of the value added tax (VAT) could yield an additional 2.3 percent of non-oil GDP. Thus, the combined revenue-increasing potential of these taxes is 2.9 percent of GDP. Revising fees for public services would constitute an additional source of non-oil revenues. The government has started implementing reforms to contain current spending. The cabinet has decided to increase diesel and kerosene prices from 55 fils per liter to 170 fils per liter (with potential saving of 0.5 percent of GDP). Some allowances for Kuwaitis travelling for healthcare Actual/ProjectedEquilibrium(lowoil price)Equilibrium(baselineoil price) Government Non-oil Primary Deficit, 1994/95–2018/19 1/ Sources: Country authorities; World Economic Forum; andIMF staff calculations.1/The baseline calculations assume long-term values of the real rate of return of assets, inflation, and population growth of Kuwaiti nationals of 4 percent, 2 percent, and 1.4 percent, respectively. Oil reserves are assumed to be depleted by 2075 and the oil price to be at $93 per barrel in 2019 and remain constant in real terms thereafter. The lower oil price scenario assumes oil prices are 20 percent lower than in the baseline scenario (which leaves the 2014 average at around $82 and the 2019 price at around $75). Page 15 abroad have been rationalized. The government is in advanced stages of sending a proposal to the cabinet for reducing subsidies for electricity. The government’s proposal on a tariff structure for electricity based on a sliding scale of usage would generate revenues of about 1 percent of GDP each year and a reduction in usage by 20 percent. Staff suggested that over the medium term, policies need to be implemented to eliminate the gap between the reference price (domestic production cost with some remuneration for capital in the sector) and the current tariffs. Staff and the authorities were of the view that to generate broad public support, a successful subsidy reform entailed (i) a comprehensive reform plan with impact assessment studies, (ii) appropriate phasing of price increases, (iii) a far-reaching communication strategy raising awareness about the cost of subsidies and the benefits of reform, and (iv) targeted mitigating measures, especially to protect the vulnerable segment of the population. The government is actively engaged on these fronts. The government is also considering a public sector wage reform, on which staff made suggestions. The objectives of the reform include revamping the current payroll system, linking performance management with promotions, standardizing salaries across public sector jobs, and moving to a system of salary indexation with periodic rebasing. Staff welcomed this development as it would simplify the wage structure, but suggested design changes since the proposal left room for arbitrary increases in salaries during the rebasing year and did not address the issue of containing employment growth. Staff suggested the Ministry of Finance be given powers to set wage bill ceilings or overall expenditure limits as part of the medium-term fiscal framework to contain arbitrary wage increases during the rebasing. Moreover, staff also emphasized that reducing the wage gap between public and private sector jobs to create incentives for nationals to take up private sector jobs, and restraining the increase in public sector employment should be part of the reform. Introducing skills testing for new and existing staff is a possibility. Wage subsidies need to be reviewed to retain the original intention of it being temporary. The authorities agreed that the development of the private sector and focusing on diversification should reduce the need to absorb new entrants into the public sector. There was consensus between staff and the authorities on the need for prioritizing capital expenditure towards social and physical infrastructure projects, accompanied by measures to improve efficiency, to support growth. Staff highlighted that the higher capital spending should be accompanied by improved efficiency of public investment, consistent Containing current spending while maintaining capital spending would mitigate the negative impact on growth, as the multiplier for capital spending is estimated to be above 1 while that on current spending is estimated to be below 1. 3.54.0MENAP Oil ExportersKuwaitThailandColombiaBrazilSouth Africa B p Appraisal Selection Implementation Evaluation Source: Dabla-Norriset al, IMIF 2011, Country Authorities, Fund staff estimates. Public Investment Management Index by Stages of ProjectCycle Page 16 with the broader diversification goals, and integrated with the budget formulation process. Although Kuwait compares better than oil exporters in the MENA region in terms of public investment management, it falls behind when compared to other emerging market economies. In the near term, staff and the authorities identified actions needed to improve efficiency that would include adopting a general strategy to modernize the procurement system, raising the oversight of public investment projects by increasing the transparency on decisions related to such projects, preparing an infrastructure needs assessment and effectively implementing the anti-corruption framework, and assessing the state of the public investment management system. Over the medium term, the framework for managing public investment should be revamped, particularly by developing the medium-term expenditure framework, the appraisal of investment projects, and by introducing a systematic ex-post evaluation of projects (Selected Issues Paper II). The government recognizes the importance of making more rapid progress in establishing a fiscal policy framework to lessen fiscal policy uncertainty. It would entail developing a medium-term macroeconomic framework to provide multiyear projections of key economic variables, a medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) to provide multiyear targets or ceilings on aggregate fiscal variables; and a medium-term expenditure framework to translate the overall budget envelope into a set of multiyear expenditure ceilings and policies for the main spending ministries (Selected Issues Paper I). These elements will lay a strong foundation for the public finance management reform underway with the help of the World Bank. The macro-fiscal unit can play an important role in this process.