RISKS Growth is moderating, though still high, and inflation has declined. Real GDP growth is projected at about 7½ percent in 2014, supported by external demand and foreign direct investment (FDI). With initial fiscal consolidation efforts underway, domestic activity has slowed, led Page 5 by construction. Mining production continues to weaken, the result of a moratorium on new mines and the decline in global metal prices. Imports data indicate that nondurable consumption and investment growth continues to moderate. Inflation has fallen to 3 percent (October 2014) from 6½ percent at end-2013, largely from food and fuel prices (Figure 1). Fiscal policy tightened in 2014. The deficit declined to 4¼ percent of GDP in FY2014 from 5½ of GDP in FY2013, mainly from expenditure consolidation. Current spending (including arrears payment of ½ percent of GDP) was close to budget, thanks to efforts to contain the wage bill. Capital expenditure came in higher than planned, as the government paid down arrears by 1½ percent of GDP. Revenue collection rose by 15 percent (y/y), though tax revenues fell short of budget by about 2½ percentage points of GDP on account of weak mining profit tax collection and overly optimistic budgeted revenue. While still tight, the treasury’s liquidity position has improved, with deposits covering 1½ months of current spending (Figure 2). While credit growth has declined, central bank balance sheet expansion continues to be brisk. Cuts in public infrastructure projects have allowed credit growth to decline to 16 percent (y/y), from 35 percent (y/y) at end-2013. However, a sharp expansion in the BOL’s net domestic assets has contributed to rapid reserve money and deposit growth. As a result, banks’ excess reserves have risen to 7 percent of GDP, from 5 percent of GDP at end-2013, pressuring profitability and potentially leading to easier lending standards down the road (Figure 3). The external position remains highly vulnerable, and international reserves do not offer adequate protection against external shocks (Box 2). The current account deficit is expected to remain large at 25 percent of GDP in 2014, with improvement in the nonresource current account balance, consequent of tighter fiscal policy and a pickup in export growth. Declining mining exports contribute to a slight worsening of the resource current account from last year. While FDI and long- term loan inflows are robust, particularly for export-oriented resource projects, the portion of the current account deficit financed by other, traditionally more volatile flows remains high at 7 percent of GDP (Table 2). The BOL has been intervening to keep the USD/kip exchange rate stable at slightly below the band’s mid-point, resulting in an appreciation of 3½ percent (y/y) in nominal effective terms (Figure 4). The real effective exchange rate appreciated by 5 percent compared to a year ago, and the CGER-type analysis and broader trends in the balance of payments suggest that the kip remains overvalued by 10–20 percent relative to the level implied by medium-term fundamentals. Gross international reserves are estimated at 1 month of prospective imports of goods and services (US$0.7 billion, August 2014), a slight increase from 0.8 month of import cover during the last Article IV. External debt, mostly long-term, rose to 84½ percent of GDP in nominal terms (83½ percent of GDP in present value terms) from about 80 percent of GDP the previous year (76 percent of GDP in present value terms). Even though the risk of external debt distress remains moderate, it has increased compared to the last Article IV, verging on a transition to high risk (Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)). Page 6 The implementation of recent policy measures has reduced immediate foreign- currency liquidity risks, but bank balance sheets have weakened in the past year (Financial Stability Map and Table 6). Limits on foreign-currency lending, supply of foreign exchange by the BOL and a leading state-owned bank, and robust foreign-currency deposit growth, have allowed banks to rebuild U.S. dollar liquidity buffers from very low levels. The USD/kip bid-ask spread has narrowed, and the previously sizable parallel foreign exchange premium has become negligible. Nevertheless, measured credit risks have risen. Accumulation of public infrastructure arrears has led to losses in the business sector, with knock-on effects on banks. The system’s nonperforming loan ratio (NPL) is estimated to have doubled during the first half of 2014, cutting into bank profitability and capital cushion. In the same period, state-owned banks’ average NPL is reported to have increased from 2 percent to about 8 percent, with average capital-to-asset ratio (CAR) declining to 3 percent. Reflecting partial dollarization in the economy (almost exclusively US dollar and Thai Baht), direct exposure to foreign currency through lending and deposits remain high, with the foreign-currency shares in total lending and deposits standing at 48 percent, down from 50 percent in 2013. Lao P.D.R: Country Financial Stability Map (Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite) 2. Inward spillover risks 1. Macroeconomic risks 5. Monetary and financial conditions 3. Credit risks 4. Market and liquidity risks Lao P.D.R.: Parallel exchange rate premium (In percent) Kip/USD Kip/Baht Jan-13 Apr-13 Jul-13 Oct-13 Jan-14 Apr-14 Jul-14 Oct-14 Source: Bank of Lao P.D.R. Sources: IMF staff estimates and calculations. 6. Risk appetite Latest A moderate further cooling down in economic activity is expected in the near term, but external vulnerabilities will remain elevated. As growth continues to moderate, inflation is projected to remain in the mid-single digits. The current account deficit is projected to improve gradually to about 21 percent of GDP, but with lower capital inflows, reserves would rise only slightly to 1¼ months of imports by end-2015. Over the medium term, growth is projected to be close to the official target of 7½ percent in the baseline, supported by strong resource-related FDI, a gradual pickup of investment inflows into nonresource sectors, and accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. Long-term purchase agreements governing tariffs and volumes will help insulate power export income from fluctuations in energy prices, and as large-scale power projects come on line, lifting exports and moderating resource imports, the resource current account would turn into moderate surplus. However, with the overall current account weighed down by the large deficit in the nonresource sector and reserves projected at around 2 months of imports, the external position would remain fragile and a significant risk to sustained growth. A more robust and sustainable growth path would require medium-term fiscal consolidation, greater exchange rate flexibility, and tighter domestic monetary conditions, in line with staff’s advice (Alternative scenario, Table 7). Page 7 Under the baseline, downside risks continue to dominate. A more expansionary fiscal stance would worsen the external position. With a very thin international reserves cushion, shocks that have been common in the past, such as terms-of-trade deterioration or a decline in capital inflows, could force large movements in the exchange rate. Such sudden and large exchange rate depreciation could lead to debt defaults, given high external debt, deteriorating net foreign asset positions at banks, and sizable domestic foreign-currency lending. This could precipitate a loss of confidence in the banking system, and trigger deposit flights. With an economic slowdown and bank recapitalization needs, public debt sustainability would be undermined (see DSA). A protracted growth slowdown in China, Thailand, and Vietnam would lower export growth, investment inflows, grants and remittances, as well as fiscal revenues (Figure 5). Authorities’ Views The authorities shared staff’s assessment that the economy was adjusting in the right direction. They broadly concurred with the near-term macroeconomic and financial sector outlook, and are concerned about weaker mineral export prices and potential capital flow volatility triggered by China’s slowdown and tighter financial conditions in the United States, respectively. Nevertheless, the authorities considered international reserves to be adequate, based on their preferred metric, at close to the target of 5 months of official merchandise imports associated with non-FDI activities—a significantly lower amount than those used in the staff’s metric based on trading partners’ export statistics (Tables 2 and 5). In addition, they pointed out that the nonbank private sector was already highly dollarized, reducing the need for international reserves holding for precautionary reasons. Lao P.D.R.: Risk Assessment Matrix Risk side Likelihood Impact Transmission channels Policy Response Up/Down- Large, abrupt exchange rate depreciation, triggered by terms of trade deterioration (global metal price decline/sharp rise in oil prices) or decline in private capital inflows More expansionary fiscal policy Fiscal arrears clearance delayed Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies, growth slowdown and financial risks in China (medium- term)  H Loan repayment difficulties leading to defaults, loss of confidence in banks, deposit flight; heightened public debt distress; adverse macro- financial feedback loop. Accelerate fiscal consolidation, and trade/investment reforms. Activate banking crisis management plan, ensure emergency liquidity while maintaining monetary control, orderly bank recapitalization and resolution, strengthen safety nets. Stand ready to raise interest rates. After the nominal exchange rate is stabilized, interest rates can be lowered, and fiscal policy adjusted to support the recovery.    H H Worse external position. Monetary control and business confidence undermined Broaden revenue base, reduce exemptions, strengthen administration, increase excise tax and VAT rate, curtail non- essential spending. Tighten domestic monetary conditions further. M/L Weaker business and bank balance sheets. Weaker private investment growth. Announce clearance plan. Curtail current spending. Take necessary prudential measures to ensure robust banks' liquidity and solvency. H/M Weaker exports (especially mineral and electricity), tourism receipts, investment inflows, grants, and remittances Adopt a monetary policy framework with greater exchange rate flexibility. Improve business climate, and accelerate capital market development to enhance productivity and attract FDI. Page 8