Fiscal and Expenditure Impulses--Initial Contribution to Growth. (Percent of previous year's GDP) Staff estimates that fiscal policy will ease slightly in FY2015 from weak mining revenue and a strong uptick in nonwage current spending. The deficit is projected to rise to 4¾ percent of GDP in FY2015 from 4¼ percent of GDP in FY2014, with the nonmining deficit largely unchanged at 6¼ percent of GDP. Revenue is budgeted to grow by 20 percent over the previous year’s outturn, based on higher effective excise and value-added taxes on petroleum, luxury goods, and vehicles, stricter enforcement of customs rules, and other efforts to strengthen revenue administration and enhance compliance. Nevertheless, staff expects weak mining revenue to offset the gains from overall administrative efforts, resulting in an expansionary revenue stance. On the expenditure side, civil service compensation is budgeted to rise by 7 percent compared to last year’s outturn to accommodate career promotion and a small net new intake, and capital spending would rise by 8 percent. While these efforts are expected to produce 1¾ percentage points of GDP in fiscal savings, a large budgeted increase in nonwage current spending would reduce fiscal savings by 1 percentage point of GDP, yielding a mildly contractionary expenditure stance. Expenditure impulse Revenue impulse Fiscal impulse Sources: IMF staff estimates. FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 Proj. Unless revenue efforts are strengthened and expenditure rationalization intensifies, consolidation efforts would weaken over the medium term. The identification of remaining arrears is proceeding slowly, and plans to address them remain unclear. Staff’s baseline fiscal projection assumes ½ percent of GDP in arrears payment in FY2015 and an additional 1½ percent of GDP over the medium term. On current policies, the deficits are expected to deteriorate beyond 5 percent of GDP in the medium term, with the nonmining deficit averaging at 7 percent of GDP. Public and publicly guaranteed debt (excluding unidentified arrears) is projected at 60 percent of GDP in 2014 (52 percent of GDP in present value terms), requiring immediate attention. Longer-term public debt dynamics have worsened compared to the previous year, raising the risk of debt distress. Maintaining the current policy trajectory would increase public debt to about 65 percent of GDP in the medium term, making it infeasible under reasonable medium-term consolidation policies to achieve the authorities’ target of 40–45 percent of GDP by the mid-2020s Page 9 (Table 5 and DSA). Moreover, mobilization of new capital for state-owned banks could potentially add to future public debt. Owing to significant reliance on external borrowing, public debt is also sensitive to large, abrupt exchange rate movements. (2010) Expenditure (In percent of GDP) A more growth-friendly composition of expenditure is desirable over the medium term. Capital spending exceeds the low-income and emerging-market country averages. However, maintaining high-quality capital spending will become more challenging as grants are expected to decline as a percentage of GDP. More spending on education and health, currently low in a cross- country comparison, would improve long-term competitiveness and promote growth inclusiveness. Civil service reforms offer a potential to reduce compensation significantly as a share of GDP, increasing space for critical capital and social spending. Education LICs EMs Lao P.D.R. Lao P.D.R Interest payments (2013) (excl. grant-financed capital expenditure) Capital expenditure (2013) Sources: IMF, WEO; World Bank, WDI; World Health Organization; and IMF staff calculations. LICs amd EMs estimates based on samples of 57 and 96 economies, respectively. Health (Lao PDR 2012, others 2011) Compensation of public employees (Lao PDR 2013, others 2011 ) Medium-term fiscal consolidation should be based on stronger revenue efforts and expenditure rationalization. A strategy anchored around a nonmining deficit target of no more than 5 percent of GDP would reduce near-term external vulnerabilities and lower public debt in the medium-term. On top of efforts to contain the public wage bill, more emphasis will be needed on revenue mobilization, controlling off-budget capital spending, and rationalizing non-essential current spending. To enhance fiscal credibility, the government should explain deviations from budget targets in the mid-term budget review to the National Assembly and outline corrective steps to get back on track. Tax-base broadening and administration improvement have the potential to yield substantial additional revenues (Box 3). Proposed revenue measures include: (i) broadening the tax base by eliminating exemptions (mainly in CIT and VAT), flattening the PIT rate schedule; and introducing taxes on property value; and (ii) strengthening administration, notably by establishing a large taxpayer unit and increasing technical capacity to raise mining revenues, and raising the threshold at which VAT registration becomes compulsory. To help support medium-term revenue mobilization, it would be useful to undertake a comprehensive review of the tax system. Strengthening control over spending and cash resources (treasury single account (TSA)), revenue forecasts, and recording and processing of arrears would improve public sector financial management. A TSA would also facilitate BOL’s liquidity management. These priority areas could be further developed in close cooperation with the IMF. Expenditure strategy should focus on three elements: (i) containing the public wage bill in a sustainable way, including by accelerating civil-service reform; (ii) curtailing non-essential current spending; (iii) controlling off-budget capital spending and targeting capital expenditure to support the growth potential, in line with implementation capacity. The potential savings would Page 10 provide scope for raising the shares of health and education spending in the budget, paying down arrears, and addressing possible contingent liabilities from state-owned bank recapitalization. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with staff’s fiscal assessment and recommendations, though successful implementation would require time to upgrade technology and staff capacity. More revenue efforts will be required to ensure continued consolidation, which is central to restoring macroeconomic stability. The government is undertaking investment to upgrade technology and staff capacity to strengthen tax administration. Significantly larger yields are expected from a focus on large taxpayers and taxes on vehicles, petrol, and luxury goods, as collection will be based on transaction prices instead of outdated reference prices. More use of electronic declaration and payments at customs check points, intensified efforts to counter smuggling, and electronic tax payments to enhance compliance are underway. Expenditure would be set based on more conservative revenue projections. The public sector wage bill would be contained through limits on new intake, and capital spending and off-budget expenditure rationalization remains a priority. A high-level committee has been established to quantify and resolve arrears and debts related to public infrastructure projects, and resolution could take several years. The National Assembly would welcome further fiscal transparency, and the authorities would welcome consultation with the Fund on expenditure rationalization experience in other countries.