The commitment to keep the exchange rate within a reasonably wide and adjustable band has provided an anchor for macro-financial stability, and merits staff’s support. Making full use of this flexibility is important to help buffer external shocks. In addition, it will become increasingly risky to maintain a tightly managed peg to the U.S. dollar while the recovery in the United States firms up and the Fed exits from unconventional monetary support, given the overvalued real exchange rate, loose domestic monetary conditions, and the thin reserves cushion. Greater exchange rate flexibility, tighter macroeconomic policies, and higher international reserves would bolster the exchange rate anchor. Staff recommends allowing the USD/kip exchange rate to move more flexibly within the official +/–5 percent band, with tighter fiscal and monetary policies supporting a gradual buildup of reserves to around 4 months of import cover. Occasional, modest intervention in the foreign exchange markets will be warranted to prevent rapid exchange rate movements and anchor expectations. This approach would help avoid the risk of a sharp, potentially destabilizing devaluation, particularly in light of the risks from currency mismatches. Draining excess kip liquidity from the banking system will enhance the BOL’s monetary and inflation control. Doing so would further limit the exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices, mitigating the risk of inflation resurgence as the exchange rate adjusts toward equilibrium (Box 4). Absorbing excess liquidity is also important for a functioning interbank market, Page 11 and would enable the BOL to move toward targeting a short-term interbank rate in the medium term. Options include the resumption of BOL bill issuance, raising the reserve requirements on kip deposits, and accelerating the unwinding of quasi-fiscal lending. Ongoing collaboration between the BOL and IMF experts to develop the interbank market should help strengthen liquidity management and forecasting. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the key objectives of low inflation and external stability, but were not convinced about the need for monetary tightening and greater exchange rate flexibility. The BOL views inflation control as a priority, and notes from experience that movements in the kip vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and the Thai baht could strongly influence domestic prices. While they agree that greater exchange rate flexibility would promote reserves accumulation, an outcome they desire, well-anchored exchange rate expectations are important to keep import cost and inflation in check and avoid capital outflows. The authorities are aware that tighter US monetary conditions could cause capital flow reversal and lower net inflows to Lao P.D.R., and are monitoring financial markets closely. They expect gross international reserves to rise in 2015 from government foreign-currency revenues sale and local governments’ loan repayment to the BOL. Draining excess liquidity is not a near-term priority as credit growth is already declining, though more government bond issuance for liquidity management purposes could be considered in the future.