The economy has been moving toward a “soft landing,” with the key priority now to strengthen the external position and preserve financial stability. GDP growth is moderating from 8 percent in 2013, partly from fiscal tightening, and credit growth has abated from excessive levels. Inflation has declined. Significant gains in poverty reduction over the past decade have been preserved, though inequality has increased slightly (Box 1). However, external vulnerabilities remain a concern The current account continues to be in large deficit and international reserves remain inadequate for precautionary needs. The economy is exposed to downside external shocks, notably a regional growth slowdown and a deterioration in terms-of-trade and capital inflows. Following years of rapid credit growth, bank balance sheets are showing signs of weakness, raising financial stability concerns. Public and publicly guaranteed debt has risen to a level that requires attention. The authorities have placed a high priority on strong growth with macroeconomic stability. The government recognized that fiscal policy was sharply expansionary and procyclical in 2013, and started to tighten in 2014. The medium-term GDP growth target has been lowered to 7½ percent per annum, from 8 percent. Additional fiscal consolidation efforts, greater exchange rate flexibility, tighter monetary conditions, and prompt efforts to address banking sector vulnerabilities would support the authorities’ agenda to entrench stability and put growth on a sustained, robust path. Accelerating compliance with WTO and ASEAN commitments would promote trade integration and private sector-led growth, especially in the nonresource sector. The change in policy direction was consistent with past Fund advice, but policies should be further strengthened to reduce vulnerabilities. The authorities have made progress on priorities outlined in the last Article IV consultation. Fiscal consolidation has commenced, mainly through curbs on civil service compensation and capital spending cuts. Public investment cuts have limited the BOL’s quasi-fiscal lending and lowered credit growth. Strict enforcement of regulation on banks’ net open foreign exchange positions and the limits on foreign-currency lending has helped reduce foreign-currency liquidity risk at banks. However, excess kip liquidity in the banking system has risen; greater exchange rate flexibility, observed in the second half of 2013, has not resumed; the authorities remain convinced that, measured against their preferred metric, international reserves are more or less adequate; and policies to strengthen banking sector soundness could be accelerated, particularly in light of worsening conditions at state-owned and some private banks. IMF technical assistance (TA) has increased in the areas of revenue administration, monetary operations, banking supervision, and government finance and external sector statistics.