Financial stability concerns are rising. Despite lower credit growth, measured credit risks have increased as the corporate sector has become more leveraged over the past few years (Paragraph 8). Rising NPLs—reportedly concentrated in public infrastructure-related activity—have cut into bank profitability and capital cushion. Financial institutions have been granted forbearance on compliance with key prudential norms as they restructure delinquent loans. Looking ahead, growing excess liquidity gives banks scope to expand credit, potentially leading to easier lending standards in times of fewer investment opportunities and heightened near-term macroeconomic risks. Efforts to review asset quality at undercapitalized state-owned banks are welcome, but a more comprehensive agenda is needed. Principal elements include: A more expeditious recognition of NPLs, supported by diagnostic assessments of systemic banks conducted by appropriate experts; ensuring that all banks achieve the minimum-mandated CAR of 8 percent in a prompt, time-bound manner after the diagnostic assessments have been performed; developing resolution options to deal with NPLs; strengthening financial supervision, with a timeline for phasing out regulatory forbearance. Staff encourages preparation of a contingency plan for the banking sector in the event of financial distress, including strengthening the institutional setup for crisis management with resolution authority, a sound emergency liquidity assistance framework with appropriate safeguards, a bank resolution framework, and a communications strategy. The IMF is ready to provide further TA on financial sector supervision, crisis management, and stress testing. Page 12 Putting in place key elements for sound lending practices would enhance macro- financial resiliency. This includes a clear and uniformly applied accounting framework, strong supervisory oversight and enforcement, a credit culture built on transparency, creditors’ rights, independent and objective credit analysis, and an effective debt resolution process. International experience shows that moving in this direction would enhance the benefits from financial deepening and improve financial access by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Staff welcomes the recent approval of the AML/CFT law by the National Assembly and the authorities’ commitment to implement all remaining items in the action plan as agreed with the Financial Action Task Force to ensure a robust operating environment for banks. A number of measures have been taken to reduce exchange rate risks on bank and corporate balance sheets. These include strict enforcement of banks’ compliance with the regulation on net open foreign exchange positions, the limits on foreign-currency lending to borrowers without sufficient foreign-currency income, and cash-on-hand requirements. Access to foreign-currency swap facilities with other central banks could mitigate the vulnerability of the banking system to foreign-currency liquidity shocks. Additional measures, such as maximum credit exposures in relation to capital, would help ensure sufficient loss absorption capacity. Collecting corporate and household balance sheet information and TA on assessing the balance sheet risks in the banking system would improve the BOL’s ability to monitor and manage the economy’s exposure to exchange rate risks. Authorities’ Views The authorities shared staff’s assessment, and plan to move toward risk-based supervision in the medium term. The entry of foreign and private banks in recent years has expanded access to banking services, and helped create a more commercially oriented banking sector. The depth of the financial system has increased significantly, though financial access by SMEs remains limited. External auditing requirements and a depositor protection system have contributed to financial system stability. To ensure that supervisory and bank risk management capacity can keep pace with financial deepening, the authorities have suspended banking license issuance to review progress and address weakness. They emphasized strong regulatory enforcement to enhance credit quality and lower foreign exchange risks, and planned to build the framework and capacity for risk-based supervision. The BOL and the Ministry of Finance are coordinating to prioritize fiscal arrears settlement to limit new NPLs. Options to strengthen state-owned banks are under review. Page 13