Productivity growth is key to maintaining the pace of income convergence. Latvia’s PPP per capita GDP now stands around 60 percent of the EU-15 average. The rapid income convergence over the past two decades was driven largely by productivity growth, which averaged 4 percent over the period. As the labor force is projected to decline, the burden of future income convergence will need to be shouldered by investment and continued TFP growth. See Schneider, F: “Size and Development of the Shadow Economy of 31 European and 5 other OECD Countries from 2003 to 2015: Different Developments” and Putniņš and Sauka: “Shadow Economy Index for the Baltic Countries”. PPP GDP per capita (percent of EU average, LHS) GDP (index 2008=100, RHS) GDP per capita (index 2008=100, RHS) Sources: Eurostat and IMF staffcalculations. Real GDP per Capita and Real GDP Page 13 Staff simulations (see text chart) show that if the medium-term growth projections can be sustained over the long-term—which will require ongoing reform efforts—and the long run pace of convergence is maintained, the gap could be closed within a generation. In order to generate the faster pace of convergence seen in the immediate post crisis period Latvia will need to grow even faster. In addition to structural reforms, the financial sector will have to play its part by providing the credit needed to support future investment, particularly as wage pressures erode company profitability, and hence their ability to self-finance. Latvia has ample scope to raise productivity, but this will require further structural reform Maintaining productivity growth will not be simple, as easy gains have likely already been exhausted and firms are approaching their technology frontiers. Indeed, firm level data suggest that productivity growth since 2010 was largely due to “catch-up” by less productive firms (see Selected Issues Paper). Nonetheless, there is ample scope for further gains, if Latvia can move towards the “productivity frontier” set by others. Latvian labor productivity across all sectors in 2014 (measured in 2010 euros) remains at about a third of the EU15 average, with agriculture doing relatively better and manufacturing relatively worse. Closing such gaps will require continued progress on structural reforms, notably to improve state-owned enterprise (SOE) governance and strengthen the business environment, upgrade public infrastructure, and modernize legal systems (see Text Box). Improving SoE governance and the business environment. SoEs are dominant in a variety of network sectors, such as electricity, postal services, airlines, railways and telecom, potentially creating barriers to entry. Given Latvia’s size, many of these represent natural monopolies, but initiatives to foster competition by unbundling services such as generation, transmission and distribution in the energy markets are welcome. Furthermore, SoE governance exhibits non-transparent accountability and shareholder power, hindering efficiency. In this context, the re-introduction of independent boards and annual reporting from 2016 for the largest SOEs is welcome. While a framework law to strengthen SOE governance was passed in October 2014 and a new cross-sectoral coordination unit has been set up, implementation will be key. Furthermore, reduction in the complexity of regulatory procedures, simplification of license and permit systems, and removal of compulsory chamber membership in professional services would be important to strengthen business environment. See OECD (2015), “Review of Latvia’s position relative to the OECD guidelines on corporate governance of state- owned enterprises,” OECD Publishing See OECD (2015), “Policy areas for increasing productivity in Latvia economics,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers , No 1255. Long run (1995-2014) pace of convergence Post crisis (2010-14) pace of convergence Sources: Eurostat and IMF staffcalculations. Real GDP per capita (Percent of EU15 average) Projection Page 14 Relatively less productive firms saw the greatest increase in productivity… …while firms that increased employment less saw greater cumulative productivity gains. Productivity Developments With potential for significant gains in particular in upgrading property rights and the legal system Nevertheless, labor productivity remains far from the frontier, even relative to other Baltic countries… Enhancing public infrastructure would help attract FDI and associated technological knowhow. An important area where reforms are both necessary and well-identified is ports: Riga and Ventspils ports both remain overly dependent on low-value added bulk traffic and face strong competition, especially from Russian ports. Rail connectivity, both cargo and passenger is limited, and while major roads that are eligible for EU investment have improved in quality and are well maintained, the majority of local roads are in a poor condition with limited funding for repairs. Energy costs, particularly those related to transmission and distribution, are relatively high and links to the wider European energy markets are still being developed. In this context, initiatives to improve connectivity such as Rail Baltics, and efforts to further integrate regional energy markets can boost efficiency and reduce costs. Improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the insolvency regime will benefit firms, individuals, and the financial sector . Recent steps to strengthen the insolvency regime and Sources: Orbis;and IMF staff calculations. Firms that increased employment the most Firms that increased employment the least Increase in productivity (Percent of average increase in TFP of all firms) Difference statistically significant Difference statistically significant Z BalticsCEESEE-EUSEE-XEUCIS Easing business regulation Lowering restrictions on FDI Property rights Upgrading legal system Potential Efficiency Gains fromStructural Reforms (Potential improvement in TFP, percent) Sources: Eurostatand IMF staff calculations. 255075100TotalAgricultureConstructionManufacturingServices Latvia Estonia Lithuania Labor productivity, 2014 (Relative to EU15, measured in 2010 euros)Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 institutions including efforts to consolidate court districts, training for judges and administrators on insolvency issues, and subjecting insolvency administrators to greater income disclosure and stricter supervision, are starting to bear fruit. The length of in-court proceedings has fallen from 3 to 1.5 years in the past 5 years, and clearance rates have risen. Nonetheless, banks continue to report concerns about lengthy procedures and low recovery rates. Staff stressed that effective implementation of the recent reforms is vital to fully realize efficiency gains, and called on the authorities to monitor developments and report on progress. Effort is also needed to further strengthen the transparency of, and procedures for, case assignment. Sustaining growth in the longer term will likely require further structural transformation with an emphasis on high connectivity sectors and diversified and sophisticated exports. Economies that have been successful at maintaining the pace of convergence, such as Czech Republic, Hong Kong SAR, Ireland, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan Province of China, all shifted from low-skilled labor-intensive activities to developing the national innovation systems required to compete with high-income countries in more sophisticated products and pushing the global technological frontier.  Improvements in innovation and research and development could lay the ground for such a transformation and help Latvia move up the value chain. R&D intensity remains well below the EU average and the share of high-technology exports remains small (9.2 percent in 2014). The New Industrial Policy and Smart Specialization Strategy seek to address these deficiencies but are in the initial stages of implementation. Staff supports the authorities’ aim to more than double R&D spending, from the current 0.6 percent of GDP to 1.5 percent by 2020, largely through enhanced private sector spending, supported by EU- funded innovation and R&D schemes. However, achieving this target may be difficult, particularly as the total amount of financing for R&D and innovation has not been boosted. R&D and innovation incentive schemes are in place but greater uptake is needed, and industry-science links need to be strengthened. See May 2016, European Regional Economic Issues Report See IMF Country Report No. 15/337 See Gill and Kharas, 2007, Yusuf and Nabeshima, 2009, and Woo, 2009. x EE ee Research and innovation SME competitiveness Education and training EU Countries: Pro-growth ESIF Spending, 2014-20 (Percent of total ESIF spending) 1/ Spending on thematic objectives 1 (research and innovation), 3 (SME competitiveness), and 10 (eductaion and training).Sources: European Commission (https://cohesiondata.ec.europa.eu/); and IMF staff calculations. Page 16 The authorities agreed with the need for reforms across various sectors to support productivity and growth. In particular they noted that progress was being made strengthening SOE governance, with the appointment of independent boards under way; gas market liberalization is planned for 2017; important progress is being made in implementing the new insolvency regime and is beginning to bear fruit; and detailed strategies under the National Development Plan and Smart Specialization Strategy have been formulated for the technological transformation of the economy. They also noted that while the goal to increase R&D spending to 1.5 percent of GDP is ambitious, relevant schemes were being redesigned based on past experience.