Latvia’s three largest banks comfortably passed the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment. The wider banking system is also well capitalized and liquid, with an average CET1 ratio of about 18 percent and a liquidity ratio of around 64 percent, substantially higher than regulatory minimum requirements of 8 percent and 30 percent respectively. Citadele, the “good bank” created upon the dissolution of Parex, was sold to a consortium of international investors within the timetable set by DG Competition. The sale triggered the exercise of a put-option equivalent to about 0.4 percent of GDP compensating the EBRD for its injection of equity capital in Parex at the outset of the crisis. Banking supervision is now shared between the Latvian regulator (the FCMC) and the SSM. The SSM directly supervises Latvia’s three largest banks, accounting for about 42 percent of the banking system by assets. The Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs) for these banks are led by an ECB official and include Latvian representation. On the other hand, the Colleges of Supervisors for the large banking groups—two of which are subsidiaries of Swedish parent banks and are among Latvia’s three largest banks— are chaired by the Swedish supervisory authorities and include representatives from the ECB , while Latvia’s FCMC has observerstatus. The authorities report that information sharing and cooperation among these supervisory bodies has so far been good. They Latvia’s economic crisis was sparked by a run on the country’s largest domestic bank, Parex, in 2008. Page 11 agreed with staff that open communication channels among the ECB, the Swedish regulators and the FCMC will remain essential going forward, especially when capital and liquidity conditions are less benign than at present. Ongoing geopolitical tensions and the deep economic downturn in Russia highlight potential risks stemming from the high level of NRDs in Latvia’s banking system. NRDs, over 80 percent of which are estimated to originate from Russia and other CIS countries, currently account for about half of the banking sector’s total deposits, and could therefore be vulnerable to a sudden stop or flow reversal. Moreover, since NRDs are covered by the country’s deposit guarantee scheme, they represent a significant contingent fiscal liability. That said, to date there are few signs of NRD inflows being impeded due to geopolitical events (Box 1). Risks to the domestic economy are mitigated by various factors. NRD banks hold the major share of their assets abroad in liquid instruments such as European and US government securities, and bank deposits. They are already subject to higher capital and liquidity requirements, in line with past staff advice. Moreover, the FCMC plans to impose a “business model risk” add-on to NRD banks’ contributions to Latvia’s deposit guarantee scheme, ensuring that NRD banks pay more into the scheme per dollar of deposits. The authorities remain keenly aware of the need for vigilant supervision of the NRD banking sector. AML / CFT supervision is being strengthened and made more risk-based. The Latvian bank regulator, the FCMC, reported that it conducts frequent offsite and onsite bank inspections, and that customer due diligence guidelines have been strengthened since the Moneyval report in 2012. The authorities noted that the Financial Intelligence Unit responsible for fighting money laundering and other financial crimes now receives greater budgetary support—which it has used to expand staff, undertake more training programs and invest in more sophisticated risk- assessment software—and works in cooperation with the State Revenue Service and foreign regulators.