Under staff’s baseline scenario, economic growth will ease slightly in 2014. Consumption is expected to level off from the rapid pace of last year, but should remain robust, supported by the continuing tightness of labor markets and a rise in the minimum wage from 280 to 325 euros per month. A rebound in investment and imports is predicated on improved business sentiment and the release of pent-up investment demand in the wake of euro adoption. Stronger growth in the euro area and other trade partners should enable more rapid export growth. However, the downward revision of baseline growth in Russia will have a moderating impact on the rebound in investment and exports. Inflation should pick up as the downward pressure from commodity prices recedes and wages continue to rise. The forecast is rather sensitive to the extent of the investment recovery, which in turn is tied to the prospects of resuscitating credit. Looking further ahead, with continuing reform efforts and prudent macroeconomic management, growth of about 4 percent per annum—well above the euro area average—should be attainable during the convergence process. There are risks to this broadly favorable outlook (RAM). A prolonged slowdown in European partner countries would dampen Latvia’s recovery and increase its current account deficit, while a surge in global financial volatility could affect bank funding. Ongoing events in Ukraine A growth rate close to or greater than 4 percent per annum was achieved by several Central European emerging markets in the decade before the crisis, as they expanded trade links with West European economies and integrated into supply chains. Latvia’s own GDP growth rate between 1997–2006 averaged 7.5 percent. Page 8 could generate real and external spillovers. While trade links with Ukraine are minor, Russia accounts for about 11 percent of exports. A deeper slowdown in Russia would adversely affect trade prospects, especially if there were broader regional spillovers. As noted by the authorities, ruble depreciation could depress export margins even if trade volumes held steady. Moreover, the flow of non-resident deposits (NRDs) to the Latvian banking system from CIS countries could be subject to volatility. On the domestic front, slow progress on important structural reforms could cause an erosion of hard-won gains in competitiveness, a resurfacing of imbalances and upward pressure on external debt ratios. That said, Latvia does have upside potential if it can generate higher levels of investment, including through additional foreign direct investment, and rapidly implement reforms aimed at enhancing productivity and improving the business environment.