Lackluster economic growth is expected to continue this year. This reflects the adverse impact of the anemic external environment, particularly Russia’s sharp slowdown, on exports and investment. This will be mitigated but not fully offset by higher disposable income due to lower oil prices and robust real wages, which would tend to support private consumption. LM has now reopened and is gradually ramping-up production, but is not expected to reach full capacity until the fourth quarter. Given abundant liquidity in the banking system, the accommodative monetary stance of the ECB is unlikely to exercise much impact except through a weaker euro and expectations of a more robust recovery in the Euro Area. While inflation is expected to fall in 2015, reflecting the sharply lower oil price forecast, the liberalization of electricity tariffs will support prices to some extent. Over time, growth is expected to accelerate as the external climate improves and investment picks-up, but this is predicated on strong reform efforts. Annual medium-term growth of around 4 percent—higher than in core economies—should be achievable as the economy converges towards Euro Area average income levels. This is conditional on measures to enhance competitiveness, and continued prudent macroeconomic management. Adverse demographics, including continuing emigration, will tend to reduce the labor force, so reforms aimed at reducing high structural unemployment will be needed simply to keep employment constant. Robust growth will depend on capital accumulation—underpinned by a resumption of credit supply—and TFP growth (see selected issues paper on Latvia’s medium-term growth). International evidence shows that while several countries at a similar level of development have been able to increase labor productivity rapidly and converge towards frontier income levels, others have failed to do so: the key is to attract sufficient investment, especially in industries with high investment multipliers, and lay the foundations for rapidly improving productivity, including by building infrastructure and through reforms to education. The outlook is subject to significant downside risks (RAM). A prolonged slowdown in Russia and the Euro Area would further dampen confidence and thwart a pick-up in economic activity, while a further escalation of sanctions and counter-sanctions could disrupt trade settlements. A sharp supply-driven rise in oil prices would remove an important factor supporting projected growth, especially in the near-term. Resurgent sovereign stress arising from events in Greece could spill over to higher bond yields in Latvia. A failure to tackle the structural reform agenda would impede productivity growth and diminish competitiveness over the medium term; indeed the external assessment (Box 2) shows that there are already some signs of eroding competitiveness due to recently rising unit labor costs (although so far these losses are minor From January 1st, 2015, smaller enterprises and households—which had hitherto bought electricity from the state- owned JSC Latvenergo at subsidized rates—shifted to purchasing electricity on the free market (with some exemptions for special groups such as poor households or households with many children). This reform—long advocated by the European commission—was originally scheduled for April, 2014 but was delayed to develop a proper compensation mechanism for low income households. Page 8 compared to the gains made from internal devaluation since the crisis). The external assessment also shows that Latvia is vulnerable to a severe growth or current account shock, which could reverse the projected medium-term trend of a gradually falling debt-to-GDP ratio. The authorities broadly concurred with these risks, but noted that while sovereign stress arising in the European periphery might increase somewhat the cost of the government’s external financing from the current extremely low rates, Latvia’s low public debt and sound macroeconomic fundamentals make it very unlikely to be rationed from credit markets. Indeed, ratings agencies have repeatedly upgraded the country’s sovereign rating over the last three years. The authorities also noted that—partly as a result of the ECB’s unconventional policy actions—there were upside risks from a stronger-than- expected recovery in the Euro Area.