The 2014 budget continues with fiscal consolidation at a measured pace, appropriate to the economy’s cyclical position and moderate government debt. It targets a general government deficit of 0.9 percent of GDP, a gradual narrowing from the 1.3 percent deficit in 2013. The budget is the first to be governed by the new Fiscal Discipline Law (FDL), whose adoption is in line with Fund advice. After adjusting for transfers from government revenue to the privately managed pension pillar (the second pillar), the budget is compatible with the FDL’s medium-term objective of a structural deficit no greater than 0.5 percent. The budget appropriately “unfreezes” some expenditure areas that have been under tight control since the crisis, while rearranging some revenue streams. Small pensions were indexed in September 2013, and the minimum wage has been increased from 285 euros to 320 euros per month. The authorities noted that these measures should be viewed in the context of substantial wage cuts in 2009–10 and only limited increases in 2011–13. On the revenue side, the earlier schedule of reductions in the personal income tax rate has been delayed, in line with staff advice, and replaced instead by a 1 percentage point reduction in social security contributions. To reduce the tax burden on low-income workers and families, the non-taxable threshold for workers and dependents has been increased. While the budget goes some distance to address high levels of inequality, more is needed. In particular, staff urged reversal of the 2013 cuts to Latvia’s Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI) benefit, and a re-centralization of the scheme’s financing, in line with the recommendations of a comprehensive World Bank study on employment. Social exclusion benefits in Latvia are among the lowest in Europe (Appendix III), while regional disparities mean that some income-constrained local governments may be unable to provide even the reduced benefit levels in full. The authorities argued, however, that higher GMI benefits and centralized financing were only introduced as a crisis measure, and have been appropriately reversed now that the economy is recovering. They also Page 12 pointed out that local governments had not faced any constraints in financing the benefit scheme in Budgetary planning will need to contend with several potential fiscal headwinds over the medium-term. Future planned declines in the PIT rate and in SOEs’ payout ratios will act as a drag on revenue, reducing revenue as a percentage of GDP by about 4 percentage points between 2013 and 2016, and thus requiring corresponding reductions in spending to meet medium-term deficit targets. Staff argued that such large reductions could impede adequate public expenditure on investment, especially in priority areas like infrastructure. Several options could be considered to ensure that the fiscal envelope remains adequate. First, the PIT cut should be reconsidered. While the authorities view this as a measure to improve work incentives, untargeted cuts in the PIT rate are not first-best from an efficiency or equity perspective. Second, revenues from property taxes could be expanded, in conjunction with cadastre reform. Property taxes are generally non-distortionary compared with other forms of taxation, and currently amount to only about 0.7 percent in Latvia, low by international standards. The authorities agreed that this could be a promising source of revenue, but suggested that political consensus—likely to develop only after the October election— would be required to move forward. Third, measures to broaden the tax base by combating the grey economy should continue to be pursued vigorously. The authorities pointed to significant progress in this area as a result of improved tax administration, a crackdown on fictitious companies and more frequent audits. Various indicators suggest that there has been a reduction in the number of unregistered businesses and “envelope salaries”, an increase in the number of taxpayers, and an increase in the rate of recovered tax arrears.