Bank deleveraging reflects both demand and supply factors. The debt overhang and uncertain outlook continue to hold back credit growth and investment in an environment of tightened lending standards. Discussions with bank representatives suggest that SMEs and low income households in particular face hurdles accessing funding because of the higher risks they represent and their lack of collateral. The credit contraction has persisted well past the point in the cycle when most countries see a resumption of credit growth. It is particularly worrying in the As a recent example, the bankruptcy of Latvijas Krajbanka—which in September 2011 accounted for about 1½ percent of Latvia’s NRDs and 8 percent of domestic deposits—required the Deposit Guarantee Fund to pay out about 336 million lats (about 2.2 percent of GDP) to cover insured deposits, of which 200 million lats came from a treasury loan. See Appendix I, 2012 Article IV Consultation with Latvia. See Baltic Cluster Report, 2014, IMF Country Report No. ISCR/14/116. Page 12 context of a tightening labor market and high real wage growth. For several years after the trough of the crisis, firms were able to finance investment through retained profits, since productivity growth outstripped wages. But now the lack of credit is likely to be a binding constraint on investment. The authorities have few direct levers to encourage credit supply, given the dominance of Nordic subsidiaries in Latvia’s domestic economy. ECB quantitative easing is unlikely to have an impact on bank lending, since Nordic subsidiaries depend on parent banks for funding rather than wholesale markets, while the parent banks themselves are not liquidity constrained. The subsidiary banks note that, while they have indeed tightened lending standards since the crisis, the main reason for anemic lending is lack of demand. The reduction in their loan book over the last few years has created excess cash holdings, which in turn have been repatriated to the parent banks; thus the observed increase in the percentage of local deposit funding for the subsidiaries is not a conscious change in business model but rather a consequence of excess liquidity. The recently created Single Development Institute (SDI) is appropriately taking a more active role in supporting SME lending. The SDI has introduced a number of programs designed to catalyze private bank lending, including loan guarantee schemes and a program to reduce credit risk for private lenders by providing subordinated loans. The authorities also pointed to recent efforts to develop credit bureaus to make available potential borrowers’ credit related information in a standardized way, which would help banks to screen borrowers and reduce informational asymmetries in the loan market. Staff encouraged all these initiatives, while noting that care is needed to ensure that the SDI is genuinely addressing market failures rather than supporting unviable businesses. Policy measures to reduce the still high debt overhang would increase demand for credit while improving perceptions of credit risk on the supply side. While earlier legal amendments have already strengthened the insolvency regime, its administration and implementation could be further improved. Banks report that insolvency procedures can be very lengthy and insolvency administrators obstructive. The authorities pointed to various measures being planned, or already implemented, to reduce the backlog of pending cases, such as a greater number of courts and better specialization and allocation of judges across courts. A new law makes As described in previous staff reports, the SDI is a new institution formed through the merger of the Latvian Guarantee Agency, the Rural Development Fund and the Mortgage and Land Bank. Productivity growth Real wage growth Productivity Growth and Real Wage Growth (Percent) Sources: CSB and IMF staff calculations. Page 13 insolvency administrators state officials, subjecting them to greater income disclosure and stricter supervision. And reforms are underway to encourage mediation or arbitration as an alternative to much lengthier regular court procedures. A compromise has been reached on the implementation of recent amendments to the insolvency law which could have had the unintended consequence of further dampening credit supply. The amendments—passed by Parliament last year—limited the liability of mortgage borrowers to collateral and reduced the discharge period for debtors from 3.5 years to 1 year after declaring insolvency. While the amendments did not apply retroactively, thus limiting the immediate impact on bank balance sheets, they created further uncertainty amid an already weak lending environment. Several banks responded by charging higher mortgage down payments and rationing credit to low-income households and households that live outside major cities, despite the amendments not having taken effect. Staff therefore welcomed the recent compromise which requires banks to offer customers a choice between a “regular” mortgage and a limited-recourse mortgage of the type prescribed by the amendments (which can be priced differently).