Latvia’s medium-term macroeconomic challenge—maintaining competitiveness under a fixed exchange rate regime—remains unaltered by euro accession. The chief source of past competitiveness gains was a combination of productivity growth and wage restraint. The resulting turnaround in the real effective exchange rate enabled an export-driven recovery. But with the output gap near zero and the labor market tightening correspondingly, wages are inevitably on the rise. Productivity gains should therefore be the chief driver of competitiveness gains going forward. The authorities agreed on the importance of structural reforms across a broad range of areas, aimed at improving productivity, lowering structural unemployment and enhancing competitiveness. Upgrading public infrastructure could provide an important spur to competitiveness. As noted in the Baltic Cluster Report (BCR), infrastructure improvements would enhance productivity, while helping to attract FDI and associated technological knowhow. Staff urged implementation of the recommendations of the World Bank’s recent comprehensive assessment of Latvian ports: enhancing connectivity to land transport, and improving governance and accountability. Reforms to liberalize the electricity sector and deregulate tariffs would encourage new suppliers to enter the market, over time increasing supply and reducing prices. On a different front, centralizing SOE management while divesting non-core activities—in line with long-planned reforms—would improve efficiency and accountability, contributing to an improvement in the business environment. The authorities agreed with the thrust of recommended reforms in each of these areas. The World Bank recommendations were being studied with a view to develop an actionable plan. Tariff liberalization in the electricity sector—initially planned for April—had been postponed in order to develop better safeguards for low-income households, who would be Page 9 negatively affected by a rise in tariffs. Legal amendments establishing centralized management of SOEs are pending in parliament. Progress on education and training reforms could help Latvia reduce structural unemployment and move up the product value chain. As highlighted in the Cluster Report, reforms to higher education — including an independent quality-based accreditation of study fields, better targeting of public funding to universities, consolidation of higher education institutions and promoting the use of EU foreign languages in teaching — would build a more skilled workforce. Reforms to vocational training—including apprenticeship programs and better alignment of training with employers’ needs — could help reduce skills mismatches and hence alleviate structural unemployment in the medium-term. The authorities agreed with the need for wide-ranging reforms, and pointed to progress in a number of areas. A project has been launched with the World Bank to study a new financing model for higher education. Institutes of higher education are being encouraged to shift resources from the social sciences towards STEM fields, and to collaborate with municipalities and the private sector in anticipating the skills demanded by the market. A pilot project has been launched with technical assistance from Germany under which students from 6 vocational education and training (VET) institutions apprentice at firms with international links. The program will be studied and potentially expanded. The Latvian labor market is very flexible, as documented in the BCR, but work incentives could be further improved. In particular, a more gradual phasing-out of the guaranteed minimum income (GMI) benefit — which currently phases out one-for-one with income— would reduce the tax wedge for GMI recipients entering employment. More generally, the BCR finds that labor taxation is high across the Baltics relative to comparator countries, so measures to reduce the tax wedge could yield high dividends in reducing structural unemployment. In Latvia, a system of in- work tax credits and benefits should be considered; empirical evidence suggests that these have proven particularly effective in increasing employment of lower skilled workers. The authorities agreed that reducing taxes on labor could help improve work incentives and reduce structural unemployment – and pointed to the lowering of social contributions by 1 percentage point in the 2014 budget. Moreover, the Ministry of Welfare noted that it is working on a proposal to allow GMI recipients to continue to collect the GMI benefit for a period of four months after entering employment. Productivity Growth and Real Wage Growth (Percent) Productivity growth Real wage growth