The continuing contraction of credit is a concern, especially when coupled with the investment downturn. For several years following the trough of the crisis, productivity growth Page 10 remained well above wage growth, allowing firms to finance investment using retained profits. But the sharp contraction in gross fixed investment in 2013 suggests that the limits to internal financing of investment may have been reached; with the tightening of the labor market, real wages are now rising more quickly and profit margins are being squeezed. Latvia’s creditless recovery is in line with historical experience, but its lengthy duration makes it an outlier. The Baltic Cluster report finds that sharp boom-bust cycles are often followed by creditless recoveries, especially if the cycle is accompanied by a banking crisis, as in Latvia’s case. However, even among the sample of emerging economies that experienced creditless recoveries in the past, positive credit growth has usually resumed by this stage in the cycle. Staff analysis suggests that a combination of demand and supply factors is likely responsible for weak credit: private agents remain burdened with legacy debts, while banks have significantly tightened lending standards since the crisis. The authorities broadly concurred with the assessment, pointing to the need to ensure that credit supply to firms is not restricted to only large corporations. Measures to further reduce the private sector’s debt overhang could help resuscitate the demand for credit, lower perceptions of credit risk, and underpin a rebound in investment. While earlier legal amendments have already strengthened the insolvency regime, its administration and implementation could be strengthened. Staff recommended reforms to the judicial system to speed up the often cumbersome process of debt resolution. A recent measure allowing the presiding officer of a court to transfer cases to less burdened jurisdictions is helping to better distribute the backlog of cases, and the number of courts has been increased. The authorities noted that legal amendments are in train to provide more efficient alternatives to the regular court system. The system of arbitration courts—which is currently unwieldy and of uneven quality—will be consolidated and standardized, to increase public confidence in arbitration and encourage its use. The Law of Mediation is being amended to allow courts to order parties to seek mediation (replacing the current purely voluntary nature of mediation). Separately, amendments to the Civil Procedure Law aim at strengthening the role of administrators in authenticating liabilities. Staff warned against the hasty passage of recent legislative proposals that could act as a drag on new lending. Proposed amendments to the Personal Insolvency Law—currently with Parliament—would limit the liability of mortgage borrowers and their guarantors to the value of collateral. The authorities confirmed that they will not support the measure, which is likely to drive down the supply and raise the cost of new mortgage lending if enacted. They are confident that in any case the amendment will not be retroactive (which could lead to large-scale write-downs of banks’ mortgage books). See “Republic of Latvia: Selected Issues”, January 2013, IMF Country Report No. 13/29. The current personal insolvency framework provides for eligible debtors to be discharged after successful implementation of a payment plan over a maximum period of 3.5 years. Page 11 Over the medium-term, encouraging non-bank sources of finance may help reduce vulnerability to bank-led credit crunches. As detailed in the Baltic Cluster Report, the small scale of Latvia’s domestic market constrains development of its own capital market. Staff encouraged the authorities to pursue integration into regional markets in order to access a larger investment pool. Latvia’s stock market—like those of the other Baltic countries—is already fully integrated with the Nordic exchanges (within the Nasdaq OMX group), sharing a common trading platform and supervisory standards. But smaller companies could be encouraged to list on alternative exchanges such as First North, while regional ratings agencies or credit guarantee schemes—subject to strict supervision and risk management standards—could be explored to alleviate financing constraints for SMEs. The authorities pointed to the formation of the Single Development Institute (Appendix I) as a vehicle for encouraging alternative sources of financing for SMEs. But they noted that government schemes need to be very carefully designed to avoid moral hazard and market distortions.