The recovery slowed considerably in 2014 amid a deteriorating external environment. GDP growth fell from 4.2 percent in 2013 to an estimated 2.4 percent, reflecting the prolonged closure of a large steel manufacturer Liepajas Metalurgs (LM), and weak economic performance in the Euro Area (EA) and Russia amid rising geopolitical tensions. Despite the decline, the GDP growth rate remained well above the Euro Area average of 0.9 percent. To date the direct impact of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, including sanctions, is estimated to be relatively small (Box 1). However, the conflict—together with the lingering economic malaise in the Euro Area—has raised uncertainty and likely been a key factor in holding back domestic demand. Consumption growth decelerated strongly, and the anticipated investment recovery was modest. Private consumption growth was only 2.3 percent in 2014, much lower than 6.3 percent in 2013, as the uncertain economic climate led to more precautionary savings. Gross fixed investment increased by a sluggish 1.6 percent, belying expectations of a strong rebound from the 5.2 percent contraction of 2013. Apart from weak external conditions, controversy over Change in inventory Gross fixed investment Net exports Government consumption Private consumption GDP GDP Growth and Contributions (Real, annual percent) Sources: CSB and IMF staff calculations. Page 6 proposed amendments to the insolvency law likely contributed to an uncertain domestic environment. Exports remained subdued due to tepid growth among trading partners and the full- year impact of the closure of LM in mid-2013, while the depreciation of the ruble against the euro had a negative impact on export receipts, especially in the last quarter. The current account deficit widened slightly to about 3 percent of GDP. The labor market continued to tighten. Real wages increased 6.3 percent and the increases were broad-based, resulting from both a higher minimum wage (320 euros per month, up from the previous level of 280 euros) and competition for higher skilled workers. It is unlikely that the rapid wage growth signals an overheating labor market at this juncture: few companies reported labor shortages as an important obstacle to businesses, and part of the recorded wage increase probably reflects successful tax compliance measures, which have led to more accurate reporting and reduced under-the-table “envelope wages”. The unemployment rate declined further to about 10.5 percent in December 2014, down from 11.3 percent a year ago, while the participation rate stayed constant. Inflation recovered slightly on the back of robust core inflation. Headline inflation averaged only 0.7 percent, following zero price growth the previous year. Despite a significant increase in core inflation to 1.5 percent (from 0.2 percent the previous year), reflecting strong wage growth, the continued decline in food and energy prices held back headline inflation. In comparison, core inflation in the Euro Area was 0.7 percent in 2014. Banks continued to repair their balance sheets. Bank profitability improved further, while the overall NPL ratio declined to 6.8 percent in December 2014 from 8.3 percent a year earlier. However, deleveraging continues, with the stock of bank credit to the private sector declining by about 7.6 percent (y-on-y) in December 2014. Moreover, the issuance of new loans actually decreased in 2014. The shrinking stock of domestic credit—extended primarily by large Nordic subsidiary banks—was matched by the repatriation of funds to parent banks. Asset prices continued their gradual recovery (Figure 6), although both stock prices and property prices remain well under the levels reached just prior to the financial crisis. There is little evidence that geopolitical tensions have disrupted the flow of NRDs into Latvia. NRD growth was stable in 2014 and accelerated slightly towards the end of the year. Excluding exchange rate effects, which were substantial due to the depreciation of the euro against the US dollar, the stock of NRDs increased by 14 percent year-on-year in December 2014, broadly in line with the average rate of growth over the last three years. The general government deficit widened by about ½ percentage point to around 1.4 percent of GDP in 2014. While this exceeded the nominal budget target of 0.9 percent of GDP, the breach was largely accounted for by a one-off payment related to the sale of Citadele bank (see below). The negative budgetary impact of the economic slowdown was largely offset by revenue gains from improved tax compliance and higher wages. With the output gap still negative, staff estimate that the structural deficit, excluding the one-off cost, remains just under 1 percent of GDP. Page 7