Latvia enters the euro area with the fastest rate of growth in Europe, despite some leveling-off in the pace of expansion. Growth has moderated from an average of 5.3 percent in 2011–12 to 4.1 percent in 2013. The output gap is now largely closed and remaining unemployment is largely structural. GDP Growth and Contributions (Real, annual percent) In 2013 robust consumption growth partly compensated for an investment slowdown and unexpected supply shocks in the metal industry. Consumption grew at 5.0 percent y-on-y, buoyed by rising real wages as labor market conditions tightened. On the other hand gross fixed investment declined by 4.3 percent, partly driven by negative developments in the metal industry, but also possibly reflecting increasingly binding credit constraints, and a wait-and-see attitude by investors in the run-up to euro adoption. In the middle of the year the steelmaker Liepajas Metalurgs—accounting for about 2 percent of GDP and 4 percent of exports— ceased production, following a debt default that triggered a government guarantee (Appendix I). Anemic growth in trade partners and the shuttering of Liepajas Metalurgs contributed to the weakness of exports. However, import growth was even slower—consistent with the investment slowdown—resulting in an improvement of the trade balance. Change in inventory Gross fixed investment Net exports Government consumption Private consumption GDP Page 6 Inflation fell sharply. Headline inflation in 2013 was zero, compared with 2.3 percent the previous year, continuing a sustained decline since the peak of early-2011. The main cause for the decline was a 1.7 percent fall in energy prices, which has a large weight in the Latvian economy, partly due to the importance of the transportation sector. Excluding energy, food and non-alcoholic beverage components, CPI inflation was about 0.6 percent in 2013. Inflation has picked up in the early months of 2014, with y-on-y CPI rising to 0.6 percent in February, and core CPI to 1.2 percent. Unemployment, while still high, is falling rapidly. By end-2013, the unemployment rate had declined to 11.3 percent, relative to 13.9 percent at end-2012, continuing the steep fall from a crisis peak of about 20 percent in 2010 The improvement is underpinned by strong job creation: over the same period, employment increased by 2.1 percent, while the participation rate held steady. Tightening labor market conditions are reflected in rising wages: real wages increased by about 4.2 percent in 2013, a significant acceleration from the muted pace of earlier wage growth (1.3 percent in 2012). This is in line with staff analysis suggesting that the cyclical component of unemployment has largely been eliminated at this juncture; remaining unemployment is mainly structural in nature. Bank balance sheets are improving, but net credit growth has yet to resume. Banks’ return on equity improved to 9.7 percent in 2013 from 8.8 percent the previous year. With the pace of write-offs accelerating, the NPL ratio for non-financial corporate loans declined to 7.9 percent in September 2013 from 10.9 percent a year previously, while that of household loans declined from 15.9 percent to 13.4 percent. But the amortization of existing loans continued to exceed the issuance of new loans, and domestic credit contracted by 5.7 percent in 2013. Nordic parent banks continue to deleverage from their Latvian subsidiaries. Liabilities to parent banks declined to 4.2 billion euros by end-2013 from 5.2 billion euros a year ago, bringing loan-to-deposit ratios to 134 percent from 160 percent a year earlier. Banks report that they are now generally comfortable with the level of loan-to-deposit ratios, and stand ready to expand their balance sheets, but that credit growth is restrained by a combination of weak demand and tighter lending standards. Meanwhile non-resident deposits (NRDs) in the banking system continued to grow, albeit at a slower pace. NRDs grew by 11.1 percent in 2013 compared to 17.1 percent in 2012, belying concerns of a surge of deposit inflows in the wake of the Cyprus banking crisis. The 2013 budget target was met despite a large unanticipated government payment on behalf of the steel firm. The general government deficit outturn of 1.3 percent of GDP was slightly below the target of 1.4 percent. Improved tax administration and reforms to tackle High structural unemployment characterizes not just Latvia’s economy but that of all the Baltic countries, as described in the Baltic Cluster Report. In Latvia the Nordic subsidiaries are responsible for the vast majority of domestic lending, funded by a mix of parent bank loans and domestic deposits; while a different segment of banks with much weaker links to the domestic economy specializes in non-resident deposit liabilities (which are mainly channeled into foreign assets). See Appendix 1 of the 2012 Article IV Staff Report for a detailed description of the institutional features of Latvia’s banking system. Under the European System of Accounts (ESA) definition. Page 7 underreporting yielded substantial revenue gains. This more than compensated for higher than planned expenditures caused by the guarantee call on Liepajas Metalurgs (about 0.3 percent of GDP), and the indexation of small pensions (below 285 euros) from September onwards. Adjusting for revenue transfers from the government to the privately managed pension pillar (the second pillar), the 2013 outturn implied a fiscal consolidation of about 0.8 percent of GDP. Separately, the passage of the Fiscal Discipline Law (FDL)— which constrains the structurally adjusted fiscal deficit to 0.5 percent of GDP or less—ensures that future budgets will be grounded in a medium-term framework that seeks to avoid pro-cyclicality. Since the crisis external stability has improved notably, but there are lingering concerns (Appendix II). From a substantially overvalued pre-crisis starting point, staff estimate that the real effective exchange rate is now broadly in line with fundamentals. External debt has fallen substantially but remains high at about 131 percent of GDP at end-2013. While external debt is projected to decrease by a further 10 percentage points of GDP over the medium term in the baseline, large shocks to growth and the non-interest current account could impede the adjustment. Moreover, NRDs are subject to sudden stops in the face of a sufficiently large financial shock, although the risk is mitigated by the accumulation of liquid foreign assets by and higher prudential requirements for NRD-specialized banks.