Rising wage pressures pose risks to competitiveness. Recent wage increases are partly the consequence of the long period of strong productivity gains and an unwinding of the wage restraint that prevailed in the aftermath of the 2009 recession. However, real unit labor costs have already risen past their 2005 pre-crisis level, and wage pressures are likely to persist over the foreseeable future, as the labor force is expected to continue to decline, due to a low birth rate and emigration, and to a lack of skilled workers. These pressures would then raise labor costs of production and erode Latvia’s competitive edge if not matched by productivity gains and supported by appropriate macroeconomic policies. Real wages have outpaced productivity in recent years... And unit labor cost increases have eroded the gains made in the post-crisis period Minimum wage increases should not exceed productivity growth over the medium term (see Cross Country Report on Minimum Wages, www.imf.org) Recent hikes, well in excess of labor productivity, have raised the minimum wage to about 44 percent of the average wage in 2015, an increase of almost 4 percentage points from 2013. While the minimum wage provides support to the most vulnerable and can help reduce income inequality, staff estimates that at the current level, minimum wage increases in excess of EU-28 Estonia Latvia Lithuania Poland Latvia: Unit Labor Cost -Manufacturing (2005=100) Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Labor Productivity Real Wages Labor Productivity and Wages (Index, 2000Q1=100) Sources: Haver and IMF staff estimates. Page 17 labor productivity can be detrimental to employment—a minimum wage increase of 5 percent in excess of labor productivity could cause a 1 percent loss of employment among low-income earners. In this regard, the authorities are to be commended for putting on hold plans for further steep hikes, and raising the minimum wage appropriately by about 2.5 percent in 2016 in line with productivity. At the same time, complementary policies should be employed to address inequality concerns. Further reforms are needed to alleviate the tightening labor market. The authorities have already taken some steps to raise the participation rate and reduce structural unemployment. The statutory retirement age is being raised gradually towards 65 years by 2025—it currently stands at 62½, and the criteria for early retirement and disability have been tightened. Female labor force participation is already relatively high by regional standards, at 55 percent. Several ongoing projects are targeted at various segments of the unemployed population, including a project to facilitate regional labor mobility. Staff argued that in-work tax credits and improvements in tapering of benefits when working is needed to enhance work incentives and further encourage labor participation. Active labor market policies (ALMPs) should continue to be strengthened, and more effort should be made to attract high-skilled foreign workers. Continued improvements in higher and vocational education would help reduce skills mismatches and enhance competitiveness. The authorities have an ambitious reform agenda to build a more skilled workforce, although implementation is still at an early stage. A new performance- based financing model for higher education has been introduced. Consolidation of higher education institutions, underpinned by quality-based accreditation, is underway, while public funds are being targeted to science, technology and mathematics, and away from social sciences. Meanwhile, steps have been taken to better align vocational education programs with market demand. A pilot program based on apprenticeships and councils of social partners/sector experts was recently completed. Z BalticsCEESEE-EU Skill Shortage Index, 2000-14 (High skill, difference from EU-15)Oversupply Shortage Sources: Eurostatand IMF staff calculations. Skill shortage is defined as the differencebetween the share of high-skilled labor in total employment and the same share in total population. Page 18 The authorities agreed that competitiveness needs to be preserved, and that action is needed across various fronts. They recognized that tightening labor market conditions need to be addressed, and that effective education reform would be crucial. They also noted that as the economic situation in Latvia improves, and wage differentials narrow, net migration may well reverse as Latvian emigres begin to return. They noted that the labor participation rate is expected to continue to rise over the medium term and that their education agenda is bearing fruit in addressing skills mismatches. They pointed out in particular, that whereas the overall student population has been declining, the number of students in sciences and technology was stable. They agreed that the minimum wage should move in line with productivity over the medium term