Latvia’s banking sector is bifurcated, and dominated by commercial banks with strong cross border linkages (see Selected Issues Paper). The two segments follow very different business models: the foreign (largely Nordic) banks deal mainly with domestic clients and provide the lion’s share of domestic lending (more than 85 percent); while the domestic banks rely mostly on non- resident deposits, and their assets are composed of highly liquid foreign assets. Latvia through the Credit Cycle The credit cycle may be close to turning, and the delay to date is likely hampering growth. The post-crisis period of deleveraging and balance sheet repair has left the banking system well capitalized, liquid, and profitable. NPLs have come down from 20 percent in 2010 to 5.4 percent at end-March 2016, provisioning is strong, and debt service capacity has improved substantially (Figure 4). Taken together these suggest that Latvia is likely towards the end of the repair stage of the credit cycle. This assessment is supported by an index of financial conditions in Latvia, which suggests a return to neutral conditions. Against this background, the absence of credit growth is especially concerning as rising wage pressures could erode companies’ ability to self-finance the investment that is needed to support growth both now and in the future. The FCI is constructed using various indicators of financial conditions (NPLs, credit growth, profitability, house prices and funding ratios). For Latvia it explains more than 75 percent of the covariance of the data. For an in-depth analysis of credit-less recovery in the Baltics, see IMF Country Report 14/116. I.Expansion: Propertyprices increased Credit growth was strong NPLs were low II.Peak: Leverage peaked Property prices peaked LDR peaked Bank profitabitlity peaked IV. Repair Provisions to NPLs increased Leverage fell Credit shrinkage stabilised III.Downturn Bank profitability declined Credit collapsed NPLs increased Page 19 While demand factors explain subdued lending activity to larger firms, supply factors are likely more important for SMEs and households . For SMEs and households, banks cite lack of documentable income as an important factor constraining their ability to lend. In 2007, legislation was introduced prohibiting lending to natural persons against income other than that reported to the State Revenue Services, a practice that was commonplace before the crisis. This (sound) requirement likely makes some households with undocumented income ineligible for borrowing. A lack of collateral or sufficient cash flow are important constraints on SME lending. For instance, according to one bank, out of the 200 thousand companies registered only 15–20 thousand are potentially eligible borrowers, once those firms that are loss making or have negative equity are eliminated. The larger banks have also adopted a much more cautious attitude towards lending, given their experience with the slow bankruptcy procedures and low recovery rates post crisis. This leaves most of the domestically focused banks competing over a few large and collateral rich firms, where, in fact demand seems to be lacking as investment plans are held back in the face of economic and geopolitical uncertainties, and in some cases delays in the startup of a new round of EU structural funds. Financial conditions have turned positive… … but banks’ lending standards have not generally eased. Access to credit for SMEs should be facilitated. The SME sector is particularly credit constrained. If well designed to address market failures, Government programs such as loan guarantee schemes and subordinated loans through the Single Development Institute, are welcome. Nevertheless, these programs cannot alleviate the problem for those firms or individuals that are part of the gray economy. Staff suggested that the authorities explore the experience in other jurisdictions where supervisors have defined a code of conduct for lenders in an attempt to prevent discrimination against lending to SMEs, for instance, the Credit Review Office in Ireland. Lending by Nordic subsidiaries could be better-attuned to Latvian conditions. There is some evidence that centralized risk management by parent banks could be contributing to overly-constrained lending in Latvia. Given Latvia’s recent crisis experience, and hence the Financial Condition Index Short-term loans Long-term loans Cumulative Changes in Lending Standards to NFC (Positive values indicate a tightening) Page 20 higher probabilities of default, and rates of loss given default, it may be that banks’ internal risk models place too much weight on the recent historical episode, relative to current conditions. Indeed, after a sharp tightening since the onset of the crisis, bank lending standards have not changed substantially. Also, subsidiary level data suggests that Nordic banks’ lending is more procyclical in Latvia (and the rest of the Baltics) compared to the home country. Based on this, staff urged the Latvian prudential authorities to use the results of the benchmarking exercise of banks’ risk models conducted with their European partners to ensure they appropriately capture risk, and that crisis legacies and associated risk aversion do not unduly constrain lending. The authorities’ recent actions to combat financial fraud and mitigate AML/CFT risks are commendable, yet safeguarding financial stability requires ongoing vigilance and action. The risks associated with non-resident deposits (NRDs) warrant continued vigilance. NRD banks account for about 50 percent of total deposits, of which over 80 percent are estimated to originate from Russia and CIS countries. The NRD banks enjoy high liquidity ratios and stress tests suggest they can withstand outflows of close to 60 percent. Nevertheless, NRDs could be vulnerable to sudden reversals, and as required by EU law, they are covered by the state deposit guarantee scheme and thus represent a contingent fiscal liability. That said, to date there are few signs of volatility in NRD inflows (Box 1), and risks to the domestic economy are mitigated by various factors. NRD banks hold close to 60 percent of their assets in liquid instruments, and are appropriately subject to higher capital and liquidity requirements, and higher contributions to Latvia’s deposit guarantee scheme per dollar of deposits. The authorities have stepped up their anti-money laundering (AML) efforts, but more is needed. As noted previously, the FCMC recently imposed fines against two banks, requested board replacement of one, while revoking the license of another. More importantly, the authorities have taken steps to address some of the recommendations of the OECD’s Working Group on Bribery, including widening the definition of Politically Exposed Persons (PEP). The FCMC has also adopted a risk-based supervision strategy, has already, and is planning to increase further internal resources, and has employed external resources for in-depth analyses of banks’ procedures in order to impose minimum standards on their risk monitoring systems. Staff commended these efforts, encouraged the authorities to bring the AML/CFT framework in line with the FATF standard, and ensure The Bank Lending Survey conducted by the Bank of Latvia, in cooperation with the ECB, is addressed to senior loan officers, and asks about changes in lending standards in the past quarter and intentions for one quarter ahead. The annual benchmarking exercise, foreseen in Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV), is conducted by EU institutions and competent authorities, according to the EBA methodology, and will allow for an assessment of differences in calculation of risk weights for a given portfolio across institutions. Defined as banks with more than 20 percent of their assets funded by non-resident deposits. See Appendix I, 2012 Article IV Consultation with Latvia. Page 21 that sufficient resources are allocated to AML supervision activities, in line with the recommendations of the OECD’s Working Group on Bribery. The authorities agreed that the banking system is robust, and that a resumption of credit will be vital to future growth. They shared the view that demand and supply factors were likely relevant for different segments of borrowers to varying degrees, and that a multifaceted approach should be explored while ensuring financial stability. They welcomed the suggestion of using the benchmarking exercise conducted with their European partners to review banks’ internal risk models. They were also open to exploring approaches from other jurisdictions. In addition, they plan to review their post-crisis financial sector measures to see if any had outlived their usefulness. They agreed with the critical importance of vigilant supervision to mitigate both real and reputational risks, including those associated with the NRD sector. In this context, they underscored their recent enhanced efforts to address AML issues. They agreed that continued effort was needed to improve the operation of the insolvency regime.