The 2015 budget is broadly neutral. A 1 percentage point cut in the personal income tax (PIT) rate to 23 percent, which will result in an estimated revenue loss of ¼ percent of GDP, is expected to be offset by growth of the tax base, as tax compliance continues to improve and wages rise (including through a further 40 euros increase in the minimum wage), and by a cut in capital spending. The structural deficit target of 1 percent of GDP is in line with the authorities’ Fiscal Discipline Law (FDL), and strikes an appropriate balance between the need to rebuild fiscal space over the cycle and that of avoiding fiscal drag in a weak economic environment. The authorities agreed with staff that, given the unusually large uncertainties regarding external conditions, the budget should be implemented flexibly in accordance with the FDL. Automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully in case economic growth falls below the forecast. Staff urged further measures targeted at reducing inequality and strengthening the social safety net. At less than one fifth the EU average (per inhabitant) social protection benefits in Latvia remain among the lowest in Europe. At the same time, income inequality (as reflected for instance in the ratio of the highest to the lowest income quintile) is among the highest. The authorities have recently taken some measures to alleviate these problems, such as the 2014 increase in the non-taxable minimum allowance, but more is needed. In particular, the cuts to Latvia’s Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI) benefit in 2013, and the de-centralization of the scheme’s financing should be reversed, in line with the recommendations of the World Bank study. Current fiscal policies could significantly reduce the budget envelope and constrain priority spending over the medium term. Planned declines in the PIT rate and SOEs’ payout ratio, together with increases in tax allowances and cuts in social contributions, are estimated to reduce The FDL sets a medium-term objective (MTO) of 0.5 percent of GDP, but permits deviations from this target for revenue transfers to the privately managed Pillar II pension fund. The FDL is designed to be compatible with Latvia’s commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). Page 9 revenue by over three percentage points of GDP between 2013 and 2017. Staff estimate that additional revenue measures equivalent to 0.6 percent of GDP in 2016 and 2017 will be needed to safeguard priority investment, particularly infrastructure investment (thus keeping public capital expenditure above a historical low of about three percent of GDP), and social spending, including on improving social exclusion benefits and introducing progressive tax allowances. Alternatively, sizable expenditure reductions would be required in other areas, but staff and the authorities agreed that there was limited scope for substantial permanent cuts in other parts of the budget, given the already low level of public expenditures in Latvia (see text chart). Several options could be considered to open fiscal space while reducing inequality. First the PIT rate cut should be reconsidered. While the authorities view the PIT cut as a measure to improve work incentives, a more targeted way to achieve this goal would be to further expand the non-taxable minimum allowance, and to introduce a more gradual phasing-out of the GMI benefit, which currently falls one- to-one with income. Second, property tax revenue, which currently amounts to less than 0.8 percent of GDP, (well below European and OECD average levels) should be expanded. Staff urged the authorities to enable local municipalities to raise the real estate tax rate The PIT rate is scheduled to be lowered by one percentage point in 2015 and again in 2016, while SOE payout ratios are to be cut from the current 90 percent level to 70 percent in 2016 and to 27 percent in 2017. The measures considered here have a permanent effect on revenue, i.e., if enacted in 2016 a measure would entail a gain in 2017 and future years as well (provided it is not reversed). hu B P s k K z h p G A H un w Change 2006-13 General Government Revenue (End-2006, Percent of GDP) Source: Eurostat hu B s k z h p G P K A H un w Change 2006-13 General Government Expenditure (End-2006, Percent of GDP) Source: Eurostat 2016 2017 Measures Maintain PIT rate at the 2015 rate of 23 percent0.210.20Increase property tax rate by 0.5 ppt on buildings and land0.220.22Improve cadastral revenue0.080.08Reverse ceiling introduced on social contributions for incomes above 48,6000.140.14Better-targeted tax allowances 1/0.200.20 Increase CIT from current 15 to 16%0.100.10Remove excise exemptions on gazoil for agriculture0.140.14 Total Memorandum items Structural deficit: authorities' target-0.8-0.7Structural deficit: staff estimate without measures-1.5-1.3 Gap Potential Fiscal Measures In percent of GDP Impact on revenue 1/ Including lower tax allowances for pensioners, lower tax allowances for dependents and elimination of non-taxable threshold for high-income individuals, Source: Latvian authorities and staff calculations Page 10 on high-valued land and buildings above the current 1.5 percent ceiling. This should go hand-in- hand with cadastral reform to remove substantial discrepancies in property valuation, for instance between old and renovated or new buildings and to correct inconsistent valuation of agricultural land; such discrepancies damage both tax collection and credibility. Third, the cap on social security contributions could be removed (while maintaining the cap on benefits). The combined effect of these measures should suffice to close the revenue gap estimated under current policies. Moreover, other options exist should the authorities choose not to fully implement the measures above. For example, the minimum non-taxable threshold for pensioners and the tax allowance for dependents could be reduced, and excises on fuel used in agriculture raised, in conjunction with better-targeted direct support for low- and middle-income households. Alternatively, the corporate income tax rate, which is among the lowest in the EU, could be raised. The authorities recognized the need for enhancing revenue over the medium term and reducing inequality. They emphasized ongoing measures for combating the grey economy, noting the significant gains achieved to-date, and agreed that revenues from property taxes could be improved. They were not amenable to reversing and decentralizing the cuts to the GMI benefit this year, but noted that medium-term plans are under consideration for increasing GMI benefits within an integrated social benefit system (under which a minimum level of combined benefits— comprising the GMI, unemployment insurance, parental benefits, etc—would be defined relative to the economy’s median wage). They will also consider introducing progressive minimum non-taxable thresholds in the future, which would help ameliorate inequality.