Growth picked up somewhat last year despite a weak external environment. GDP growth rose to 2.7 percent, up about ¼ percent over the previous year. A short-lived reopening of Liepajas Metalurgs (LM)—a large steel manufacturer—gave the economy a boost early in the year, and private consumption grew by 3.3 percent, spurred by gains in employment and real wages. However, weak external conditions, combined with lingering geopolitical tensions, had a dampening effect, as did the effective cessation of production by LM later in the year. Investment saw only a modest turnaround, at 2.1 percent following a contraction of almost 5.5 percent over 2013–14. Page 9 Exports grew by only 1.4 percent, reflecting tepid growth in the euro area and the prolonged recession in Russia , although Latvian businesses proved resilient and able to penetrate alternative markets (Box 1). The real effective exchange rate remained broadly in line with fundamentals, with the euro depreciation against the dollar offsetting the ruble depreciation (Box 2). The current account deficit narrowed to 1.2 percent of GDP, as imports fell faster than exports. Inflation remained well below target, falling to 0.2 percent, driven by the decline in oil and food prices and low inflation in the euro area. Downward pressures were partially offset by the liberalization of electricity tariffs for smaller enterprises and households. Core inflation averaged 1 percent, supported by strong wage growth. Producer price growth remained negative, reaching -1.6 percent. The labor market continued to tighten, keeping pressure on wages. Higher employment drove the unemployment rate down to 9.9 percent in 2015, while the working age population (15–74) declined by 1.5 percent due to demographics and emigration. Still high unemployment is largely structural in nature, partly reflecting lack of regional labor mobility and skills mismatch, with higher- skilled workers in relatively short supply. Real wages increased by 6.7 percent, following a 6 percent increase the previous year, reflecting demand, especially for higher skilled labor, and successive hikes in the minimum wage (from EUR 285 per month in 2013 to EUR 360 in 2015). However, the recorded wage increase is likely to comprise some measurement error: some workers under-report their official earnings, claiming to earn only the minimum wage to evade taxes, and the recent minimum wage increases will therefore result in large recorded official wage increases for such workers even though their actual wages would not change. The financial sector continued to strengthen, as did private sector balance sheets Banks further improved their balance sheets, bringing the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio down to 5.4 percent in March, and the capital adequacy ratio up close to 23 percent. Bank profits were robust and liquidity abundant. More broadly, asset prices are gradually recovering, while household and corporate debt continues to fall and borrowers’ repayment capacity improves. On the supervisory front, the Financial and Capital Market Commission (FCMC) took a series of steps to clamp down in Population Working Age Population Net emigration (RHS) Population and net emigration (Number of people, thousands)Sources: Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia Gross capital formation Government consumption Private consumption Net exports GDP Output Gap GDP Growth and Contributions (Real, annual percent) Projections Page 10 anti-money laundering (AML) cases, including bank fines and personnel actions, and revoking the license of a small bank—Trasta Komercbanka—in early March due to breaches of AML requirements. The bank, which accounts for only 1.4 percent of total banking sector assets, does not pose a risk to financial stability, and its remaining assets are expected to cover over 90 percent of its liabilities, including all deposits covered under the deposit insurance guarantee. Furthermore, on the recommendation of the authorities, the banks have commissioned in depth audits of their AML/CFT procedures with a number of US law firms. Rietumu Banka is undergoing an AQR ahead of the transition of its supervision responsibility to the SSM, reflecting its emergence as Latvia’s third largest bank. Yet credit growth remains elusive Latvia’s credit-less recovery continues, outlasting its neighbors’, and broader historical, experience. The stock of bank credit to the private sector fell by 2.2 percent (y-on-y) at end-2015 compared to a drop of 7 percent at end-2014. The loan to deposit ratio continues to fall, albeit more slowly, due to a continued fall in the stock of loans as well as a robust growth of resident deposits at 9 percent (y-on-y), reflecting strong wage growth as well as precautionary sentiments. The stock of NRDs (at constant exchange rates) increased by just above 1 percent y-on-y in December 2015, compared to 15 percent a year earlier, and there has been a modest outflow in Q1 2016. The general government deficit was around 1.3 percent of GDP in 2015, 0.3 percentage points higher than targeted in the budget. The higher outturn is the result of a previously agreed change of plans from long-term renting to purchasing the newly built offices of the State Revenue Services. Tax revenues were supported by strong wage growth and improved tax compliance, albeit showing signs of weakening in the first quarter of 2016. With the output gap slightly negative, staff estimates that the 2015 structural deficit was at 1.1 percent of GDP, in line with the Fiscal Discipline Law (FDL) and Latvia’s European Union commitments.