Lithuania appears on track to meet the entry criteria for euro adoption. The fiscal deficit and public debt are well below Maastricht thresholds; the exchange rate has long been fixed under the currency board arrangement, and inflation and interest rates run at less than the reference values—the average of the three “best- performing” EU economies plus a margin of 1.5 and 2 percentage points, respectively. Prospects for sustaining good fiscal performance and low inflation in the longer run are favorable, provided policies remain supportive (Boxes 4 and 5). European institutions will take a final decision on Inflation and Interest Rate Criteria for Euro Adoption (Percent) Reference value inflation (excl. Greece) 1/ Lithuania inflation Reference value interest Lithuania interest Sources: Haver; ECB; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Refernce values for March2014 are calculated using Bulgaria, Latvia and Cyprus. Greece is excluded from the best inflation performers at any point in the chart. Page 12 Lithuania’s euro adoption application in July, based on the convergence reports of the EC and the ECB, to be published in June. After two decades of a currency board arrangement, the economy is well prepared for EMU, but supporting policy frameworks would benefit from further strengthening. Lithuania has demonstrated economic flexibility and political grit to deal with shocks and deliver adjustment— most recently in the wake of the 2008/09 crisis, but also during the Russia crisis of 1998 and following 2002 when the currency board was re-pegged from a weak U.S. dollar to a strengthening euro. But controlling the business and financial cycles has proved more challenging, as evidenced by the large boom-bust cycle during 2003–10. It will therefore be essential to preserve and build upon economic flexibility while strengthening countercyclical policy frameworks to make EMU membership a lasting success. The fiscal framework will be strengthened by the Fiscal Compact, but it should be supplemented by a countercyclical fiscal rule to ensure that fiscal buffers are built in good times, to provide the space needed for economic stabilizers to operate freely in downturns. Integration with the compact’s correction mechanism is important to avoid potential inconsistencies and fragmentation in public financial management. The planned establishment of a fiscal council in the National Audit Office should be expedited to allow sufficient time to build expertise. The financial framework will benefit from establishing macro-prudential powers for the Bank of Lithuania, with related legislation currently before Parliament. This will allow leaning against the wind when financial cycles cannot be addressed adequately by common monetary policy. Close cooperation of home and host country authorities of cross-border banks remains important— the Nordic-Baltic cooperation forums are valuable platforms that should be preserved, built upon, and adapted to the emerging European banking union. There have been tangible reforms to the restructuring and insolvency frameworks and more are in the pipeline. This will not only facilitate dealing with existing debt overhangs, but can also help guard against debt-deflation problems in future, potentially arising from asymmetric shocks inside the currency union. Court rulings have established precedents that clarify implementation and application of the law and this has helped speed up resolution of non- performing loans. Speedier and more widespread use of the household insolvency law that came into effect in early 2013 would be desirable. Recent changes to the corporate insolvency framework are helpful but the limited effectiveness of the framework for going-concern restructurings is yet to be tackled. Labor market flexibility should be safeguarded and built upon . Large flows in and out of unemployment and high cross-border mobility attest to a flexible labor market, with moderate unemployment benefits and contained minimum wages. Yet, skill mismatches in the labor Some 120 cases of personal bankruptcy have been initiated under the regime but only a handful of cases have progressed to agreement on payment plans. Yet, close to 20 percent of mortgages remain underwater. Page 13 market, overly restrictive provisions in the labor code, and a high tax wedge make for high structural unemployment (see below). Euro adoption would be a welcome boon for the economy. While not a sea change from the euro-based currency board, it will shift several factors in Lithuania’s favor: a relatively low reserve cover will be replaced by access to ECB liquidity, thereby enhancing financial stability and putting downward pressure on risk premiums; and, if accompanied by the right policies, even closer integration with the euro area could help foster trade, involvement in global value chains, and foreign direct investment—a welcome impetus given the importance to secure a vibrant export sector for future (see below and Baltic Cluster Report). The authorities feel ready for euro adoption and are firmly committed to the project. They recognize that there is no room for complacency once inside EMU and saw no tangible risk of undue relaxation of policies—this has not been Lithuania’s track record. The European framework imposes many checks and balances, wage formation is market driven, and external price competitiveness is high. The Bank of Lithuania underscored the importance of the forthcoming macroprudencial policy tools. Their effectiveness would further strengthen with improved home- host cooperation under the European banking union. But successful macroeconomic management requires support from fiscal policy. The Ministry of Finance is committed to complete full alignment of the fiscal framework with all EU and euro area requirements in the near future, although work on an explicit countercyclical fiscal rule seems to be left for later. Page 14 Box 4. Sustainability of Low Inflation * Lithuania’s inflation track record is reassuring. It has maintained comparatively low inflation since 1999 with an annual average inflation differential to the euro area (EA) of just 0.8 percentage points—one-third that of Latvia and less than half that of Estonia. Since mid-2013, inflation has converged to euro area levels and the differential turned negative in mid-2013. However, inflation has been much more volatile than in the EA, primarily reflecting the pronounced boom-bust cycle of the Baltic economies during 2003–10. With negative output gaps now closing, a harder test for containing inflation lies ahead. Inflation, 1997-2013 (Percent, YoY) Estonia Latvia Lithuania Euro Area Source: Eurostat. Income convergence implies somewhat higher inflation in Lithuania than in the EA. Catching-up economies are characterized by higher productivity growth in the tradable sector but not necessarily in the nontradable sector than richer economies. International price equalization for tradable goods and wage equalization within countries across tradable and nontradable sectors then imply a positive inflation differential in catching-up countries—the so-called Balassa-Samuelson (BS) effect. A simple accounting exercise confirms this pattern of relative productivity growth for Lithuania compared to the EA and puts the BS effects at about 0.7 percentage points, or 73 percent of the observed inflation differential with the EA since 2000. Econometric estimates, accounting also for inflation persistence, the impact of commodity prices, and short-run cyclical factors, suggest a long-run BS effect of some 1.1 percentage points annually. The analysis finds no empirical support for the presence of price convergence channels over and above the BS effect. In the short-run, business cycle divergence, asymmetric effects of global commodity price movements, and idiosyncrasies in wage dynamics can easily swamp the underlying BS dynamics. Econometric analysis suggests that a one-standard-deviation shock to commodity price growth would cause Lithuania’s inflation differential with the EA to increase on impact by 0.2 percentage points, i.e., two times as much as the short-run BS effect. An output gap or real manufacturing wage growth shock (relative to the EA) would increase the inflation differential by 0.4 and 0.5 percentage points, i.e., 4 times and 5 times as much as the short-term BS, respectively. Credit and fiscal variables, as well as housing prices, had no significant inflationary impact once the BS effect, real wages, and global price shocks are accounted for. Note: all variables including inflation are relative to the euro area. Last column shows the short-run impact of a one-std deviation shock. 1/ In percentage points. Sources: Haver; national authorities; WEO; and IMF staff calculations. Estimates of Inflationary Shocks on Inflation Differential Commodity prices Output gap Real wages Short-run elasticity One standard- deviation shock 1/ Impact on inflation 1/ This econometric evidence suggests an annual inflation differential of about 0.7 percentage points vis-à-vis the EA over the next five years. This is contingent on maintaining policy discipline and thus having strong supporting frameworks in place. It assumes unchanged wage formation processes, historical productivity differentials, gradually closing output gaps, and commodity prices in line with the IMF’s World Economic Outlook. In addition, there may be a small one-off inflationary impact from the switch over to the euro of 0.2 to 0.4 percentage points. ________________ * / Prepared by Hélène Poirson based on Selected Issues Paper “Inflation in Lithuania: Track-Record and Prospects.” Page 15 Box 5. Fiscal Sustainability * E C G P V H U H B G U E W K 60% threshold I P I E Z C K V I G B X U V P E E B P Y C V U U E Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations. General Government Gross Debt (Percent of GDP) Lithuania’s traditionally prudent fiscal policy suffered a major setback in the 2008/09 crisis but it was followed by a determined multi- year consolidation response. Public debt stood at a mere 15 percent of GDP on the eve of the crisis, but the deficit deteriorated sharply to 9.4 percent of GDP in the 2009 recession, despite strong consolidation measures. Determined subsequent adjustment achieved exit from EDP in spring 2013 and a deficit near 2 percent of GDP for 2013. Lithuania’s public debt-to-GDP ratio remains low by EU standards and is set to decline further. The debt ratio has now stabilized at some 40 percent of GDP and would gently decline even in a passive scenario with no further consolidation measures beyond those embedded in the 2014 budget. The authorities are rightly committed to much more aggressive debt reduction, with the precise target path to be updated in their 2014 Convergence Program. Rollover, interest- rate, and exchange-rate risks to Lithuania’s public debt stock are all well contained. Downside risks to the fiscal baseline projections are limited, except for long-run ageing-related spending. Extensive post-crisis expenditure compression is more an issue of spending quality rather than a challenge to overall sustainability. Spending overruns by local governments need to be addressed, but their size is too small to derail overall debt dynamics. Government loans to the deposit insurance fund in the context of the interventions of two banks (Snoras and Ukio) are likely to be repaid and relatively modest in any event at around 2 percent of GDP. Court-mandated compensation for past pension and wage cuts have yet to be made, but would be a one-off expense of 0.8–1.5 percent of GDP. This leaves costs related to demographic ageing as the only material concern, which could add 5–6 percent of GDP to public spending by 2060 in the absence of pension reform. There is substantial potential to strengthen public finances, especially on the revenue side. At around 26 percent of GDP, Lithuania’s overall tax-to-GDP ratio is the lowest in the EU—some 13, 6, and 4 percentage points of GDP lower than the EU, CEE, and the other Baltics average, respectively. This gap largely reflects generous allowances, exemptions, and preferential rates in Lithuania’s tax system. The recurrent taxation of wealth and property is underdeveloped. In addition, the estimated share of the shadow economy (28.5 percent of GDP) is one of the largest in the EU, but bound to retreat with income convergence. _________ ________ * / Prepared by Nan Geng based on Selected Issues Paper “Sustainability of Lithuania’s Public Finances.” Sources: Eurostat; Ministry of Finance of Lithuania; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Assumes annual structural adjustment of 0.5% of GDP until a structural deficit of 1% of GDP is reached. General Government Gross Debt and Primary Deficit (Percent of GDP) GG gross debt, alternative scenario 1/ (RHS) Debt-stabilizing primary deficit GG gross debt, baseline (RHS) Primary deficit Page 16