Good policies and favorable business conditions have helped put Lithuania back on the convergence path with Western European living standards. After the setback from the 2008/09 crisis, Lithuania’s per capita income is advancing solidly again, reaching 75 percent of the EU average in PPP terms. But the income gap narrowed within a context of slower GDP growth in both Lithuania and the EU, breeding some discontent amongst low-wage earners and spurring emigration. Years of fiscal consolidation, financial deleveraging, and policy upgrades led to strong public and private balance sheets, and underpin internal and external balance. The financial sector is comfortably capitalized, debt servicing burdens of households, and companies are low, and public debt is relatively small (42.7 percent of GDP). Unemployment is close to its historical average (9.1 percent), core inflation is low (1.9 percent), and the current account deficit is moderate (1.7 percent of GDP). Euro area membership since 2015 has reinforced stability further. Real GDP per Capita and Real GDP, 1995-2015 PPP GDP per capita (percent of EU average, LHS) GDP (index 2008=100, RHS) GDP per capita (index 2008=100, RHS) Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Household and Nonfinancial Corporate Balance Sheet Indicators, 2014 ITA FIN* FRA AUS DEU* HUN* CZE* LVA LTU* DNK NDL ) ( s gross debt to income, HH Source: Eurostat. *Denotes 2013 data for net debt to income for NFCs. The main policy challenge remains to step up the advancement of living standards, while ensuring that benefits are broadly shared throughout society. In addition to maintaining sound macroeconomic conditions, this requires pushing ahead with a comprehensive supply-side reform agenda to support productivity, protecting competitiveness in the face of mounting wage pressures, and improving economic opportunities and outcomes for all. Many reform elements are in train or under consideration, but the definition and implementation of a comprehensive package of measures will likely have to await the appointment of a new government after the elections in October. The current administration led by the Social Democrats is focused on getting new labor legislation, along with adjustments to social benefits and pensions, through Parliament and containing populist pressures. Many of the Page 8 required reforms will be multi-year endeavors and will thus more likely need to be considered by the government that will take office in December.