Price competitiveness remains intact for now, but will come under pressure on current wage and productivity trends. Because of fast wage growth and modest productivity gains in recent years, unit labor costs (ULCs) have risen much faster than in the EU. In the tradable sector, a cushion had built up in the post-crisis adjustment period when wages fell and productivity soared. Moreover, company profits recently received a windfall from lower input prices for raw materials, helping offset sharply higher wage costs. But these cushions now appear to have been largely exhausted, putting future price competitiveness at risk unless wage growth decelerates and productivity growth picks up substantially. Page 16 Manufacturing: Unit Labor Costs (2005Q1=100) Lithuania European Union (28 countries) Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Manufacturing Sector: Profits, Sales and Costs of Companies (Percent change) Profit (loss) before tax Sales Total costs Personnel costs Sources: Statistics Lithuania and IMF staff calculations. Manufacruring sector excludes petrolum products. Costs of raw materials, fuel, etc Wage pressures could persist over the medium term. With much smaller cohorts born in the post-Soviet period entering the labor market, competition among employers for suitable workers is bound to remain intense, pushing up wages. On the other hand, recent fast real wage growth could also to some extent be the result of downward inflation surprises, meaning that real wages would decelerate when inflation picks up. Fortunately, Lithuania’s labor market appears historically to have worked well, with wage and productivity developments aligned over longer periods, self-correcting transitory deviations. Population and Working Age Population, 1990-2025 (Index, 1990=100) - 20 percent - 20 percent - 28 percent 15-65 years (actual) 18-65 years (projections,redcue d mirgation scenario) All ages (actual) All ages (projections, reduced migration scenario) 18-25 years (actual) - 22 percent - 28 percent Source: Eurostat. Reduced migration scenario assumes 28,000 net emigrations per year through 2025. This is close to the historical average of 25,000. At this juncture, minimum wage increases should be paused following their sharp hikes in the past few years so as not to further fuel broader wage growth. Successive hikes since August 2012 have lifted the minimum wage by over 50 percent and it now stands at 47 percent of the average wage. A further increase for mid-2016 is under discussion. While wages in Lithuania are largely market determined, the government sets the minimum wage after non- binding tripartite consultations. Historically, a minimum wage hike of 10 percent has tended to push up overall wages by 3 percent. With the minimum wage incidence now significantly higher than in the past, this pass-through has likely increased. With wage growth already problematic from a competitiveness point of view, this is not the time for forceful minimum wage policies. Moreover, the level of the minimum wage relative to average wages is now unusually high by international See “It Takes Two to Tango: Wage and Productivity in Lithuania,” IMF Country Report No. 15/139. Page 17 standards. Adverse effects on job opportunities, especially for marginal workers, are likely much stronger than historical experience would suggest. In general, economic considerations need to come into starker focus in minimum wage setting, while the limitations of minimum wages in addressing income inequality concerns need to be recognized. This could be achieved by depoliticizing the process and giving independent experts a formal role. Developments in non-price competitiveness warrant more attention. Despite ULC-based price competitiveness remaining intact thus far, Lithuania’s export market shares have started to stagnate in recent years, even excluding the Russian market. While exporters have demonstrated nimbleness in maneuvering a difficult external environment, stagnating market shares suggest that the prices that Lithuania’s exports command are no longer rising faster than those of competitors. This in turn could well be an indication of stalled catching up with the frontier as far as product quality, mix, and sophistication is concerned. This underscores the urgency of the productivity enhancing agenda laid out above. Exports Market Shares, 2000:Q1-2015:Q3 (Percent) Share in Exports to EU Share in Exports to World Share in Exports to World excl. Russia Source: IMF ,Direction of Trade Statistics. The authorities agreed that competiveness warranted close monitoring and were appreciative of staff’s emphasis on non-price competitiveness. The minimum wage was still lower than in neighboring countries and significant adverse side effects had not materialized, but the authorities agreed that it should not decouple from productivity developments, and intend to carefully weigh all the pros and cons before going ahead with further hikes. They shared concerns about recent disappointing productivity growth, though it could prove a temporary effect from weak external demand, which generated slack in some companies. Lithuanians should not be complacent about competitiveness—improving non-price competitivenss was particularly important as the country’s future lay in producing higher value products rather than being simply a low-cost producer. Page 18 Box 3. Minimum Wage Developments in Lithuania in Regional Perspective Latest s B y k P s B k Average y H h h z Western Europe Jan 2016: 47 percent July 2016: 51 percent Lithuania: Minimum Wage Pass-through (Degree of pass through after a year, percent) If Lithuania implemented the hike considered for this July, its minimum wage would be the highest in Central Eastern and South Eastern Europe CESEE Minimum Wages (Percent of average wages) (CESEE) relative to the average wage. Minimum wages were generally frozen in the post-crisis adjustment period throughout the region, but many countries implemented sharp increases when the recovery took hold. In Lithuania, minimum wages are up 50 percent from August 2012—and 60 percent if the increase considered for July is included. Minimum wages would then exceed 50 percent of average wages and affect around 20 percent of workers. Such minimum wage ratios are unprecedented in CESEE and would put Lithuania at par with the European record in France, where excessive minimum wages are seen as a factor behind high unemployment, together with other labor market rigidities. While minimum wages have their role in protecting low-wage earners, adverse side effects are increasingly likely to come to the fore as they rise relative to the productive capabilities of the economy. Minimum wage hikes are contributing to overall wage growth, which could hurt competitiveness. Minimum wage hikes are estimated to account for one third of overall wage growth during 2012–15. Economy wide, the elasticity of the average wages with respect to minimum wages stood at some 30 percent, with considerably larger effects in sectors with high minimum wage incidence. Analysis for CESEE shows that minimum wages tend to weigh on export performance of labor intensive sectors, as well as on profits and employment growth in the tradable sector. At its current level, the minimum wage likely reduces employment prospects, especially for the low-skilled and young. At low levels, employment Sources: Eurostat, Statistics Lithuania, and IMF staff calculations. effects are small and statistically difficult to detect. But once minimum wages start to substantially exceed 40 percent of average wages, negative employment effects start to bite. For example, at a minimum wage ratio of 30 percent, a 10 percent minimum wage hike reduces youth employment by 0.4 percent, but at a ratio of 50 percent the reduction rises to 2.8 percent. Minimum wage policy alone improves the income distribution by less than is commonly believed and needs to be supplemented by other policy tools. Minimum wage hikes may not raise actual remuneration as under-the-table wage supplements (“envelope payments”) are regularized or official working hours reduced in response. Moreover, minimum-wage recipients may be second- income earners in relatively well-to-do households and the people truly at the bottom of the income distribution are likely not to be employed at all. Addressing legitimate inequality concerns, other policies need to be brought into play. ______________________________________ 1/ Based on Cross-country Report on Minimum Wages: “Getting Minimum Wages Right in Central Eastern and South Eastern Europe.” Water supply; waste management Financial and insurance activities Professional, scientific and technical activities Administrative service Health and social services Manufacturing Information and communication Public administration Real estate activities Utilities All sectors Education Wholesale and retail trade Transportation and storage Arts, entertainment and recreation Mining and quarrying Construction Accommodation and food services Other service activities Page 19