Past resilience augurs well for growth in 2015. Growth is projected at 2.8 percent, broadly unchanged from last year and led by domestic demand. Consumption will be underpinned by still- solid wage growth and lower energy prices, while external uncertainties will likely dampen investment. On the external front, improving prospects for the euro area and continuing efforts to diversify exports should largely counterbalance the negative drag from the recession in Russia and the CIS. Consumer price inflation is projected to average -0.3 percent on account of low energy and import prices. Lithuania will benefit from the ECB’s QE program mostly indirectly through its effect on euro area activity and prices—eligible and available Lithuanian government securities amount to only a small fraction of the asset purchases apportioned to the Bank of Lithuania under the program and banks’ lending policies are unlikely to materially change in the wake of declining sovereign yields. Growth is expected to pick up to 3.2 percent in 2016 and to about 3¾ percent over the medium term, although this remains contingent on underpinning policy reforms. In the nearer term, a gradually improving external environment would be the main driver and the small output gap of currently -0.2 percent of GDP would close in 2017. For the medium term, potential growth has been estimated at 3¾ percent for the post-boom-bust period, compared to actual average annual growth of 4.4 percent during 1995–2014 (IMF Country Report No. 11/320). But attaining this growth rate will require structural reforms, especially those that lift investment back to historical norms, support employment to counteract worsening demographics, and boost innovation to alleviate slowing productivity growth as Lithuania’s income gap with Western Europe narrows. Rising investment and income catching-up would push the current account into moderate deficit, which should be largely financed by FDI. Inflation is projected to pick up as the euro area moves out of deflation and should run at about 2½ percent in the medium term—slightly higher than in the euro area and in line with Lithuania’s historical record and the Balassa-Samuelson prediction for catching- up economies. Risks have moderated but remain tilted to the downside and relate mostly to external factors. Lithuania is a small and highly open economy, with exports corresponding to 80 percent of GDP. Trade with the EU dominates, but Lithuania is also an important gateway for trade with Russia and the CIS. A protracted period of slower growth in either set of trading partners would affect Lithuania through trade channels with knock-on effects on investment. Geopolitical tensions surrounding the situation in Ukraine could have stronger effects on confidence and investment than in the baseline if they became entrenched or escalated further. A surge in global financial volatility Page 14 may affect Nordic parent banks, which remain reliant on external funding and face domestic vulnerabilities, and could spill over to their Lithuanian affiliates. Insufficient investment and upgrading by Lithuanian companies could undermine medium-term growth prospects. On the upside, the boost to consumption from lower energy prices could be larger than assumed in the baseline. The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on outlook and risks. The Bank of Lithuania’s growth projections are similar to those by staff while the Ministry of Finance sees upside potential to its somewhat more conservative baseline. Both assessed underlying fundamentals as strong, with the outlook mainly clouded by external uncertainty, although successful export diversification and upgrading in companies remained essential for prospects going forward. They saw little upside risk from low energy prices to their baselines, but some mentioned good absorption of EU structural funds and resources under the “Juncker Plan” as potential boons. Slow growth in trading partners and a further escalation of geopolitical tensions were highlighted as the main downside risks, with the latter also effecting the economy through the need to raise defense spending. Regarding global financial volatility and spillovers from Nordic cross-border banks, the authorities emphasized mitigating factors: limited reliance of Lithuanian subsidiaries on parent bank funding, strong home-country sovereigns, and access to ECB liquidity. Official inflation projections are close to those by staff and the authorities also assess risks of entrenched deflation as low, pointing to robust wage growth and the limited role that price developments have played in post- crisis wage bargaining. Page 15 Republic of Lithuania––Risk Assessment Matrix Risk Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Side-effects from global financial conditions: A surge in financial volatility: As investors reassess underlying risk and move to safe-haven assets given slow and uneven growth as well as asymmetric monetary exit, with poor market liquidity amplifying the effect on volatility. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies: Euro area and Japan Weak demand and persistently low inflation from a failure to fully address crisis legacies, leading to “new mediocre” rate of growth. Emerging markets Maturing of the cycle, misallocation of investment, and incomplete structural reforms leading to prolonged slower growth. Political fragmentation that erodes the globalization process and fosters inefficiency: Russia/Ukraine the mounting conflict depresses business confidence and heightens risk aversion, amid disturbances in global financial, trade and commodity markets. High High Medium Low/Medium Bank losses and funding stress in Swedish banks could spill over to their Lithuanian subsidiaries that account for the bulk of the banking system. But domestic deposit growth in excess of domestic credit growth should mitigate the impact on the Lithuanian economy. High Lithuania would be affected through trade and investment channels. Trade with the EU dominates, but Lithuania is also an important gateway for trade with Russia and the CIS. Medium Would delay a needed pickup in investment and depress services associated with Russian transit trade Insufficient technology upgrading and investment, undermining medium term competitiveness. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to Delaying productivity enhancing investment would slow income convergence and erode competitiveness. materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 16