Growth remained resilient despite a challenging external environment. Solid growth of 2.9 percent in 2014 was mostly driven by domestic demand, as robust wage growth and generally improving labor market conditions spurred consumption. Unemployment fell to 9.6 percent in the second semester of 2014—the lowest since the crisis—and vacancy rates rose. Investment picked up strongly in early 2014 from post-crisis lows amid high capacity utilization, but slowed sharply again in the second half of the year as Russian import bans and the incipient Russian recession weighed on business confidence. Despite the difficult external environment, exports have held up reasonably well so far, reflecting in part a successful diversification drive into new markets. Inflation averaged a mere 0.2 percent in 2014 and has been negative since December, reflecting mostly external factors. Falling global energy prices and a 20 percent discount on natural gas imports from Gazprom drove energy price inflation deeply into negative territory. Imported deflation and falling world food prices also pulled down prices. Core inflation has been below 2 percent for the last two years, but currently runs some 50 bps higher than in the euro area, due to relatively fast-growing purely domestic price components, such as services, and is broadly in line with historical patterns. The risk of debt deflation dynamics taking hold in Lithuania is remote, considering stable inflation expectations, strong wage growth, and generally healthy balance sheets. See IMF Country Report No. 14/114 for an analysis of historical inflation differentials with the euro area and the role of the Balassa-Samuelson effect. 012345678910top 5 top 10 non-top 10 all destinations Nominal ExportGrowth (Total goods exports excl. minerals, y-o-y, percent) Sources: IMF, DoTS;and IMF staff calculations. Nominal Growth (percent)Nominal Growth (percent)Share in GDP (percent)2014 vs. 20132014:H2 vs. 2014:H1Total exports of goods-0.512.667.4o/w of Lithuanian origin 1/ 2/5.44.728.7o/w under sanctions 1/ 2/3.9-1.73.8Goods exports to Russia4.413.714.1o/w of Lithuanian origin 1/ 2/-16.3-4.11.6o/w under sanctions 1/ 2/-37.3-69.50.41/ Excludes exports of oil products, which are volatile.2/ Exports of Lithuanian origin exclude re-exports.Sources: Haver, Statistics Lithuania, and IMF staff calculations. Exports to Russia in Perspective Page 11 External stability strengthened further with euro adoption. For the second year running, the current account recorded a surplus, reducing the external debt ratio and improving the international investment position. The trade balance worsened in 2014, reflecting an uptick in import growth on the back of strong domestic demand. But goods exports excluding oil grew at a robust 6.5 percent and strength in the income balance contained the erosion of the current account surplus. The external balance assessment estimates that Lithuania’s current account and exchange rate are broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 1). Euro adoption removed a critical vulnerability previously associated the low reserve coverage under the currency board arrangement. Fiscal consolidation advanced more than expected in 2014 with the deficit now reaching the debt-ratio stabilizing level. The adjusted fiscal deficit improved to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2014 from 2.2 percent of GDP in 2013, corresponding to a fiscal structural improvement of 1 percent of GDP—double the amount envisaged in the budget. Better local government and social security finances, as well as moderate spending underexecution, were responsible for the overperformance. VAT shortfalls persisted despite efforts to strengthen tax administration but were offset by buoyancy in other taxes. Public debt stabilized at some 40 percent of GDP. In line with Fiscal Compact requirements, a new fiscal rule with countercyclical elements and embedded expenditure rules was The adjusted fiscal deficit excludes one-off pension compensations and Deposit Insurance Fund balances. The Constitutional Court ruled that disproportionate pension cuts in the crisis years had to be compensated, costing 0.8 percent of GDP. The accrual impact is fully reflected in the 2014 deficit, but actual payments are spread over several years. Adoption of the ESA2010 accounting framework extended the coverage of the general government sector to include the Deposit Insurance Fund. energy total core 1/ services Inflation and MajorInflationComponents (Y-o-ychange in percent) Sources: Haver; andIMF staff calculations.1/ Core excludes energy, food, alcohol,and tobacco. inflation expected to increase more rapidly or at same rate inflation expected to remain unchanged or fall Actual y-o-y inflation, RHS Inflation and Inflation Expectations (In percent)Sources: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. 201220132014General government balance - ESA 2010-3.1-2.6-0.7 of which: Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) balance 1/0.2-0.41.3Pension accruals 2/-0.8Adjusted general government balance -3.3-2.2-1.1 1/ DIF balances fluctuate due to payouts to depositors and subsequent asset recoveries following the intervention in two domestic banks in 2011 and 2013, respectively. 2/ Compensation payments for past pension cuts on accrued basis. Table. General Government Balance (In percent of GDP) Page 12 approved and will apply from next year’s budget onward. Several rating agencies upgraded Lithuania’s sovereign rating in the context of euro adoption. Box 1. External Sector Assessment The current account is balanced. External adjustment from current account deficits as large as 15 percent of GDP during the 2003–08 boom was primarily driven by export growth, rather than import compression, suggesting that it will be more easily sustained. Staff projects a gradual and moderate deterioration of the small 2014 current account surplus to a deficit of about 2 percent of GDP by 2020, as still subdued investment makes a fuller recovery and income convergence buoys consumption. It would be mostly financed by FDI. The REER is broadly aligned with fundamentals. According to the EBA-lite methodology, the external position is currently appreciably better that the “norm” derived from fundamentals, but results need to be interpreted with caution. The EBA-lite approach does not capture well the pronounced boom-bust cycle that Lithuania and emerging Europe went through in the past decade. For example, because EBA-lite does not use backward-looking explanatory variables it makes no allowance for the fact that investment has been subdued for some time in the aftermath of the bust, to compensate for the excesses of the boom. Recovering investment should eventually weaken the current account even without much exchange rate adjustment. While staff also sees the current account in deficit in the medium term, the current account norm suggested by EBA-lite of -4.8 percent of GDP is on the high side—it would put external debt on an unsustainable path. Alternative exchange rate assessment methodologies find only a very small degree of exchange rate misalignment. A direct estimate of the equilibrium real effective exchange rate finds a small undervaluation of 3.6 percent. And compared to the exchange rate that would stabilize Lithuania’s net foreign asset position, its exchange rate is marginally overvalued by 0.6 percent. Gross external debt has come down significantly in recent years and now stands at 67 percent of GDP. Standard tests suggest that it would remain sustainable under a variety of adverse shocks (Figure 1A). Just over half of external debt is owed by the public sector, of which less than half in turn is denominated in currencies other than euros. Private external debt mostly consists of debt to parent banks or companies based abroad and should therefore not be at risk of disruptive withdrawal. The IIP stands at -44 percent of GDP, reflecting mainly the excess of inward over outward FDI and funding by parent banks of their Lithuanian affiliates. Lithuania’s largely Nordic-owned financial system has further strengthened, but a revival of credit remains pending. The CAR rose to 21.3 percent, the NPL ratio declined to 6.5 percent, and strong deposit growth continues, buoying the liquidity ratio, reducing loan-to- deposit ratios to 90.6 percent, and easing net liabilities to parent banks to 11 percent of GDP. The three largest banks easily passed the ECB’s asset quality review and EBA stress tests. Financial sector profitability has been satisfactory in recent years, but performance varies across financial institutions. Supervisors are working closely with some smaller banks and the credit union sector (2½ percent of system assets) to guard against excessive risk taking and ensure sufficient capitalization, especially as the CAR rises to 10.5 percent this July following CRD IV transposition. Fundamental reform of the credit union sector along the lines suggested by the Bank of Lithuania is progressing with the proposal now under discussion in parliament. Supervisory coordination among Lithuanian, Nordic, CA-Actual0.2%CA-Fitted-4.2%CA-Norm-4.8%Residual4.4% CA-Gap 5.0%Policy gap0.6% Elasticity Real Exchange Rate Gap -8.1%Cyclical Contributions0.2%Cyclically adjusted CA0.0%Cyclically adjusted CA Norm-5.0% Summary Table Page 13 and European agencies is transitioning to the new setup under the SSM. While mortgage lending picked up ahead of euro adoption, corporate borrowing continues to contract. Overall private sector credit declined by 1.1 percent in 2014, amid subdued credit demand and credit standards that remain demanding, despite gradual loosening since 2012. Housing and equity valuations started improving from 2012, appreciating at annual average rates of 7 and 16 percent, but remaining around 35 and 20 percent below the peak levels reached at the height of the boom.