The repair of public finances is well advanced but not yet complete. If the fiscal over performance in 2013 is confirmed, a further moderate deficit reduction of ½ percent of GDP in structural terms in 2014 would seem sufficient. This would ensure further steady progress toward the medium-term objective (MTO) of a broadly balanced budget, no undue drag on the economy that is just returning to full capacity and a genuine decline of the public-debt-to-GDP ratio for the first time since the 2008/09 crisis. To achieve this consolidation, measures over and above those in the 2014 budget may be required. In the medium run, the authorities would be well advised to temporarily drive consolidation beyond their MTO. The authorities’ 2013 convergence report sets a structural deficit of 1 percent of GDP. While sufficient to ensure sound public finances in the long run, it still implies a rather slow reduction of the public debt ratio that has more than doubled since the crisis (see second figure in Box 5). A temporarily more ambitious target would be needed to demonstrate the ability to not only stabilize debt ratios but to materially bring them down after a setback and build the fiscal buffers to fall back on in the next downturn. Achieving this will require taking measures— the deficit on current policies (i.e., approved measures) would only decline marginally beyond 2014 (see “passive fiscal projections” in Tables 1 and 2). Remaining consolidation should preferably come from the revenue side and the quality of spending should be reviewed. The bulk of the post-crisis consolidation came from emergency expenditure cuts, leaving Lithuania with one of the lowest expenditure ratios in the EU and a potentially suboptimal spending structure. Remaining consolidation should therefore be met by high-quality revenue measures, in particular hitherto underdeveloped recurrent wealth and capital taxation (Country Report No. 13/82). A public expenditure review could identify areas where past cuts have gone too far and where there is remaining slack, thereby helping increase the quality of spending within Lithuania’s tight overall spending envelope. Pension reform and tax administration improvements are additional key projects to redress the looming costs of demographic aging. The compensation schemes for past pension and wage cuts should be carefully designed , mindful of competing claims on scarce budgetary resources when transposing the court rulings into concrete proposals. Spreading payments over time would avoid a spike in public borrowing or derailment of the impending decline of the public debt ratio. Local government finances require enhanced control. Past spending overruns and accumulation of arrears are a matter of concern, albeit not of macroeconomic proportions The 2014 budget targets a deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP and the 2013 deficit is estimated in the range 2 to 2½ percent of GDP, with 2.1 percent of GDP being staff’s best point estimate. Gross public debt already declined in 2013 as a ratio to GDP, but this was driven by a drawdown of cash balances rather than a small budget deficit. Page 17 considering the small size of local governments. Debt and borrowing limits for local governments are soft, as they are adjusted frequently and breaches remain essentially unsanctioned. Moreover, only spending related to special grants from the central government is independently audited. An increased revenue share for local governments from 2014 may help, but ultimately it will take hard budget constraints on their debt and borrowing limits that remain stable over time and independent scrutiny of their finances to instill better spending discipline and improve incentives to raise revenues locally. The authorities fully supported the debt reduction objective. They plan to lower the headline deficit by about one percentage point each year until a surplus of 1½ percent of GDP is reached in 2017 to visibly reduce the debt ratio, although concrete underpinning measures are yet to be specified. The introduction of a car tax was under active consideration but is unpopular. They plan to stagger compensation payments. Government officials noted that Lithuania already has several forums that review public spending, but saw potential merit in an independent overarching exercise that would cover the general government. The authorities agreed in principle with the need to better control local government finances, but noted that the existing framework of intergovernmental relations needed to be respected.