Growth is expected to pick-up from 3.3 percent this year to 3¾ percent in the medium term and to remain balanced. Momentum in domestic demand will likely extend into 2014 (and is already evident in readings of high frequency indicators early in the year). High capacity utilization, territorial planning reform, and efforts to avoid a dip in the availability of EU funds in the transition to the new 7-year financial perspective should underpin strong investment and a continued recovery in the still low investment-to-GDP ratio. The rise of real wages in line with productivity should support robust private consumption. Externally, improving prospects for western export markets are likely to be offset by the clouded outlook for Russia and other CIS countries. With the output gap expected to close in 2014, future growth will mirror potential growth, which is projected to rise to some 3¾ percent over time. Income convergence is likely to move the current account into a small deficit position and entail a slight pickup of inflation from its current historical lows. Risks around this outlook remain tilted to the downside, primarily due to external factors . As a small, open economy with strong trade and financial linkages, Lithuania is susceptible to spillovers from abroad, although the balanced external position and the absence of domestic overheating provide a degree of protection. A protracted period of low growth in advanced and emerging economies would weigh on exports, which account for some 80 percent of GDP. Increasing geopolitical tensions surrounding Ukraine would affect Lithuania through trade, commodity price, and confidence channels. Tighter global financial conditions could increase external borrowing costs and curtail parent bank funding. However, the tapering of unconventional monetary policy in the U.S. has not had significant repercussions for Lithuania so far. On the domestic front, the recent revival of investment could yet fizzle out for lack of credit. 1/ Excludes re-exports. Data for goods refer to 2013, for services 2012. Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Intra-Baltic CESEE CIS Nordics Other Europe Rest of the World Total Table. Exports of Lithuanian Origin by Destination 1/ (Percent of GDP) Goods Services Total The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on the outlook and risks. Their projections are similar, including the closing of the output gap in 2014, though they see inflation slightly lower The potential growth estimate is unchanged from last year’s Article IV Consultation and informed by the research published in IMF Country Report No. 11/327. The baseline assumes real GDP growth for Russia and Ukraine as projected in the World Economic Outlook of April 2014, but no direct disruptions to trade and other cross-border activities. Page 10 than staff and the Ministry of Finance puts medium-term growth some ½ percent higher. They saw slower trading partner growth as the most important downside risk, but noted that exports were well diversified and that Russia was important primarily for Lithuanian transport companies rather than domestic manufacturers. They downplayed risks from tighter global financing conditions, considering limited external financing needs and little remaining reliance on parent bank funding, but noted susceptibility of parent banks to housing market developments in the Nordics. They agreed that sustained lack of credit growth could eventually undermine investment. Efficient use of EU funds was equally important to further investment for income convergence. L ITHUANIA R ISK A SSESSMENT M ATRIX Source of Risk Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Side-effects from global financial conditions: surges in global financial market volatility. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies: Advanced economies. Emerging markets. Financial stress in the Euro area re-emerges. Increasing geopolitical tensions surrounding Ukraine. High Low UMP exit may lead to economic and fiscal stress, and constraints on country policy settings. Borrowing costs could rise and export markets weaken. Parent bank funding and credit could tighten, but reliance on such funding is limited. High (in Europe) Medium For advanced economies, it could imply more deleveraging or lower potential growth. Medium (elsewhere) Earlier maturing of the cycle and incomplete structural reforms entailing prolonged low growth. As a small open economy, Lithuania’s own growth would be substantially impacted through the trade channel. Protracted slow growth in advanced Europe, Poland, and Russia would have the largest adverse effects. Medium Low/Medium This could be triggered by stalled or incomplete delivery of national and euro area policy commitments. Lithuania has little direct exposure to the euro area periphery, but stress that affects the euro area core would spill over through financial and trade linkages. Medium High Disruptions in financial, trade, and commodity markets. Russia remains an important export market and the only natural gas supplier. Increasing tensions would also affect sentiment, depressing investment and consumption. Protracted period of unduly low credit growth. Medium Medium/High Structural factors hamper access to credit for productive investment, especially SMEs and startups. Investment and new-firm formation would be crimped at a time when capitalization is high, undermining long-term growth prospects. Page 11