With external drag diminishing, the near term outlook is favorable. Growth is projected to be domestic demand driven again and to rise to 2.7 percent this year. Consumption should benefit from solid wage growth and declining energy prices. Pent-up demand, high capacity Page 11 utilization, and low interest rates should spur investment. In contrast to last year, the drag from weak exports to Russia is set to be smaller, with Russia’s recession projected to ease and its importance as an export market already diminished. High frequency indicators for the first few months of 2016 also point to a growth pickup. Consumer inflation is projected to rise to 0.6 percent as the decline of import prices lessens. With imports growing faster than exports, the external current account will deteriorate somewhat. Growth could climb to some 3½ percent over the medium run. This would still be about 1 percentage point below the historical trend on account of worsening demographics and the narrower income gap relative to the global economic frontier. Still, these medium-term projections assume continued structural reforms supporting productivity and human capital development, as well as measures to safeguard competitiveness. As the output gap narrows and commodity prices begin to recover, inflation should rise and run again at a small premium over the euro area target of 2 percent, reflecting Balassa-Samuelson effects. As a catching-up country, Lithuania is expected to run a moderate current account deficit. Downside risks to the outlook dominate and mostly relate to external factors. Adverse developments in the global economy would spill over primarily through trade channels. Volatile financial conditions abroad could reach Lithuania indirectly via the foreign banks that dominate its financial system, curtailing credit supply. Regarding home grown risks, wage growth in excess of productivity gains could undermine external competitiveness going forward. On the upside, improving domestic prospects could trigger increased reverse migration, setting a virtuous circle of demand, productivity, and employment growth in motion. The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on the outlook and risks. The authorities were marginally more cautious about the prospects for a quick recovery this year. Like staff, they saw medium-term growth somewhat above 3 percent. As downside risks they highlighted developments in the euro area and Russia, as well as in China, which could affect Lithuania through third countries. But they also saw a fair amount of upside risk, including faster progress on trade diversification, bigger payoffs from current reforms, a jolt from the Juncker plan, and still lower energy prices. Because of energy prices, inflation could undershoot projections. Neither European supervisors nor the national competent authorities saw immediate risks to financial stability from spillovers of potential financial volatility abroad through the cross-border banks, pointing to healthy capitalization, ample liquidity, and much reduced parent bank funding. Potential risks to competitiveness are on the authorities’ radar screen, but to some extent high wage growth is the natural outcome of labor market tightness, underscoring the need to boost productivity. See “How Fast Can the Baltics Grow in the Medium Term?” in: IMF Country Report No. 11/327. See “Inflation in Lithuania: Track-Record and Prospects,” in: IMF Country Report No. 14/114. Page 12 Source of Risks Republic of Lithuania: Risk Assessment Matrix Impact if Realized Time Horizon Short Term Low/Medium Direct exposure to global financial markets is limited, but potentially reduced access to funding of Nordic parent banks would lead to tighter lending conditions in their Lithuanian subsidiaries. Investment in Lithuania would suffer. Short Term Medium Term High As a small open economy, Lithuania would be strongly affected through trade channels, with potential knock on effects for investment. A worse-than- expected performance in the euro area or the CIS would be particularly damaging. Medium Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions: Sharp asset price decline and decompression of credit spreads as investors reassess underlying risk and respond to unanticipated changes in growth and financial fundamentals in large economies, Fed policy rate path, and increases in U.S. term premia, with poor market liquidity amplifying volatility. Sharper-than-expected global growth slowdown: Medium Significant slowdown in other large EMs. Turning of the credit cycle and fallout from excess household and corporate leverage (incl. in FX) as investors withdraw from EM corporate debt, generating disorderly deleveraging, with potential spillbacks to advanced economies. High/Medium Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies. Weak demand and persistently low inflation from a failure to fully address crisis legacies and undertake structural reforms, leading to low medium-term growth and persisting financial imbalances in the Euro area and Japan (high likelihood). Easy global financial conditions coming to an end and insufficient reform progress undermine medium- term growth in emerging markets and suppress commodity prices (medium likelihood). Policy Recommendations Mitigation/Response Euro area monetary policy would be the first line of defense. If needed, activate resolution and restructuring plans in coordination with home- country authorities. Reinforce efforts to diversify exports. Coordinate policy response at the European level. Allow automatic stabilizers to operate. Allow discretionary easing of fiscal policy if the shock is large. High Dislocation in capital and labor flows: Heightened risk of fragmentation/security dislocation mainly in part of Europe, with negative global spillovers. Short Term Short to Medium Term Medium Risks to competitiveness: Wage growth continues to significantly outstrip productivity growth for an extended period. Emigration and aging create labor shortages, push up wages, and hamper productivity growth. Low/Medium Prolongation of Russia/Ukraine conflict would heighten risk aversion, weigh on investment, and depress transit trade services with Russia. Lithuania is not overly reliant on capital inflow or exposed to labor inflows. High Income convergence, employment, and potential growth would suffer. Allow automatic stabilizers to operate. Allow discretionary easing of fiscal policy if the shock is large. Reassure investors of Lithuania’s solid fundamentals. Pause minimum wage hikes as necessary. Boost productivity growth through structural reforms. Improve employability of labor and ease restrictions on non-EU immigration. Page 13