Growth in 2013 remained solid, despite a difficult external environment. Largely driven by domestic demand, real GDP expanded by 3.3 percent, as rising real wages boosted private consumption and investment rebounded on the back of high capacity utilization, more public investment, and a recovery in construction. Export growth slowed in the second half of the year, reflecting a softening of trading partner demand and weaker agricultural export growth following the 2012 bumper harvest. Unemployment continued to fall, including for youth and the longer-term unemployed. Global price developments further reduced inflation. Average inflation continued to moderate from 3.2 percent in 2012 to 1.2 percent in 2013, reflecting falling energy prices, food price Page 6 disinflation, and global price trends. Average core inflation ran at a moderate 1.4 percent last year, despite a pickup of wage growth, partly reflecting the sizable one-off minimum wage increases in July 2012 and January 2013 for a cumulative 25 percent. Production Capacity Utilization (Percent) Investment in Tangible Fixed Assets (Percent of GDP) Average (2003-2013) l l l Private Public Source: National authorities. Source: National authorities. External stability is in place , with the exchange rate broadly aligned with fundamentals, manageable external debt and international investment positions, and the current account in moderate surplus (Box 1). Despite slowing exports, Lithuania continued to gain world market share and the current account balance improved in 2013 on account of a pickup of current transfers from the EU. Lithuania has among the best absorption rates of EU funds, with 99 percent of funds from the 2007–13 framework contracted and 75 percent paid as of end-2013. Lithuania’s international reserve coverage appears relatively low at some 70 percent of the Fund’s reserve metric, but much of the external debt reflects inter-company loans and euro adoption would remove any remaining vulnerability. Page 7 Box 1: External Stability Assessment Estimates indicate that the real effective exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. Results of Real Effective Exchange Rate Assessment Using Different Techniques Macro balance approach (gap) Equilib. real ER approach Ext. sustain. approach Over (+)/under(-)valuation The current account is broadly balanced. Adjustment from the large deficits of the 2003–08 boom period was primarily driven by a surge in exports, rather than a compression of imports, thus suggesting that the adjustment effort is sustainable. Staff projects the current account to swing into a deficit on the order of 1½–2 percent of GDP over the medium term as income levels converge with Western Europe. It would be more than fully covered by FDI. Gross external debt has come down significantly in recent years and now stands at 65 percent of GDP. Standardized tests suggest that it would remain sustainable under a variety of adverse shocks (Figure 1A). Private external debt relative to GDP and gross external debt relative to exports remain below the customary vulnerability thresholds. Moreover, a significant share of external debt is owed to foreign parent companies and foreign banks and should therefore not be subject to disruptive withdrawal. Gross Exteral Debt (Percent of GDP) General government MFIs Other sectors Direct investment (intercompany lending) 2009Q4 2013Q3 The international investment position stands at negative 46 percent of GDP. The excess of inward over outward foreign direct investment together with net parent bank funding for Lithuanian subsidiaries fully explain this liability position. International reserves stood at a relatively low €6 billion at end-2013, compared to an adequacy metric of €8.9 billion. Elevated short-term foreign debt is partly responsible, although much of it is owed to parent banks and companies. Nonetheless, reserves are also on the low side when related to GDP (17 percent) or months of imports (2½ months). But this will no longer be a source of vulnerability when Lithuania adopts the euro. The repair of public finances continues to advance, but court rulings to correct some of the crisis-related expenditure cuts have yet to be implemented. The 2013 fiscal deficit likely overperformed its 2½ percent of GDP target . Tight expenditure allocations and control, as well as efforts to improve upon the sluggish tax collection in the first part of the year, reduced the deficit to an estimated 2.1 percent of GDP, following the abrogation of the EC’s Excessive Deficit Procedure last June based on the 3.2-percent-of-GDP deficit in 2012. The 2014 budget targets a deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP for the general government. Forgoing generalized pension and wage increases drives the further consolidation. In a Page 8 loosening relative to recent years, other expenditure is allowed to grow roughly in line with nominal GDP. No significant tax policy changes are envisaged. Recent Constitutional Court rulings mandate the restoration and compensation for wage and pension cuts to the extent that they were disproportionate across pensioners and government employees, respectively (Box 2). Pension and wage restoration has already taken place and is reflected in the 2014 budget law. But compensation for wage and pension losses in the crisis years costing between 0.8 and 1.5 percent of GDP is not, pending decisions on the modalities and phasing of compensation payments. Box 2. Constitutional Court Ruling on Pension and Wage Cuts Background . In the wake of the 2008/09 crisis, wages for government employees and pensions were cut as part of the necessary fiscal consolidation effort. Cuts were larger and hence disproportionate for higher- wage and higher-pension earners. Decisions . In two separate rulings, the Constitutional Court established that this disproportionality was unconstitutional. It mandates disproportionate cuts to be reversed and foregone income to be compensated. The rulings do not precisely pin down the modalities and timing of corrective actions. Table. Constitutional Court Rulings on Restoration and Compensation of Disproportionate Public Sector Pension and Wage Cuts Constitutional Court Ruling (CCR) Subject Implementation status Budgetary Impact Wages July 2013 CCR Restoration Restored in Oct 2013 LTL 34 million in 2013 and additional LTL 211 million in 2014 (0.19 ppt of GDP in total) Compensation No concrete timetable for implementation specified yet. 0.2-0.6 ppt of GDP Pensions April 2010 CCR (February 2012 CCR re- iterated the April 2010 CCR; it also ruled that postponement of compensation of pension cuts is not unconstitutional.) Restoration Restored in 2012 LTL 500 million (or 0.5 ppt of GDP) Compensation Compensation envisaged to begin in late 2014. 0.6-0.9 ppt of GDP Next steps . Pension and wage restoration has already taken place. Compensation schemes remain under discussion, with decisions likely to be taken in a staggered manner and payments phased over several years. Once compensation payments have been approved by Parliament, their full amount will immediately be recognized as public expenditure, thereby increasing the accrual fiscal deficit as calculated by Eurostat. But as a one-off expenditure, it would not affect the structural fiscal balance. It may also be excluded or discounted when assessing compliance with SGP deficit limits. The financial system is stable, but credit growth remains sluggish . Over 90 percent of the system is owned by Nordic cross-border banking groups. Capital adequacy rose further to a comfortable 17½ percent at end-2013 and liquidity indicators are well ahead of regulatory minima. While some smaller banks would benefit from bigger capital buffers—especially as the regulatory bar will rise with the implementation of global and European reforms—and credit unions are in need of reform, they do not pose material risk to overall financial stability because of their small size. Page 9 Despite good progress in reducing non-performing loans, private sector credit has yet to return decisively to positive growth, likely reflecting engrained post-crisis risk aversion on the part of both potential borrowers and banks, as well as debt overhang in many households.