Much progress has been made in working through crisis legacies. Non-performing loan ratios have been brought down from a peak of 20 percent to 11 percent, with one major bank reporting that it will essentially be done with addressing the aftermath of the crisis in the course of 2014. High reliance on parent bank funding has been consigned to the past as loan-to-deposit ratios fell to 107 percent—a level that parent banks generally feel comfortable with. But progress has been uneven across banks, meaning that supervisors need to remain vigilant. The authorities are rightly tackling governance and competency issues in the small credit union sector (2 percent of financial sector assets) through a combination of stop-gap measures and limited legislative changes until a broader reform of the sector can be put in place. Real Credit Growth 1/ (YoY percent) Finland Sweden Lithuania EM Boom Recession Recovery Aftermath Yet, private sector credit shows only tepid signs of recovery at best. Staff analysis for the Baltic Cluster Report confirms that “creditless recoveries” are to be expected after large financial boom-bust cycles like those experienced by the Baltic economies. However, even by this benchmark, real private sector credit growth should have turned positive by now, but has not. Both credit demand Local governments account for 9 percent of public spending (2.7 percent of GDP) and 4.1 percent of public debt (1.6 percent of GDP). The stock of their arrears stands at 1 percent of GDP. + + + + + + + + + + + + 1/ Time t indicates start of economic recovery. Units are quarters. Page 18 and supply factors seem to be responsible, with strong risk aversion now entrenched in potential borrowers and banks. Accordingly, banks chase after perceived good credits—large and successful firms—while SMEs and new companies risk falling by the wayside. Credit developments require close monitoring. Further improvements in the insolvency frameworks could help support more credit to the economy. And fostering more reliance on other sources for financing investment, such as capital market development and leasing, is worth considering. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of the financial sector. They felt that the financial sector is characterized by a high degree of stability, following the successful intervention of two domestic banks in 2011 and 2013. Remaining areas of softness, such as the credit union sector, were well under control. A consultation paper on fundamental credit union reform had already been issued and the four most problematic credit unions (out of a total of some 80 credit unions) have been closed in the past two years. The authorities indicated that they intend to participate in the Asset Quality Review ahead of planned euro adoption. They thought that progress in reducing NPLs and loan-to-deposit ratios improved prospects for a resumption of credit growth, but agreed that investment could be hampered if it failed to materialize in the not-too- distant future. They agreed that capital markets played only a marginal financing role, in part due to shallow domestic markets failing to attract investor interest. Efforts to complete the already well- advanced regional integration of Baltic exchanges are underway.