Impact of Lower Exports to Russia on GDP Last year, growth took a temporary hit from the difficult external environment. It fell to 1.6 percent, less than half its 2010–14 average. Exports to Russia contracted by some 40 percent, due to ruble depreciation, recession, and sanctions on selected EU exports—a shock of over 1½ percent of GDP, which was somewhat alleviated by export reorientation, primarily in the transport sector. Economic growth was driven by a 4.9 percent expansion of private consumption on the back of favorable wage developments and 10 percent higher investment, reflecting elevated capacity utilization, and a spike in EU-funds utilization. The labor market tightened, with unemployment falling nearly to its structural level and real wages advancing by 5.5 percent. Sources: Statistics Lithuania; Bank of Lithuania; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Impact of efforts to reoriented the exports of transport services and goods of Lithuania origin to countries other than Russia are estimated from the difference between the actual growth rate in such exports and the expected growth rate implied by the decline of exports to Russia. 2/ The projected growth rates of Lithuanian exports to Russia are based on projections of Russian's import growth in 2016. Goods of Lithuanian origin Exports of services Impact in 2015 (a+b) Impact of shock (a) Impact of export reorientation efforts (b) Exports of goods and services to Russia Impact on GDP growth (ppts) Goods of Lithuanian origin O/w under sanctions Impact in 2016 Nominal Growth Exports of goods Exports of services Real Growth Share in GDP (percent) (percent) Inflation and Major Inflation Components (Year-on-year change in percent) External factors caused the price level to fall in 2015, but deflation is unlikely to take root. The fall in global energy prices pushed down fuel and heating prices. And food prices, which had modestly contributed to inflation in 2014, were flat, partly due to excess supply related to Russia’s embargo on many food imports. This improved consumers’ purchasing power by an estimated 2 percent. While headline inflation fell to -0.7 percent, core inflation picked up to 1.9 percent as strong wage growth drove up services prices. With no signs of wages decelerating and balance sheets strong, the emergence of entrenched domestic deflationary dynamics remains only a remote possibility. Sources: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Core excludes energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco. Dec-13 Mar-14 Jun-14 Sep-14 Dec-14 Mar-15 Jun-15 Sep-15 Dec-15 services core 1/ energy total The external current account moved into moderate deficit in 2015 due to weak export markets and strong domestic demand. Plummeting exports to Russia, as well as to the CIS more generally, and imports buoyed by strong machinery and equipment investment made for the first trade deficit in several years despite improving terms of trade. The income account also Page 9 deteriorated because of higher profits of foreign-owned companies and lower remittances. But thanks to the inflow of EU-funds, the capital account surplus more than fully covered the deficit in the current account. Accordingly, the Net International Investment Position improved somewhat to -45 percent of GDP. The external balance assessment finds Lithuania’s current account and exchange rate to be broadly aligned with fundamentals (Box 1). The fiscal deficit declined further last year, reaching structural balance and undershooting for the first time the level of ½ percent of GDP for the structural deficit long advocated by staff. Despite the economic slowdown, the headline fiscal deficit declined from 0.7 percent of GDP in 2014 to 0.2 percent of GDP, about one percentage point of GDP less than planned in the budget. The revenue-friendly growth composition—key tax bases such as wage income and retail sales grew much faster than GDP—together with incipient results from better tax administration were chiefly responsible. Correcting for one-off and cyclical effects suggests a negative fiscal impulse of ¾ percent of GDP. But, on the other hand, the government’s prefinancing of European Structural and Investment Funds for the private sector provided a sizable boost to the economy, which is not captured by fiscal stance and impulse calculations. Financing conditions continued to be favorable with spreads on long-term government bonds vis-à-vis Germany narrowing to less than 50 bps. Lithuania’s largely Nordic-owned financial system is stable. The CAR rose to 24.8 percent, the NPL ratio declined to 5.5 percent, the loan-to-deposit ratio has been halved since its 2008 peak, falling to 100 percent, and net parent bank funding is down to less than 4 percent of GDP. Thanks to cost-cutting measures, bank profitability has so far proven resilient despite revenue losses from euro adoption and negative interest rates, although performance varies across financial institutions. Recent capital injections into smaller domestic banks are welcome, but close monitoring of these institutions remains important. Measures to contain weaknesses in the small credit union sector are in place, but more fundamental reform still awaits parliamentary approval. Credit growth is resuming at a moderate pace. For the first time since the 2008/09 crisis, private-sector credit growth moved convincingly back into positive territory, reaching 4.1 percent last year. A pickup in credit demand and strong borrower balance sheets rather than a material loosening of credit standards were responsible. Higher credit growth in support of investment is welcome, but lending is not typically reaching SMEs, where forays of banks remain exploratory. Continued support through government sponsored schemes using EU funds to improve SMEs’ access to financing, remains therefore important. With credit growth moderate, real housing prices some 30 percent below their 2008 peak, and low financial depth, there is no evidence of imminent financial risks emerging. Were they to do so, a comprehensive macroprudential toolkit in now in place to address them. To maximize its traction, cooperation with banks’ home-country authorities needs to be strong. It might take coordinated moral suasion to address run-away consumer loans Gross external debt would have also fallen in 2015 had it not been for accounting operations related to euro adoption that added some 10 percent of GDP in Bank of Lithuania external debt. Page 10 when banks are overcapitalized. Support from home-country authorities is also critical in the case of cross-border loans to corporates. Box 1. External Sector Assessment A moderate current account deficit of around 2½ percent of GDP seems appropriate for the medium term. After registering mostly surpluses during the adjustment period following the 2008/09 crisis, the current account moved to a deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP last year, as a result of collapsing Russian import demand. While ongoing trade diversification should erase most of this effect over time, other forces point to a widening of the external deficit. In particular, investment should rise as the recovery from the compressed post-crisis levels fully unwinds. However, current account deterioration must not go too far. Reasonable savings are required ahead of demographic aging and large EU funds will eventually run out. Elevated external debt (75 percent of GDP) and a sizable negative Net International Investment Position (-45 percent of GDP) also need to be taken into account, even though relatively large FDI and inter-company loan components mean that there are no immediate external stability concerns. The exchange rate appears to be broadly in line with fundamentals. Direct estimation of the REER, through the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate approach (ERER) indicates that Lithuania’s REER is close to equilibrium, marginally overvalued at 3 percent. The External Sustainability Approach (ES) shows that compared to the current account that would stabilize Lithuania’s net foreign asset position (-3.3 percent of GDP), the actual current account is somewhat better and the exchange rate is slightly undervalued by 2.6 percent. The EBA-lite methodology indicates that Lithuania’s policies are broadly appropriate, but finds a moderate real exchange rate undervaluation. The current account norm is estimated as -4.3 percent of GDP—a larger deficit than the -1.7 percent of GDP recorded for 2015. This result should be interpreted with caution. The estimation does not take into account the current period of relatively low investment to compensate for the excesses of the boom years up to 2008 and the need to save ahead of one of the largest demographic challenges in Europe. CA-Actual CA-Norm CA-Gap Elasticity Real Exchange Rate Gap Cyclical Contributions Cyclically adjusted CA Cyclically adjusted CA Norm Summary Table CA-Fitted Residual Policy gap