With euro adoption in January, Lithuania turned the page on the period of adjustment that followed the 2008/09 crisis. Growth was among the strongest in Europe in recent years, lifting real GDP above its previous peak and bringing per-capita income to 73 percent of the EU average (in PPP terms). Internal and external imbalances have corrected, with unemployment below its historical average and the current account in slight surplus. Households’ and companies’ balance sheets are generally healthy; the loan-to-deposit ratio of the banking system has fallen well below 100 percent; and fiscal consolidation reduced the deficit to the debt-ratio stabilizing level. Euro adoption strengthened financial stability by securing access to ECB liquidity. It also came with important upgrades to policy frameworks, such as new fiscal rules, a fully fledged macroprudential toolkit, and banking supervision under the SSM. Overall, legacies from the boom-bust cycle are largely confined to the jump in public debt from some 15 to 40 percent of GDP and still subdued credit and investment. The main policy challenge for Lithuania now is to successfully write the next chapter of convergence with living standards in Western Europe. This requires maintaining stability, notably securing fiscal space to deal with future downturns and spending pressures, and safeguarding the strong external position as wages converge and growth of domestic demand outstrips that of foreign demand. But more is needed to fulfill Lithuania’s aspirations: only higher investment, more innovation, and structural reforms to make the most of demographically declining labor resources can underwrite sustained and rapid economic growth. Far-reaching proposals for a new social model were tabled in March, ahead of general elections next fall. Since taking office in late 2012, the left-leaning coalition government led by the Social Democrats accomplished euro adoption, further advanced fiscal consolidation through expenditure restraint, and continued with energy sector reform, including diversifying gas supplies with the opening of Lithuania’s LNG terminal in late 2014. Geopolitical tensions surrounding the situation in Ukraine prompted the reintroduction of the draft and a phased doubling of defense spending to 2 percent of GDP by 2020. Apart from defense issues, the policy focus is on completing other projects to diversify energy supplies, fighting the shadow economy, and helping firms open GDP per capita (PPP, percent of EU average) real GDP (euro million, 2005 prices, RHS) RealGDP per Capita and Real GDP Czech RepublicDenmarkGermanyFranceItalyLatvia (2011)LithuaniaHungaryNetherlandsAustriaFinland-1000100200300400500600700800050100150200250300 ss HH ( ) Net debt to income, NFCs (percent) Household and Nonfinancial CorporateBalance Sheet Indicators, 2013 Page 10 new export markets to substitute for losses in the CIS. In March, the government unveiled for general consultation a reform package dubbed the “new social model” that proposes a new labor code, pension reform, and adjustments to social benefits and employment support programs.