EU Countries: Pro-growth ESIF Spending, 2014-20 (Percent of 2014 GDP) Boosting productivity is a key to sustainably raise living standards, and policies should be framed in a coherent package to leverage impact. Total factor productivity growth averaged 3½ percent per year since 1995, but has been much slower recently. The authorities have rightly earmarked a large share of EU funds for corrective policies—equivalent to over 5 percent of GDP over seven years. Reforms fall into three broad categories, but should be assembled into a credible reform package to clearly communicate the way forward. h 1/ Spending on thematic objectives 1 (research and innovation), 3 (SME competitiveness), and 10 (eductaion and training). Sources: European Commission (https://cohesiondata.ec.europa.eu/); and IMF staff calculations. Research and innovation Education and training SME competitiveness h z k y G h y H P w s G B s y s s k B K y P x Page 14 There is room to improve the employability of labor. Upgrading skills, right grading skills, and lowering the tax wedge would help reduce still high structural unemployment, foster efficient use of talent, and combat the shadow economy. Productivity would rise and economic opportunities would improve, especially for currently disadvantage parts of society. Upgrading skills . Resources devoted to active labor market programs (ALMPs) are less than half the EU average and seven times less than in leading Denmark. There is accordingly ample scope to ramp up spending while ensuring quality, and coverage should be extended to include those at risk of job loss. A program for life-long learning would be a valuable preventative complement. Right grading skills . Lithuania’s tertiary education attainment rate (56 percent) is the highest in the EU, yet skill shortages are a key concern for employers. Chosen fields of study do not accord well with labor market needs and vocational training is underdeveloped. Building on the recently launched “job barometer,” mandatory orientation for students that are provided government-paid study places could be considered. Government should also review the mix of the study places that it pays for to ensure value-for-money. The profile of vocational training should be raised and made less school-based. Reducing the tax wedge . The personal income tax rate of 15 percent seems low, but applies to all income above the basic allowance rather than being phased in. More importantly, social security contributions run at some 40 percent and apply from the first euro earned. Incentives for low-wage earners to go informal are accordingly high. There is also a risk of benefit traps even at modest benefit levels. A basic allowance for social security contributions could be considered. Phasing it out as incomes rise would contain its fiscal costs. Company upgrading is instrumental for improved productivity. Lithuania ranks poorly on innovation indicators, occupying the forth place from the bottom on the European Innovation Score Board. The fragmentation of the innovation system and excessive emphasis on physical infrastructure needs addressing. More cross-border clusters and competence centers promise efficiency gains. Above all, more focus should be put on the promotion of more sophisticated products, better processes, better branding and marketing, new markets, etc. rather than on scientific breakthroughs that are difficult to commercialize. While supporting programs are already in place, these remain limited in size and scope. Structural unemployment was estimated as close to the double digits. See “Unemployment in the Baltics,” IMF Country Report No. 14/117. Estimates of the share of the shadow economy vary between 13 and 26 percent. See “Shadow Economy Index for the Baltic Countries 2009–14,” The Centre for Sustainable Business at SSE Riga, 2015; and F. Schneider, 2015, “Size and Development of the Shadow Economy of 31 European and 5 other OECD Countries from 2003 to 2015: Different Developments,” respectively. Around the world, informal players are found to operate at just half the average productivity level of formal companies in the same sector. See D. Farrell, 2004, “The Hidden Dangers of the Informal Economy,” McKinsey Quarterly, June 2004. Page 15 Lithuania’s favorable business climate can be further improved. Lithuania ranks 20 out of 189 countries in the Doing Business Report’s assessment of regulatory quality and efficiency— second only to Estonia in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE). An important remaining shortcoming is the outmoded labor code, which deters job creation and FDI. The new labor code proposed as part of the “New Social Model” currently before parliament is welcome. It would modernize labor relations. Key features include an up-to-date set of contracts; shorter notice periods and less severance pay; more wage transparency; better labor representation in firms; and more training opportunities. But the original proposal should not be unduly diluted—the establishment of a payroll tax financed severance pay fund would be counterproductive, considering Lithuania’s already high labor tax wedge. Other areas for improvement in the business environment are bankruptcy procedures, which are lengthy with low recovery rates, and tight restrictions on immigration from non-EU countries. Government proposals for accelerated procedures to grant temporary resident permits for applicants with desirable occupations are welcome. “Labor market tests” could be dropped altogether for those with pertinent skills. The authorities strongly agreed with staff’s diagnoses and the thrust of the proposed reforms, but also underscored the complexity of the task. They were keenly aware that the education system must be better geared toward labor market needs. Some reforms are already in train, such as new curriculums in vocational training and initiation of apprentice programs, and, in higher education, better connected universities and streamlined study programs. But the reform process is complex because of the multitude of stakeholders that need to be brought on board. Passage of the new labor code is a key priority. The authorities took note with interest of the idea to introduce a basic social security contribution allowance, although a recent constitutional court ruling to make social security more insurance-based complicated matters. They saw the economic merits of streamlined bankruptcy procedures and more liberal rules for immigration from non-EU countries, but both issues were politically and socially sensitive.