Luxembourg’s economic success rests on the twin pillars of stability and openness . Its responsive, low tax, financially centered economic model has served it well, with growth outpacing the euro area in most years (Box 1 and Figure 1). Latest figures show real GDP expanding by 2½ percent y/y in the first three quarters of 2014, with net service exports as the largest driver. Box 1. Luxembourg: Some Defining Traits A stable political environment with a tradition of consultation with social partners . After 19 years under Prime Minister Juncker, a coalition of three other parties took office in late 2013. In its Programme Gouvernemental , the new government committed to focus on policies to manage the public finances soundly and keep gross debt below 30 percent of GDP; promote growth, sustainable development, and social cohesion; and fight unemployment. A demonstrated ability to adapt to large economic shocks and reposition the economy . This has included early steps to embrace capital account openness and adapt prudential and legal frameworks, making Luxembourg a center for eurobond issuance and many other financial flows and activities. A complex financial hub that serves all of Europe . The focus is on low margin, high volume business, especially valuation, custody, settlement, and legal services to funds. The sector includes: A banking system with assets of some 16 times GDP . Dominated by units of foreign banks, some with key roles in group liquidity management, the system also houses locally active banks (that lend domestically) with assets of about 2¾ times GDP. The second largest investment fund industry in the world . Global assets of almost €3½ trillion amount to some one-tenth of the global total or 70 times GDP, with most funds enjoying EU “passports.” A systemic international central securities depository, Clearstream Banking S.A. . Active in custody, settlement, collateral management (including triparty repo and securities lending), and issuance services, Clearstream is an infrastructure platform of similar importance as Belgium’s Euroclear and the U.S. Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation. A modestly sized insurance industry with assets of about 4 times GDP. Life insurance dominates with some two-thirds of total assets, followed by reinsurance, then property and casualty. A record of fiscal conservatism . A central government net asset position of about 20 percent of GDP leaves Luxembourg as one of two euro area sovereigns rated ‘AAA’ by all major rating agencies. A large share of cross border workers . Commuters from neighboring Belgium, France, and Germany account for more than 40 percent of domestic employment. Luxembourg thus provides important benefits to the regions immediately around it. BanksInvestment funds Bank and Fund Liabilities, 2014 Sources: BCL, ECB, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Retail(equity)Other Capitaland wholesale funds Othernonres. dep. Interbank nonresident deposits Domestic deposits Financial Sector Shares in: NominalGDP Value Added Employment Revenue Page 9 Figure 1. Luxembourg: Economic Activity Growth has outpaced neighbors in most years … … although volatility is pronounced. Net exports are the main driver lately … Services trade dominates goods trade … … yet investment net of lumpy items is also helping. … and financial sector value added is growing again. The large role of commuting workers leaves unemployment among residents relatively elevated despite strong job creation, while falling inflation has tracked euro area trends (Figure 2). Job growth has exceeded 2 percent y/y, although almost half of the new jobs go to cross border workers, leaving the domestic unemployment rate at 7 percent. Residents’ incentives to take low paying jobs are limited by a generous welfare system. Inflation has tended to exceed that in neighboring countries, reflecting in part wage indexation and, this year, a VAT rate increase. Ireland (Index, Q1 2008 = 100)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Public consumption Private consumption Investment GDP Real GDP by Expenditure Gross Fixed Investment (Billions of 2005 euros) Total Excluding satellites and airplanes Sources: STATEC and IMF staff calculations. Exports (goods) Exports (services) Imports (goods) Imports (services) Exports and Imports (Billions of euros)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Trade Financial Public Other services Agriculture, industry, construction Total gross value added Real Gross Value Added by Industry (Percentage point contribution to growth y/y) Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 10 Figure 2. Luxembourg: Unemployment, Employment, and Inflation Unemployment is high by historical standards … … with half of all new jobs taken by commuting workers. Headline inflation has trended downward … … with an uptick in 2015 reflecting VAT increases. The banking system appears well capitalized, although profit conditions are tight (Figure 3). There were 143 credit institutions as of February 2015. Capital ratios are high, as is capital quality, with fully loaded Basel III capital requirements easily met by most banks. The ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment identified an end 2013 capital shortfall at one bank operating in Luxembourg (an Italian bank with a Luxembourg subsidiary), but deemed this eliminated by capital raisings during 2014. Although only a few banks lend locally, credit to domestic households and firms amounts to some 90 percent of GDP. Declining interest margins are partly offset by growing fee income from various services for the investment fund industry. Banks with negative net income in 2014 accounted for some 4 percent of system assets. Search-for-yield inflows and buoyant equity markets are driving strong growth in the investment fund industry (also Figure 3). The total number of funds stood at 3,893 as of February 2015. Assets under management have more than doubled since 2008, increasing by half a trillion euros in the last seven months alone. With some 85 percent of these assets in products compliant with the Undertakings for the Collective Investment in Transferable Securities (UCITS) Directive, equity is sourced through extensive distribution networks across the EU and beyond, and the Luxembourg, harmonizedSource: Haver Analytics. Unemployment (Percent, seasonally adjusted) Residents Nonresidents National unemployment rate (in percent) Job Growth by Residency (Percentage point contribution to growth y/y)Sources: DataInsight, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Food, beverages, and tobacco Clothing and furnishing Energy and transport Other CPI Consumer Price Index Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices Page 11 proceeds are mostly invested abroad. Strong net investment inflows reflect a search for yield at a time of falling bank deposit rates, with corporate cash pools playing a significant role. Figure 3. Luxembourg: Financial Sector Developments Bank assets have fallen while fund assets have grown … … reflecting a search for yield. ... while interbank items dominate bank balance sheets. Fund management likely has lifted banks’ net income ... Banks report strong capital and asset quality … … and funds’ growth reflects both inflows and valuations. Germany Netherlands T W NPLs to Gross Loans Bank Capital and NPLs, 2013 (Percent) Sources: BCL and IMF Financial Soundness Indicators. all locallyactive Bank deposit rate Investment fund capital gain/loss (right scale) Sources: BCL and IMF staffcalculations. Bank Deposit Rates and Investment Fund Returns (Percentper year) Interbank loans and securities Fixed and remaining assets Other loans Other securities Interbank deposits Other deposits Other liabilitiesSeries8 Banking System Balance Sheet (Billions of euros)Sources: BCL and IMF staff calculations. 200520062007200820092010201120122013 1/2014 1/ Noninterest income Net interest income Loan loss provisions Operating expenses Net income Banking System Net Income (Percent of total assets)Sources: CSSF and IMF staff calculations.1/ Net income before provisions; loan loss provisions not available. 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 -3-2-101234 Due to capital gain/loss Due to net issuance Overall growth Assets under management (right scale) InvestmentFund Assets (Percent change m/m, 12 month moving average; right scale in billions of euros) Source: BCL and IMF staff calculations. 950 1,000 1,050 Bank assets Investment fund assets (right scale) Bank and Investment Fund Assets Source: BCL. Flightto safetySearch for yield Page 12 The central bank is a net creditor to the Eurosystem, and has asked the government for more capital . Large TARGET2 net claims (reflecting banking system net foreign assets) expand the monetary authority’s balance sheet, helping reduce its capital to asset ratio to the lowest in the Eurosystem. The government has pledged to augment the central bank’s capital base going forward. Luxembourg’s external accounts confirm its role as a financial hub (Figure 4). The large surplus on financial and other services is increasingly offset by growing deficits on investment income linked to growth in investment fund assets. Staff’s External Balance Assessment- lite (EBA-lite) suggests the current account surplus is somewhat below norm, and the real effective exchange rate remains close to its long-term equilibrium value (Appendix I). The positive net international investment position is dwarfed by gross asset and liability positions reflecting the domiciliation of multinational corporations (MNCs), securities issuers, banks, and funds. Figure 4. Luxembourg: External Sector Developments The current account surplus has narrowed, driven by a growing factor income deficit … … even as net exports of financial services have remained strongly positive. Massive gross IIP positions dwarf net assets … …reflecting large FDI and portfolio investment claims. Net exports of goods Net exports of services Net factor expense Net transfers Current Account (Percent of GDP)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Imports Financial Services Trade Source: BCL. Net international investment position Gross assets (right scale) International Investment Position Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Foreign direct investment Portfolio investments Other investments Financial derivativesSources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. IIP Structure: Assets (outer) and Liabilities (inner), 2014 025507510002468LuxembourgGermanyECB Own funds (capital, reserves, & provisions) TARGET2 gross claims (right scale) Central Bank Own Funds, 2013 (Percent of total assets)Sources: Haver Analyticsand central bank annual reports for 2013. Page 13