Staff’s baseline has growth slowing from almost 3 percent in 2014 to 2¼ percent over the medium term (Figure 5). Near-term prospects have brightened with those for the euro area. Potential growth has likely fallen from pre crisis levels, however, including as a result of financial sector activity shifting from banks to funds, where value added is smaller. Combining filtering techniques and production function approaches, staff puts potential growth at 1½–2¼ percent. Figure 5. Luxembourg: Growth Projections, Trade Links, Sentiment, and Potential Luxembourg’s growth rates are projected to remain bounded by euro area and world growth. Domestic sentiment, while improving, remains below the long-run average … … and three methodologies suggest potential growth is lower than before. Economic Sentiment Indicator (Index, long-term average = 100) Source: Haver Analytics. HP filter Filtered components Production function Measures of Potential Output Growth (Percent change y/y) Source:IMF staff calculations. LuxembourgEuro area World Real GDP Growth and Trade Links (Percent change y/y unless otherwise indicated) Sources: STATEC, IMF World Economic Outlook , and IMF staff calculations. projections Services: Exports (outer),Imports (inner) (Millionsof euros, 2014) RoWOther EuropeEuro area Goods: Exports (outer), Imports (inner) (Millions of euros, 2014) EuropeEuro area Page 14 The macroeconomic projections are fraught with more than the usual degree of uncertainty . As a city state economy, Luxembourg displays all the attendant patterns of strong growth, high output volatility, and sometimes large revisions to historical data. Migration, commuting, and financial services activity are especially difficult to forecast. Foreign tax policy initiatives that could diminish Luxembourg’s tax base and financial sector events that could blemish its strong reputation are the main country-specific risks . EU and OECD initiatives to tighten tax transparency standards, along with U.S. proposals to tax offshore cash pools of U.S. firms, could hurt Luxembourg’s standing as a destination for FDI and a center for corporate treasury operations (Box 2). The failure of the Espírito Santo group of companies last year reminded that Luxembourg’s reputation for strong prudential oversight can be tested in unexpected ways even when other competent authorities are in charge under EU law. Although such processes or events could see some activities migrating away—with adverse impacts on total factor productivity, exports, jobs, and revenues—the authorities’ strategy of engagement in the relevant international fora is the correct risk management approach. Near-term growth risks are broadly symmetric around staff’s baseline . Assuming the Luxembourg-specific challenges are well managed, domestic demand and net exports could beat the baseline. While the impact on disposable incomes of lower oil prices is largely offset by higher VAT (a rate hike took effect on January 1, 2015), that on investment from cheaper term funding and lower threshold returns on projects related to the ECB’s quantitative easing (QE), and from the EU Investment Plan, could surprise positively. Goods exports would suffer should there be a protracted period of slow growth in advanced economies. Service exports are tied to demand from global investors for asset management services, where the positive effects of QE are tempered by expectations of U.S. tightening. Should geopolitical tensions or renewed financial stress in the euro area trigger a surge in global financial market volatility, the effects for Luxembourg could be mixed . On the one hand, a severe reversal of benign financial conditions would hurt equity market performance and risk appetite, triggering valuation effects and outflows from the fund industry. On the other 201220132014201520162017201820192020Est. Real GDP (percent change)-0.22.02.92.52.32.32.22.22.2 Domestic demand (percentage pt. contribution to growth)0.00.41.31.61.51.71.71.71.7 Net exports (percentage pt. contribution to growth)-0.51.11.71.30.80.60.60.50.5CPI inflation (percent change)2.91.70.70.61.61.71.92.02.2General government balance (percent of GDP)0.10.90.6-0.50.10.10.20.20.3General government gross debt (percent of GDP)21.423.623.324.424.925.525.926.226.4Unemployment rate (percent, national definition)6.16.97.16.96.76.66.56.36.2Current account balance (percent of GDP)5.74.95.24.74.64.44.44.34.3Source: Staff estimates. Luxembourg: Baseline Macroeconomic Framework, 2012–20 Page 15 hand, the banking system could once more receive safe haven inflows, as was the case during the global financial crisis in 2008–09. Box 2. Luxembourg: Selected Tax and Tax Transparency Initiatives Several tax initiatives underway abroad have ramifications for Luxembourg The OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) project . Launched in 2013 at the G20’s request, the project identifies 15 areas for action. In late 2014, the OECD issued recommendations in seven of these, proposing measures to curb hybrid mismatch arrangements that exploit differences in tax treatment across countries as well as “treaty shopping” and other forms of arbitrage. The OECD also called for automatic information sharing on the allocation of profits, economic activity, and taxation of MNCs. Recommendations in the remaining eight areas are due later in 2015. EU rule changes and investigations: In 2014, the Directorate General for Competition launched probes into whether transfer pricing at four MNCs in the EU, two of which are in Luxembourg, could involve impermissible state aid. In January 2015, new anti abuse provisions were added to the Parent-Subsidiary Directive that governs intragroup profit distribution, closing loopholes related to hybrid loans and mandating other steps to ensure that “tax arrangements reflect economic reality.” In March 2015, the Commission presented a package of tax transparency measures as part of its agenda to tackle corporate tax avoidance and harmful tax competition in the EU, including a legislative proposal for automatic sharing of advance cross border tax rulings. Going forward, the Commission also plans to present an action plan on corporate taxation, which could include a re-launch of the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base proposal and ideas for implementing the BEPS recommendations. U.S. overseas taxation . The U.S. federal budget for fiscal 2016 proposes a one-time 14 percent tax on the stock of accumulated overseas profits of U.S. corporations and a 19 percent tax on future profits. These profits are currently not subject to U.S. taxation until repatriated, which motivates U.S. firms to hold an estimated $2 trillion abroad, including in jurisdictions such as Luxembourg. Luxembourg, in turn, is increasing tax transparency . The authorities have commenced automatic exchange of information on interest payments under the EU Savings Directive (from 2015). They will extend this to other sources of income as well as account balances (from 2017), and are committed to implementing the OECD Standard for Automatic Exchange of Financial Account Information in Tax Matters (by 2017). They also exchange, upon request, firm specific tax rulings with other EU countries, and have strengthened information requirements for tax ruling applications and related procedures. Luxembourg has also made progress in AML/CFT in recent years . Next steps will need to center on the 2012 Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, where effective implementation would necessarily include stricter approaches to tax crimes and transparency. In the macroprudential domain, there is some risk that a protracted period of low interest rates could spawn a credit fueled housing bubble (Figure 6). Credit to households has been growing by about 7 percent y/y, yet household debt seems managable (data vary by source). If a bubble were to develop, housing prices could correct, compressing household consumption or triggering defaults and possibly disrupting credit to the economy. With rising housing prices spanning decades, reflecting population and job growth combined with zoning and other rules that Page 16 constrain supply, there seems no immediate reason to expect a correction, although pockets of risk are possible. Separately, volatile aggregate credit to firms reflects the prevalence of MNCs with cross border financing arrangements and treasury operations run out of Luxembourg. Figure 6. Luxembourg: Credit and Housing Market Developments Credit to households has grown steadily while that to firms tends to jump around … … and the share of mortgages in locally active banks’ assets has increased significantly. Housing prices are on an upward trend … … outpacing most of the euro area. The authorities shared staff’s assessment of macroeconomic risks, but viewed the challenges to Luxembourg’s economic model and growth prospects more favorably Considering improving indicators for the euro area, boosted by QE, they view growth of almost 3 percent in 2014 as a reasonable guide to medium-term performance. The strength and diversity of the financial sector as well as government efforts to diversify the nonfinancial economy were highlighted as supporting factors, as were the commitment to fiscal prudence, the track record of political and social stability, the region’s skilled multilingual labor force, and the business friendly environment with responsive authorities and modern infrastructures. Recognizing the importance of reinforcing financial sector oversight arrangements and engaging fully in EU and international processes to enhance tax transparency standards, and having refined the scope of advance tax agreements (or so-called rulings) for Luxembourg resident taxpayers, they expressed confidence that any resulting changes would serve to strengthen Luxembourg’s economic model. To illustrate, they Households Nonfinancial corporations Credit to Households and Nonfinancial Corporations (Percent change y/y) Sources: DataInsight and IMF staff calculations. 152025300510152025FranceGermanyLuxembourgNetherlandsBelgium Mortgage Loans of Domestic Banks (Percent of total assets)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Number of apartment transactions (right scale) Houses and apartments Apartments only National Housing Prices and Transactions (Index number, Q1 2010 = 100; right scale in units)Source: BCL. Netherlands Spain Harmonized Housing Prices (Index, 2008 = 100)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 17 pointed to the fact that the move toward tax transparency had had no material impact on the level of bank deposits: inflows from high net worth clients and nonfinancial corporations attracted by sophisticated one-stop-shop services have smoothly offset outflows from smaller depositors.