Thanks to sound policy management, Luxembourg has weathered the crisis well . After a shallow recession in 2012, growth reached 2.1 percent in 2013—the second best performance in the euro area. The gradual improvement in the euro area supported a rebound in exports (Figure 1). Meanwhile, a healthy fiscal position, accommodative credit conditions and continued employment growth shielded domestic demand from external headwinds. Credit has been particularly dynamic for mortgage purposes, but less so to non-financial corporates (Figure 2). A new government based on a three-party coalition took office following early elections in October 2013. But trend growth has slowed markedly from the pre-crisis period . The period of buoyant pre-crisis activity—with average growth of 4¾ percent over 2000–08, driven by rapidly expanding financial services—has come to an end. The ongoing changes in the EU financial landscape will call for adjustment. Meanwhile, labor costs have risen substantially more than in trade partners, and underlying productivity has been dented by the crisis (Figure 3). As a consequence, potential growth is estimated to have been cut to half the pre-crisis period, at about 2– 2¼ percent. While the external position remains strong, the economy faces several challenges from an evolving external environment. The current account surplus reached 5.2 percent of GDP in 2013, and the exchange rate is estimated to be broadly in line with fundamentals (Appendix I). However, Luxembourg’s role as a hub for EMU financial activities ties its fortunes intrinsically to the euro area (Box 1 and Figure 4). Deleveraging trends, EU-driven regulatory changes, and the global move toward higher transparency of cross-border financial flows will weigh on the banking sector. Large and volatile capital flows are dominated by cross-border banking and investment fund activities with limited linkages to domestic activity, but their sheer size in comparison to the economy could still generate inward spillovers in case of systemic shocks. Luxembourg’s fiscal position is healthy, but there are looming challenges there too. The fiscal position is characterized by a structural surplus and very low general government debt (23 percent of GDP in 2013), and Luxembourg remains one of the few AAA-rated sovereigns in the region. However, the fiscal position will come under strain from upcoming losses in e-VAT revenue, and rapidly growing public expenditures. The G20-driven push to increase transparency in corporate taxation could also affect Luxembourg, as it hosts large multinational activities. Euro area max and min Luxembourg and Euro Area Real GDP Recovery (In index number, 2009Q1 = 100)Sources: Eurostat Agriculture, industry, construction Trade Average Contribution to Gross Value Added (In qoq contribution to growth)Sources: Haver Analytics, IMF Staff calculations. Page 7 Box 1. Luxembourg’s Financial Sector Luxembourg hosts a large financial sector mostly focused on cross-border businesses . It hosts the second largest fund industry after the U.S., a large banking sector (15 times GDP) with diversified activities, and one of the largest primary markets for international bond issuance. A wide spectrum of specialized financial service providers gravitate around the industry, with support ranging from legal to accounting and IT activities. In 2012, the sector contributed 22 percent of GDP and 11 percent of employment. The banking sector is dominated by subsidiaries and branches of foreign groups . These conduct mostly cross-border businesses, including wealth management, intragroup treasury and liquidity management, custody services to investment funds, and international wholesale lending. Unlike other countries with a large financial sector, the system is a net provider of liquidity, and overall non–resident deposits have remained stable, even after the move to automatic exchange of information for tax purposes was announced in April 2013. Only a handful of banks— less than 20 percent of total banking assets but about 250 percent of GDP—provide credit to the economy, with generally limited links with the internationally-oriented sector. Half of these domestically-oriented banks are stand-alone domestic banking groups, the rest are owned by European banking groups. The investment fund industry manages assets amounting to 2.6 trillion euro . The industry benefits from the established trademark and passporting features of UCITS (Undertaking for Collective Investment on Transferable Securities) products, and caters to a diversified pool of non-resident investors. After a marginal decline in May 2013 in the context of global volatility, assets under management have resumed their increase. UCITS funds for retail distribution under EU regulation continue to dominate, with around 80 percent of assets. Money market fund activities have been curtailed in the wake of the crisis, and constant net asset value (CNAV) funds, which generated substantial liquidity pressures in 2009, account for only 5 percent of total fund assets. A large part of the investment funds’ products are sold outside of the euro area, but similarly, a substantial part of the funds are invested in assets from non-euro area countries. In synergy with those activities, the financial sector is also involved in bond issuance, and custodian and settlement activities . Luxembourg is one of the biggest international bond issuance markets in the world. It hosts an important global clearing and settlement player focusing on euro-denominated bonds. It is also home to various other financial services. The insurance sector is relatively large and growing, with total assets over 5 times GDP. The country’s business model benefits from several key comparative advantages Stable political and economic conditions, as exemplified by the AAA sovereign rating, a central location within the euro area and a multi-lingual society. A first-mover advantage, as the country’s financial center status was originally built on European banks’ foreign exchange and euro loan businesses that were attracted by flexible regulations. The authorities have generally been proactive in implementing new European regulations. EU and euro area financial integration, in particular the European passport for financial intermediaries and single rulebooks for financial regulation, such as UCITS. A range of advisory and ancillary services that financial institutions and investors can access. Inv. fundsBonds issuanceMarket cap. Size of Different Sectors of Luxembourg Financial Industry (In multiples of GDP) Page 8 Despite an inclusive social model, the labor market is showing some signs of strain, and the housing market is posing multi-dimensional challenges . Unemployment has doubled since the early 2000s to reach 7 percent, even though employment has increased steadily, including during the crisis. Rapid pre-crisis growth allowed for a well-developed safety net and substantial income redistribution, but generous social benefits also tend to generate inactivity traps. The temporary adjustment to automatic wage indexation—limiting it to one tranche every twelve months—has mitigated the steady erosion in cost competitiveness, but the agreement expires at the end of 2014. Meanwhile, rapid income and population growth is feeding demand for residential real estate, while structural supply shortages persist (Box 2). Box 2. Housing Market Challenges House prices picked up strongly in 2013 , by almost 9 percent, following a longer period of moderate but sustained growth between 2003 and 2011, and a slight decline in 2012. Cyclical as well as structural factors are contributing to the imbalance between demand and supply Continuing population and employment growth, as well as a very large group of non-resident workers (around 40 percent of employment) are pushing up structural demand. With mortgage interest rates at record lows, accommodative financial conditions provide further impetus to demand, while government policies (i.e. interest subsidies, tax deductibility of mortgage loan interest payments, and other assistance) strengthen incentives for home ownership. Meanwhile, supply is held back by constraints on building, including through environmental and zoning rules. Low recurrent taxation on immovable property is keeping the opportunity cost of holding unused land or property low, especially in a context of expectations of continuous price increases, further reducing turnover. Domestically-oriented banks’ exposure to Luxembourg’s real estate market has risen significantly Mortgage credit never slowed during the crisis, even as credit to non-financial corporates fell sharply. As a consequence, mortgage credit has risen from 12 percent of domestically oriented banks’ assets in 2008 to 24 percent in 2012, or almost 50 percent of GDP. Households’ financial position is strong, though with pockets of vulnerability . Household debt to GDP is around 55 percent, and households are among the wealthiest in the region. However, much of the wealth is held in real estate, and therefore sensitive to valuation changes. With most loans at floating interest rates, increases in interest rates, as well as higher unemployment, could pose risks for households with a more fragile financial position. See also Selected Issues Paper: “The Residential Real Estate Market”. Page 9