Luxembourg’s small open economy plays a pivotal role in intermediating global capital flows. Deep-rooted traditions of fiscal prudence, business-friendly regulation, a skilled labor force, and low and predictable taxes have made Luxembourg a global financial center, home of multinational companies, and one of the richest countries in the EU. This has positioned the country to benefit from the surge in global financial assets induced by quantitative easing (QE) by the world’s major central banks, search for yield, and safe haven flows. During 2015, gross international assets of the country increased by €1.1 trillion to €9.5 trillion (180 times GDP). Its large financial sector directly contributes ¼ of GDP, 18 percent of budget revenues, and 11 percent of employment. Figure 1. Economic Activity Growth has outpaced neighbors … Net exports are the main driver lately … … although volatility is pronounced. Dominated by rising exports of financial services. France (Index, Q1 2008 = 100)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. (Percent change y/y)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Net exports Public consumption Private consumption Investment Real GDP by Expenditure Exports (goods) Exports (services) Imports (goods) Imports (services) Exports and Imports Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Luxembourg: Foreign Assets and GDP (December 2015) Direct investment(non-bank financial and holding companies) €4.6 trillion Portfolio investment(investmentfunds) €3.5 trillion Other investment(banks, money-market funds) €1.2 trillion GDP(2015)€52.1 billion Gross foreignassets €9.5 trillion Page 10 Economic performance in 2015 once again surprised on the upside. Despite the 2 percent VAT hike that frontloaded private consumption to 2014 and—together with other fiscal consolidation measures—depressed it in 2015, strong investments and net exports fuelled by financial services propelled GDP growth to an estimated 4.8 percent. Meanwhile, the current account surplus was steady at about 5½ percent of GDP in 2015, with a decline in merchanting activities offset by an increase in the services balance. Strong economic performance and active labor market policies have helped reduce the unemployment rate to 6½ percent by early 2016. After picking up in the second half of 2015, headline inflation dipped again to near zero early this year, in line with euro area trends. Figure 2. Unemployment, Employment, and Inflation Unemployment is coming down … Inflation picked up in 2015 … … with half of all new jobs taken by commuting workers. … but fell in early 2016 The financial sector continues to expand. Luxembourg’s mostly outward oriented financial system has developed into the leading private banking center in the eurozone, a central location of banks providing intra-group liquidity management, and the second largest investment fund industry in the world after the U.S. Banking system . Nearly all 144 banks located in Luxembourg are foreign-owned and service international cash management, custodian and specialized financial operations. Only five banks are domestically owned and government ownership is significant in three of these. The banking Luxembourg (Harmonized)Source: Haver Analytics. (Percent, seasonally adjusted) Residents Nonresidents National unemployment rate (in percent) Job Growth by Residency Sources: DataInsight, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Food, beverages, and tobacco Clothing and furnishing Energy and transport CPI Consumer Price Index, National Definition (Percentage point contribution to growth y/y)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Core Inflation, Harmonized Page 11 system has a very high average capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of nearly 20 percent and very low non-performing loans. After peaking during the global financial crisis, total bank assets have fluctuated around €770 billion, reflecting cross-border intra-group liquidity services provided by Luxembourg’s banks. Since Luxembourg began sharing data on deposits in 2015, according to the EU Savings Directive, small retail deposits from neighboring countries have been increasingly replaced with larger inlays of high net worth individuals. Funds industry . Since end-2008, about 20 percent (or €1.2 trillion) of all new net inflows into investments funds worldwide came to Luxembourg funds. Benefiting from major central banks’ QE, assets under management (AUM) in the funds industry jumped 28 percent y/y to €3.6 trillion in May 2015, but have stagnated since then amid global markets’ volatility. Reflecting a search for yield, net inflows in funds reached €298 billion in 2015, which accounted for 72 percent of the increase in AUM for the year. Income of local depository banks and of other providers of ancillary services benefited from the rising AUM. In the year to September 2015, bank fee income increased by 3 percent y/y while net interest margins stagnated. Tax receipts also benefited directly and indirectly from the strong performance of funds. Bank assets have fallen while fund assets have grown … … the latter boosted by QE and search for yield. Figure 3. Financial Sector Developments Fund management likely has lifted banks’ net income ... … and banks report strong capital and asset quality 700 750 800 850 900 950 1,000 Bank assets Investment fund assets (right scale) Bank and Investment Fund Assets (Billions of euros)Source: BCL. Flightto safetySearch for yield Valuation changes (RHS) Net investment (RHS) Net assets (LHS)Source:Luxembourg authorities. ECB QE announced Luxembourg: Fund Assets Under Management (In billions of euros) FED QE3 FED keeps QE Noninterest income Net interest income Loan loss provisions Operating expenses Net income Banking System Net Income (Percent of total assets) Sources: CSSF and IMF staff calculations. FranceGermanyNetherlandsBelgium r W NPLs to Gross Loans Bank Capital and NPLs, 2015 or Latest Sources: BCL and IMF Financial Soundness Indicators. allLuxembourglocallyactive Page 12 Luxembourg’s fiscal position is among the strongest in the EU. The estimated fiscal surplus of 1 percent of GDP in 2015 was the highest in the EU, and gross public debt of 21.6 percent of GDP is the second-lowest. This compares favorably to the average debt-to-GDP ratio in other financial centers (65–70 percent of GDP) and to countries with an AAA rating from at least 2 agencies (62 percent of GDP). Moreover, the public sector’s assets by far exceed its liabilities resulting in a positive public net wealth of 43 percent of GDP at the end of 2015:Q3. Luxembourg’s provision of advance tax rulings to some multinational companies is being challenged by the European Commission (EC) . The EC has decided that the advance tax ruling of Fiat involved improper state aid. The authorities disagreed with the EC decision and appealed it in court. Meanwhile, the EC is investigating the much larger tax rulings of Amazon and MacDonald’s (Appendix I). Luxembourg has supported the tax transparency agenda during its EU Presidency in the second half of 2015. It participated in the OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) project and committed to join the EU-wide automatic exchange of advance tax rulings effective from 2017. Recognizing the progress, the OECD Global Forum on tax transparency removed Luxembourg from its list of non-compliant countries in October. The current account surplus has remained stable … … while net exports of financial services have remained strongly positive. Figure 4. External Sector Developments Massive gross IIP position dwarfs net assets … … reflecting large FDI and portfolio investment claims. Net exports of goods Net exports of services Net factor expense Net transfers Current Account Net exports Imports Financial Services Trade Net (LHS) Gross (RHS) International Investment Position Foreign direct investment Portfolio investments Other investments Financial derivatives IIP Structure: Assets (outer) and Liabilities (inner), 2015 Page 13 The country is coping well with the refugee influx. From September 2015, asylum applications have increased about threefold year-on-year. Building on past experience, the authorities accommodate families with children who are considered easier to integrate over time. To enroll refugees in schools, training programs, and language classes, the authorities called on retired teachers to return to work.