The European regulatory and supervisory environment is undergoing substantial changes . As the euro area moves toward a banking union, banks and supervisors will have to prepare for the switch to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The single rulebook is being enhanced through the transposition of Basel III framework, and harmonization of banks’ recovery and resolution processes as well as of national deposit guarantee schemes. In parallel, the authorities announced that they will start the automatic exchange of information with other tax authorities under the EU Savings Taxation Directive on savings income from 2015. The financial sector appears resilient and, faced with these new challenges, is moving toward diversification Despite a contraction of their balance sheets since the crisis—driven by deleveraging pressures in euro area parent banks—banks remain highly capitalized and liquid, and NPLs are low (Table 6). However, staff stressed that, with the euro area banking sector still ailing, activities geared toward the region were likely to grow only moderately. Progress toward banking union was seen as positive in the long run. But staff noted that strengthened capital requirements and the introduction of bail-in instruments might initially exacerbate euro area deleveraging pressures, and that more harmonized EU regulation and supervision might lessen Luxembourg’s competitive advantage for some businesses. In that context, it was recognized that diversification already underway would mitigate some of the short-term effects of EU-driven changes: Luxembourg has been able to attract new institutions from emerging markets looking for a hub in the euro area, in part thanks to its extensive financial infrastructure. Banks are retooling private banking activities toward high net-worth individuals to mitigate the effects of the switch to automatic exchange of information in 2015—which could be challenging for some institutions. The investment fund industry has continued expanding, despite recent bouts of volatility in global financial markets. The rapid transposition of the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive was seen as an opportunity to develop new activities. Financial sector oversight has been steadily improved. Since the 2011 FSAP, staffing at the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (CSSF) has been increased, techniques for stress testing banks have been enhanced, and investor protection has been stepped up (Appendix III). Cooperation between the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg (BCL) and the CSSF is being enhanced in the context of the preparations for the SSM. It will be further strengthened through the foreseen set-up of a national Systemic Risk Committee, involving the supervisors, the BCL, and the Finance Ministry. Preparation for the SSM, though taxing on resources, is proceeding according to schedule, with 80 percent of total assets expected to be supervised by the SSM, either directly or through See also Selected Issues Paper: “The Financial Sector: Strengths and Challenges”. Page 16 parent banks. Staff noted that the operational independence of the CSSF could be further strengthened as part of the SSM-related revision of the legal framework. The authorities are also taking steps to preserve the resilience of the banking sector. The implementation of Basel III capital requirements is being front-loaded, with banks having to meet the minimum 7 percent CET1 from 2014. Given the already high level of capital, banks were generally expected to meet this requirement without difficulty. Staff viewed the measure as appropriate but encouraged the supervisors to remain vigilant and carefully monitor systemic banks to determine, in collaboration with European authorities, whether specific additional measures might be warranted over time. In parallel, each bank will be required to provision at least 1 percent of their insured deposits by end-2016—the aggregate provisioning already exceeds 2 percent of insured deposits. Work to transpose EU’s Deposit Guarantee Schemes and Bank Recovery and Resolution Directives has started, and banks will be mandated to prepare resolution plans in this context. Coordination with all parties involved, in the context of the future Single Supervision and Resolution Mechanisms, would be critical in the event of a potential systemic shock in one of the large euro area parent banks. Domestic residential real estate exposures require monitoring . Exposures have risen substantially since 2008. The authorities have taken several positive steps, including by raising risk weights for mortgage loans exceeding 80 percent of loan-to-value ratios and by requiring frequent stress testing. While early indications suggest these measures are gaining traction, staff argued that supervisors should stand ready to take additional macro-prudential measures if exposures continued to rise. Given their systemic importance for the domestic economy, consideration could also be given to maintaining higher capital requirements for domestically-oriented banks, in collaboration with European authorities. Interconnections and emerging risks should be carefully scrutinized. Staff underscored the need to closely monitor the entire financial sector. In particular, links between the various domestic financial actors—for example, from large deposits in the banking system from the fund industry, specialized financial service providers, financial holdings and via financial infrastructures—warrant close monitoring, including of potential inward and outward spillovers. The proposed Systemic Risk Committee would be well-placed to monitor these risks, possibly through system-wide stress testing covering both investment funds and banks. Staff stressed that diversification comes with both benefits and risks. In that context, emerging risks should receive enhanced attention; for example, currency mismatch risks could increase as banks’ business in foreign currencies expands. Staff encouraged the authorities to publish their assessments regularly to show that they are closely following new developments in the sector. Seven banks with head offices in Luxembourg, including two domestically-oriented banks, will be subject to the comprehensive assessment directly. 62 other banks, including all other major domestically-oriented banks, will also be subject to the exercise through their head offices in other euro area countries. Page 17 Likewise, to maintain the confidence in the financial sector and ward off reputational risks, staff called for more communication on the authorities’ commitment to investor and depositor protection. Staff pointed to remaining shortcomings in the AML/CFT and tax information exchange frameworks to be addressed. While the Financial Action Task Force recently recognized efforts in addressing some of the shortcomings under the 2003 AML/CFT standard, further progress is needed in relation to the treatment of tax offences, transparency of legal persons and arrangements, and exchange of information with foreign counterparts (Appendix IV). Authorities’ views The authorities and industry were optimistic about the financial center’s prospects under the changing environment. They saw the financial industry capable of adapting to more transparency and to upcoming EU-driven regulatory changes. They noted that these trends, which they called for, could even have upside risks as they could strengthen the financial center’s advantages. They pointed in particular to the “eco-system” developed over time in Luxembourg as a powerful selling point to attract new businesses—a unique concentration of diversified financial institutions and related services, providing services based on the EU rulebook and the civil law tradition, and supported by the multi-lingual workforce. They were also positive about the move toward a euro area banking union, as it would ensure a level playing field and contribute to the stability of the European banking system. The comprehensive assessment by the ECB was not seen as likely to raise any substantial issue as the authorities viewed banks as well capitalized and with limited exposures to risky assets. They emphasized that the national supervisors would continue to work closely with the SSM after its establishment, as envisaged in related regulations. Supervisors stressed, though, the importance of moving in collaboration with European partners. They were open to consider additional capital buffers for systemic and domestically-oriented banks. They noted, however, that these measures would have to be carried out over time and in consultation with EU partners—once the full picture of CRD IV implementation became clearer in the euro area. The authorities explained their plan to move ahead expeditiously to set up an ex-ante deposit guarantee scheme and saw merit in maintaining the current overall level of protection even as they moved to this ex-ante system. The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on possible sources of risks for the financial sector. They agreed on the need to closely monitor banks’ residential real estate exposure and to consider further measures if need be, but preferred for now to wait for the full effects of recent measures. They concurred on the need to continuously monitor risks arising from growing interconnections within the financial sector and from diversification efforts, but at this point, did not see those links posing a substantial risk to the sector’s stability. The authorities agreed with the need to communicate more proactively their focus on investor protection. Finally, the authorities indicated that they are waiting for the adoption of the 4 AML/CFT Directive to revise their legal framework in line with international and regional standards, but that they had already taken preparatory steps with regard to tax crimes and the transparency of legal persons and arrangements. Page 18