The European banking union should be especially positive for Luxembourg, and the transition to it needs to be accelerated . Financial stability issues center on the banking system given maturity transformation and leverage. Given the system’s large size and extensive foreign ownership, Luxembourg will benefit particularly from the common backstop of the Single Resolution Fund, which will eventually exceed 100 percent of Luxembourg GDP. The more integrated prudential oversight under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) should help remove blind spots for Luxembourg supervisors, shedding light on potentially important risks emanating from foreign operations of large complex banking groups with units in Luxembourg. Resource constraints and other factors have delayed Luxembourg’s transposition of the Fourth Capital Requirements Directive and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). Further delays should be minimized, and efforts made to also promptly adopt the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive. In anticipation of BRRD requirements, the authorities are proactively putting in place new bank resolution arrangements . Hitherto, failing credit institutions have been resolved under Luxembourg’s Banking Act of 1993, which provides a few bank specific provisions that prevail over the corporate bankruptcy code. The nascent resolution function is being assembled at the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (CSSF), the national competent authority for bank and investment fund regulation and supervision. The new resolution department in the CSSF is already collecting and reviewing bank information for resolution planning purposes, using existing supervisory powers to gather information. Once the BRRD is transposed into national law (which must occur by end 2015 at the very latest), the CSSF will become the recognized national resolution Page 21 authority for both banks and bank holding companies and will interact closely with the Single Resolution Mechanism at the EU level. Recently exposed limitations in EU oversight arrangements for cross border banking groups suggest Luxembourg should move proactively to reinforce sound approaches ( Selected Issues , Chapter II). Banco Espírito Santo, Portugal’s third largest bank, was brought down in mid 2014 by weaknesses at its Luxembourg based holding companies, at the bank itself, and other group entities. The experience highlighted potential lacunae in EU oversight arrangements for cross border banking groups, where the identification of nonbank companies exercising “dominant influence” over banks is principles based, and the approach to the mixing of banking and commerce is permissive. EU laws do not directly apply requirements on nonbank companies that control banks to hold capital and thus be a source of strength to their bank subsidiaries. However, although the EU Capital Requirements Regulation does not mandate such norms, it does not forbid member states from writing these or other rules for such companies into national law. Luxembourg’s reputation for prudential conservatism would be well served by taking measured action at home, while also leading a broader debate at the EU level. Maximizing the benefits of participation in the banking union may require additional national supervisory resources and coordination arrangements . Banks owning more than 80 percent of Luxembourg banking assets fall under the direct supervision of the ECB, either individually or through consolidated supervision of euro area parents. Both the CSSF and to a more limited extent the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg (BCL), responsible for liquidity supervision, contribute to SSM joint supervisory teams (JSTs) for these significant institutions. The CSSF’s staff strength increased by one-quarter over 2013–14 while its complement of bank supervisors doubled. CSSF and BCL supervisors are now engaged in 32 JSTs (of which five are for banks headquartered in Luxembourg). Resources should be expanded further as needed, where the increase in CSSF fees from 2013 was helpful. The CSSF and BCL could also consider a memorandum of understanding formalizing their respective responsibilities on JSTs as well as modalities for information sharing. Luxembourg is set to benefit from the Central Securities Depository Regulation and the launch of the ECB’s TARGET2-Securities platform for settlement in central bank money . These developments should help expand the business of Clearstream and other Luxembourg depositories. Here too, CSSF–BCL cooperation will be important, to rigorously enforce requirements for settlement and depository functions, verify that contingency plans are in place to deal with operational risks that might arise in stress scenarios, and ensure that any ancillary banking operations are adequately capitalized. Clearstream Banking S.A. Other euro area central securities depositories Securities in Custody, 2013 Sources: ECB and IMF staff calculations. Page 22 The growth of investment funds also requires that the authorities maintain strong oversight and are attentive to spillovers . Regulatory norms are largely determined at the EU level, principally under the UCITS Directive (where Luxembourg was a first mover) and the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive of mid 2013 (also swiftly transposed). Enforcement is in the competency of national authorities. Links to banks, direct and indirect, should be closely monitored, primarily through banking supervision. Given the large size of the industry relative to the banking system, funds’ cash balances, while small as a share of their total assets, make up a significant share of bank deposits. With almost 40 percent of fund assets in debt securities, global market liquidity issues could arise, especially in times of stress, with the related risk of sharp drops in fund value. The investor base that would absorb such losses is overwhelmingly in Europe (U.S. promoters are barred from marketing non U.S. fund products to U.S. retail investors and thus also distribute mostly in Europe). By contrast, roughly half of total assets are invested outside Europe, and roughly half of those in the United States. In parallel, the insurance industry’s investment portfolios and profitability also merit close monitoring, where current low interest rate conditions may challenge the life segment in particular. A systemic risk committee tasked with macroprudential oversight should be formed promptly . After several iterations, recently passed legislation provides for an appropriately broad reach, extending well beyond banking. The committee will bring together the financial sector authorities (the BCL, the CSSF, and the Commissariat aux Assurances for insurance) and the Ministry of Finance, collectively tasked with analyzing and assessing macrofinancial stability and systemic risk and recommending corrective actions. Duties should include not only risk monitoring but also the identification of regulatory gaps and impediments to effective policy action. Thus one focus for the committee could be the housing market, another should be links between banks and funds, and yet another might be arrangements for holding company oversight in a cross border context. Growth in the housing exposures of locally active banks warrants continued monitoring and readiness to deploy additional macroprudential tools if needed . Housing prices and mortgage lending continue to rise, raising concentration risks. Some households could become overstretched. In late 2012, the CSSF took positive steps to dampen these risks, advising banks to Banks (left scale)Funds by instrument Funds by geography 2/ Bank and Investment Fund Assets and Liabilities, 2014 (Billions of euros)Sources: BCL, CSSF, and IMF staff calculations. 1/ U.S. promoters distributing mostly in Europe. 2/ Domicile of incorporation of promoter. Other equityFunds' shares Debt securities Deposits& loans SharesLoans& deposits Other U.S. Other EuropeEuro areaEuro areaOther EuropeU.S. 1/ NonfinancialFixed & remaining assets securities Interbank loans & securitiesOther loansInterbank deposits liabilities depositsFunds' deposits Page 23 limit loan-to-value (LTV) ratios to 80 percent and imposing higher risk weights on mortgages with higher LTV ratios. Staff advised the authorities to step up data collection on property lending, and to prepare appropriately targeted macroprudential tools for deployment if needed. The upcoming Financial Stability Assessment (FSA) will provide an opportunity for a deeper dive into financial sector issues . As a systemic jurisdiction, Luxembourg is subject to mandatory FSAs. The last Financial System Stability Assessment was discussed by the IMF Executive Board on May 13, 2011. Assuming the next Article IV Consultation concludes on or before May 13, 2016, the next FSA may feed into the 2017 Article IV Consultation. Emphasizing the benefits, staff encouraged the authorities to proceed early with the next FSA. The authorities agreed that the banking union presents important opportunities and that delays in transposing related EU directives are regrettable . The CSSF noted that the integrated cross border approach to supervision under the SSM is already engendering a more timely flow of information on risks to the Luxembourg units of foreign banking groups. It stressed both ability and willingness to increase staffing contributions to JSTs, yet pointed out that, as its fees have been calculated for supervision of the domestic system, there may be constraints to its participation in the consolidated supervision of parent banks in other national jurisdictions. The CSSF also observed with satisfaction that the switch to automatic exchange of financial account information has been managed smoothly. The Ministry of Finance, in turn, attributed the legislative delays to the surge in EU directives just as a new national government took office. It assured that the transpositions are now underway. Keen to first build a track record implementing new AML/CFT standards, the Ministry deems a later FSAP more productive, but has not yet taken a formal decision. The authorities pointed to both national and EU initiatives that will reinforce Luxembourg’s strong brand name in finance. At the national level, the legislation that has established a systemic risk committee will improve financial sector oversight, as will implementation of a proposal to restrict the use of a bank’s franchise name by unregulated and unaffiliated nonbanks, thereby cutting unwanted reputational linkages. The authorities agreed that Luxembourg’s reputation would be well served by initiating and leading a debate on EU regulatory arrangements for nonbank companies that control banks, where Luxembourg is an important home and host jurisdiction, and decided in principle that they would do so. They felt that downside risks to the financial sector and the broader economy had receded with the improving euro area outlook. They underlined that the diversification of the financial sector is contributing to financial stability and is mitigating downside risks to the economy. At the same time, they recognized that the housing market merits continued monitoring, where better data collection is a work in progress. Page 24