Growth is expected to remain solid over the medium term, underpinned by robust domestic demand and net exports. GDP growth should ease to about 3½ percent in 2016 and to its long-term trend of 3 percent thereafter. Strong contribution of net exports of services to growth over the medium term reflects Luxembourg’s role as financial hub. Improving domestic sentiments will sustain a rebound in private consumption from the low base of 2015. From 2017, domestic demand should get a boost from planned personal income tax cuts. Despite solid growth and the encouraging drop in the unemployment rate in 2015, skills mismatches, inactivity traps, and refugees entering the labor market will likely keep unemployment at about 6 percent over the medium term. With the expected resumption of wage indexation next year, inflation is projected to pick up to 1.3 percent in 2017, and reach around 2 percent over the medium term. Figure 5. Growth Projections and Domestic Sentiment Domestic sentiment, while improving, remains below the long-run average … … and Luxembourg’s performance is likely to remain bounded by euro area and global growth. Economic Sentiment Indicator (Index, long-term average = 100) Source: Haver Analytics. Euro areaWorld Real GDP Growth Source: IMF staff calculations. projections Page 14 Luxembourg’s external position is projected to remain strong and broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals. The current account surplus is expected to hover around 5 percent of GDP over the medium term, supported by a large surplus in services partially offset by net income payments and a negative balance on goods. The financial account will feature very large gross flows due to Luxembourg’s position as a financial center. Given the projected current account surpluses, Luxembourg’s positive net international investment position is expected to gradually increase over the medium term. The External Balance Assessment (EBA-lite) approaches indicate that Luxembourg’s external position is broadly consistent with its fundamentals. Its REER appears slightly overvalued and the current account is relatively close to its norm (Appendix III). The medium-term outlook depends on Luxembourg’s adjustment to the tax transparency challenges. EC probes into the advance tax rulings and other EU and international tax transparency initiatives can undermine Luxembourg’s tax advantages and prompt transnational companies to relocate. If these risks were to materialize, they could affect both the country’s growth prospects and fiscal revenues. However, creating a taxation level playing field could ultimately benefit Luxembourg by accentuating other competitive advantages, such as its AAA ratings from all three major rating agencies, political stability, prudent fiscal stance, business friendly environment, and qualified multilingual labor force. Financial market stress could affect Luxembourg’s performance. In case of severe external shocks, unraveling financial exposures—including between banks and the funds industry— could prompt dislocations in markets or institutions beyond the scope of the national authorities. A re-assessment of the outlook or a re-evaluation of risks in global asset markets could lead to a sharp adjustment of asset prices and a decompression of credit spreads adversely affecting Luxembourg’s investment funds and banking system, which would be conduits of these spillovers across asset classes and countries. The impact on the banking system could be mitigated if Luxembourg becomes the recipient of safe havens inflows, but banks, funds management companies and providers of ancillary services would likely experience a decline of taxable income. Despite the new EU resolution framework, there remains a tail risk that banking sector difficulties would force the national authorities to step in with a bail-out of domestic banks. However, these risks do not Real GDP (percent change)4.34.14.83.63.33.23.13.03.0 Domestic demand (percentage pt. contribution to growth)0.43.91.72.12.42.22.01.91.9 Net exports (percentage pt. contribution to growth)3.80.13.01.80.91.01.11.01.0CPI inflation (percent change)1.70.70.10.51.31.61.71.92.1General government balance (percent of GDP)0.71.41.00.90.10.10.10.10.1General government gross debt (percent of GDP)23.322.921.622.622.923.123.123.223.1Unemployment rate (percent, national definition)6.97.16.96.46.36.26.26.16.0Current account balance (percent of GDP)5.75.55.55.45.35.25.15.05.0Nonfinancial private sector credit (eop, percent change)6.44.915.77.75.03.83.42.82.8Source: Staff estimates. Luxembourg: Baseline Macroeconomic Framework, 2013–21 Page 15 outweigh the benefits of the ongoing capital markets integration and banking union in the EU, which are crucial to Luxembourg’s success as a European financial hub. Other risks include weaker-than-expected growth in the euro area, Brexit, and another surge of refugees. Luxembourg’s business model relies on continued integration within the European Union, especially for its expanding financial sector, which is subject to uncertainty due to the UK’s EU membership referendum. More generally, Luxembourg also remains vulnerable to lower-than-expected growth in Europe. This highlights the need for Luxembourg to diversify its services exports away from Europe and boost competitiveness, especially of non-financial sectors. In addition, another surge in refugee arrivals could put strain on Luxembourg’s capacity to accommodate and integrate them. Banks’ exposure to the real estate market is a risk to watch closely. Rising house prices largely reflect strong demand outstripping supply, partly because of supply bottlenecks and zoning regulations. For the handful of banks that lend domestically, mortgage loans amount to €23 billion at end-October 2015, or about 45 percent of GDP. To discourage banks from providing risky loans, in 2013 the (CSSF) raised the capital provision requirements from the regular 35 percent to 75 percent for new mortgage loans with a loan-to- value ratio above 80 percent. Since 2008, household debt has risen by 10 percent of GDP, but remains moderate at 59 percent of GDP. The authorities projected higher economic growth than staff and viewed risks to the outlook as broadly balanced over the medium term. They concurred that growth would converge to its trend rate of about 3 percent over the long run, but projected that the expanding financial sector and stronger EU activity would sustain it at around 4 percent in 2016–19. Also, the authorities agreed with staff that Luxembourg’s external position is broadly in line with fundamentals. They believed that their proactive implementation of the tax transparency measures—including those spearheaded by Luxembourg during its EU presidency in the second half of 2015—would mitigate the potential downside risks as more and more jurisdictions worldwide are joining the efforts to level the international taxation playing field. Moreover, the pressures to align taxes with economic activity would motivate some companies to increase their presence in the country, while the elimination of aggressive tax regimes in all countries would accentuate Luxembourg’s many other competitive advantages, such as its triple-AAA rating. While the integration of financial sector oversight in the Banking Union is strengthening the resilience of the banking system, the authorities considered that the existing risk management framework, as well as the diversified investor base and asset composition of investment funds would help buffer the impact of financial market volatility on Luxembourg. Page 16