Luxembourg’s strong general government net asset position of over 40 percent of GDP affords some flexibility in tackling significant revenue and long-term pension challenges (Figure 7). Budget deficits, when they occur, are driven by the central government, with the social security fund generating surpluses and borrowings by other arms of government limited by law. Gross debt, which has risen from single digits pre crisis to 23 percent of GDP in 2014 (driven in part by state support for Fortis, where shareholdings are now profitable), is still among the lowest in the EU. The long-term pension position is challenging, however, and international tax transparency initiatives could have adverse implications for the revenue base. As a small open economy, it is appropriate that the authorities are targeting a budget surplus over the medium term. Figure 7. Luxembourg: Fiscal Sector Developments The net asset position is strong … … with the central government driving gross debt. Expenditures have outrun revenues excluding e-VAT … … partly reflecting a generous social benefits system. -40-20020406080100-40-200204060801002005200620072008200920102011201220132014 Q3 Other assets Social benefits Liabilities Net worth General Government Net Worth Source: International Financial Statistics. Central govt. Local govts. Social security Overall General Government Balance Source: STATEC. Total revenue Total expenditure GDP Revenue excl. e-VAT Revenues, Expenditures, and GDP (Real index number, 2005=100)Sources: DataInsight and IMF Staff calculations. Family/children Unemployment Healthcare and disability Old age and survivors Housing and social exclusion Other Social Benefits Per Head, 2012 (Euros) Sources: Eurostat and IGSS. Adjusted for family benefits provided to cross border workers. Page 18 Budget 2015 launches a multi year fiscal consolidation to address falling e-VAT revenues Under a phased shift in EU taxation on e-commerce from domicile of seller to residency of purchaser as legislated in 2008, retained e-VAT revenue is set to more than halve in 2015, to about 1 percent of GDP, and halve again by 2018. In response, the authorities have raised VAT rates by 2 percentage points, expected to yield ½ percent of GDP in 2015 with the full impact kicking in from 2016, and have introduced a temporary personal income tax to balance the budget, set at ½ percent of income. After an expenditure review in 2014, some paring down of social spending is also to begin in 2015. Based on the authorities’ macro framework, the budget targets a general government deficit of 0.2 percent of GDP in 2015, after a surplus of 0.6 percent in 2014. Based on staff’s more conservative macro framework, the deficit for 2015 is projected at 0.5 percent of GDP, still consistent with the medium-term objective. Luxembourg’s first medium-term budgetary plan envisages additional cost savings, and should restore surplus by 2016 . On this plan and staff’s macroeconomic framework, by 2018 the authorities will have completed a fiscal adjustment averaging about ⅓ percent of GDP annually. The contribution of spending measures is expected to increase as additional savings are realized. Total spending is slated to grow by 4 percent annually through 2018, down from about 5 percent in 2010–14. By 2018, the general government would reach a surplus of about 0.2 percent of GDP, with gross debt still below 26 percent of GDP. The new fiscal framework covers all three sub sectors of the general government, with adherence to the fiscal rules to be monitored by a newly established Fiscal Council, as required under the EU Fiscal Compact. The government’s fiscal package also includes a small wealth fund . Recognizing the transient nature of certain revenues, the plan is for fuel duties and remaining e-VAT totaling about €50 million annually to flow to the fund, which has a target size of €1 billion (just over 2 percent of 2014 GDP) by 2035. Observing that this is small relative to the projected future financing needs of the pension system, and too small to exert a meaningful disciplining impact on fiscal policy, staff suggested options be considered to transfer some central government financial assets to the fund, and that all future extraordinary receipts (divestment proceeds, principally) be channeled to it. 2015General govt. balance under unchanged policy (incl. e-VAT loss)-2.1Policy measures in Budget 2015VAT hike0.5Other revenue measures0.2Expenditure measures0.3Stronger macroeconomic projections and 2014 outcome0.6 Staff baseline projection-0.5Source: Staff estimates. Impact of 2015 Budget Measures on Fiscal Balance VAT increase Other revenue measures Social benefit cuts Other expenditure savings Sources:Luxembourg MoF and IMF staff calculations. Fiscal ConsolidationMeasures Page 19 Deeper pension reforms remain essential to make the benefits system more resilient to population aging . New projections being prepared by the EU Working Group on Ageing suggest annual pension obligations will increase by only 2 percent of GDP through 2050, down sharply from the 8 percent of GDP increase projected by the OECD. These should be treated with caution, as almost half of the improvement comes from Eurostat demographic projections that assume net immigration will almost double Luxembourg’s population by 2050. Staff underscored the need to contain future liabilities by implementing OECD recommendations to: (i) abolish early retirement schemes to raise the effective retirement age; (ii) introduce progressive reductions of the replacement rate; (iii) limit credits for time spent outside work; (iv) institute actuarial neutrality around the statutory retirement age; and (v) index the retirement age to longevity The authorities could use the upcoming review of pension finances in 2016 to adopt at least some of these changes. In light of global tax initiatives, staff recommended the authorities develop options to make the revenue system more robust and achieve additional expenditure savings ( Selected Issues , Chapter I). Taxes on the financial sector and on cross border retail trade (in fuel, tobacco, and other goods) yield over a quarter of total revenues. Significant receipts could prove susceptible to changes in EU and OECD tax standards and U.S. moves to tax U.S. firms’ profits held abroad. The tax challenge should be quantified as details evolve, with the 2015–16 tax policy review providing a good opportunity to assess options, including adjusting property related taxes, corporate tax exemptions, and selected financial sector levies. Further expenditure savings should also be sought, informed by regular expenditure reviews. On both the revenue and expenditure sides, the effort should be to identify measures that are equitable and durable and minimize the drag on growth. Staff also advised that care be taken to ensure that firm specific tax rulings avoid encouraging unduly complex structures, especially in the financial sector . Demand for such rulings often reflects the lack of harmonization across national tax regimes, and there are benefits in providing certainty to firms. Recently, however, it has become apparent that some rulings could give rise to layers of holding companies transacting with each other in hybrid instruments, which in the financial sector can multiply challenges for regulators and supervisors. The authorities stressed their commitment to sound fiscal policies . They expressed confidence that their budget targets for 2015 and the medium term will be met or exceeded, with planned consolidation measures either implemented in full or substituted with equally strong U K Z E U K z D k P h z h I O E D v k G P H un F F G ee I B v L x Series1 Projected Public Pension Expenditure (Percent of GDP)Source: OECD. New EU 2050projection Page 20 alternatives. On pensions, they agreed that long-term population projections by Eurostat that assume large net immigration should be viewed with caution, and acknowledged the importance of further structural reforms. They underlined their commitment to engaging fully in EU and OECD standard setting on tax transparency, but maintained that it is still early to assess revenue impacts if any . With most rules still evolving, they held that the various initiatives have not yet translated into specific risks to the revenue base that would warrant a policy response. The Ministry of Finance emphasized that it is closely monitoring developments in the EU and OECD in order to make adjustments as necessary to be fully compliant with international standards. In any event, Luxembourg is participating fully in exchanges of tax information, including for firm specific rulings upon request. Regarding corporate taxes, the Ministry of Finance noted that rates and exemptions are being analyzed in detail in view of the envisaged tax reform. Regarding taxes on fuel and tobacco, it asserted that initiatives aimed at EU harmonization have not gained traction and that rates are finely tuned to avoid increasing CO emissions while preserving fiscal revenues. Regarding indirect financial sector taxation, the Ministry of Finance stressed that no comparable tax exists in other financial centers and hence any adjustment must be carefully pondered. Stressing the merits of approaching the tax policy review as a consultative process, the Ministry also emphasized the need for a continued strong role for expenditure measures.