The outlook is for growth to firm up, but falling well short of the pre-crisis trend Growth is forecast to reach 2 to 2½ percent over 2014–19, broadly in line with potential (Table 1). A more conducive regional outlook will support trade and investment. The financial sector will continue to contribute to growth, but at a slower pace than pre-crisis, as banks retool and reorient their activities toward new businesses. Short to medium-term risks are tilted to the downside (see Table 2). On the external side, a protracted period of low growth in the euro area could hold back the recovery in the Grand Duchy, given its strong trade and financial linkages with the region. On the domestic side, failure to address forthcoming losses in revenue and strong spending growth would sharply worsen the fiscal position. As this would lead to a steady increase in public debt, investors could eventually come to doubt the stability of Luxembourg’s AAA rating, a critical requirement for the financial sector’s attractiveness. Longer-term risks pertain to the capacity to secure Luxembourg’s business model in a changing environment and to the prevalence of a large financial sector The baseline scenario assumes that the banking sector successfully reorients its activities toward more dynamic regions—as the euro area banking sector continues to deleverage—and higher net-worth individuals—as the move to automatic exchange of information for tax purposes reduces private banking geared to less affluent non-resident clients. An overriding risk, however, is that these adjustments have a larger-than-expected impact, with knock-on effects on growth, employment, and public finances. Rising residential real estate exposures could also pose a risk in the (still low-probability) event of a sharp correction in housing prices. The three largest mortgage lenders are sizeable relative to the economy and support to any of these banks would add significantly to public debt. A few of these banks also remain subsidiaries of large European banks, posing a risk of contagion as happened with Dexia. Luxembourg is a recipient of inward spillovers and a conduit for outward spillovers, rather than a generator of spillovers in its own capacity . Internationally-oriented banks represent about 80 percent of assets. In the event of a systemic shock in one of the large euro area parent banks, the treatment of intragroup exposures in any bail-in decisions will be critical, given that such exposures account for half of the sector’s assets. The 2.6 trillion euros managed by the fund industry are almost entirely invested in foreign assets. Thus, both inward and outward potential spillovers from a surge in global financial market volatility could be large—for example arising from the unwinding of unconventional monetary policies in the United States. The unwinding could affect the portfolio allocation of investment funds, but with likely limited effect on the domestic economy. Yet, the reallocation, if sizeable, could affect a wide range of countries in which these funds are invested. Page 10 . The authorities concurred that growth would not return to pre-crisis levels, but viewed short-term growth prospects slightly better than staff, on the basis of a more negative output gap. However, there was agreement that the measure of the output gap was surrounded with high uncertainty, given the small size of the economy and the ongoing adjustment in the financial sector (Box 3). They also saw risks more balanced, as they were optimistic that the financial sector would come out stronger from the regulatory changes implemented at the EU level and from the move toward greater transparency. Conversely, they viewed continued financial fragmentation within the euro area as a significant risk factor exacerbating the impact of regulatory changes in Europe and hence for financial activities in Luxembourg. Box 3. Luxembourg: Uncertainty in Potential Output Growth and Output Gap Estimates Luxembourg’s output is highly volatile and difficult to predict. Furthermore, national accounts data can be revised significantly. In addition, a decomposition of growth shows that TFP growth turned negative during the crisis period and has yet to recover sustainably. With such uncertainties, it is prudent to use various methodologies to estimate potential output. Staff estimates are based on three methodologies, with data going back to 1995: Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter . This commonly-used procedure applied to quarterly data gives annual potential output estimates that attribute more of the decline in growth to structural factors, and hence ascribes a more permanent impact of the crisis on growth. This technique results in an output gap of around 1 percent of GDP in 2013. Production function using annual HP-filtered inputs . Labor is decomposed into working age population, participation rates, hours worked, and adjusted for cross-border workers. With this method, the output gap reaches around 3½ percent in 2013. Production function using an estimated capital series based on the perpetual inventory method, and decomposing the labor components as in the previous method, while taking a view on structural unemployment and equilibrium participation rates and hours worked. This refinement results in an output gap measure of 2¼ percent in 2013. The authorities use various techniques, including well- elaborated macroeconomic models, and have adapted the European Commission’s methodology to account for the large pool of cross-border workers. The 2013 output gap used in the budgetary framework was 2¾ percent. The wide range of estimates illustrates the need for a conservative approach, as revisions to the data tend to reduce the size of the output gap over time. Going forward, staff’s medium term projections assume a very gradual recovery in potential growth, given headwinds to growth from the various challenges, and a slow pick-up in TFP reflecting diversification efforts. The output gap is projected to broadly close by 2016 K L TFP GDP Decomposition of GDP growth: K, L and TFP (in percent change, contribution to real GDP growth) Sources: Staff estimates. HPfilter Filtered inputs Pdtn fcn Uncertainty about the level of output gap (In percent of potential output) Sources: STATEC, staff estimates. Page 11