The European Banking Union and EU financial regulations frameworks are particularly positive for Luxembourg. Given the dominant presence of foreign banks with cross-border activities, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is an improvement in supervision, reducing home-host hurdles for cross-border banks, and can establish a consistently high level of oversight. The authorities should take advantage of the SSM to advocate for better oversight at the European risk monitoring. The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) can ensure swift intervention ahead of insolvency, with pooled financial support from the industry in the Single Resolution Fund (SRF). The European Deposit Insurance Scheme recently proposed by the European Commission would complete the Banking Union. Luxembourg’s investment fund industry enjoys EU passports under the regulatory norms in the Undertakings for the Collective Investment in Transferable Securities (UCITS) Directives and the Alternative Investment Fund Managers (AIFM) Directive; these allow offering investment funds across EU countries while supervision is in the competency of the CSSF. The significant enlargement of the resources of the CSSF in recent years is welcome and its capacity should be commensurate with the increasing size and complexity of the financial sector. Ensuring steady deepening of interagency collaboration in the context of the SSM and of the SRM is key. As 72 percent of bank assets in Luxembourg fall under the supervision of the ECB, the timely flow of information on micro-prudential risks, where the CSSF has primary access to supervisory information, is a critical element of the system. The CSSF participates in on- and off-site supervision of Significant Institutions as part of the joint supervisory teams (JSTs) and contributes to the development of ECB supervisory policies. JSTs also advise on waivers to the large exposure limit and national Liquidity Coverage Ratios (LCR). Such waivers should be granted only under strict criteria and deep analysis. The CSSF also contributes to the development of the ECB supervisory approach to be applied by National Competent Authorities (NCAs) in the context of Less Significant Institutions (LSIs). Regarding the SRM, the CSSF together with the Single Resolution Board initiated in 2015 the drafting of transitional resolution plans in relation to a first batch of priority institutions. The CSSF also transferred in January 2016 the ex-ante contributions collected in 2015 to the newly established SRF. For eight years, banks will be making contributions to the SRF reaching in total at least 1 percent of covered deposits. Luxembourg is implementing EU banking union directives recently transposed in national laws. The law transposing the Fourth Capital Requirements Directive (CRDIV) was adopted in July 2015. Luxembourg’s banking supervisor has raised capital buffers for systemically important banks by an extra 0.5–1 percent by January 2019 and introduced countercyclical capital buffers, initially with zero values. The new liquidity ratio of Basel III has forced some banks to use BCL’s deposit facility to meet the LCR. To comply with LCR requirements, banks that upstream liquidity to their parent will have to develop rigorous liquidity management infrastructures. The law transposing Page 17 the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive (DGSD) passed Parliament in December 2015, completing the implementation of the Single Rule Book in Luxembourg. The high interconnections of Luxembourg’s financial system with the rest of the world make it a recipient and conduit of global financial volatility (Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 1): Investment funds may propagate shocks across assets when rebalancing portfolios. They enjoy a diversified investor base (75 percent from Europe), and have global exposures to debt securities and equity across many advanced and emerging countries with the euro area accounting for 35 percent of these exposures, the U.S. 26 percent, and emerging markets 13 percent. They are linked to banks in Luxembourg, which have cross-border and foreign currency interbank claims accounting for 54 percent of total banking assets at mid-2015; 60 percent of these claims are intra-group claims. Volatility in financial markets would affect the domestic economy through investment funds Volatility of real GDP growth is highly correlated with the volatility of investment fund assets’ growth, which in turn fluctuates with global market developments. Fiscal revenues from the financial sector—overall accounting for about 8 percent of GDP in 2014—would also be affected by market fluctuations. Globally, the investment fund industry is subject to increasing risks: Credit risk. As a result of a search for yields, exposures have shifted to more risky and less liquid assets. Exposure of Luxembourg funds to corporate bonds had risen from €141 billion (or 29 percent of total bond investments) at the end of 2008 to €648 billion (or 45 percent of total bond investments) in October 2015. Counterparty risk. Such risks could occur for instance in the securities lending activities of funds, and in repos, and derivatives. Market risk. A shock could occur as investors reassess rich valuations in one or several countries or asset classes (such as high yield corporate bonds). The growing use of derivative Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 1 provides an analysis of how investment funds can propagate shocks across countries and asset classes. Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 1 analyzes the transmission of shocks to the Luxembourg real economy. Net inflows in investment funds (RHS) Change in cross-border interbank claims (RHS) Financial sector real gross value added growth Real GDP growthSources: BCL,Haver Analytics, and BIS. FinancialSector Flows and Value Added Growth (Percent changey-o-y;right scale in billions of euros) Net assets Derivatives Leverage (right scale) Sample of Luxembourg Funds with Leverage> 100 Percent (In billions of euros; right scale in percent) Sources:Bloomberg and IMF Staff estimates. Page 18 leverage increases sensitivity to market movements, such as those resulting from interest rate shifts. Redemption risk. High asset valuations, the large cash pools of corporations invested in recent years, and first-mover advantages increase the likelihood of sudden runs on investment funds. Experience from the global financial crisis and of the 2011–12 euro area crisis shows that gross and net redemptions can be large. Liquidity risk. Some funds may be less liquid than redemption terms and conditions, further exacerbating susceptibility to runs. To protect fund value, asset managers could first sell risky assets, potentially aggravating the market impact especially in less liquid markets. Cash holdings would initially increase in the portfolio of investment funds for precautionary reasons, but would decline if redemptions are sustained over time. Investors could also reallocate from more risky to less risky investment funds. As asset prices increasingly move in unison, benefits of diversification dwindle. If a shock becomes severe, fire sales affecting one market or asset class could spread to other countries or assets. In such circumstances, global factors can drive the returns of diverse funds, and common responses of asset managers across countries and asset classes can offset the benefits of portfolio diversification. Shocks can be transmitted from the investment fund industry to banks (Box 1). While investors bear the risks of investment funds, shocks affecting the investment fund industry could be transmitted to the banking system through various links, and impact Luxembourg as activity in the financial sector declines. On the other hand, the banking system, where contingent liabilities of the vast majority of (foreign-owned) banks would be the responsibility of their home country, might also benefit from safe haven flows. Direct exposures to banks. Luxembourg’s investment funds hold claims on domestic and foreign banks via bond and stock holdings, derivative exposures, loans, and deposits. These overall exposures amounted to €821 billion in 2015:Q3, 73 percent of which outside Luxembourg. Domestically, investment funds hold substantial claims on banks such as deposits and derivative instruments. Deposits are concentrated among depository banks, and are channeled to the parent or to other banks. Sudden and sustained redemptions from investors could trigger a sell-off of bank securities or a withdrawal of deposits to avoid selling-off less liquid assets, with potentially adverse impacts on the banking system. On the other hand, bank deposits could increase as asset managers Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 1, October 2015. Bank liabilities Bank assets Individual LuxembourgBank Exposures to Investment Funds and Money Market Funds (Percent oftotal bank assets) Page 19 rebalance portfolios, or as investors seek safe assets. Abroad, investment funds have significant holdings of bank bonds, stocks, derivatives, and deposits. Investment funds’ liabilities to banks in Luxembourg and banks abroad are also large, amounting to €175 billion in 2015:Q3. Box 1. Linkages between Investment Funds and Banks Securities and derivatives. Investment funds hold significant claims on banks in the form of bonds, equities, loans and derivative contracts, valued at €601 billion, and have €175 billion of liabilities to banks in the form of derivatives, loans and short sales in 2015:Q3, including €133 billion of derivative contracts. Cash balances. Investment funds hold large bank deposits, estimated at €220 billion in 2015:Q3, about half of which are concentrated in Luxembourg’s depository banks, totaling 50 percent of their liabilities. Deposits of investment funds can be volatile, with a standard deviation of monthly net deposit inflows of about €5 billion since 2009. During the global financial crisis, while aggregate net redemptions reached around €100 billion between September and December 2008, total deposits of investment funds initially increased in 2008:Q4 as a result of fire sales, and then declined by €13.7 billion in 2009:Q1, among which €5 billion were withdrawn from Luxembourg banks. In 2011:Q4, deposits declined by €9 billion, of which €3.6 billion from Luxembourg banks. Liquidity support. While asset managers are legally separated from investment funds, they can provide temporary credit lines to meet redemptions in situations of acute illiquidity. As the balance sheets of asset managers are small compared to the value of funds, such support might come from the owners or affiliates of asset managers, including large banks or insurance companies which could also directly buy investment fund’s shares. Bank services. Banks provide services to funds, such as depository services, pricing, brokerage, and accounting services which are often priced in proportion to total fund assets, and sometimes share common clients with asset managers. Banks, as well as insurance companies, also serve as counterparties for securities lending by investment funds and various types of derivative contracts held by investment funds. Business integration. Substantial direct connections between the asset managers, related banks or insurance companies would create further scope for contagion. Reputational risks. In case of a deep crisis in one market, contagion can spread to other segments of the financial system and, potentially, affect Luxembourg’s established trademark as a financial center. Banks (left scale)Funds by instrument Bank and Investment Fund Assets and Liabilities, Dec 2015 Sources: BCL, and IMF staff calculations. Other equity Funds' shares Debt securitiesDeposits& loans SharesLoans& deposits Other Otherassets Other debtsecuritiesOther assets Interbank loans & securities Other loans Interbank depositsOther liabilitiesOther deposits Funds' deposits Debt claims on government Page 20 Other linkages. Banks, in particular depository banks, derive income from providing various and substantial services to investment funds, are counterparties for securities lending, and sometimes have common clients with asset managers. In addition, there are significant ownership links between Luxembourg fund management companies and large banking groups or insurance companies, creating further scope for contagion during periods of severe market volatility, including through reputational effects or implicit guarantees. Oversight of investment funds and asset managers should remain strong and continue to evolve. Risk monitoring and the frameworks for risk management and supervision of investment funds are laid out in the UCITS directives III and IV, covering 80 percent of the funds in Luxembourg, and in the AIFM Directive covering other funds. The data reporting allows the CSSF to obtain precise information on individual investment funds, and the CSSF has oversight over the liquidity stress tests that the asset managers have to perform. Adequate resources should be allocated to the oversight to ensure that sound risk management practices, prudential norms or rules governing liquidity, leverage, redemptions and asset valuation are in place at the fund and at the asset manager levels. Some areas require specific attention: Data monitoring should allow detecting early warning signs of realization of market risk, credit risk or liquidity risk and possible shocks through redemptions. Data monitoring should allow identifying funds’ sensitivity to interest rates and credit market movements. The use of derivatives that could boost yields and leverage, securities lending, and liquidity mismatches between assets and redemption terms should be more specifically scrutinized, especially given the increased use of derivative leverage by several of Luxembourg’s bond funds in recent years. The CSSF should evaluate investment funds’ resilience under various stress test scenarios. Risks should be assessed not only at the investment fund level but also from a financial stability perspective, allowing for correlated shocks across funds and for significant large portfolio reallocations between funds and net redemptions. The toolkit of liquidity risk management of investment funds by asset managers and regulators— comprising redemption fees, gates, side pockets and suspension of redemptions—should be tested to severe stress scenarios and continue to evolve with international best practice. Risk monitoring and policy frameworks should take into account linkages between banks and investment funds Joint scenario analysis between banks and investment funds including liquidity stress tests should be undertaken. The large fund exposures to corporate bonds could turn illiquid and cause sharp movements in fund value, which, joined with redemptions and shocks to other asset classes, could have indirect effects on banks’ income. Changes in direct exposures to banks could affect banks’ liquidity position and funding. Chapter 3 of the April 2015 Global Financial Stability Report concluded that oversight of the asset management industry should be strengthened at the global level. Page 21 As redemptions could affect banks in Luxembourg and abroad, the authorities should advocate further financial stability analysis of these linkages in the SSM, and include them in the design of joint fund-bank stress test scenarios, including asset managers who are owned by systemic banks. To mitigate the impact of potential shocks, banks should be compliant with the local LCR with good collateral, while the Eurosystem should stand ready to provide liquidity to banks if a shock materializes. Comité de Risque Systémique (CRS) should play an important role in the macroprudential oversight of Luxembourg’s financial system. The committee, bringing together the Ministry of Finance, the BCL, the CSSF, and the Commissariat aux Assurances , has added the analysis of linkages between investment funds and banks to its work program at the national level, but it should also ensure that the linkages are examined at the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), and, if needed, that corrective actions are recommended. On the housing market and in light of ever rising housing prices, the authorities should explore the effectiveness of recent measures in containing risk and whether further macro-prudential measures such as limits to loan-to-value ratios in addition to those already taken in 2013 would be appropriate. Credit to households has grown steadily … … raising the share of mortgages in bank assets. Figure 6. Credit and Housing Market Developments Housing prices are on an upward trend … … outpacing most of the euro area. Households Nonfinancial corporations Credit to Households and Nonfinancial Corporations (Percent change y/y)Sources: DataInsight and IMF staff calculations. 051015202530051015202530FranceGermanyLuxembourg*NetherlandsBelgium Mortgage Loans of Domestic Banks (Percent of total assets)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations.* 2013 data. Number of apartment transactions (right scale) Houses and apartments Apartments only National Housing Prices and Transactions (Index number, Q1 2010 = 100; right scale in units) Sources: BCL and IMF Staff calculations. Ireland Netherlands Spain Harmonized Housing Prices (Index, 2008 = 100) Page 22 The authorities should increase the capital of the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg (BCL). Adding capital now should anticipate that capital may fall when monetary policy is normalized, and ensure that BCL operational expenses are well covered (Box 2). Even if redenomination risks of Target 2 claims have receded in recent years, the comprehensive net worth of the central bank is important from a risk management perspective. An agreement between the government and the BCL should be reached and implemented swiftly. Box 2. Capital Increase of the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg The BCL would benefit from a one-off capital increase. The low level of capital of the BCL means that it currently operates with little financial buffers to cover its net present value of operating expenses. Such buffers could dwindle were the BCL to experience losses or lower returns going forward. Risks to the BCL balance sheet appear manageable. In contrast to several other euro area central banks, the BCL has very limited exposures to financial institutions (€6 billion), hence credit risk vis-à-vis euro area financial entities is limited. Its creditor position in the Target 2 balance of the Eurosystem (reflected in liabilities of €57 billion to depository institutions) means that it might experience losses only if tail risks such as redenomination risks materialize. As a net borrower from euro area depository institutions, some remuneration risks could materialize going forward when monetary policy is normalized. Market risk and currency risk would arise mainly from the large exposures vis-à-vis non-euro area residents and are affected by the global evolution of asset prices and returns. The financial strength of the BCL matters for the functioning of the Eurosystem. Given that the monetary policy stance is decided by the Governing Council of the ECB, the voice of euro area national central banks is best heard if political interference can be avoided by ensuring their financial strength. Moreover, national central banks’ capital also matters because, as owners of the ECB, they should stand ready to recapitalize the ECB would a need arise. Progress has been made in implementing the 2012 AML/CFT standard and further critical work is underway. As a result of legislation passed in 2014–15, all acts of terrorist financing covered by the 2012 standard are criminalized, bearer shares must be immobilized, and authorized operators acting in the Luxembourg Freeport are subject to AML/CFT measures. Work is currently underway to implement the revised FATF standard and the 4th AML/CFT EU Directive, including listing tax crimes amongst the predicate offenses to the money laundering offense, and facilitating timely access to information on beneficial owners of legal persons and arrangements. The authorities are encouraged to pursue these efforts—which are critical in light of ongoing international initiatives to curb tax evasion and the misuse of corporate structures—on a timely basis, and to ensure that the intensity of AML/CFT supervision of the financial sector remains commensurate with the level of money laundering and terrorist financing risks. Sources: Haver Analytics and centralbank websites. Capital ofSelected Central Banks (03/2016 or 12/2015) (In percent of total assets) Page 23 The upcoming mandatory Financial Stability Assessment (FSA) is an opportunity to review the financial system in greater depth. As a systemic jurisdiction, Luxembourg is subject to mandatory FSAs. For the FSA to be completed on time, the Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) report must be discussed in the Board with the 2017 Article IV consultation. Staff encouraged the authorities to consider further analysis of bank-fund linkages as part of the FSA. The authorities considered the Banking Union strongly positive for the euro area as a whole and for Luxembourg. They noted that the attractiveness of the euro area financial system as a whole will be improved once the fully fledged banking union is achieved. The authorities argued in favor of achieving the last pillar of the Banking Union, the common European deposit insurance scheme, to complete the Union backstop. Being a full member of the SSM (and of the other pillars of the Banking Union) generates strong benefits to Luxembourg and also facilitates home-host discussions, including for non-EU cross-border banks. The authorities noted that waivers granted to large exposure limits or the LCR would follow strict supervisory rules and assessment by the JSTs with decisions taken at the SSM Supervisory Board. Regarding oversight of nonbank holding companies of banks, measures are taken to monitor ownership links at the time of authorization. The authorities agreed that linkages between investment funds and banks warrant further analysis. They considered that bank-fund linkages require further analysis from a macro- prudential perspective and should be included in the design of joint fund-bank stress test scenarios. The CRS has added the analysis of these linkages to its work program. Investment strategies of investment funds are well advertized in their prospectus and management companies must perform mandatory liquidity risk management and stress tests which are reviewed by the CSSF. The authorities argued that the existing EU Directives provide a solid framework for risk monitoring, risk management and supervision of Luxembourg’s investment funds. They are also actively participating in international discussions in this area and they are well informed about international developments. They consider themselves well positioned to implement resulting recommendations and to integrate improvements in their regulatory practices. In that respect, they welcomed the UCITS V and AIFM Directives which have clarified and strengthened the role and responsibilities of depository banks. They felt that the diversification strategies of the large number of investment funds provide a buffer to the impact of market volatility on Luxembourg’s financial system, thus mitigating downside risks to the economy. They agreed that the housing market merits continued monitoring, as continued price rises may not be sustainable