The medium-term revenue risks related to the international tax transparency agenda and financial sector volatility, and the long-term pension challenges make it appropriate for Luxembourg to run a small fiscal surplus and aim to set the public debt ratio on a slightly downward path. The structural fiscal surplus of around ½ percent of GDP over the medium term could be achieved by fully implementing previously announced consolidation measures in the while limiting the size of the announced tax reduction package. In combination with a gradual pension reform, this should rebalance public finances to eliminate central government deficits, set the public debt–to-GDP ratio on a slightly declining path, and ensure long-term viability of the pension scheme. Page 24 Years of fiscal surpluses shaped strong net asset position … … but the central government deficits drive gross debt. Figure 7. Fiscal Sector Developments Expenditures and revenues have outpaced GDP … … partly reflecting a generous social benefit system. After better than expected performance in 2015, Luxembourg’s fiscal position is projected to remain strong in 2016, with the fiscal surplus remaining at about 1 percent of GDP. Changing EU rules on allocating VAT from e-commerce subtracted about 1.2 percent of GDP from fiscal revenues in 2015. Moreover, one-offs including a public sector wage hike, costs of the EU presidency, public infrastructure investment, and accommodating refugees added around 0.2 percent of GDP to public spending. On the positive side, rising AUMs in Luxembourg-based funds boosted subscription tax intake by up to 0.2 percent of GDP. The fiscal adjustment package offsetting the e-VAT loss ( ) delivered spending cuts of 0.2 percent of GDP. In addition, tax increases brought in extra revenues of 0.6 percent of GDP, even as the 2-percent VAT rate hike raked less revenue than expected amid weak domestic demand. Barring revenue shocks or discretionary spending, the general government’s fiscal surplus should remain at nearly 1 percent of GDP in 2016, as adjustment measures should largely offset higher refugee-related spending of around ¼ percent of GDP. Changes in Fiscal Balance in 2015 (percent of GDP) Fiscal balance -0.4 Loss of e-VAT -1.2 One-off spending -0.2 Subscription tax +0.2 Zukunftspak +0.2 Tax hikes +0.6 Source: Staff estimates. Other assets Social security Liabilities Net worth General Government Net Worth (Percent of GDP)Source: International Financial Statistics. -3-2-1012345-3-2-101234520052006200720082009201020112012201320142015 est. Central govt. Local govts. Social security Overall General Government Balance (Percent of GDP)Source: STATEC; staff estimates. 10011012013014015010011012013014015020052006200720082009201020112012201320142015 est. Total revenue Total expenditure Revenue excl. e-VAT Revenues, Expenditures, and GDP (Real index number, 2005=100)Sources: DataInsight and IMF Staff calculations. Family/children Healthcare and disability Old age and survivors Housing and social exclusion Social Benefits Per Head, 2013 (Euros) Sources: Eurostat and IGSS. Adjusted for family benefits provided to cross border workers. Page 25 According to the EC, Luxembourg is one of only five EU countries fully compliant with the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). The ongoing tax policy review presents an opportunity to address fiscal revenue risks from the EU and international tax transparency initiatives and volatile financial flows. EC state aide probes, enhanced transparency for tax rulings, international agreements on tax information exchanges, and OECD/G20 anti-Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) recommendations should in time help to create a more level international corporate taxation playing field and reduce the national scope to grant favorable tax treatment to selected companies. This can diminish their incentives to conduct business through Luxembourg and affect corporate income taxes which yield as much as 5 percent of GDP. Furthermore, shifts in investment portfolio allocations can put at risk the subscription tax yielding 1½ percent of GDP and other fiscal revenues generated by the funds industry. Moreover, falling oil and gas prices diminish incentives for cross-border retail fuel sales, undercutting fuel excise and VAT revenues yielding about 2 percent of GDP. In this context, the tax reform should aim at widening the corporate tax base while eliminating special tax regimes and lowering statutory tax rates. The decision to phase out the IP Box tax regime from mid-2016 is a step in this direction. The government should also develop contingency measures, including revisiting the low real estate taxes, in case negative revenue risks materialize. Tax reform proposals unveiled at end-February contain a significant reduction in personal taxation and also in the corporate income tax rate from 2017. In addition to allowing expiration of the temporary surcharge on personal income, the government proposed to rebalance the income tax brackets to reduce the tax burden on all but the wealthiest households; allow families to file their taxes jointly or separately; realign parental tax benefits; and increase home ownership incentives. Corporations would benefit from reduction in the statutory profit tax rate by 3 percentage points to about 26 percent by 2018. These measures would reduce total fiscal revenue by up to 1 percent of GDP, fully using up the projected fiscal surpluses over the medium term. While some of the tax measures aim to increase housing supply, the envisaged tax relief for home buyers would aggravate existing imbalances given that demand for real estate structurally outstrips supply. While acknowledging that the proposed tax cuts are broadly affordable, staff emphasized the need to use the available fiscal space for growth-enhancing measures. Staff argued for limiting the tax cuts to less than ½ percent of GDP, broadening the tax base, and using part of the fiscal surplus for public investments in infrastructure. However, staff recognized that the medium-term fiscal position would remain broadly appropriate under the proposed tax cuts. Under the baseline, Luxembourg’s public debt would stay well below the authorities’ ceiling of 30 percent of GDP over the medium term and remain sustainable under plausible scenarios, including a sizeable contingent liability shock stemming from the banking sector (Tables 7–8). Page 26 Continued reform of the pension system is necessary to ensure its viability over the long run (Box 3). While the pension system is currently generating surpluses, population ageing is expected to put significant pressure on pension expenditures. Despite factoring in continued strong migrants inflows and a doubling of Luxembourg’s population by 2060, the 2015 EU Ageing Report projected an increase of pension expenditures of about 4 percent of GDP between 2013 and 2060. Under a less optimistic assumption for migrant inflows, the 2012 Ageing Report projected an increase in pension expenditures of about 9 percent of GDP by 2060. Accordingly, the upcoming 2016 pension review should propose additional parametric reforms of the pension system to increase the effective retirement age, now the lowest among the neighboring countries. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to sound fiscal policies and stressed that the announced tax reductions are commensurate with the fiscal position’s strength . They noted that significant fiscal surpluses in 2014–15 emerging from upward revision of the initial prudent estimates and another large surplus projected for 2016 have stoked pressures to cut taxes. The authorities also noted limited public support for further reform of the pension system that is running current surpluses and has accumulated reserve assets of about 30 percent of GDP. Steady economic growth and migrant inflows have led to an upward revision of the potential GDP growth rate as well as an improved outlook for long-term pension and age-related spending. Recognizing these developments, the EC proposed to lower its MTO for Luxembourg from 0.5 percent of GDP structural fiscal surplus to 0.5 percent of GDP deficit. The authorities project that Luxembourg fiscal position will remain in small surplus even after the tax cuts, which is well above the new MTO. The authorities acknowledged that implementing EU and OECD tax transparency requirements could lead to some fiscal losses upfront but benefit the country in the long run. They pointed out that the losses from changing EU rules on allocating VAT from e-commerce proved less than initially estimated as several large companies preferred to stay in Luxembourg, and some even expanded their operations. In the same vein, the authorities considered that the OECD and EU initiatives countering tax base shifting and, in time, creating a more level international taxation playing field, would motivate some companies to increase their economic presence in Luxembourg, which could offset the immediate fiscal losses from enhanced tax transparency. Meanwhile, the authorities have reaffirmed their disagreement with the EC decision that the advance tax ruling provided to FIAT involved improper state aid. They appealed this decision in court and expect the court hearings to take a few years. Page 27 Box 3. Pension Reform in Luxembourg Luxembourg’s pay-as-you-go pension system is generous and currently generating surpluses . Its effective retirement age is low while its replacement rate (average pension benefit as a share of average wage at retirement) is amongst the highest in Europe. However, Luxembourg’s public pension expenditures are lower than pension contributions owing to the current advantageous demographics. However, pension expenditures are expected to increase significantly over time. The EC in its 2012 Ageing Report projected an increase in pension expenditures from 9.2 percent of GDP in 2010 to 18.6 percent of GDP by 2060, owing to adverse demographics due to population ageing. The recent 2015 Ageing Report forecasts a more benign increase in pension expenditures (from 9.4 percent of GDP in 2013 to 13.4 percent of GDP in 2060), mainly due to more robust population growth, via net migration. This appears more optimistic than the recent population projection produced by the United Nations. Continued reform of the pension system is advisable . The very strong population growth projection, through long-term net migration, should be treated with caution. Additional pension reform should thus be considered, including through increasing the effective retirement age and lowering benefits, to improve the sustainability of the system and fairness across generations. As such, additional measures would strengthen the pension reform introduced in 2012, which included (i) a slow and gradual decline in the replacement rate; (ii) automatic decline in indexation, benefits and increase in contributions in the event that future expenditures exceed contributions; and (iii) incentives to postpone retirement. 1, 2 See “16 th Update of the Stability and Growth Programme of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg 2015-2019”, May 2015. See also “Déficit, Croissance et Bien-Etre Intergénérationnel : Comment Réformer les Pensions au Luxembourg”, Cahier d’Etudes No 87, Banque Centrale du Luxembourg, March 2014. Source: The 2015 Ageing Report, European Commission1/ The replacement rate is the average benefit as a share of average wage at retirement. 2/ For the 2015 Ageing Report, the year 2015 should be replaced by 2013. Source: The 2015 Ageing Report, European Commission F M Z H B P B G H O F Y P V EEE D N D N O EU average Average Effective Exit Age from Labour Market, 2014 LTHRROBGSILVDEFICZELHUSKFRITLUES Average Public Pension Replacement Rate 1, 2 , 2013 (Inpercent) 2015 Ageing Report 2012 Ageing Report Public Pension ExpendituresProjection (Inpercent of GDP) 2015 Ageing Report 2012 Ageing Report UN 2015 Revision Population Projection (Inthousands) Source: The 2015 Ageing Report, European Commission and Fundstaff calculations. The replacement rate is the average benefit as a share of average wage at retirement. Exlcudes countries with mandatory and quasi-mandatory occupational pension scheme. Page 28