Though the economy has bottomed and a nascent recovery has begun, 2016 will record the third consecutive annual contraction in real output. In the third quarter, sequential seasonally adjusted growth reached 8 percent, the first positive result in 10 quarters. Moreover, in November, gaming revenue posted the fourth consecutive month of annual growth. Nonetheless, the deceleration in domestic demand continued in 2016, contracting over 6 percent and putting a break on the recovery. In particular, the drag on investment from the end of the tourism-related building boom will continue and private consumption will moderate amid less wage growth, a sharp decline in the pace of immigration, and weaker credit. In 2017, an export recovery on a low base will lift growth above 2 percent despite continued weak domestic demand. For the medium term, one can expect a moderation in growth, fiscal balances and current account surpluses compared to historical averages. Going forward, Macao SAR is well positioned to have sustainable growth in the low to mid-single digits. In addition to its still highly valuable gaming monopoly within China, it is a known tourist brand with significant geographic 13Q114Q115Q116Q117Q1 Consumption Investment Net exports: goods Net exports: services Real GDP growth (in percent) Real GDP: Contribution to Growth (In percentage points, year-on year growth) 17Q4 Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. Jan-12Mar-13Jun-14Aug-15Nov-16 Gross Gaming Revenue (In percent, year-on-year growth) Sources: Macao Statistics and Census Services; and IMF estimates. Page 12 proximity to—and cultural affinity with—the largest and fastest growing middle class in the world in Mainland China. Growth— Growth in the medium term is now projected to settle around 3.5 percent, below the 5 percent forecast at the time of the last Article IV consultation. The lower potential growth reflects the partly permanent loss of high-spending visitors from the Mainland. In particular, this projection assumes that a) growth will remain primarily a function of tourism for the foreseeable future despite some progress in diversification; b) tourism visitor growth will gradually converge to the projected growth of outbound tourists from China as non-gaming facilities are developed further; and c) spending per visitor will resume a modest increase but remain at a much lower level compared to the recent peak reflecting the permanent change in clientele. Fiscal Accounts