Macao SAR is a small, open economy that has grown rapidly due to a surge in gaming tourism. In the 15 years after the return to Chinese sovereignty in 1999, Macao SAR averaged real GDP growth of 10.6 percent. This impressive growth primarily reflects the de jure monopoly on gambling within China, the liberalization of the gaming sector to outside investment in 2002, and the rapid rise in consumer spending power of the Mainland. Now the largest casino center in the world with revenues more than four times that of Las Vegas, the gaming sector accounts for 48 percent of output and 77 percent of general government revenue (See Appendix III: Tourism Sector). The gaming boom has also led to a rapid rise in the demand for labor, pushing the unemployment rate below 2 percent and strongly increasing the role of migrant workers who now account for 39 percent of the total employed (See Appendix II: Labor Market). With a population of 646,800 people and an area of 12 square miles, Macao SAR today is considered among the most population-dense regions in the world. However, the decade-long boom in gaming revenues came to an abrupt end in 2014. Relative to the peak in early 2014, gaming exports fell by 50 percent and the economy has now contracted cumulatively by one third. The aggregate number of visitors remained broadly stable but there was a sharp fall in spending per visitor due to a contraction in the high-end casino business. High-roller “VIP” gaming revenue fell from US$30 billion in 2013 to US$16 billion in 2015. The sharp fall broadly mirrored developments in luxury spending elsewhere in the region (including in Hong Kong SAR) and followed the sustained anticorruption campaign on the Mainland. This fall in demand and a weaker outlook for the casino sector had knock-on effects on housing—prices have contracted cumulatively by 21 percent from their peak in 2014. The growth in private fixed asset investment also fell sharply from 43.7 percent in 2014 to 3.3 percent in 2015 but this mostly reflected the scheduled completion of large integrated resort construction projects. Nonetheless, the spillovers of the shock to the rest of the economy have been surprisingly limited. Unemployment is 1.9 percent, up only 0.2 percentage points from the historical low in 2014. Median real wages have stabilized but remain up 7 percent over end-2014 levels. Meanwhile, in the financial sector, nonperforming loans are unchanged at just q lli q lli Page 10 0.1 percent despite a deceleration in credit growth from 36 percent in 2014:Q2 to 5.7 percent in 2016:Q3. The main reason for this resilience in the labor market and financial sector is that, as noted above, even though spending per tourist fell sharply, the number of tourists was broadly stable, implying limited scope to reduce the number of workers needed to run core functions in the tourism industry. Indeed, nonresidents, who returned to their country of origin in large numbers during the global financial crisis, have largely remained employed throughout this downturn. As a result, most of the contraction in revenues was absorbed in the form of lower extraordinary profits rather than reduced employment. This resilience in the tourism sector’s demand for labor helped contain the fall in domestic consumption and deterioration in bank asset quality. The fall in output would have been greater were it not for substantial fiscal loosening. The general government overall balance fell from 27 percent of GDP in 2013 to 13.7 percent in 2015. Moreover, the 2016 budget targeted a further loosening of 8 percentage points to reach a surplus of 5 percent of GDP in 2016 though current projections suggest that under-execution of expenditures will result in an end-year outcome closer to 6½ percent. The majority of the fiscal deterioration reflects the fall in gaming revenues, which are taxed at roughly 40 percent. However, the non-gaming fiscal balance, a better measure of the impact of fiscal policy on domestic demand, also widened materially, largely due to discretionary changes rather than automatic stabilizers. In particular, the fiscal impulse was driven by higher expenditures on investment and social benefits. There was no other material macroeconomic response to the output contraction. As a result of the peg, the authorities do not control interest rate policy but they do use macroprudential measures—loan to value ratios, debt servicing ratios, and a special stamp duty—to safeguard financial stability from potential risks in the real estate market. Nonetheless, despite the sizable correction in housing prices, the authorities considered there was no need to loosen these limits given that price levels remained well above those in 2012 when the measures were last tightened. There are three key macroprudential ratios aimed at residential real estate: 1) a debt service to income limit of 50 percent (introduced September 2010); 2) a special stamp duty on properties sold within one year of purchase (20 percent of cost of property ) or two years of purchase (10 percent) (introduced April 2011); and 3) a maximum loan-to-value ratio ranging from 50 to 90 percent depending on cost of property (more stringent levels apply to nonresidents) (introduced October 2012). z bud dd = Page 11 Moreover, the volume of transactions and level of prices have started to recover. Looking ahead, Macao SAR faces a difficult transition to a new economic model, but fortunately does so from a position of strength . Even before the recent downturn, economic growth was expected to moderate to single digits over the medium term as gaming started to face constraints to land supply, government controls on the expansion of tables, and external competition. However, the urgency to find a more diversified economic model has been sharpened by the recent correction which is largely seen as permanent. To help with this transition, Macao SAR can draw on deep buffers. First and foremost, Macao SAR has zero gross public debt and fiscal reserves equal to 95 percent of GDP due historically to high taxes on gaming and a generally prudent expenditure policy. Second, the high public and private savings have contributed to 14 years of double-digit current account surpluses. As a result, Macao SAR is a net foreign creditor on the order of 280 percent of GDP; in addition to substantial private assets, foreign exchange reserves, critical to the credibility of Macao SAR’s currency board linked to the Hong Kong dollar (and thus, in turn, to the U.S. dollar), amount to US$18.9 billion, just under 100 percent of pataca M2.