Macao SAR’s external position is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (Box 5 and Table 5). Exchange rate valuation models yield a broad range of estimates, which is not surprising given the uncertainty in such assessments for offshore centers like Macao SAR, whose gross exports and external assets are considerably larger than in other economies. The current account surplus mainly reflects the on-going gaming boom rather than any fundamental misalignment of the exchange rate or other undesirable policies. As a result, there is no convincing evidence of misvaluation. That said, in the event that the government were to scale up spending on health and education over the medium term (see below), this could lead to a somewhat lower national savings rate, requiring the real exchange rate to adjust to a more depreciated equilibrium level. The currency board linked to the Hong Kong dollar is the best arrangement for Macao SAR and should be maintained. Given its small and very open economy, the system has provided a crucial nominal anchor for Macao SAR, helped maintain economic and financial stability, and kept the real effective exchange rate broadly in equilibrium. It has also overseen generally good economic performance. Macao SAR meets the pre-requisites for sustaining a currency board, namely flexible labor and product markets that prevent sizable or persistent misalignments, fiscal discipline, prudent management of foreign exchange reserves, and robust financial sector regulation and supervision (Table 6). As with all currency board arrangements, adjustment to shocks has had to take place through price movements, such that both headline and property price inflation have been higher and more volatile than in economies with a more flexible exchange rate (Figure 4). Overall, though, the benefits of the arrangement far outweigh the costs. Pegging to the Hong Kong dollar remains sensible, given its wide circulation in Macao SAR (around two-thirds of loans and deposits), significant trade and financial integration between the two territories, and close co-movement in their output and inflation. Linking to the renminbi would not be appropriate given its lack of convertibility, and the Mainland’s significant capital account restrictions and different stage of development. Sources: CEIC; IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff calculations 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Real GDP Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Hong Kong SAR Mainland Macao SAR (RHS) Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed that the currency board is the most desirable arrangement for Macao SAR. They also felt that the link with the Hong Kong dollar was appropriate, particularly given strong real and financial linkages with Hong Kong SAR. In terms of the renminbi, they concurred that the Mainland’s capital account restrictions complicate its viability as a peg, Page 13 including in terms of honoring unlimited convertibility and as a store of value for absorbing Macao SAR’s large surpluses. The authorities also broadly shared staff’s external assessment, with the territory’s flexible prices keeping the real exchange rate in equilibrium and a medium-term current account surplus of around 40 percent of GDP justified by the present gaming boom.