Macao SAR’s traditionally healthy fiscal position may face pressures over the longer term. Macao SAR has no public debt and holds significant fiscal reserves that should be sufficient to offset shocks without an accumulation of public debt. However, the government is heavily dependent on gaming revenues, which are volatile and will slow as the sector matures and faces greater competition from online gaming and other venues in Asia. At the same time, spending pressures will mount due to population aging—with the old-age dependency ratio forecast to rise from 10 to 30 percent by 2030—and the possibility of increased social spending and investments to diversify the economy (Figure 5). Currently, these are addressed through ad-hoc measures, such as cash transfers to citizens and public injections into the pension fund. To ensure the best use of resources over time, consideration could be given to embedding a longer horizon into fiscal policy decisions. Establishing a medium-term budget framework . Macao SAR currently has a one-year horizon in its budget, with limited forecasting of expenditure and revenue. The main items are for the most part based on the previous year’s budget and there is no multi-year costing of expenditure programs, such that outcomes tend to be significantly different. Moving toward a medium-term budget framework would help promote transparency, support fiscal discipline, and ensure that growth in spending is consistent with development and fiscal objectives. Without such a framework, there is a risk of procyclicality in spending that could exacerbate the impact of shocks and harm fiscal sustainability. Based on international experience, consideration could be given to building capacity for formulating forecasts for revenue, spending and the fiscal balance over a 3–5 year horizon that are embedded into the annual budget. These could be prepared by the Ministry of Finance in consultation with other government agencies. Over time, based on the experience of other countries facing population aging, a Long-term Fiscal Report covering the next few decades may also be a useful device to inform the public about future fiscal pressures, and develop and evaluate policy options. Both these exercises should incorporate the likely slowdown in gaming revenues as well as potential spending obligations associated with population aging, promoting economic diversification, and addressing inequality. Setting up a sovereign wealth fund. There may be merit to allocating some part of the fiscal reserves to a sovereign wealth fund (SWF) with a clear mandate to achieve better risk-adjusted returns over a long-term horizon, including through a more diversified asset allocation strategy. This would help build sustainable buffers that could be used to offset the impact of potential adverse shocks and set money aside to fund long-term aging expenditures. International experience suggests that a variety of institutional arrangements are possible for a SWF, including having the monetary authority manage the assets, often with the help of external fund managers (Box 6 and text table). In terms of the governance of SWFs, the Santiago Principles developed in Page 14 2008 by the International Working Group of Sovereign Wealth Funds provide guidance on the best global practice for ensuring full accountability and transparency. Key Features of Selected Sovereign Wealth Funds SWF Objective Norway Government Pension Fund Pension reserve, stabilization Kazakhstan National Fund Savings, stabilization, and development Government of Singapore Investment Corporation Reserve fund Korea Investment Corporation Reserve fund, development China Investment Corporation Savings Temasek (Singapore) Savings Institutional Arrangements Total Assets (In billions of U.S. dollars) Asset Allocation Government- Cash Income Related Securities Equities Others Average Return (2008-2012) Central government accounts managed by the central bank Central government accounts managed by the central bank Agency managing international reserves under the government’s direction Agency managing international reserves under the government’s direction Separate public entity Separate public entity In percent Sources: ; Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute; Sovereign Wealth Fund websites; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ The average return for: (a) Korea Investment Corporation is the annualized return for traditional asset portfolios during 2005-2012; (b) Government of Singapore Investment Corporation is the annualized 20-year real return till March 2013; and (c) Kazakhstan National Fund is the annualized return during 2000 ‒ Authorities’ views. In light of the impending aging of Macao SAR’s population, the authorities agreed with the need for incorporating a longer-term horizon into fiscal policy decisions. They noted that preserving fiscal discipline was of paramount importance, as enshrined in the Basic Law. In particular, they acknowledged the desirability of boosting returns on the fast rising fiscal reserves associated with the current gaming boom. From this year, the AMCM has decided to invest around 10 percent of the reserves in equities, including with the help of external managers. They were willing to contemplate further moves in this direction, such as by establishing a sovereign wealth fund under government control for part of the fiscal reserves. However, they emphasized that these would need to be backed by a clear increase in risk tolerance and willingness to judge performance over a long-term horizon.