The economy has continued to perform strongly over the last year. Growth rose to 11.9 percent in 2013 from 9.1 percent the previous year, driven by a pick-up in gaming exports (Table 1). Robust activity and low unemployment kept inflation relatively elevated at 5½ percent. Notwithstanding some countervailing measures by the government, property prices increased by nearly 40 percent again last year, supported by rising incomes and low interest rates. The banking system remains in solid health, with robust growth in both deposits and loans. Under the baseline global outlook, Macao SAR’s prospects are highly favorable (Table 2). Growth is likely to remain robust, at 8-10 percent through 2017, on the back of gaming exports as the global economy strengthens and continued investment related to several casino expansion projects, including construction of hotels and large entertainment complexes. Amid brisk activity and historically low unemployment, inflation should stay around 5-5½ percent. At the same time, demand for property will continue to be supported by strong economic growth and low, albeit slowly rising, interest rates. The current account is expected to decline as a share of GDP, as the Page 7 services surplus narrows due to capacity constraints in the tourism sector while the merchandise trade deficit rises somewhat due to capital and raw material imports associated with high investment. Meanwhile, the capital and financial account should remain in deficit as the public sector accumulates assets overseas due to rising fiscal reserves and banks continue to lend abroad, taking advantage of rising external demand and interest rates as the global recovery gains momentum. In 2018 and 2019, private investment will contract as work on expansion projects is completed. As a result, growth is likely to moderate to mid-single digits. The current account surplus should tick up, reflecting a slowdown in goods imports and a pick-up in service exports as new capacity comes on line. However, given the economy’s narrow base, a potential sharp drop in tourism and gaming revenues is a core risk. Such a decline could stem from a renewed downturn or protracted stagnation in the United States and euro area that stalls the global recovery, a severe slowdown in the Mainland or Hong Kong SAR or a fall in visitors due to visa policy changes in the Mainland or any weaknesses in Macao SAR’s AML/CFT framework (see risk matrix in Appendix I). In addition to hurting growth and fiscal revenue, such shocks could lead to liquidity strains and deterioration in banks’ asset quality. Personal credit for housing (share of private domestic credit ) Property Market Indicators The main domestic risk is a sharp correction in the property market, triggered by a shift in demand fundamentals or abrupt tightening in liquidity conditions. Housing affordability has deteriorated sharply through the global crisis and staff models suggest potential price overvaluation (Box 1). A number of triggers could result in a shift in expectations or fundamentals supporting the property market. These include a shock to the gaming and tourism industries that stunts economic growth or a sharp rise in interest rates, due to faster-than-anticipated withdrawal of unconventional monetary policy abroad or increased financial market volatility in its wake (mirroring developments in the United States due to the currency board). A severe downturn in the property market could have a significant negative impact on credit quality, fiscal revenue, and overall economic performance. Construction accounts for around 80 percent of fixed capital information, around 4.7 percent of GDP in value-added terms, and nearly 10 percent of employment. The financial sector is also exposed, with mortgages and the construction sector together accounting for almost half of private domestic credit. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff calculations. Excluding financial investment. Construction and public works (share of private domestic credit) Real estate, renting (share of employment) Authorities’ views: Outlook and risks. The authorities agreed with the baseline outlook. While acknowledging that Macao SAR is susceptible to external shocks, they felt that risks were receding, particularly with the global recovery in train and the Mainland’s strong reform plan for rebalancing its economy. On balance, the authorities view the normalization of US monetary policy as beneficial for Macao SAR, since it should normalize domestic interest rates, cool property prices, and contain imported inflation as the exchange rate strengthens with the U.S. dollar. They noted that global Page 8 financial markets expect the exit to be gradual and well-executed with interest rates only rising slowly over time, and therefore do not anticipate significant volatility. Even in the extreme event of a bumpy exit, they felt Macao SAR’s vulnerability is reduced by the paucity of short-term capital inflows, owing to the persistent surplus position of the public and private sectors and lack of domestic money or capital market instruments. Nevertheless, they recognized that there could be a more tangible impact on domestic credit conditions and the property market. Property market. The authorities felt that the rise Housing Affordability (Price-to-income ratio ) Macao SAR Shanghai Singapore China Beijing Hong Kong SAR in property prices was reflective of fast income growth, very tight supply of land, and loose global monetary conditions. While it was hard to determine the fair value of housing in this environment, they were concerned about worsening affordability and focusing attention on containing any financial stability risks that may arise. They were encouraged that measures implemented in the last few years—including lowering caps on loan-to value (LTV) and debt service-to-income ratios and hiking stamp duties—have helped cool the market by slowing transactions, lowering the share of property-related loans, and reducing foreign speculative activity. On the latter, they noted that the share of nonresidents in the total value of property purchases had fallen from over 20 percent in 2011 to less than 5 percent in 2013. Notwithstanding the territory’s space constraints, supply is also being mobilized to help meet rising demand, with 19,000 public housing units completed in the last few years and plans for reclaiming around 3.5 km of land. Sources: AMCM; CEIC; Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Price of a 70 sq.m. home as a multiple of annual household disposable income US UK Japan