Under the baseline, current macroeconomic policies are set to continue. Maintaining the authorities’ cautious approach to fiscal management, the 2014 budget is based on conservative revenue projections and another sizable surplus is expected (Table 3). The fiscal stance and recent surpluses provide a cushion to withstand any future downturns. This is especially important given the absence of monetary policy discretion under the currency board arrangement. Macroprudential policies remain focused on strengthening the resilience of the banking sector to risks from a slowdown in gaming and rapidly rising property prices. The gaming sector is predominantly financed overseas, but banks are indirectly exposed through lending for gaming operators’ working capital and related industries (such as hotels and construction), as well as the sector’s importance to the wider economy. Bank exposure to the property market is significant, and debt service on mortgage loans is around 25 percent of household incomes based on newly-approved mortgage data. The banking system has buffers to cushion shocks through solid profits and strong capital positions, as well as potential support that foreign banks could provide to their branches or subsidiaries operating in Macao SAR. To further mitigate these risks and identify potential weak points, industry-wide stress testing that captures both domestic and external Page 9 Asia: Housing Prices and Macroprudential Policies (MPPs) (Average across all episodes; year-over-year percentage change in housing prices) shocks and dynamic provisioning should be established. At the same time, close scrutiny of the drivers of sharp property price increases in recent years, including investor composition, will help guide prudential measures. The authorities have taken a number of timely steps to curb speculative activity and boost supply in the last few years. Should price acceleration persist, international experience (notably from Asia) suggests that tighter housing-related tax policies—including higher stamp duties and property taxes—and additional macroprudential measures— such as limits on credit exposure to the property sector, stricter caps on debt service coverage, or lower LTV ratios for purchases of second or more homes— could be used to curtail excessive price growth and contain systemic risk (Box 2). Source: IMF Asia and Pacific Regional Economic Outlook (April 2014). Relevant tightening policies introduced over the period 2000:Q1 ‒ 2013:Q1. Excludes overlapping episodes within four quarters. Housing-related MPPs All MPPs + + + + + + If shocks materialize, fiscal and prudential policies will need to be deployed as the main defense. In the first instance, automatic stabilizers should be allowed full play, although these are fairly small. If growth slows more significantly, Macao SAR could undertake rapid fiscal stimulus to shore up domestic demand through targeted tax relief and direct transfers to vulnerable households, support for SMEs, and accelerated infrastructure spending. Should the growth slowdown be accompanied by significant financial strains, liquidity and capital support could be temporarily made available to banks, as was announced during the onset of the global crisis. If domestic monetary conditions tighten suddenly due to the withdrawal of unconventional monetary policy, there may be scope for a macroprudential response, including using capital buffers to avoid a procyclical contraction in lending and monitoring market developments to decide whether and when measures should be recalibrated. In particular, if the property market experiences a sharp downturn, some prudential measures that were tightened during the upswing could be selectively and judiciously unwound, in line with dissipation in systemic risks. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed that the fiscal surplus envisaged for 2014 was appropriate, bolstering resources available to withstand any future shocks and underpinning confidence in the currency board. Given that property prices continue to rise, they remain vigilant to further acceleration, and could consider additional measures aimed at constraining housing credit supply and speculative demand to contain systemic risks. If shocks materialize, they concurred that fiscal and prudential policies would be the main tools to buttress growth and contain risks to financial stability. While they viewed the sudden tightening of monetary conditions as a low-probability event, they would continue to monitor closely market developments, notably with regard to the property sector. With banks having strong buffers—the average capital adequacy ratio stands at around 15 percent—and average household debt service-to-income ratios of around 30 percent, they felt that the economy should be able to withstand some price correction under such a scenario. If prices fell more precipitously, they were open to the idea of unwinding some housing-related measures enacted in recent years, They emphasized that they would only consider such unwinding provided it did not pose systemic risk, for instance by attracting less creditworthy buyers as the cycle turns, and thus harming household balance sheets and potentially weakening financial stability in the future Page 10