Short-Run Fiscal Policy Macao SAR would benefit from an explicit counter-cyclical fiscal framework as part of near-term budget preparation . As a small open economy reliant primarily on external demand, the economy faces substantial volatility in output. Over time, progress on diversifying the economy will help moderate but not eliminate such fluctuations. In this context, and given Macao SAR’s substantial fiscal space, there is scope for Macao SAR to pursue more concerted counter-cyclical policy to help lean against the wind, offsetting sharp changes in private Central Budget Government Expenditure (Excluding Transfers): Budget vs. Actual (In percent of GDP) Sources: Financial Services Bureau; and IMF staff estimates 1/ 2016 actual expenditure is staff estimates. Budget Actual Page 14 demand. Though looser fiscal policy will in part leak into higher imports, this channel is generally less pronounced in a fixed exchange rate regime because there is no resulting currency appreciation. At the same time, incorporating such a framework more explicitly into budget preparation will help avoid excessive loosening that could put pressure on the external position. It is important to note that for demand management via fiscal policy to work, the budget should better predict final fiscal outcomes: in recent years, expenditure execution has repeatedly fallen materially short of the budget (especially on capital spending), reducing its effectiveness as a macroeconomic tool (see Box 1: Short-Run Demand Management with Fiscal Policy). Current estimates suggest that the output gap is closing, reducing the need for further stimulus going forward . As discussed above, fiscal loosening, including discretionary expenditure increases, during the recent downturn helped avoid a greater contraction and the excess slack in the economy is now falling. One can see this recovery in both the gaming and non-gaming sectors and the output gap, measured by a range of indicators, is expected to be broadly closed by 2017 (See Box 2: Measuring the Business Cycle). As a result, automatic stabilizers, which are primarily gaming revenue in Macao SAR, will improve, boosting the fiscal result going forward. In this context, there is not a strong case on cyclical grounds for continued fiscal impulse in the non-gaming overall balance in 2017 as seen in recent years. In particular, the authorities should ensure that any temporary expenditure increases introduced during the downturn are allowed to expire as the economy recovers. Authorities’ Views. The authorities agreed that their prudent approach during the boom years and currently ample fiscal space allowed them to accommodate, rather than offset, sharp falls in tax revenue as a result of sudden downturns. They also agreed that the economy was recovering and expenditure increases were likely to slow in the near-term. However, there was some doubt about going further than automatic stabilizers, questioning whether demand management could be effective in a small open economy like Macao SAR. The authorities also underscored the importance of a cautious fiscal policy as critical to maintaining the credibility of the currency board. Housing Risks in the housing market appear broadly contained. Housing in Macao SAR experienced a remarkable boom: between end 2008 and mid-2014, prices rose by over 500 percent (nearly 400 percent in real terms). To some degree, this asset appreciation can be explained by fundamentals including rising real wages, financial deepening, and population growth amid a relatively fixed supply of land. In the period since mid-2014, prices have partially corrected, falling by over 30 percent, and are back at 2013 levels. However, only 0.1 percent of residential mortgage loans _ _ Page 15 have negative equity (and nonperforming loans are roughly the same magnitude). This strength in asset quality likely owes to three factors. First, for most homeowners, prices are still above the purchase price given the size of the initial boom and the short period of the recent correction. Second, the average loan to value remains well below regulatory maxima. And third, average debt service to income has been consistently low at 25 percent. According to the most recent data, real estate prices and transactions have started to increase again, suggesting that the correction may have bottomed. In light of these dynamics, the current macroprudential stance appears appropriate. An easing of macro prudential standards would be an appropriate response in the event of a rapid and self-reinforcing decline in housing prices that posed risks to financial stability and the broader economy. Current indications suggest, however, that existing standards remain appropriate, including the loan-to-value ratio and debt service-to-income ratio applied in Macao SAR. While house prices have fallen, the adjustment has been orderly and the market appears to be stabilizing without any significant stress on balance sheets or financial stability. Current public concerns about housing affordability are best addressed through other means. To the degree there are social goals of improving the accessibility of housing, fueling demand via loosening macroprudential regulations amid tight supply may increase the price more than improve affordability. Instead, it would be more effective to provide targeted (means-tested) transfers and ensure that regulatory policy is adequate to support further private sector supply at market (rather than subsidized) prices. In this regard, efficient execution of housing plans for reclaimed land and well- targeted public housing supply will be important. Nonetheless, if the impact of speculative demand on real estate prices is a material concern, the authorities could consider more targeted macroprudential measures such as tighter loan-to-value ratios on second-home purchases. Authorities’ Views. The authorities shared the view that a loosening in macroprudential regulations was not necessary given current market fundamentals. They also shared the view that loosening in measures might actually reduce affordability unless supported by improvements to housing supply. The authorities were open to further exploration of some targeted measures at preventing excessive speculation. However, they highlighted that concerns about affordability had not fallen materially despite the price correction and there is already nascent evidence of a recovery in prices. Residential mortgage currently accounts for 22 percent of bank loans (commercial real estate accounts for another 21 percent.) See “Staff Guidance Note on Macroprudential Policy,” December 2014 = Page 16 Financial Sector Stepping back from the narrow housing issue, analysis of banking system balance sheets suggests that the sector remains sound. The large size of the banking system—assets of 375 percent of GDP at end-October 2016—suggests the need for supervisory caution (See Appendix I: Banking Sector). Nonetheless, it is useful to look at the domestic and foreign parts of the balance sheet separately as headline ratios can be misleading in Macao SAR. The domestic part of the banking system has strong foundations for liquidity and asset quality with a deposit-to-loan ratio of 118 percent and a nonperforming loan ratio of just 0.1 percent. The persistence of such high loan quality is somewhat surprising at the end of a sustained fall in output and raises some questions about ever-greening. However, the strength appears to reflect both the relative resilience of the economy (gaming operators still make large profits and unemployment is unchanged) and the fact that private sector leverage is relatively moderate: domestic corporate and household debt are 50 and 57 percent of GDP, respectively. There is a large degree of direct or indirect exposure to gaming but this is both somewhat inevitable given the structure of the economy and relatively safe given the strength of gaming operator balance sheets. The foreign side of bank balance sheets ( 231 percent of GDP in assets and 152 percent of GDP in liabilities) is more opaque but risks also appear contained. An obvious risk is that foreign liabilities are almost entirely deposits (99 percent of total) which are largely short term, raising the risk of a sharp fall in funding. However, three factors mitigate this risk. First, the vast majority of the foreign liabilities belong to branches of foreign banks suggesting it is difficult to view the balance sheets on a stand-alone basis. Second, roughly 85 percent of the liabilities to foreign banks (half of total foreign liabilities) are to related parties (parent or sister banks reflecting Macao SAR’s role in corporate treasury management) which reduces the likelihood of a run. And third, the foreign liabilities are entirely used to purchase foreign rather than domestic assets, suggesting that in the event of a fall in funding, the banks can use their own foreign assets (provided liquidity and quality is adequate) rather than needing foreign exchange reserves. Nonetheless, particularly given the pegged exchange rate regime, supervisors should remain vigilant about the nature of the foreign borrowing (maturity, type of counterpart) and foreign investments (quality, liquidity). Authorities’ Views. The authorities emphasized that the strength of the banking system— even after a dual shock to the gaming and housing sectors—was a testament to their supervision and the banks’ own prudence. They recognized that the banks had aggressively sought out foreign funding and investment opportunities but argued that this was an appropriate business model given ee Page 17 the limited size of the domestic market. In general, the authorities believed that risks to funding were contained given the predominance of related-party exposures. Finally, they noted that they had substantially increased transparency surrounding banks’ exposures to China (23 percent of foreign assets in 2016:Q3, down from a peak of 38 percent in 2014:Q2) on the recommendation of the last Article IV consultation.