After more than 400 years of Portuguese rule, Macao SAR returned to China’s sovereignty at the end of 1999. Discussions took place with the consent of the Chinese authorities. They were the first since the handover, although the IMF has maintained a relationship with Macao SAR, focused mainly on technical assistance and training (including an FSAP in 2011). Like neighboring Hong Kong SAR, Macao is a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China. With its economic and social systems remaining unchanged for 50 years under its governing constitution (The Basic Law), the territory is a free port and separate customs jurisdiction. Macao SAR is a small and highly open economy , with a population of around 600,000 spread over only 31km . Its economic fortunes are driven by tourism, mainly related to the gaming industry. Visitors originate mostly from the Mainland and Hong Kong SAR, and rose to a record-high of 29 million in 2013. Gaming directly accounts for four-fifths of exports, three-quarters of fiscal revenue, one-quarter of employment, and more than half of GDP at current producer prices (Figure 1 and Appendix II). A decade-long gaming boom has lifted per capita incomes near global highs. For the first three years after the handover, the economy was mired in deflationary growth in the aftermath of a property slump, a sharp rise in bad loans, and dwindling tourism due to the Asian crisis and SARS. After February 2002, liberalization of the casino industry and relaxation of tourist travel policies by the Mainland revitalized the economy. By the middle of the decade, Macao SAR had overtaken Las Vegas as the largest gaming center in the world. However, inflationary pressures—both consumer and property prices—have picked up, and inequality has remained a concern during this period of rapid growth. Prudent macroeconomic management has enabled Macao SAR to navigate global and regional shocks, to which it is exposed due to its openness and narrow base. The policy framework has served Macao SAR well in maintaining financial stability and a strong external position, while successfully weathering several external shocks, including the recent global crisis. It is anchored by the combination of a currency board pegged to the Hong Kong dollar (and hence indirectly the U.S. dollar), flexible markets, and a commitment to safeguarding fiscal discipline and financial stability. Monetary conditions. Under the currency board arrangement, domestic liquidity grows in line with international reserves and monetary conditions are tied to those in Hong Kong SAR (and thus ultimately the United States). The domestic currency, the pataca, is more than 100 percent backed by foreign assets. External position . Macao SAR is a net external creditor, with a sizable current account surplus, large foreign reserves, and no exchange restrictions on current and capital account transactions (Figure 2). The real effective exchange rate has appreciated in recent years, mirroring developments in the U.S. dollar. Public finances. Owing to the boom in the gaming sector and cautious management of public finances, Macao SAR has enjoyed large fiscal surpluses in recent years. It has no public debt and holds fiscal reserves of nearly 60 percent of GDP, serving as a key buffer against external shocks. Page 6 Financial system. At nearly 250 percent of GDP, Macao SAR’s financial sector is large, bank dominated, and mainly foreign owned (Figure 3). Local banking operations have strong balance sheets, are flush with liquidity through domestic deposits, and benefit from the financial and risk management support of their parent banks. There are no organized capital markets and about 60 percent of financial assets are external. Supportive policies in the United States and the Mainland also helped Macao SAR rebound from the global crisis. After averaging 14 percent during the preceding six years, growth fell to low single-digits in 2008 and 2009, as tourism plummeted following a tightening of visa policies by the Mainland and the onset of the global recession. Growth recovered quickly thereafter, lifted by two major forces. First, the loosening of monetary conditions in the United States, which led to a corresponding fall in domestic interest rates, facilitated rapid credit growth aimed at both domestic and external borrowers, and increased foreign inflows into Macao SAR’s property sector. Second, the strong recovery in the Mainland and its supportive measures toward the territory— including speeding up cross-boundary infrastructure projects and facilitating greater economic and financial integration—helped boost investment and service exports. The outlook is bright, but Macao SAR needs to prepare for future shifts in the global and domestic landscape . With the United States beginning to withdraw from unconventional monetary policy as its economy gains strength and the Mainland engaging in major structural reforms to rebalance its growth, Macao SAR will face a different global environment. This will bring opportunities for further development of services that Macao SAR should position itself to seize. At the same time, macroeconomic and prudential policies may need to be recalibrated as these shifts may heighten volatility. Over a longer horizon, growth could slow as the gaming sector matures and the population ages. As a result, Macao SAR will need to preserve its traditional strengths by bolstering financial soundness, ensuring external stability, maintaining fiscal prudence, and diversifying the economy. These issues formed the basis of the discussions, as described below.