Macao SAR’s financial system is bank oriented and foreign owned, with virtually all banks being either subsidiaries or branches of overseas banks. Banks fund themselves primarily through domestic deposits, placing the majority of their excess liquidity with their parent banks and offshore affiliates. If needed, branches can borrow liquidity from their parent banks. Macao SAR’s banking system is dominated by Mainland and Hong Kong SAR-owned banks—together, they account for almost 85 percent of total bank assets. The financial system appears competitive, featuring 26 commercial banks, two offshore banks, a postal savings bank and other credit institutions, insurance companies, finance companies, securities dealers, and pension funds. Inward spillover risks 2008:Q2 2013:Q2 Macroeconomic risks Macao SAR: Financial Stability Map Since the onset of the global crisis, rapid credit growth and a booming property market have emerged as key issues for financial stability in Macao SAR. Money supply and credit to the private sector have been growing at an annual average of around 15 and 30 percent, respectively. Moreover, growing interconnectedness with global financial markets has broadened transmission channels from external shocks. The global crisis has strongly demonstrated the need for an overarching framework and early warning systems to monitor systemic financial stability. In this context, staff’s Financial Stability Map suggests that the improving global economy and strong domestic growth have increased risk appetite, while low global interest rates and expanding money supply have eased monetary and financial conditions. As a result, Macao SAR is facing elevated risks from potential inward spillovers and market and liquidity shocks, and low to medium ones with regard to the macroeconomy and credit quality. Source: IMF staff estimates. Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. Monetary and financial conditions Market and liquidity risks Credit risks Risk appetite Financial system resilience has been bolstered by the progress made on key recommendations from the IMF’s 2011 Financial Assessment Program (FSAP) (Box 3 and Table 4). The FSAP concluded that banks generally enjoy robust capitalization and adequate profitability. In line with its recommendations, progress has been made in further strengthening the supervisory framework, including by enhancing off-site analysis and improving communication with parent financial institutions. In addition, the financial safety net has been bolstered by the introduction of a deposit insurance scheme. Increasing the de jure operational independence of the Monetary Authority of Macao (AMCM) and developing a rapid remedial action framework to facilitate an orderly approach to addressing banking problems are being considered in the ongoing review of the Financial System Act, and Macao SAR plans to adopt fully the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) to enhance the transparency of banks’ financial reporting. It is important to implement these remaining recommendations expeditiously. Given heightened exposure to a few jurisdictions, close monitoring and co-operation with their home supervisors will help guard against adverse cross-border financial spillovers Page 11 Counterparty risk is high, given that banks place the bulk of their surplus liquidity with banks abroad. At the same time, concentration risk has also risen due to increased bank exposure to a few jurisdictions, although mostly with high sovereign ratings and strong fundamentals. In particular, there are risks from lending to Hong Kong SAR, Portugal and the Mainland (together accounting for around two-thirds of external interbank assets). Credit and funding shocks emanating in these jurisdictions could have a significant impact on the domestic banking system (Box 4). To identify emerging risks, the AMCM should stress test and closely monitor banks’ foreign exposures, including through closer cooperation with home supervisors and an assessment of financial stability developments in those jurisdictions, while ensuring that banks maintain prudent underwriting standards and hold adequate buffers against potential risks. Publicizing more details about the nature of these exposures—including granular information on lenders, borrowers, and risk implications—would also provide useful information to supervisors, the market and the public. Steps to strengthen further the AML/CFT framework are welcome. In 2007, Macao SAR underwent a mutual evaluation of its anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) framework by the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG). The areas found to have room for improvement included customer due diligence measures on financial institutions and designated nonfinancial businesses and professions (DNFBPs), confiscation and freezing of criminal assets, targeted financial sanctions required by UN Security Council resolutions, regulation and supervision of DNFBPs, measures on cross-border transportation of cash and bearer negotiable instruments, and international cooperation. In light of the information in Macao SAR’s progress reports to the APG and of the risks faced by the gaming sector, remaining measures needed to safeguard integrity in the gaming sector should be steadfastly implemented, in particular to bolster customer due diligence requirements in line with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standard, and to strengthen oversight of all market players, including junket promoters and their associates. Authorities’ views. The authorities noted that significant progress has been made in bolstering financial stability in recent years, in line with FSAP recommendations. In addition, banks conduct regular reviews on the effectiveness of their risk management practices, internal controls and business strategies, and submit them to the AMCM on an annual basis. Any deficiencies identified by the AMCM require prompt remedial measures. Banks are also required to conduct their own stress tests and AMCM is working toward implementing sector-wide stress testing. In terms of cross-border financial spillovers, they pointed out that linkages with Hong Kong SAR and Portugal are long-standing and reflect limited domestic lending opportunities. More recently, lending to the Mainland has risen briskly to around 20 percent of banks’ overseas portfolio, spurred by increased integration and interest differentials. They noted that two Mainland banks account for the majority of these exposures, which are mainly related to trade financing, backed by collateral and letters of guarantee from their headquarters, and not to potentially more risky segments of the Mainland financial system (including “shadow” banks). If necessary, banks also have the discretion to off-load bad assets to their headquarters under local banking regulations. These features reduce credit risks. Nevertheless, as exposures will rise further with Mainland integration and given liquidity/counterparty risks, the authorities agreed that maintaining close cooperation with Mainland supervisors and publicizing more detailed information on exposures would be worthwhile. In terms of bolstering the AML/CFT framework, they noted that several steps have been Page 12 taken in light of the APG recommendations. In particular, guidelines for financial institutions have been revised, junket promoters have been incorporated into customer due diligence measures, and the Financial Intelligence Unit has strengthened its ability to cooperate with its foreign counterparts.