Diagnostics Fiscal policy space built up during the pre-crisis years has largely been depleted since 2008. Benefiting from strong economic growth, FYR Macedonia created a sizable fiscal space in the years leading up to the global financial crisis by maintaining a balanced overall fiscal position and entered the crisis with one of the lowest general government debt-to-GDP ratios in emerging Europe (text chart). Since 2008, there has been a reversal. This reflects fiscal support for the economy in the aftermath of the crisis, but also policy choices and low revenue efficiency. Policy choices. The authorities’ strategic decision to maintain a low tax environment and other incentives to attract FDI has borne fruit, but has also produced tax and pension and social insurance contribution rates that are among the lowest in the region (Figure 2). The social transfer system has remained generous even as contribution rates were cut. VAT productivity CIT productivity PIT productivity MKD Western Balkans Tax Productivity: FYR Macedonia and other SEE Countries Source: IMF staff calculations.Note: Tax productivity is calculated as tax receipts in percent of GDP divided by the standard tax rates. Western Balkans includes Albania; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Kosovo; FYR Macedonia; Montenegro; and Serbia. General government gross debt (lhs; percent of GDP) Real GDP growth (rhs; percent) General government fiscal balance (rhs; percent of GDP)Sources: IMF, WEO. FYR Macedonia: Historical Fiscal Path and Growth Page 20 Low revenue efficiency. FYR Macedonia’s tax productivity and efficiency are low compared to regional peers, particularly for the VAT which contributes one third of tax revenues and social contributions (text chart). Fiscal deficit is projected to reach 4 percent of GDP in 2015 compared to 3.4 percent targeted in the original budget . Revenue developments in the first sixth month showed a stronger-than-budgeted performance in profit taxes, resulting from the removal of exemptions on non-reinvested profits, and in excise taxes due to higher production from a strategic partnership with Philip Morris. However, most other revenue categories, particularly VAT, other taxes and non-tax revenues, underperformed. During the mission’s visit, the authorities were in the process of preparing a supplementary budget which is currently being discussed in the parliament. Based on the details shared with the mission, which include wage increases for the police forces and additional capital expenditures entailed by the worsened security situation together in the amount of 1.1 billion denars, staff’s preliminary estimates suggest a deficit of 4 percent of GDP for 2015. With no policy changes, the overall deficit is likely to remain well above 3 percent of GDP in the medium term with general government debt rising to 45 percent of GDP by 2020 The broader public sector debt would reach 54 percent of GDP. The projected fiscal trajectory would produce a primary deficit (2.1 percent of GDP) that is 1.6 ppts higher than the debt-stabilizing primary balance and increase gross fiscal financing needs from 15 percent of GDP in 2015 to 18 percent by 2020 (Public DSA Annex). The authorities’ envisaged fiscal rules are likely to yield too little fiscal consolidation in the medium term. The planned fiscal rules, which are expected to be operational as of January 1, 2017, will cap the overall budget deficit at 3 percent of GDP and public debt at 60 percent. However, given the fixed exchange rate regime, a lower debt limit would serve FYR Macedonia better by creating a larger fiscal space needed to counter macroeconomic shocks and absorb medium-term spending pressures from population ageing. A lower debt level would also reduce risks emanating from elevated financing needs. Under the baseline (no policy change) scenario, the public debt rule is projected to be non-binding but the overall fiscal deficit is likely to miss the limit envisaged in the fiscal rule. Discussion Staff advised additional measures to contain the 2015 budget deficit. While details of the supplementary budget were still being worked out, the authorities expressed their intention to contain the deficit to around 3.6–3.7 percent of GDP. Staff considered this slightly higher deficit relative to the original budget target as Overall Revenue VAT arrears 1/0.40.2 VAT efficiency 2/-- Expenditure Goods and Services0.20.2 Social transfers 3/-0.2 Source: IMF staff estimates.Notes: 1/ VAT arrears accumulated during 2014 stood at 2 percent of GDP.2/ Assume VAT efficiency improves beginning in 2017 and reaches Western Balkans average by 2020.3/ Transfers include pension, health, unemployment benefits, social assistance, subsidies, and transfersto local governments. A thorough expenditure review is needed to identify the exact items to be cut. -1.00.20.62017–20201.8 FYR Macedonia: Possible Measures underlying Fiscal Consolidation 2015–2020 Page 21 appropriate in light of the lower growth. Achieving this target would require saving the significant over-performance in profit tax revenues and adopting additional measures. These measures would include scaling back the increase in goods and services spending from 21 percent in the original budget to 14 percent in the supplementary budget, and collecting a part of the tax arrears which for 2014 alone amounted to 2 percent of GDP (text table). The recommended consolidation implies a reduction of 0.6 percent of GDP in the cyclically-adjusted primary balance for 2015 and 0.7 percent for 2016. The authorities considered staff’s 2015 fiscal projections to be too pessimistic on the revenue side, particularly for VAT and social contributions, and thought the deficit target in the supplementary budget was achievable without additional measures. In line with the authorities’ medium term fiscal strategy (MTFS), staff recommended consolidation to keep public debt comfortably below 50 percent of GDP (text chart). The authorities’ 2015–17 MTFS appropriately aims to reduce the overall deficit to below 3 percent of GDP by 2017; however, measures are yet to be identified. Working within the parameters of low tax rates, and, in the absence of a thorough public expenditure review, staff sees scope for adjustment (3 ppts of GDP over six years) to be delivered by the following measures. Higher revenue efficiency. Staff’s estimates suggest that increasing efficiency to the average level of Western Balkan countries could enhance tax revenues permanently between 1½–2 percent of GDP. A recent FAD TA mission identifies the following measures that would help achieve that aim: establishing a permanent risk management unit and a modernization unit in the Public Revenue Office; expanding the audit coverage focusing on large taxpayers; and commencing a high wealth individual program. Expenditure cuts. The composition of public expenditure is heavily skewed in favor of wages and social transfers (Figure 2). Transfers constitute 64 percent of total expenditure (18 percent in subsidies), which does not sit well with a catching-up economy requiring significant investment in infrastructure (Table 2). Staff recommended rationalization based on a thorough public expenditure review to identify areas of low efficiency. Staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to enshrine sustainability in fiscal rules but emphasized the need for adequate space and stronger budgetary institutions. public debt (adjustment, lhs) public debt (baseline;lhs) fiscal balance (adjustment; rhs) fiscal balance (baseline; rhs)Source: IMF staff estimate. FYR Macedonia: Fiscal Balance and Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Page 22 Staff considered the 60 percent of GDP debt limit to be too high and suggested adopting a lower operational threshold or debt brakes at 50 percent of GDP as used in several other countries in the region. The credibility of any fiscal rule also depends on institutional arrangements underpinning budgets. Currently, the fiscal framework suffers from a number of weaknesses: an absence of detailed budgetary estimates for central government institutions, a lack of reconciliation between the medium-term budget framework and the annual budget process, and over-optimistic growth projections which tend to produce revenue over-projections (text chart). These weaknesses underscore the importance of including effective oversight and corrective measures in the enabling legislation for the new fiscal rules, including establishing an independent body such as a fiscal council to inform macroeconomic forecasts. The inclusion of debt incurred by state-owned enterprises in the overall limit is appropriate given the full government guarantee. In this context, the projected scaling up of investment and borrowing by PESR, which is outside the budget, needs to be complemented by clear and transparent procedures to assess, select, prioritize and monitor these projects to ensure adequate debt-servicing capacity in future. The authorities reiterated their commitment to the formal fiscal rules and were confident that the deficit would be below 3 percent of GDP by 2017. They noted the boost in growth and competitiveness from higher infrastructure spending and their plan to prioritize expenditures in favor of capital projects in roads, railway, energy, and health infrastructure. They were not overly concerned about the medium-term debt dynamics and stressed that debt would remain well below the 60 percent limit. They are closely monitoring the PESR debt which they see as relatively stable, with new borrowing netting out repayments. The authorities noted the shortcomings in their MTFS document– including the lack of sectoral guidance for detailed budget preparation, and the absence of reconciliation with the previous MTFS – which they propose to address in the public finance management reform program to be drafted later this year. The authorities are currently considering the design features taking into account regional experiences to include in their new Fiscal Responsibility Law. Most emerging European countries that use a debt rule either cap the public debt at 50 percent of GDP (Hungary) or at a lower level (Kosovo and Serbia) or use debt brakes starting at 50 percent of GDP (Slovak Republic and Poland). See Selected Issues Paper, FYR Macedonia: Fiscal Rules to Ensure Sustainability Projections under the Medium Term Fiscal Strategy Actual FYR Macedonia: General Government Revenues,Actual and Projections in the Medium Term Fiscal Strategy ( Billions of denars) Sources: IMF, WEO; and IMF staff calculations based on various budgets and Medium Term (3 years) Fiscal Strategies (MTFS). Page 23