GDP growth is expected to remain broad-based but moderate to 3.2 percent in 2015 under the combined effects of domestic political uncertainties and the crisis in Greece, before gradually improving over the medium term Some private investment plans, both domestic and foreign, are reportedly on hold until new elections, while private consumption is being affected by negative confidence effects. Output gap is projected to close in 2018 (Figure 1). The current account deficit is expected to improve in the medium term reflecting the build-up of export capacities in the Technological Industrial Development Zones (TIDZ) (Table 3). While private transfers are assumed to hold steady as proven during the global financial crisis, FDI would weaken to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2015 and 2016, and modestly strengthen thereafter. External debt would rise further reflecting public sector borrowing. As oil prices begin to stabilize, headline inflation is projected to reach 0.8 percent at end-2015. Downside risks to this forecast are substantial (Box 3). Domestic political risks. A derailment or incomplete implementation of the complex political agreement could have further negative impact on economic sentiment and growth. This may also complicate the opening of negotiations for the EU accession affecting longer term prospects Spillover from Greece. More than a fifth of banking sector assets is held by the two subsidiaries of Greek banks. Although these subsidiaries operate on a standalone basis with limited exposure to parents, a prolonged and deep crisis in Greece could trigger contagion. Exports could weaken from the second-round effects of weaker euro area growth and possible disruption in the Thessaloniki port which processes most of the bulk trade. Staff’s estimates under a downside scenario suggest a broad-based slowdown in growth to around 1½ percent in 2015–16 reflecting the impact through various direct and indirect spillover channels (Box 4). Greece (22.2)Slovenia (16.1) France (8.0) Turkey (6.2)Bulgaria (5.7) Germany (18.9)United States (15.4) Turkey (12.1)Italy (10.9)Switzerland (9.9)Germany (35.81)Bulgaria (7.58)Italy (6.67)Serbia (6.31)Greece (4.97) Netherlands (20.5) Austria (12.2) Greece (10.9) Slovenia (10) Hungary (8.2) FYR Macedonia: Top Five External Real and Financial Links Remittances Bank assetsFDI Exports Sources: SNLFinancial; NBRM; World bank; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 Box 3. Risk Assessment Matrix (Scale—high, medium, or low) Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Recommended policy response Sustained domestic political uncertainty Euro area bond market contagion (from delays in debt servicing by Greece, faltering reforms and political social upheavals) Protracted period of slower growth in the euro area Weaker FDI and exports, given significant direct trade and FDI linkages with euro area. Growth slowdown via lower consumption and investment Possible delays in opening of EU accession negotiation Implementing the recently-reached agreement between major political parties is key to dampening political uncertainties. Limited dependence of Greek Continue to closely subsidiaries on parent bank funding and their financial strength are important mitigating factors. monitor possible contagion risks to the financial sector from Greece. The recently adopted CFMs also Banking supervision and reduce risks of BOP pressures emanating from capital outflows to Greece, although circumventions are possible. However, a prolonged and deep turmoil in Greece could have a significant impact on the economy via dampened confidence, lower exports, and higher sovereign spreads. crisis management framework are broadly in line with best practices, though some areas could be further strengthened, e.g. provision of ELA in foreign currency. Further pre-emptive ring-fencing measures could be considered to avoid CFMs. Tighten monetary policy in response to potential large capital outflows and pressures on reserves and currency. Pre-finance 2016 financing needs, and cut low priority current spending. Restart monetary policy easing to support demand Recast fiscal policy to effectively support demand, without jeopardizing the goal to rebuild fiscal space in the medium term. Page 16 Box 3. Risk Assessment Matrix (concluded) (Scale—high, medium, or low) Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Recommended policy response Persistently low energy prices Low (Positive) Heightened risk aversion related to Russia/Ukraine conflict Higher consumption, inflation may dip back into negative if followed by cuts in administrative prices Do not cut administrative prices, rather take advantage of low price to add fiscal space. Low Conflicts could depress Pre-finance fiscal international investor confidence and re-price risks in emerging markets, amid disturbances in global financial, trade and commodity markets. Direct trade exposure with Russia/Ukraine is low, except for gas. financing needs for 2016 to avoid going to market in times of turbulence; Improve fuel storage capacities and diversify sources for gas imports over the medium run. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline ("low" is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, "medium" a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and "high" a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks at the time of discussions with the authorities. Page 17 Box 4. Linkages to Greece and Possible Spillovers A prolonged and deep crisis in Greece could potentially affect FYR Macedonia’s economy via direct and indirect real links, international financial linkages, as well as through the presence of Greek-owned banks in the domestic financial sector. Direct trade links with Greece are limited, but exports to the euro area (EA) constitute a large part of total exports (text chart). Exports to Greece have halved since the global financial crisis and now count for less than 5 percent of total. However, exports to other EA countries, particularly Germany, have rapidly increased in recent years due to FDI and activities in the Technological Industrial Development Zones (TIDZ). A significant slowdown in EA growth would, therefore, impact FYR Macedonia’s exports. Additional impact could come from possible disruption of bulk trade at the harbor of Thessaloniki which processes most of this trade. International financial linkages include FDI flows and external government financing. FDI stock from the EA constitutes about half of the total stock, whereas a tenth of FDI stock consists of investment from Greece. Fiscal financing needs are likely to remain high for the coming years and stand at 15 percent of GDP in 2016 which include payments falling due externally. Increased uncertainty and risk aversion in the market could significantly increase sovereign risk spreads elevating debt servicing costs and effectively ruling out external bond issuance. Greek-owned banks hold a significant share of FYR Macedonia’s banking sector assets but appear sound. About 22 percent of assets and 24 percent of deposits in the banking sector are Greek-owned, mainly through the Stopanska Bank (a subsidiary of National Bank of Greece holding one fifth of assets/deposits), and marginally through a small subsidiary of the Alpha Bank. Both subsidiaries are adequately capitalized, liquid, mostly deposit-funded, operate on a stand-alone basis, and do not hold Greek sovereign bonds. Exposures to parent banks are limited at less than 3 percent of assets. Spillovers from Greece through indirect channels could weigh significantly on growth, while the combination of higher financing needs, lower reserves and the inability to issue bond externally could create pressures on the foreign exchange market. Under the downside scenario, where the crisis in Greece is prolonged and deep, the main assumptions include: (i) a significant decline in overall exports due to lower demand in the EA and possible disruption of trade through Greece; (ii) lower FDI inflows from the EA as some EA investors may go into a long wait-and-see mode; (iii) deposit withdrawals from the Greek subsidiaries and a slowdown in credit growth due to general uncertainties, and (iv) a significant spike in sovereign spreads given uncertainties and risk aversion in the international financial market. Remittances are projected to remain unchanged. The resulting lower consumption, exports and investment would lower real GDP growth to around 1½ percent in 2015–16 (text chart). The lower growth would widen the overall fiscal deficit; additional financing needs for 2015 are likely to be met through domestic liquidity. The current account deficit would also widen on account of the trade deficit as the reduction in imports would not outweigh the fall in exports. A prolonged period of market stress and no sovereign issuance could create pressure on reserves and the exchange rate, particularly if deposit outflows are not contained within the domestic financial sector. FYR Macedonia: Real and Financial Sector Linkages with Greece Sources: NBRM, IMF Staff Calculations Exports to euro area excl. Greece Exports to Greece Exports to the rest of the world Export Share by Country FDI from euro area excl. Greece FDI from Greece FDI from the rest of the world FDI Stock by Source Non-Greek banks Greek banks Banking Sector Assets (Percent of Total, Data as of Mar 2015) Page 18 Box 4. Linkages to Greece and Possible Spillovers (concluded) The authorities have stepped-up preemptive and contingency measures in the financial sector. Since 2010, the authorities have strengthened their supervision and crisis management tools to contain possible spillovers stemming from Greece. Banks have been subjected to stringent provisioning requirements for holding low rated assets and to ex post notification for any significant transactions with Greece. In addition, current prudential regulations limit intra-group exposure to 10 percent of capital. Bank deposits, liquidity position and developments in FX market are being monitored on a daily basis. In 2012, the authorities prohibited the early repayment of subordinated loans extended after July 1 st , 2012 to parents. The lender of last resort (LOLR) framework is aligned with the international best practices (FSAP update, 2008). Emergency Liquidity Assistance in local currency is available against qualifying collateral which have recently been extended, but not in foreign currency. The NBRM has also a handful of bank resolution tools and intervention powers for broad triggers to address problems with capital adequacy and liquidity (such as corrective actions, administration, recapitalization, purchase and assumption transactions including removing shareholders, and revocation of license). On a forward-looking basis, stress tests conducted by the NBRM show both Greek subsidiaries being able to withstand strong liquidity pressures. More recently, the authorities adopted capital flow measures (CFMs) against Greece. These measures aim at preventing any Greek interest, including many Greek-owned companies of all sizes operating in FYR Macedonia, to suddenly borrow from Macedonian banks and send to Greece. While the magnitude of the risk is hard to quantify, the sizable presence of Greek businesses make the risk significant and the authorities wanted to prevent possible misconduct that would have undermined the soundness of the domestic financial sector or potentially cause a balance of payment crisis. The measures are time-bound (valid for a maximum of 6 months) and forward-looking: the authorities noted that their aim is not to affect current transactions. __________________ Please see the NBRM Press Release for details on these measures. http://www.nbrm.mk/?ItemID=54D14FF11D232D4ABF074C20C393FBB8 Scenario Real GDP (% growth rate) Scenario Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)Source: IMF Staff Calculations1/The downside scenario with prolonged crisis in Greece assumes (i) 10 percent fall in export values in 2015-2016 along with associated drop in import values; (ii) 10 percent decline in FDI inflows from euro area in 2015-2016; (iii) a slowdown in private sector credit by half of that of baseline in 2015 with no recovery in 2016; and(iv) an increase in sovereign spreads by 300 bps in 2015 and 200 bps in 2016. Other relevant assumptions include no further deterioration in domestic political situations, remittances held-up, and secured intercompany repayments. FYRMacedonia: Spilloversfrom Greece 1/ Scenario Current Account Balance (% of GDP) Page 19 The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on the near-term outlook and risks, but were more optimistic on the medium term. While still in the process of revising their forecasts, they expect a broadly similar GDP growth rate for 2015. However, they view the negative impact of domestic political uncertainties to have peaked in May and the impact from Greece to be more short-lived. In particular, the authorities expect a faster improvement in confidence and, for the medium term, an accelerated FDI and public investment to support a growth of around 4 percent and stronger exports to produce lower current account deficits. Risks from a prolonged and deep crisis in Greece are viewed as significant, but manageable given the reorientation of trade flows that have already taken place since 2010 and policy actions taken to limit contagion, including recently-adopted capital flow measures (CFMs) (Box 4). The authorities also project a faster rebound in prices with headline inflation reaching 2 percent by 2016.