Diagnostics A prolonged period of monetary accommodation has built up structural liquidity despite a pickup in credit growth (text chart). The amount of CB bills issued for sterilization purposes has persistently fallen short of absorbing excess liquidity since the volume was capped in April 2012, causing banks to hold deposits in the marginal liquidity facilities. Ample liquidity in the system provides a cushion against shocks to the financial sector, particularly in the current juncture, but may create risks to financial stability. This also results in the policy rate being higher than the “effective” short-term interest rate faced by banks for the purpose of liquidity management (Figure 3). The banking sector remains sound and profitable. Banks are well-capitalized and liquid. Profitability has steadily risen to pre-crisis levels, reflecting contained overhead costs (53.6 percent of gross income in the first quarter) and comfortable interest margins (61 percent of gross income). Strong deposits growth has allowed credit to be increasingly funded by domestic deposits, preserving loan-to-deposit ratios below 90 percent on average and reducing risks from deleveraging by parent banks (text chart). NPL ratios have been slow to decline reflecting structural bottlenecks. Although lower than in most other Western Balkan countries, NPLs have persisted since the crisis despite the credit recovery (text chart). These are mostly legacy loans and fully provisioned, hence financial stability risks are low. A faster resolution is held back by 60801001201401602009Q42010Q42011Q42012Q42013Q42014Q42015Q1 Deposits of fin. instit. Deposits from parent Short-term deposits Long-term deposits Loans, sub. debt and hybrid Equity and reserves Other sources LTD ratio (rhs) FYR Macedonia: Sources of Funding for Banks (Percent)Source:NBRM. UVKMKDBIHHRVMNESRBALBBalticsCEE5NMSWBS FYR Macedonia and Peers: Non-Performing Loans (Percent of total loans) December 2008 Change 2008-Latest Postcrisis Peak Sources: The Western Balkans: 15 Yearsof Economic Transition , IMF 2014; IMF, Financial SoundnessIndicators Database; and country authorities.Note: Group medians. Definition of NPL may differ by country. NMS includes Bulgaria; Czech Republic; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia; Lithuania; Poland; Romania; Slovak Republic; and Slovenia. WBS includes Albania (ALB); Bosnia and Herzegovina (BIH); Croatia (HRV); Kosovo (UVK); Macedonia (MKD); Montenegro (MNE); and Serbia (SRB). FYR Macedonia: Liquidity Developments (Billions of Denars) Structural liquidity Credit growth (percent; rhs) Sources: NBRM; and IMF staff calculations.Note: Structural liquidity is calculated as the sum of net foreign assets, net public sector assets, net bank assets,other items net, minus currency in circulation and reserves held by banks at the central bank. Page 24 structural bottlenecks: delays in collateral enforcement, infrequent utilization of out-of-court restructuring procedures, weaknesses in the corporate insolvency framework, and a lack of tax incentives and market for distressed debts. The two Greek-owned subsidiaries are sound but there are risks of contagion. Both subsidiaries are liquid and well-capitalized with limited links to parents and Greece (Box 4). Since 2010, NBRM has been pro-active in putting in place various prudential measures (stringent provisioning requirements for holding Greek assets, limitation of intra-group exposure to 10 percent of capital , ex-post notification for parent-sub transaction, daily monitoring of deposits, and pre-approval for subordinated loan repayment) that have led Greek-owned subsidiaries to drastically wind down exposure to the parent group. However, a short-term drain in the form of repatriation of non-distributed earnings or deposit outflows cannot be ruled out—which both banks appear capable of withstanding given high share of liquid assets. Risks of a broader contagion in the form of system-wide deposit withdrawal seem contained for now. Discussion The authorities and staff agreed that the monetary policy easing cycle has ended. Limited capital mobility allows FYR Macedonia to have some control over monetary policy despite a fixed exchange rate regime (officially classified as stabilized arrangement ). Given the broad-based growth and the pick-up in credit so far, the room for monetary accommodation appears to be largely exhausted. At the same time, a still negative output gap and very low inflation do not yet call for monetary tightening. Overall, bank assets-to-GDP ratio appears in line with economic development (text chart). Credit growth is projected to moderate in the coming months due to high domestic and external uncertainties, but strengthen subsequently to continue the financial deepening process. Staff recommended a tightening of monetary policies should demand pressures pick up, a low probability in the current environment, or risks to financial stability emerge. Consumer and mortgage lending growth rates have been in the double-digits, which require vigilance. The authorities agreed and expressed their intention to use targeted macro-prudential policies to address risks concentrated in specific borrower group, while an increase in the policy rate would be considered in case of external or price stability risks. Staff supports this approach. Reserves are adequate according to various metrics and are projected to remain so in the medium term ALB BIH HRV UVK MKD MNE SRB BGRCZE EST HUN LVA LTUPOL ROMSVKSVNBEL FRADEU ITA B k ss s G P ( ) GDP per capita (U.S. dollars) Bank Assets and Income per Capita (2000-11 average) Source: The Western Balkans: 15 Years of Economic Transition , IMF 2014; Data source: World Bank Global Financial Development Database (GFDD). Page 25 dampening external instability concerns (text table). Nonetheless, some policy tightening may be needed to preserve the ongoing de-euroization, which has a bearing on financial stability, should external uncertainties negatively impact the pace of private transfer inflows and conversion of deposits from foreign to local currency. Staff supported maintaining the strengthened surveillance currently in place to fend off contagion risks. The prudential measures that have been in place for some time has served to protect the stability of the financial sector. The revised Banking Law provides the central bank with powers to intervene in insolvent banks or ring-fence illiquid but solvent ones. More recently, as discussed in Box 4, the authorities, fearing possible capital outflows by Greek businesses operating in FYR Macedonia, adopted CFMs which ban new capital flows to Greece. These measures have limitations, including the possibility to circumvent. While agreeing with the staff that prudential measures would have been preferable to address these concerns, the authorities explained that, in the absence of any clear signs of financial instability, they were unable to intensify surveillance of financial transactions in solvent banks via further prudential measures. There has been no noticeable impact of CFMs on the domestic economy to date, including on the regular operations of Greek banks and businesses. There have also been no signs of circumventions via third parties or spillovers on other countries’ policy responses. The costs and benefits of the CFMs, however, need to be assessed on an ongoing basis. The authorities noted good progress regarding supervisory cooperation in the context of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) . The supervision department of the central bank successfully passed the European Banking Authority (EBA) assessment on the equivalence of confidentiality regimes in April, hence paving the way for its formal participation in supervisory colleges on cross-border banking groups. In practice, the exchange of information on the Greek-owned banks has taken place on a regular basis in the last few months within the SSM. The authorities eagerly await further EBA assessments scheduled in 2016, as passing these would authorize lifting the current EU requirement that subsidiaries of EU banks fully provision their holding of non-EU public assets. This requirement comes at a high cost to the domestic banking sector. Staff is seeking additional clarifications from the authorities to ascertain the possible jurisdictional implications of the recent measures. 201220132014201520162017201820192020Reserve/STD (percent) 101.0106.5115.9111.5121.3118.5120.6134.4133.2Reserve/Months of prospective import goods 6.25.26.05.25.25.25.04.64.8Reserve/Broad money (percent) 50.743.748.344.145.445.342.039.037.0Expanded 'Greenspan-Guidotti' metric: Reserves/(STD + CA deficit)91.698.8110.097.7100.9100.0103.1113.6112.9Reserves/Fund combination metric (percent) Reserve adequacy ratios for Macedonia - 2012-2020 Notes: 1/ Suggested threshold for adequacy: 100 percent; 2/ Suggested range for adequacy: 3-6 months; 3/ Suggested threshold for adequacy: 20 percent; 4/ Suggested range for adequacy: 100-150 percent Page 26