Economic recovery has strengthened. Benefiting from strong fiscal stimulus, credit growth and foreign investment, FYR Macedonia is experiencing one of the highest economic growth rates in the region. With output recovery more robust than in other emerging European countries, income convergence continued in post-crisis years and was faster than in other Western Balkan countries. GDP per capita in PPP terms now stands around one third of the EU-15 average (text chart). Going forward, the challenge is to maintain economic recovery without jeopardizing sustainability, while also tackling downside risks. The government’s growth strategy focusing on attracting foreign investment and enhancing public infrastructure has produced robust growth and a well-diversified export portfolio. However, export success has come at a cost of rapidly rising external public and private indebtedness and resulting high financing needs While improving infrastructure remains a key ingredient to support the export-led growth in this small, land-locked economy, going forward, a careful balancing is required to secure strong pay-off from the debt build-up. At the same time, the uncertain external environment, particularly with regards to Greece and possible spillovers, makes it urgent to bolster policy space. Domestic political climate has become more polarized . The wiretapping scandal in early 2015 alleging vote rigging and large-scale government abuse of power led to the resignation of top officials and has made the domestic political discord a front and center issue. With mediation from the European Union (EU) and the US, the main political parties have reached an agreement to hold new elections on April 24, 2016. Transition arrangements are complex, spanning over a period of 9 months. They include the return of the opposition to the Parliament, the appointment of a special public prosecutor in September 2015, the appointment of opposition members to several high-level positions, the resignation of the incumbent government before mid-January 2016, and the formation of an interim government led by the current ruling coalition with a mandate limited to the organization of elections. FYR MacedoniaCEE 1/WesternBalkans 2/Baltic States 3/ Real GDP, 2014 (Percent of pre-crisis GDP (2008) level) Sources: IMF, WEO; and IMF staff calculations.Notes: 1/ Weighted average of Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. 2/ Weighted average of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia. 3/ Weighted average of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. FYR Macedonia Western Balkans 1/ Real GDP per Capita, Purchasing Power Parity (USD) (Percent of average EU-15) Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook (WEO); and IMF staff calculations.Note: 1/ Weighted average of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, FYR Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia. Data for Kosovo is unavailable. Page 10 The EU Accession, which anchors the authorities’ long-term vision, remains at an impasse. In its October 2014 progress report, the European Commission maintained its recommendation to open accession negotiations which have been blocked by the name dispute with Greece. Recently, the Commission fielded an expert mission that recommended urgent actions targeting intelligence, judicial and prosecution services, external oversight, conduct of elections and media freedom. Progress on this front will likely weigh in the Commission's decision to maintain its recommendation. Text Box. Relations with the Fund and IMF Past Policy Advice A two-year Precautionary and Liquidity Line (PLL) was approved on January 19, 2011. In March 2011, the authorities drew about US$305 million (286 percent of quota). Following the expiration of the PLL in January 2013, there was a period of post-program monitoring which terminated in January 2015. All outstanding Fund credit (about US$174 million) was repaid in advance in February 2015. The authorities’ policy actions in the areas of monetary and financial sector have generally been in line with the IMF advice. Traction in the areas of fiscal policy and public finance management has been limited over the past few years. The authorities are yet to implement a fiscal policy anchored in a medium-term fiscal strategy which ensures a gradual consolidation and stabilizes public debt, a key recommendation of the 2014 Article IV Consultation.