6. The economic situation deteriorated significantly during the transition period (2009-2013). The 2009 political crisis interrupted a period of economic growth, with sizable and widespread private and public investment, that had started in 2003. In recent years, large mining projects reaching commercial production have provided an impetus to growth, but are masking stagnation and real declines in other sectors of the economy (Figure 2). Real GDP (Index 1960=100) Madagascar Sub-Saharan Africa Investment and Savings ) P ( ( P f G D P ) Source: Malagasy authorities; and World Development Indicators, the World Bank. Real GDP growth Investment (right scale) Savings (right scale) 7. Preliminary estimates indicate an economic recovery, albeit limited, in 2014 . Real GDP growth is expected to have been around 3 percent with inflation at about 7 percent (Tables 1 and 2), with the ongoing phasing out of fuel subsidies expected to increase inflation temporarily. While the mining sector remained buoyant, other key sectors experienced a more modest rebound. Agricultural production, in slow recovery following a severe locust infestation in 2013, is estimated to have increased by less than 1 percent. Companies in the Export Processing Zone grew by about 2 percent in 2014. Tourism is recovering gradually but remained well below 2008 levels. 8. Fiscal policy has faced significant challenges in recent years. Weak revenues and waning donor flows since 2009 have forced sharp expenditure cuts, targeting public investment and social spending, but also goods and services (Figure 3). Additional budgetary pressures have come from subsidized fuel prices (since 2010), losses at the public utility (JIRAMA), and financial imbalances at the civil service pension fund. Given these circumstances, there was a significant accumulation of budgetary arrears to domestic suppliers (with a stock estimated at about 4½ percent of GDP at end- July 2014). There was however no evidence of external arrears. The stock of public debt, which is mostly concessional, amounted to about 35 percent of GDP at end-2014. 9. Fiscal performance was mixed in 2014. While progress was made in implementing policies, outcomes fell somewhat short of expectations. The 2014 supplementary budget (approved in June 2014 and in line with the understandings supported by the RCF) aimed to improve tax and customs Page 8 revenue collections, while increasing funding of priority public infrastructure and social spending. Tax revenues are estimated to have fallen short of the level envisaged in the supplementary budget (by about 1 percent of GDP), which constrained expenditure (Tables 3 and 4). Donor budgetary financing only became available towards the very end of the year. There continued to be budgetary pressures from fuel subsidies, public enterprises, and the civil service pension fund, which have diverted resources from high-priority spending. However, progress was made in coming to agreement with creditors on a schedule for the clearance of domestic arrears and on some first steps in defining a plan to shore up the finances of JIRAMA. In addition, a priority PFM action plan was adopted. FAD technical assistance was provided on revenue administration, tax policy, PFM, and fuel subsidy reform. 10. Broad money growth was driven by lending to the private sector in 2014. Growing demand for short-term borrowing by the private sector and concerns about the weakening currency prompted domestic interest rates to increase and raised the cost of domestic government financing. As a result, the government relied on statutory advances from the central bank (1.4 percent of GDP at end-November 2014, in excess of what was envisaged but within the norms envisaged in the central bank law) as an alternative means of financing (Figure 5 and Tables 6 and 7). Contrary to expectations, central bank international reserves dwindled somewhat. 11. The financial sector remains shallow and with limited access. Domestic credit as a share of GDP remains low and the economy is largely cash based. Access to credit is expensive and limited, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises and households. There is no stock exchange or debt market, outside of government paper. The financial sector comprises 11 banks, 5 financial establishments, 30 micro-finance institutions (MFIs), and 5 insurance companies. The financial sector is dominated by banks (all-but-one foreign owned) that offer basic savings instruments and credit to a limited customer base. New banks have entered the financial market in recent years and a new investor acquired a controlling position in one of the largest banks in 2014. At the same time, the MFIs have been growing rapidly, albeit from a low base. 12. While financial soundness indicators seem satisfactory in the aggregate, there are pockets of vulnerability (Table 8). Following governance problems, one undercapitalized non- systemic bank was closed in 2014, triggering some losses in other financial institutions with cross-deposits. A temporary administrator was appointed to develop a restructuring plan for underperforming MFIs. 13. The current account deficit (including official transfers) narrowed to an estimated 2 percent of GDP in 2014. The improvement was driven by growing mineral exports, decreasing food import needs, and lower-than-anticipated international oil prices (Figure 4 and Table 5). External vulnerabilities are accented by relatively low international reserves (now at 2 months import cover). Public spending on health and education increased from 2.8 percent of GDP in 2012 to about 4 percent of GDP in the 2014 supplementary budget. Page 9 14. Competitiveness has declined in recent years. Recent volatility in balance of payments flows, driven by large scale mining projects and the political crisis, make a definitive assessment of Madagascar’s exchange rate difficult. The three models that were used to assess the REER against fundamentals do not provide a definitive assessment on the deviation from fundamentals. (Box 2 and see the Selected Issues Paper on the external sector assessment). However, there have been recent downward trends in competiveness indicators, such as the World Bank Doing Business Report (latest ranking: 163 rd out of 189 countries) and the WEF Competiveness Index. The official exchange rate is depreciating gradually (10 percent y-o-y in nominal effective terms at end-September 2014 and 14 percent y-o-y versus the U.S. dollar at end-November 2014) and the central bank has been propping up the published exchange rate via round-trip bilateral transactions. Due to an illiquid official market, anecdotal evidence suggests that a significant amount of large foreign exchange transactions take place bilaterally at a somewhat more depreciated rate. The published exchange rate is based on the weighted average of transactions in the official market. The central bank has been influencing marginally the published rate by undertaking near-instantaneous round-trip transactions with counterparts at the end of the day at rates that differ from the daily average up until that point. Page 10 Box 2. Exchange Rate Assessment The model-based analysis does not provide a definitive assessment on exchange rate valuation. However, market indicators suggest that competiveness could be improved. Balance of payments and REER performance Balance of payments flows have been highly volatile in recent years, which make a definitive assessment of Madagascar’s exchange rate valuation. Large scale mining investments, volatile energy and food prices and the decline in donor flows following the political crisis have all contributed to this volatility. Foreign exchange reserves have responded by peaking at 4 months of import cover in 2010, before declining to around 2 months at present. Exchange rate valuation models The macroeconomic balance approach (‘EBA-Lite' and GCER) suggests that the current account deficit is higher than that implied by cross-country saving-investment norms. The CGER methodology gives ambiguous results, while the EBA-Lite methodology suggests some overvaluation. The external stability approach suggests that the current account is greater than that needed to stabilize the current net foreign asset (NFA) position. For a low-income country, such as Madagascar, a higher ‘steady-state’ NFA is perhaps more appropriate, which would reduce the size of the implied overvaluation. The baseline equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER) approach suggests a relatively large overvaluation of the exchange rate. However, this model is sensitive to structural breaks in the data – one such event could be the large-scale mining projects, which began in 2008. Controlling for this generates a model implied exchange rate that that is less overvalued. Survey measures of competitiveness A steady deterioration in survey based measures of competitiveness adds further evidence that the equilibrium exchange rate may be overvalued. These measures expose deep structural weaknesses in Madagascar’s ability to export goods and attract foreign investment. Summary of results Macro balance approach: External stability approach: Equilibrium exchange rate approach: Implied exchange rate valuation (percent, positive = overvalued) GCER EBA-Lite Current NFA NFA/GDP at 80% Baseline Controling for breaks 1 to -5 0.2 to 3.6 Range -5 to 17