18. The key fiscal policy goal is to generate budgetary space in support of inclusive growth and poverty reduction. Against this backdrop, and as reflected in the draft 2015 budget, discussions focused on (i) revenue mobilization; (ii) the level and composition of public spending; (iii) financing options; and (iv) public financial management (PFM) reforms to improve the effectiveness of spending. 19. The recently approved 2015 budget law envisages an overall fiscal deficit of 2.7 percent of GDP by harnessing available resources to raise critical spending. Overall, staff are of the view that the budget’s intentions are good, but will need to bolstered by a strong commitment in implementation, particularly in terms of improving tax revenue. Tax revenues are projected to increase to 11.5 percent of GDP (from about 10 percent in 2014), primarily as a result of improved revenue administration. Key initiatives in this area will include the automation of VAT cross-checking, tightening excise controls, increasing risk-based controls at customs, and improving customs/domestic tax agency cooperation. The wage bill envisages the regularization of some 10,000 temporary (FRAM) teachers (raising the total payroll to 183,000 civil servants) and a 5 percent structural salary increase. The ongoing phase-out of fuel price subsidies, compensated by a small targeted urban transport subsidy, will limit spending on transfers and subsidies. Increased external financing will support higher capital spending. Domestic arrears of about 0.6 percent of GDP will be cleared during 2015, with the remainder being settled in subsequent years. 20. Improved revenue mobilization is critical (see the Selected Issues Paper on tax revenues). Recent in-depth reviews of the general tax code and of revenue administration procedures indicate that Madagascar’s tax rates are by-and-large consistent with those of a modern tax system, but weaknesses in revenue administration and tax exemptions have eroded the tax base. In this context, it will be important to finalize and implement medium-term reform plans for the customs and tax administrations, supported by ongoing technical assistance. 21. Increasing and improving the composition of public expenditure are priorities. While the self-imposed budgetary austerity during the transition years helped avert a macroeconomic crisis, public spending has been inadequate to address Madagascar’s development needs. Expenditure should be rebalanced in favor of priority spending on education, health, and infrastructure. Potential areas for cost savings include, inter alia, reducing inefficient subsidies and budgetary transfers to loss-making public enterprises and tackling the underfunding of the civil service pension funds. The 2015 budget envisages fuel subsidies of 0.1 percent of GDP, transfers to JIRAMA of 0.4 percent of GDP, and transfers to the civil service pension fund of 0.5 percent of GDP. Page 14 22. PFM reforms would enhance the efficiency of public finances. There has been some deterioration in PFM performance in recent years, as evidenced by their CPIA rating and the recently published 2013 PEFA self-assessment. The overall performance of the PFM system has not improved since the period 2006-2008 and nine performance indicators have been downgraded. Based on these findings, the authorities have adopted in October 2014 a Priority Action Plan (PAP) for PFM reforms to address several weaknesses by the end of 2015 and prepare the ground for a PFM reform strategy covering the period 2016–18. 23. Authorities’ views. The authorities concurred that revenue performance was weak, and emphasized that the 2008 tax reforms had simplified the tax system and current weaknesses were mostly due to challenges in revenue administration. Their medium-term goal was a tax ratio (excluding VAT refunds) of 14 percent of GDP, which they viewed as achievable. Their near-term intention was to intensify revenue administration reforms, with a focus on widening the tax base and better audit. An effort to modernize the Mining and Petroleum Codes was also underway. Emphasizing the importance of transparency, the authorities indicated that they would issue an EITI reconciliation report for 2012 and 2013 by end-December 2014, following the lifting (in June 2014) of their suspension as an EITI candidate country. With regards to spending, the 2014 supplementary budget launched the process of raising the level and improving the composition of spending and the forthcoming NDP will flesh out their medium-term priorities. The authorities confirmed their intention of eliminate fuel price subsidies by mid-2015. A plan to revitalize JIRAMA is being prepared, with the assistance of the World Bank. New legislation allows for greater scrutiny of JIRAMA’s accounts and its board of directors was replaced in October 2014. With regards to financing, the authorities agreed to refrain from a net increase in statutory advances during 2015. The authorities noted recent advances in PFM reform, including the adoption of a Priority Action Plan, and their engagement to develop a medium-term PFM strategy for 2016–19 (with technical assistance from the African Development Bank). B. Monetary, Financial, and Exchange Rate Policies: Strengthening Central Bank Independence Madagascar: Optimal Level of Reserves 25. The current floating exchange rate regime is appropriate; however international reserves are below optimal levels . To provide a truer reflection of the market equilibrium and with a view to reintegrating the off-market foreign exchange transactions that emerged since 2013, staff encouraged the Central Bank to avoid round-trip bilateral transactions. Furthermore, the pass-through from exchange rate movements to consumer prices is in line with that of other SSA countries, and tends to be less pronounced when the exchange rate adjustment is small Cost of holding reserves, percent Fixed regime Source: IMF staff estimates. Flexible regime p m f h m v R Actual, end-June 2014 Page 15 (see the Selected Issues Paper on exchange rate pass-through). Against this background, staff advised the authorities to continue to maintain a floating exchange rate and pursue a monetary policy aimed at steadily increasing international reserves and maintaining single-digit inflation. Using an assumption that the long-term opportunity cost of holding reserves is 7 percent, Madagascar’s optimal reserve cover is estimated at 3½ months of import cover, based on the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric. 26. A more active monetary policy would improve its transmission mechanism. In addition to giving more priority to mopping up excess liquidity through deposit auctions (appels d’offre négatifs (AON)), it would give more relevance to the reference rate, which has not moved for several years. To date, monetary policy has been relatively passive, allowing for large excess bank reserves regularly in recent years, and subject to fiscal dominance in 2014, when the government increasingly resorted to statutory advances from the central bank. The central bank also needs to be recapitalized, due to some losses in recent years, which will also help provide the central bank with instruments for liquidity operations. 27. The effectiveness of central bank operations would benefit from a well-prioritized reform agenda. Priorities include measures to make the foreign-exchange interbank market more efficient and moving towards international best practice, updating the regulatory framework for banking sector supervision, and strengthening reserve management and central bank internal audit and accounting. Excess Bank Reserves (Billions of Ariary) 28. An updated safeguards assessment identified additional steps to enhance the independence of the Central Bank . The assessment noted that the political crisis in 2009 had affected the Central Bank’s governance and financial autonomy, and interrupted the development of internal controls. The appointment of the Central Bank Governor in October 2014 was an important step towards restoring stability of the governance arrangements, but the assessment also recommended that an independent oversight of the its operations be established through an audit committee of the Board. The Central Bank should resume regular publication of its audited financial statements, take steps to improve the external audit quality, and implement International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Technical assistance from MCM/LEG has been provided to review the legal framework of the central bank, so as to strengthen its independence by reviewing its mandates, functions, instruments, governance and control mechanisms. Source: Malagasy authorities. 29. Authorities’ views. The authorities gave priority to improving the effectiveness of central bank operations and reviewing the legal framework of the central bank. The Central Bank has Page 16 already initiated a review of its legal framework to support the necessary reforms and strengthen its autonomy. As priority actions, the audited financial accounts for the Central Bank for 2010–13 were approved for publication, and the Central Bank intends to move forward with the creation of an Audit Committee of its Board. As regards foreign exchange reserves, the central bank indicated its intention to gradually increase its foreign reserves and scale back buyback transactions. With regards to the need to recapitalize the central bank, the government has decided to settle outstanding obligations through securitization and issuance of interest-bearing debt instruments, though the needed appropriations may need to wait for the supplementary 2015 budget. 30. In terms of the financial sector, there are some emerging challenges in terms of supervision of banks and MFIs (see the Selected Issues Paper on the financial sector). While non-performing loans are on average at a moderate level, credit risk remains important and should be monitored carefully. A few banks have a significant share of their lending focused on a few large clients. Indirect interconnectedness is high, as many banks have deposits in other banks and banks refinance MFIs. As all-but-one banks is foreign owned, it is important to develop Memoranda of Understandings with the foreign supervisors of the parent companies. Additional resources should be provided to the banking supervisors (CSBF) to increase the frequency of onsite supervision and move towards a risk-based supervision system. Continued financial deepening would help to increase domestic savings, make a contribution to poverty reduction, and make the country less vulnerable to external shocks. Supervision of MFIs (currently the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance) needs to be strengthened significantly. 31. Authorities’ views. The authorities recognized the need to increase the sophistication of their banking supervision to match that of the banks. In addition to launching their own financial stability report and increasing their staffing level, the CSBF is in the process of preparing a three-year strategic plan. The priorities are to update the legal framework for banking supervision and align it with best international practices, move towards risk-based banking supervision, and automate data collection, thereby freeing up more time for analysis of the financial sector data.