15. The authorities are at a crossroads: to either undertake a well-prioritized medium-term economic program that is implemented concertedly or to continue on the path of stagnation and persistent poverty . This context served as the framework for the 2014 Article IV discussions. The authorities’ forthcoming National Development Plan would delineate the principal axes of reform and policy priorities for the coming years. It is envisaged that such reforms could increase real growth to 5 percent a year, driven by agriculture (both higher productivity and expansion), Page 11 mining (given abundant natural resources), labor-intensive manufacturing including textiles (absorbing a rapidly growing labor force), and tourism (given the strong potential for ecotourism) (Figure 6). Investment, both public and private, would need to be scaled up accordingly across various sectors, with additional resources needed to close the balance of payments and fiscal gaps over the medium term. 16. There are significant downside risks (Box 3). The key risk is domestic and linked to slow implementation of reforms, which would cap economic growth to well below 5 percent a year. The lack of economic and structural reforms would not attract sufficient resources from investors and development partners, forcing a significant import compression and putting pressure on foreign exchange reserves. This would come at a considerable cost, as essential investments in infrastructure would fall short of expectations. Lack of progress in tackling persistent poverty could also increase social tensions. One external risk is the volatility in oil prices, which on the down-side could lead to BOP and fiscal pressures. A wider spread of the Ebola pandemic could also have negative but likely- modest indirect effects (primarily linked to tourism). A more direct and significant effect could stem from a possible intensification and persistence of the recent outbreak of bubonic plague. Appendix I presents the highlights of what an alternative muddling-through low-growth scenario would imply. 17. Authorities’ views. Although recognizing that downside risks are significant, the authorities were confident about the possibility of accelerating the pace of recovery and achieving annual economic growth of 5 percent or more starting in 2015. They stressed the prudent assumptions used for their projections, and several favorable factors that should support economic activity, such as an expected rebound in the production of rice and other agricultural products, a recovery in manufacturing exports (mainly textiles) thanks to the recent restoration of AGOA trade privileges, and additional external financing that should reactivate infrastructure projects. The authorities were of the view that, with a more ambitious scaling-up of infrastructure projects (subject to available financing), one could envisage stronger economic growth rates of up to 10 percent per year over the medium-term. The authorities noted that an eventual ECF program would provide needed support to their medium-term reform plans. Page 12 Box 3. Madagascar: Risk Assessment Matrix 1/ Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Medium Politically motivated uncertainty and tensions. Medium Cyclones, floods, and droughts. Potential Impact Policy Response Domestic Risks High: Reduced inflow of FDI and donor support and reduced export earnings from tourism. Reduced fiscal space impedes the government’s ability to deliver public services. Medium: Loss and damage of real and human capital and lower growth. Maintain exchange rate flexibility and reallocate fiscal spending to support of the most vulnerable. Encourage development partners to work more closely with government to enable spending in social priority areas. Reallocate fiscal spending to finance recovery work and make appeal to donors for post-disaster financing. External Risks High Low: Slower growth in tourism. Maintain exchange rate flexibility. Protracted period of modest growth in Europe. Uncertain/slow donor support Medium High: Reduced fiscal space impedes the government’s ability to deliver public services. Medium: Sharp rise in oil prices triggering BOP and fiscal pressures. Medium: Decreasing tourism, as tourists start avoiding all African destinations. Energize donor support through a concerted campaign emphasizing the merits and needs of the medium-term development plan; look within budget for ways to protect key public services. More protracted removal of fuel price subsidies, maintain exchange rate flexibility, and careful monetary policy tightening to contain second-round inflation pressures. Strengthen preventive health services and information campaign. Medium Medium Heightened geopolitical risks in the Middle East. Ebola spreading to several countries (but not Madagascar). 1/ The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of the IMF staff. The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 13 POLICY DISCUSSIONS—IMPROVING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH AND REDUCING POVERTY