1. Madagascar is now one of the poorest countries in the world, with GDP per capita having halved since 1960 . About 93 percent of the population lives below US$2 (PPP) per day (see the Selected Issues Paper on poverty). Economic growth has been low (1.8 percent per year since 1960) while population growth has been rapid (2.9 percent per year), reaching 22.9 million in 2013 from 5.1 million in 1960. Currently, about half the population is less than 20 years of age. Poverty Headcount ($2/day) in Selected Sub-Saharan African Countries (Percent of population, most recent observation) Real GDP per Capita (Constant 2005 U.S. dollars, index 1960=100) Sub-Saharan Africa Madagascar Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank. Real GDP Growth (Annual percentage change) 2. Madagascar remains fragile, having experienced a long history of recurring political instability and significant vulnerabilities. Over the last fifty years, all heads of state (excluding the current President) have either gained or lost power in the context of an unconstitutional event. Uncertainties linked to political instability, weak institutions, and weak governance have eroded the foundation for solid economic growth, with short-term rent-seeking having taken precedence over longer-term nation building. Madagascar is also highly vulnerable to climatic and other exogenous shocks, such as cyclones, floods, locust infestations, and health epidemics. President impeached and new president designated 1991 crisis led to elections in 1993 elections led to crisis Regular elections Regular elections 2009 crisis led to transfer of power Source: Malagasy authorities. 3. The most recent political crisis erupted in 2009 and led to economic stagnation and a significant deterioration of development outcomes . The then-president fled Madagascar after a period of civil unrest. The transition regime that assumed power was not recognized by a majority of the international community. Donor financing dwindled, with a complete stop of budget support. Significant fiscal tightening helped ensure that macroeconomic stability was not jeopardized, but at a cost of a sharp reduction in public spending. Structural reforms stalled as the transition regime Page 6 lacked a medium-term vision and strategy. After a sharp fall in economic activity in 2009, annual growth has not exceeded 3 percent. Social services have deteriorated, including basic health care and primary education. The attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) has become an increasingly remote target (Figure 1 and Table 9). 4. The government that assumed power in early 2014, following constitutional elections, has shown a commitment to addressing these challenges . The new government has given priority to raising social and infrastructure spending back to more normal levels (starting with the 2014 supplementary budget) and creating a foundation for faster and more inclusive growth and for poverty reduction. In support of this commitment, the authorities received a disbursement (SDR 30.55 million) under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) in June 2014. A new National Development Plan (NDP) is under preparation that will cast the economic and structural reform priorities over the medium term. 5. The bulk of the advice provided in the context of the last Article IV consultation (in 2007) remains highly relevant today (Box 1). However, the government’s capacity to provide for Madagascar’s social and development needs is weaker today than in 2007, and progress on structural reforms has been limited. Tax revenues have fallen back to low levels reflecting a more prevalent informal economy, challenges in tax and customs administration, and increasing corruption. Public financial management (PFM) has also weakened, and the authorities have yet to implement measures to rehabilitate the electricity sector or deepen financial intermediation. Box 1. Main Recommendations from the 2007 Article IV Consultation Staff emphasized the following areas as key to maintaining macroeconomic stability and addressing key structural