Context . General elections were held on May 5, 2013. Prime Minister Najib’s incumbent coalition won narrow election, thus ensuring smooth policy transition. Amidst a difficult external environment for Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) last spring-summer, the administration has taken actions that signal its resolve to respond decisively to domestic and external challenges. A High-Level Fiscal Policy Committee (FPC) was created to improve management of the public finances, food and fuel subsidies and electricity tariffs are being rationalized, and a Goods and Services Tax (GST) will be introduced in 2015. These measures are key steps towards rebuilding fiscal buffers lost on account of expansionary policies during the global financial crisis. Economic developments . Growth slowed to 4.7 percent in 2013, compared with 5.6 percent in 2012, but remained healthy. Weak external demand, especially in the first half of the year, weighed on activity, and a small negative output gap opened up. Domestic demand remained robust, supported by healthy labor markets, accommodative financial conditions and, during the first half, expansionary fiscal policies (Figure 1). Inflation remained subdued through the spring and summer despite the introduction of a minimum wage in 2013 but picked up recently. Headline inflation rose to 3.2 percent year ‐ on ‐ year in December, reflecting subsidy cuts. Core inflation has also increased but is still very low, less than 2 percent in December (Figure 2). Financial Market Developments Like many other EMEs, Malaysia has been experiencing capital outflows during periods of market turbulence, including spring-summer and early this year. Between end¬May and end¬2013, the yield curve for Malaysian Government Securities (MGS) has steepened: 10 ‐ year yields have increased by 70 bps, and the spread against the U.S. dollar has widened by about 20 bps. During summer turbulence, the ringgit weakened by about 11 percent against the dollar (peak-to-trough) and after a brief period of strengthening is now back below the September Page 6 trough. Deep financial markets and a flexible exchange rate have helped facilitate financial adjustment, and the economy has been able to absorb the shocks without appreciable harm to date. Outlook . Growth is projected to accelerate to 5.0 percent in 2014. Consumption and investment growth are expected to moderate somewhat but should generally hold up amidst conditions of full employment and the long pipeline of large, multiyear investment projects. In addition, the pickup of export growth since the second half of 2013 should be sustained as the global economy continues to improve, and offset headwinds from fiscal consolidation (a fiscal impulse of about minus 1 percent of GDP in 2014, although staff views the fiscal multipliers as low). Over the medium term, growth is expected to average 5 percent, reflecting higher investment, including infrastructure upgrades, which should help boost productivity. The gradual removal of subsidies is expected to result in a modest increase in inflation during 2014. Second round price effects are, however, expected to be limited in light of the low initial level of inflation, and BNM’s considerable monetary policy credibility. Inflation will likely reach about 4.0 percent in 2015 following the introduction of GST, but in staff’s baseline scenario, is expected to gradually moderate to below 3.0 percent in the medium term. Risks . The risks to the staff’s baseline scenario are primarily on the downside and stem from both external and domestic sources (Appendix 2). External risks. A key risk is a potentially bumpy exit from unconventional monetary policies (UMP) in advanced economies (AEs), which could trigger bouts of financial market turbulence and dampen external demand. With foreign investors still holding sizeable positions in the domestic bond and equity markets, Malaysia is vulnerable to capital outflows during periods of heightened global financial stress, as evidenced during spring-summer 2013. Other risks include a further slowdown in China, a protracted period of slow growth in Europe, and commodity price shocks. Domestic risks. The relatively high level of federal debt (close to the government’s self-imposed ceiling of 55 percent of GDP) and large contingent federal liabilities limit the room for countercyclical fiscal policy. And while recent fiscal actions are welcomed, there remain implementation risks associated with these comprehensive reforms. In particular, setbacks in the implementation of fiscal reforms could undermine investor sentiments and trigger outflows from the bond market and a jump in yields which, in the context of the government’s high financing needs, could have a significant macro-fiscal impact. In staff’s view, however, implementation risks are low—the authorities have demonstrated the political will and possess the technical expertise to carry reforms out. In addition, high house prices, rising household debt, and banks’ large exposure to real estate remain a concern, particularly in light of UMP unwinding and a likely tightening in domestic financial conditions and higher interest rates. Other domestic risks include a higher and more persistent increase in inflation and inflation expectations, triggered by higher fuel and electricity prices as subsidies are being rationalized. Adjustments in fuel prices are expected to add about 0.5 percentage point to annual inflation in 2014 15, while the GST could add about 0.9 percentage point in 2015. The low starting level of inflation and the Page 7 substantial policy credibility of the monetary authorities, circumscribe, in staff’s view, the risk of second round effects. Policy advice . The authorities are taking decisive and proactive steps to reinforce Malaysia’s macroeconomic and structural policies (Appendix 1). While specific measures are consistent with Fund policy advice, they are home grown and driven by the authorities’ own multiyear adjustment and reform programs. Specifically, the authorities took action to strengthen Malaysia’s public finances during the second half of 2013. These measures are framed in the context of a medium term fiscal adjustment program and are consistent with past Fund technical assistance and staff policy advice. The authorities are carefully monitoring financial sector risks and are implementing additional macro prudential measures; they are also in the process of strengthening their information base through the collection of granular data on household assets and liabilities. The authorities are allowing two-way exchange rate flexibility. They are also implementing wide ranging structural reforms, and their specific programs benefit from extensive technical and policy support from the IMF and other international organizations. Authorities’ views . The authorities were in broad agreement with staff’s assessment of the economic outlook and balance of risks. They anticipate growth to increase in 2014 with the improvement in the external environment, although the fiscal consolidation can be expected to be a drag on growth. Private investment growth should remain robust at about 13 percent but some moderation in private consumption growth is likely. The authorities also see the main risks to the outlook are being primarily on the downside and they highlighted risks from external sources, with a slowdown in global growth a key concern. In addition, uncertainty surrounding the unwinding of UMPs and the potential for policy missteps along the way and heightened volatility are also key risks for Malaysia. On the domestic front, the authorities reiterated their commitment to steadfast implementation of fiscal reforms. The authorities acknowledged the risk of spillover to prices of other nonfuel goods and services from subsidy rationalization, which will raise headline inflation (albeit from low starting levels). They assess the risk of second-round effect at this point to be limited. The authorities are less concerned with risks to financial stability from high household debt and house prices. They pointed to the large cushions provided by high levels of household financial assets, healthy labor markets and low risk of unemployment. In addition, mortgage interest rates are largely tied to the policy rate (indirectly through the base lending rate), which has been relatively stable and makes sudden increases unlikely. Lastly, the authorities’ targeted and phased approach to macroprudential policies, along with efforts to increase financial literacy, has curtailed risks. Page 8