Recent developments . The Malaysian economy continued to perform well in 2014 and the authorities have taken advantage of favorable conditions provided by the growing economy, full employment, and a benign political calendar to implement key fiscal reforms. These decisive steps, driven by the authorities’ multiyear adjustment and reform agenda, are consistent with Fund policy advice (Appendix 1). Growth accelerated to 5.9 percent as the recovery of exports and continued strong private demand offset mild headwinds from lower public spending. Private investment continues to be fueled by accommodative financial conditions and the catalytic effects of long term public investment programs. Strong employment and wage growth supported private consumption. The removal of fuel subsidies pushed inflation above its historical average but without any signs of more generalized inflationary pressures, despite a positive output gap. Credit growth has moderated yet remains brisk, with residential property loan growth close to 14 percent in September. Deposit growth has slowed to the single digits and domestic liquidity conditions are beginning to tighten. The ringgit appreciated against the U.S. dollar through mid-August but subsequently depreciated by 10 percent as oil prices fell, for a cumulative depreciation by year-end of about 6.3 percent since January 2014, with further depreciation pressures in early January 2015. Reserves have declined by over US$15 billion between mid-August to end-December 2014 amid capital outflows. Outlook . Growth is expected to moderate to a still robust rate of 4.8 percent in 2015. Activity will be led by growth in private investment in the non-oil sector, which is likely to benefit from lower energy costs. Private consumption growth is likely to moderate, reflecting the net effects of lower commodity prices, the impact of GST, and slower credit growth. The projected decline in average crude oil prices for 2015 compared to 2014 is a large negative terms of trade shock for Malaysia (Appendix 2). Nevertheless, only a modest negative impact on growth is expected as lower energy costs should help stimulate the non-oil sector and boost activity in Malaysia’s main trading partners. Financial conditions remain accommodative but are tightening, a trend that should continue in 2015 and become a drag on growth, particularly private consumption. GST implementation will increase inflation on introduction in April 2015 but lower fuel prices, subdued underlying inflation, and a narrowing output gap will mitigate the impact. Risks. Risks to the baseline are tilted to the downside. Despite the improved outlook for the US economy, weak prospects for Europe and Japan along with falling fuel and commodity prices, are adding to economic uncertainties (see Appendix 3).  External risks. A protracted period of slower growth in advanced economies and emerging markets would slow growth in Malaysia through the trade channel with second round effects on For an empirical assessment, see the forthcoming Selected Issues Paper “The Impact of Lower Oil Prices on Malaysia: a VAR Approach” by Niamh Sheridan (2015). Page 6 domestic demand. Sizeable foreign holdings of local currency assets expose Malaysia to volatility in international capital flows. In a risk scenario, a surge in global volatility could see investors reducing their exposure to Malaysian assets. This risk is mitigated by Malaysia’s flexible exchange rate, ample monetary policy credibility, well timed fiscal adjustment, and financial cushions from large official reserves and institutional savings. Malaysia could be vulnerable to contagion and financial volatility in the case of a disorderly adjustment to persistent dollar strength, although the export-oriented manufacturing sector is likely to benefit.  Domestic risk s. The authorities are proceeding with fiscal reforms but should guard against slowdown in reform momentum. It will be important to continue on this path and balance the budget by 2020. The impact of lower global oil and gas prices on Malaysia could be larger, dampening growth through delayed investment plans and the impact of higher real interest rates; in addition the current account surplus could narrow and additional measures would be needed to meet the fiscal targets. Although there are signs of cooling in the housing market and personal lending growth has been curtailed, financial vulnerabilities remain due to high household debt and elevated house prices. Authorities’ views. The authorities were in broad agreement with staff’s assessment.  They expect growth to remain steady in 2015, led by private demand. Private consumption will continue to expand, albeit at a more moderate rate following implementation of GST and other price adjustments. Slower household credit growth is not expected to have a significant impact on consumption as long as economic growth is sustained. Investment in the oil and gas sector could be affected, if oil prices remain low for an extended period of time. It must be noted that Malaysia’s investment is broad-based with the oil and gas sector accounting for less that 20 percent of private investment and the services and manufacturing sectors contributed to 80 percent of growth in investment in 2013. On the external front, commodity and resource- based exports will be affected by lower commodity prices, however, non-resource based manufacturing exports, which account for 53 percent of total exports, will provide support to export growth.  The authorities viewed the external risks to the outlook as significant. They voiced concerns about the recovery in advanced economies, where growth risks and widening policy divergence could trigger global financial market turbulence with negative spillovers to the real economy.  In terms of financial sector risks, the authorities were less concerned than staff. They noted that credit and house price growth have moderated while successful implementation of targeted macroprudential measures has curtailed risks and increased financial sector resilience. The authorities have assessed the capacity of banks to withstand and respond to a wide range of shocks and adverse scenarios. These stress tests indicate that bank balance sheets are resilient, including to large changes in house prices and interest rates. Page 7