. The 2012 IMF-World Bank Financial Assessment Program (FSAP) found that Malaysia’s financial system is sound and backed by a strong supervisory and regulatory system. Malaysia’s financial system is well diversified although banks continue to provide over 85 percent of credit domestically. Nonbanks, including development financial institutions, provide the remaining 15 percent of credit but constitute only 9 percent of financial system assets. Consistent with the FSAP, staff found that Malaysian banks are well-capitalized, profitable, and have adequate liquidity buffers. With a Tier 1 capital ratio of 13.9 percent at end 2012, banks are well-positioned to meet the Page 16 Basel III target of 8.5 percent by 2019. Banks’ liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) of 60 percent is consistent with the 2015 Basel III target but meeting the 2019 target of 100 percent, while attainable, is more challenging under current definition. Banks’ funding structure is dominated by deposits, which make up 80 percent of the total; 17 percent of these deposits are classified as strictly callable. Banks are moderately profitable, with return on equity averaging about 14 percent in recent years, although recent heightened competition for retail deposits has compressed net interest margins. Looking ahead, banks’ funding costs are likely to increase as deposit rates rise with the unwinding of UMPs but, with variable rate loans largely tied to the BLR (which has tended to only change when the OPR changes), banks could face further compression of their net interest rate margins. Malaysia: Macrofinancial-Environtment Spidergram 1/ Gross portfolio inflows to GDP Liquid assets to short- term liabilities Sovereign CDS spread (bps) Non-performing loans (NPL) ratio Private domestic credit growth (percent y/y) Regulatory Tier 1 Capital to Risk- Weighted Assets 2012Q3 2013Q3 Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics and Financial Soundness Indicators ; Bloomberg LP.; Haver analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. FSAP update . Staff noted that the authorities have made significant progress with implementation of the recommendations of the FSAP (see Appendix 6). Notably, the Financial Services Act (FSA) and the Islamic Financial Services Act (IFSA) came into force on June 30, 2013, strengthening BNM’s powers, including the ability to take prompt corrective action for financial institutions and to carry out consolidated supervision of financial holding companies. In addition, the regulatory perimeter is widened to include onshore nonbank financial entities and nonbank financial entities operating in the offshore The decline in banks’ CAR from 17.6 percent at end-2012 to 14.7 percent at Q3:2013, is reflective of banks’ efforts to reduce capital that no longer qualifies as loss-absorbing capital under Basel III. The Tier 1 capital ratio of the banking system, the relevant Basel III metric, has remained stable over this period. Liquidity as measured by one-year coverage of liabilities with assets has come down slightly since 2012 but remains similar to the 2011 level. Under the LCR, the more stringent Basel III definition of liquidity, that measures one-month coverage of liabilities, banks are consistent with the global phase-in schedule. Banks’ spreads between lending and deposit rates have shrunk over the past 10 years (by about 100 bps) as lending rates have come down faster than deposit rates, reflecting, in part, increasing competition in the banking sector and improving borrower creditworthiness (as evidenced by falling amounts of impaired loans for the overall system). However, BNM issued an industry consultation paper in January 2014 proposing a new reference rate to replace the BLR. The proposed new reference rate is designed to reflect each financial institution’s funding costs, enhancing transparency in setting the reference rate, and increasing the sensitivity of the reference rate to changes in an institution’s funding costs, which will reduce their risk. Page 17 Labuan International Business and Financial Center (Labuan IBFC) other than those licensed by the Labuan Financial Services Authority. The IFSA provides a legal framework that is consistent with Shariah on regulation and supervision, from licensing to the winding up of institutions. Separately, a high-level committee, the Financial Stability Executive Committee, comprising the BNM, Perbadanan Insurans Deposit Malaysia (PIDM), and the fiscal authority, formed since 2010 to discuss systemic risk issues and decide on measures to address such risks, including those emanating from entities outside of the regulatory purview of BNM, has expanded its permanent membership to include the Securities Commission. With regard to the FSAP recommendation for improvement in granular data on household assets and liabilities, the authorities expect to complete collection of data by income group by end Staff position . In staff’s view, the following areas warrant attention: Household debt . Concerns have centered on rapidly growing household debt of 83 percent of GDP, amid rising exposure of banks to the household sector (47 percent of banks’ assets), vigorous house price appreciation, and strong growth in unsecured consumer credit (see Box 4). Given the rapid credit growth to households and growing credit intermediation by nonbanks to households, staff suggested that additional macroprudential measures may be needed and emphasized the importance of continuing to enhance monitoring. Options for additional macroprudential policies include explicit limits on debt service-to-income ratios, which would have to be supported by ongoing development of credit registries; capping LTVs on second and first mortgages, or additional capital charges on loans with high LTVs. Recent independent policy actions by state governments to curb price increases also suggest there is scope for closer coordination between local and federal authorities to ensure that combined measures are not overly restrictive. Staff welcomed progress with the collection of granular data to support surveillance and steps recently taken by the authorities to issue guidelines for responsible financing to nonbanks that are similar to those applicable to banks. Banks’ exposure to real estate . Banks carry significant exposure to the nonfinancial corporate sector (43 percent of banks’ assets). Exposure to the real estate sector makes up about 30 percent of the total stock of corporate loans, and nearly 40 percent of recent flow, which suggests that a price correction in the real estate market could have a significant In November 2013, S&P downgraded its rating outlook for one large bank and two mid-tier banks on concerns that asset quality could deteriorate in the future due to rising household indebtedness and potential for a correction in house prices. However, also during November 2013, Moodys’ affirmed its stable ratings for 9 Malaysian banks, including the one large bank downgraded by S&P, while raising its future outlook to positive from stable. In its guidelines on responsible financing for financial institutions, the BNM already requires banks to set a prudent limit on the debt service ratio (DSR). Importantly, there is no set limit for all borrowers but rather banks are expected to vary the DSR based on borrower creditworthiness. Page 18 impact on the value of banks’ collateral. The aggregate nonfinancial corporate sector has assets estimated to be more than 4 times GDP. Corporate debt . Corporates rely mainly on bank loans for financing, which make up nearly 60 percent of total liabilities. Debt issuance is long term in nature and mainly denominated in ringgit, averaging almost 80 percent of the total in recent years. Following the advent of the global financial crisis in 2008, there was a surge in U.S. dollar-denominated debt issuance by Malaysian corporates seeking to take advantage of low borrowing rates in global markets, but this has reverted to the average pre-crisis level since 2010. The aggregate solvency situation appears comfortable with earnings of nearly four times interest expense on debt liabilities, while the liquidity situation with current assets of nearly 1.6 times current liabilities is adequate. In aggregate, cash buffers estimated at 14 percent of assets are reasonable, and leverage is moderate with a debt-equity ratio of about 45 percent. Nevertheless, the solvency situation varies considerably across the corporate universe and the aggregate picture could change rapidly as earnings are volatile. Resident companies including large multinational companies hedge their foreign currency exposure either with onshore banks or by relying on foreign currency earnings from abroad to meet the foreign currency commitment. There were no reports of concerns in the corporate sector from the depreciation of the ringgit during the summer of 2013. Asset quality . Overall asset quality has improved significantly in recent years with nonperforming loans at a relatively low level of 2 percent of gross loans in 2013 compared with 6 percent at end 2007. Against a backdrop of strong credit growth, the long term improvement in asset quality is confirmed by a trend decline in the amounts of impaired loans, although there has been a slight reversal in this trend since March 2013. Providing a cushion, banks’ provisions cover nearly 100 percent of all impaired loans. Banks’ holdings of government and corporate securities comprised about 16 percent of total assets in August 2013, of which federal government securities are 4.5 percent, although accounting for government-guaranteed securities increases the potential exposure. Nevertheless, with many of these securities held to maturity, there was no significant impact on banks’ capital from higher MGS yields in 2013. Unlike the household sector, data on individually listed corporates is available on filings data and it is therefore possible to assess potential vulnerabilities at a granular level. Further detailed assessment of foreign currency assets and liabilities of domestic corporates is desirable. It would require access to banks’ data on the size and nature of foreign currency hedging done by corporates as this is not publicly available information. Page 19 Foreign currency and cross-border exposures . For the banking system as a whole, foreign currency exposure is 4 percent of loans and 5 percent of deposits. The authorities’ own stress tests indicate a manageable level of FX liquidity risk in the banking system. Banks emphasize the need to strengthen fee based income and to continue with plans to expand overseas in ASEAN. As cross-border banking activity continues to grow, the authorities are appropriately expanding the list of countries with which they have Memoranda of Understanding for cross-border supervision. At present, cross-border assets are mainly funded from host countries. Overseas lending by the top five banks makes up nearly 24 percent of total lending while loans-to-local deposit ratios are moderate at about 84 percent. Most of the exposure and international earnings contributions come from Singapore, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Thailand and Cambodia. Although Malaysian banking operations in Indonesia and Thailand remain profitable as of Q3:2013, asset quality could weaken in response to recent developments. Malaysian banks are likely to continue expanding abroad as ASEAN economic integration picks up steam in the years ahead. International experience suggests that substantial financial integration spearheaded by rapid bank expansion in new markets can pose challenges for bank risk management and supervisory monitoring. Going forward, it will thus be important to deepen home-host cooperation and supervision and strengthen crisis prevention and mitigation mechanisms, as outlined in Malaysia’s Financial Sector Blueprint. The impact of higher interest rates . In view of ongoing and prospective unwinding of UMPs in AEs and the normalization of global interest rates, staff conducted a simple solvency sensitivity analysis of the aggregate household, corporate and banking balance sheets to increases in MGS yields, the OPR, banks’ deposits rates and nonperforming loans (NPLs) (see Appendix 7). From a financial stability perspective, plausible increases in domestic interest rates resulting from orderly tapering of UMP in advanced economies appear manageable at the aggregate level. For example, an increase in MGS yields by 100 bps combined with an increase in the OPR of 50 bps over the course of one year is estimated to have little impact on aggregate household balance sheets or bank capital because of earnings and savings buffers. However, the corporate interest servicing ratio rises by 2.6 percentage points to 27.6 percent, which could potentially lead to difficulties at some individual corporates but is unlikely to have a systemic impact. More stringent stress tests . While an increase in borrowing costs by 100 bps over 12 months is plausible, more stringent tightening of financial conditions cannot be ruled out going forward. A 200 bps increase in the policy rate over a one-year period would: Increase the aggregate household debt servicing ratio (DSR) by 4 percentage points to nearly 48 percent ignoring the corresponding increase in income from savings; including the latter would raise the aggregate household DSR by only half a percentage point. However, the asset and liability positions may not match across all categories of households and some income groups may experience larger increases in their DSR and may become stressed. Raise the corporate interest service ratio by nearly 8 percentage points to 33 percent, assuming no change in corporate earnings and full rollover of debt coming due. Page 20 Reduce the banking system’s Tier 1 capital ratio by 1.1 percentage points to 12.8 percent (same as a doubling of NPLs). The same rate shock over a 2 year period would have a much lower impact on bank capital as it would allow use of additional earnings as a buffer. It is important to emphasize that these results are obtained at the aggregate level; and the future availability of granular data on households together with more detailed analysis at individual corporate and banking level would provide more information on vulnerabilities of individual institutions. Authorities’ views . The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment that the financial sector is well diversified; and the banking system is strongly capitalized, very liquid and reasonably profitable. They noted recent enhancements in internal models used to stress-test banks’ solvency and liquidity, addressing, for instance, the FSAP recommendation for multiyear bottom up analysis. In terms of asset quality, the authorities commented that while the household debt burden has risen as a proportion of GDP in recent years, it remains well-supported by much larger financial asset buffers; while on the corporate side, leverage remains moderate. They described their approach to macroprudential policies as intentionally gradual in order to avoid unintended consequences and over adjustment. They noted that rapidly increasing house prices are a concern but argued the increase is not solely driven by credit but primarily reflects mismatches between supply and demand, motivating increases in the Real Property Gains Tax (RPGT) and other budgetary measures to increase the supply of affordable housing. With regards to the impact of UMP withdrawal, the authorities believe that households will remain largely unaffected as potentially higher debt servicing costs would be offset by higher rates of return on savings including deposits. The authorities highlighted steps taken in strengthening regulation of the financial sector, in particular, the implementation of the Financial Services Act and the Islamic Financial Services Act, which significantly expand the scope of BNM’s supervisory and regulatory powers. In particular, the power in relation to consolidated supervision allows BNM to extend the perimeter of its regulation and supervision to the subsidiaries of domestic banks operating in the Labuan International Business and Financial Center. The authorities pointed out the challenges faced by domestic banks in meeting the Basel III LCR requirement related to the Basel III standardized assumptions regarding run off rates for deposits in comparison to BNM’s behavioral modeling approach. Separately, the authorities have been monitoring closely the growth in credit provided by nonbanks to households and have taken steps to collaborate with the relevant regulator in issuing guidelines for responsible lending. Page 21