ADDRESSING IMBALANCES Leverage and risks . Malaysia’s financial system is strong and well diversified, Malaysian banks are well-capitalized and profitable, and the authorities have made significant progress on FSAP recommendations (see Appendix 7). Financial Credit-to-GDP Gap 1/ (In percent of GDP, deviation from one-sided HP filter, estimation period 2000:Q1 to 2013:Q4) sector vulnerabilities reflect several years of rapid credit growth and significant increase in leverage. Credit has increased by over 60 percent since end-2009 and the ratio of credit-to-GDP is above long-term trend. Real interest rates on deposits have been negative since 2009 and deposit growth has slowed while savings in financial products have grown strongly, raising concerns about disintermediation in the banking sector and excessive financial risk- taking (see Appendix 8). Sources: CEIC Data Co., Ltd.; and staff calculations. 1/ The credit-to-GDP gap is computed using the Basel III methodology. The 2 percent and 10 percent lines indicate thresholds at which regulators are expected to begin imposing the countercyclical capital buffer and when it should be fully deployed. Gap 2 percent threshold 10 percent threshold 2005Q1 2006Q1 2007Q1 2008Q1 2009Q1 2010Q1 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 Household debt . Household debt has grown rapidly since 2008, reflecting growth in both mortgages and personal credit. Just over half the debt is owed on residential property, of which about 70 percent are variable rate mortgages. NBFI lending to households has doubled since 2009 and accounted for about 20 percent of household debt at end-2013. Since 2008, house prices have increased by 60 percent, outpacing income and rental growth. Mitigating the risks are strong financial buffers, with household financial assets at just over twice household debt. However lower income borrowers are more highly leveraged. And while there are signs of cooling in the housing market, this could also be a temporary respite reflecting property re-pricing ahead of GST implementation and the prohibition of Interest Capitalization Schemes. Macroprudential measures have been successful in curbing risks. Personal loan growth has slowed in response to measures targeting NBFIs in July 2013 and tighter caps on debt-service ratios of lower income households. An enhanced framework for risk-based pricing is also helping reduce loan applications and approvals. Nevertheless, additional macro-prudential measures, such as LTV caps on second and first mortgages, may be needed. Page 12 Corporate sector debt. Corporate sector debt has increased in Malaysia and is now close to the average for other Asian countries. The debt securities and sukuk markets are an important source of financing. Debt issuance is mostly long term and ringgit denominated with limited holding by foreigners. Nonfinancial private offshore external debt is about 9 percent of GDP and resident companies with foreign currency exposure either hedged using onshore banks or have a natural hedge of foreign currency earnings. On aggregate, corporate solvency and liquidity ratios appear comfortable. Non-financial Corporate Credit to GDP Ratio Average(2003-2007) 1/ 2014:Q3 P Z w f v P w K V K H Sources: CEIC Data Co. Ltd.; HAVER Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 1/Except for Singapore, which is average for 2004-07, and for China, which is average for 2007 only. 2/ For Vietnam graph shows private-sector-credit-to-GDP ratio. Commercial Banks' Impaired Loans, November 2014 Impaired loan (bill RM) Net impaired loans to net total loans (percent, RHS) Asset quality. Asset quality continues to improve, with a nonperforming loan ratio of 1.8 percent compared with 6 percent at end-2007. Against a backdrop of strong credit growth, the improvement is also confirmed by a decline in the amounts of impaired loans. Vintage analysis by BNM shows that the default rate by months-on- book has been declining for loans originating in later periods. Provisioning is adequate with a ratio just over 100 percent. To address a gradual decline in collective impairment provisioning, BNM will require that by end 2015, banks maintain, on aggregate, collective impairment provisions and regulatory reserves of at least 1.2 percent of total outstanding loans (net of individual impairment provisions). Risk-informed price standards, which came into effect in March 2014, require banks to articulate costs and expected losses for different retail loan and financing product segments and ensure that these are in line with banks’ risk management plans. Source: CEIC Data Co. Ltd. Disintermediation. Deposit growth has been trending down since end-2011 and was 7.8 percent y-o-y at end November 2014, compared with 8.3 percent at end-2013. Growth in deposits by individuals has also declined to 3.8 percent at end November, compared with 6.0 percent at end-2013. Combined with strong loan growth this has pushed up the loan-to-deposit ratio to 86.6 percent at end-November 2014 compared with 84.6 percent at end-2013. The banks remain predominately deposit funded but slow system-wide deposit growth along with the pending implementation of the Basel III LCR is nudging up deposit interest rates. The new reference rate framework for loan pricing, which came into effect in 2015, should ensure that higher funding costs are passed on to retail lending rates, although this could be offset by stiff competition in the mortgage market. A higher policy rate would help to ease these pressures by increasing deposit rates, encouraging savings to remain in the banking system and curbing the pace of Page 13 disintermediation, while also reversing negative real interest rates and curtailing the growth in leverage. Savings in financial products has grown rapidly since 2009, almost doubling in size; this development reflects ongoing structural development in the financial market but also fueled by low interest rates and the search for yields by investors. Foreign currency and overseas exposure of banks. Overseas operations of domestic banks continue to expand within Asia, primarily into Indonesia and Singapore. Total assets of overseas subsidiaries and branches grew by 16.3 percent during 2013. The assets of overseas operations are dominated by loans and investment in plain vanilla debt securities and are largely funded by local currency deposits, limiting potential cross-border funding risks. Malaysian banks are primarily deposit-funded, however, foreign currency borrowing has increased, reflecting the foreign currency needs of their customers and as part of the banks’ foreign currency liquidity management. Authorities’ views. The authorities view financial sector vulnerabilities as having moderated pointing to a slowdown in the growth of household debt and in lending from the nonbank sector and a decline in speculative behavior in the real estate market. These developments reflect macroprudential measures taken by BNM and other government agencies in a holistic approach to address rising household indebtedness and house prices. Their approach has been deliberately gradual and targeted in order to avoid any over-correction. The authorities do not see the need for additional policy action in this area at this time. Existing measures—such as risk informed pricing, more rigorous borrower affordability assessment, continued supervisory vigilance over underwriting practices and additional capital requirements—continue to be effective in strengthening the risk taking practices of financial institutions (including the nonbanks). The authorities are of the view that slowing deposit growth is a natural consequence of financial sector development.