RESILIENCE EPF Malaysia: Federal Domestic Debt by Holder (In billions of ringgit) . Like other EMEs, Malaysia was affected by capital flow volatility in May-June 2013 and in early 2014. During May through end July, foreign investors reduced their exposures to Malaysian bonds and equities (by 3.5 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively, of early- May allocations on a net basis). Over this period, the yield curve for government securities steepened, with 10 year yields rising by 102 bps peak-trough, while U.S. 10 year treasury yields rose 69 bps. Malaysian corporate bonds sold off during the summer turbulence with yields increasing by 120 bps (JP Morgan JACI Malaysia). On the equity side, there was no pronounced impact despite some foreign investor outflow, as domestic investors stepped in with purchases and stock prices rose by 1.3 percent between mid-May and end-July. The ringgit weakened by about 11 percent against the dollar (peak-to-trough). Sources: Bank Negara Malaysia; staff calculations Foreign Banks Vulnerabilities and resilience . The spring-summer 2013 episode is the latest in a series of risk on/risk off cycles that Malaysia has endured in recent years, resulting in significant volatility in net portfolio flows (Figure 5). With UMP withdrawal and the normalization of interest rates in AEs, the carry trade advantage for Malaysian assets, especially government securities, will likely become less pronounced. While the mission’s baseline assumption is that UMP exit is likely to be gradual, the possibility of sudden and significant portfolio outflows from Malaysia and other emerging market countries cannot be ruled out. Malaysia’s vulnerability is related to its relatively high level of federal debt and large foreign holdings of government securities (42 percent). These risks were traditionally mitigated by Malaysia’s strong external position but have come to the fore recently, following the decline in its current account surplus (to 3 4 percent of GDP in 2013 14 from an average of 12½ percent of GDP in 2009 11). But, similar to its experience during bouts of volatility in global capital flows in recent years, Malaysia dealt with the latest episode skillfully, allowing the exchange rate to act as a shock absorber while intervening to avoid excessive volatility. The role of domestic institutional investors . The Malaysian economy’s resilience during the May-June episode was facilitated by offsetting opportunistic purchases by large domestic institutional investors who provided depth to its financial markets. Staff confirmed that domestic investors, including banks and saving funds, resorted to significant purchases of equities as well as domestic government securities during the turbulent period, thus facilitating “financial” (as opposed to “real”) adjustment (See Appendix 8 and WEO, October 2013, Chapter 3). Domestic investors play a stabilizing role in the market: if foreign investors were to reduce holdings of domestic assets sharply, the resulting depreciation of the ringgit would make sales of foreign assets by domestic investors Page 22 more attractive prompting an offsetting inflow. Staff’s illustrative calculations using data for the third quarter of 2013 suggest domestic investors have additional capacity of about 6 percent of GDP for purchases of MGS. By comparison, foreign outflows from MGS during Q2:2013 amounted to about 1 percent of GDP, and foreign investors held about 13 percent of GDP in MGS as of Q3:2013. Nevertheless, caution is warranted: international exposure of domestic institutional investors, estimated at about 20 percent of GDP, is well below that of total foreign ownership of domestic equities and bonds; and, overseas holdings of domestic institutional investors may not be fully liquid. Estimated Capacity for Additional Holdings of Malaysian Government Securities Domestically Entity Assets (In percent of GDP) Estimated Target MGS Allocation Q3:2013 Underweight MGS Space in Stock of Assets MGS Space in Flow Total MGS Capacity (In percent) EPF--Domestic Pension Fund KWAP--Civil Service Employees Pension LTH--Haj Support Fund Khazanah PNB--Permodalan National Berhad Banks Total Total stock of MGS Foreign holdings of MGS MGS outflow (June-September) Sources: Bank Negara Malaysia; GLICs; and IMF staff estimates (December 2013). Authorities’ views . The authorities highlighted the growing depth of domestic capital markets, which has led to a structural increase in nonresident holdings of government and BNM securities. They noted that compared with past episodes of capital flight, Malaysia is now better prepared to deal with potential risks of capital outflows on account of higher levels of international reserves, better capitalized financial intermediaries, a wider range of monetary instruments to manage liquidity, and much deeper capacity of domestic institutional investors to absorb selling by nonresidents. The authorities also observed that the volatility in capital flows experienced during May September 2013 did not have any significant adverse impact on the real economy. Page 23