Monetary policy stance. Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) raised its Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) in July 2014, the first increase since May 2011. BNM has since adopted a wait and see attitude and this cautious stance is appropriate for now taking into consideration lower expected inflation, the slowdown in domestic economic growth, which will narrow the output gap, and increased uncertainty surrounding the domestic and global outlook. In addition, a market-driven tightening of domestic liquidity conditions is underway amidst capital outflows and intensified bank competition for deposits following a slowdown in deposit growth and ahead of the phased implementation of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) beginning in June 2015. Moreover, there is no evidence of generalized price pressures, and while GST introduction will push headline inflation up by 0.7–0.9 percent, it is a one-off fiscal shock that should be accommodated and the impact could be offset by lower fuel For more details see the forthcoming Selected Issues Paper, “Fiscal Risks and Resilience in Malaysia: Lessons from the Domestic and International Experience,” by Juan Jauregui and Lewis Murara (2015). Page 10 prices. In staff’s view, it would be prudent to move from the current accommodative monetary policy stance towards a neutral stance consistent with the need to maintain price stability and curb financial imbalances once the uncertainty surrounding the global outlook dissipates. The calibration of monetary policy could prove challenging though: too slow a pace risks further build-up of financial imbalances yet too fast risks an over-correction of the real economy. In the event global financial volatility were to lead to large capital outflows and a squeeze on liquidity, BNM should stand ready to provide liquidity to maintain orderly market conditions and prevent an excessive tightening in monetary conditions. Overnight Policy Rate and 3 month KLIBOR (Percent) 3 Month KLIBOR Overnight Policy Rate 7/2013 10/2013 1/2014 7/2014 10/2014 Sources: CEIC Data Co. Ltd. Banks' claims on private sector Broad money Broad Money and Credit Growth 1/ (In percent, year-on-year) Sources: IMF, Integrated Monetary database ; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ At depository corporations level. Macroprudential policies. Monetary policy should continue to be complemented by macroprudential policies. Until the rate tightening in July, and with the strength of the domestic recovery uncertain, BNM appropriately relied on macroprudential policies to dampen financial risks. BNM’s macroprudential policies were aimed at reducing credit and house price increases but have also focused on enhancing the resilience of the banking system (see table 8 and paragraph 18). Authorities’ views. The authorities viewed the current monetary policy stance as being appropriate to maintaining price stability and consistent with sustainable growth prospects. Their step towards monetary policy normalization in July 2014 reflected assessments at the time of lower downside risks to growth and an increase in upside risks to inflation. The decision also took into consideration the risks of destabilizing financial imbalances. They viewed their current policy setting as appropriate, taking into account: the increased uncertainty since the summer in the growth outlook in major advanced and emerging markets economies; the fall in oil and commodity prices; and the heightened risk of global financial volatility along with a moderating risk of domestic financial imbalances. Further adjustments, given the significant uncertainty, remain contingent on new information. Page 11