External Sector Assessment Following several years of external rebalancing, the current account surplus shrank from 11 percent of GDP in 2011 to an estimated 3.5 percent of GDP in 2014. The surplus was reduced in the second half of 2014 reflecting lower crude oil and gas prices, although manufacturing exports increased and imports also fell. Despite the dramatic reduction in its current account surplus in recent years, Malaysia’s external position is still assessed to be stronger than is consistent with medium term fundamentals and desirable policies (see Appendix 4). For 2014, staff assesses the gap between the cyclically-adjusted current account and its norm to be about 3 percent of GDP and Malaysia’s real effective exchange rate (REER) by about 10 percent (consistent with the identified current account gap). In the medium term, staff projects the current account surplus to decline to 2 percent of GDP as external rebalancing continues and lower oil and gas prices reduce the oil and gas trade surplus. Foreign reserves, at about 85 percent of the Fund’s reserve- adequacy metric, are assessed to be adequate given the flexibility of the exchange rate. Page 14 External Debt (In percent of annualized GDP) Foreign denominated debt Ringgit denominated debt held by foreigners Capital flow volatility. Malaysia’s highly open economy is affected by swings in international capital flows. Portfolio flows were volatile again in 2014, with large net inflows in the second quarter followed by outflows in the latter part of 2014 but, similar to previous episodes, the real economy was unaffected. Malaysia’s deep and liquid financial markets make it possible for foreign investors, including retail investors, enter and exit easily compared to other emerging short-term domestic currency debt. The flexible exchange rate provides an important first line of defense against the risks from rising debt. Strong bank and corporate balance sheets, which reduce fear of floating, make this buffering role possible. Moreover, exchange rate flexibility and domestic currency borrowing allow Malaysia to avoid the currency mismatch problem associated with “original sin”, by creating more balanced risk-sharing with foreign creditors during risk off episodes. The current account surplus, substantial official international reserves, and domestic investors are also important sources of resilience. In particular, deep-pocketed institutions such as the Employee Provident Fund (EPF) have ample liquidity and tend to step in during risk off episodes for opportunistic investments. Hence, while potential outflows by foreigners could be larger in future, they are likely to be accommodated by financial markets and could be offset by lower outflows by domestic investors. Sources: CEIC Data Co. Ltd; and IMF staff calculations. Authorities’ views. The authorities agree that the current account is likely to remain in surplus for the foreseeable future, however, they disagree with staff’s assessment of external imbalances, particularly with regard to the exchange rate, pointing to the absence of qualitative evidence that the ringgit is undervalued. The uncertainty surrounding the EBA estimates and poor fit in the case of Malaysia, suggests that caution is warranted in drawing conclusions about Malaysia using this approach. In the authorities’ view, Malaysia has over the years, strengthened its resilience to bouts of capital flow volatility, as demonstrated during the May 2013 Fed taper tantrum episode with no spillovers to the real economy.