Background . The authorities undertook important fiscal reforms in 2014, taking advantage of the favorable conjuncture provided by full employment, strong growth momentum, low inflation and, lately, declining oil prices. On December 1, 2014, remaining fuel subsides on RON95 gasoline and diesel fuel were removed, culminating an effort that began with the floating of prices for RON97 premium petrol in 2010 and also included earlier moves (in September 2013 and October 2014) which raised the prices of diesel and RON95 petrol by 20 sen per liter (about 10 percent) each. Prices for RON95 petrol and diesel are now set monthly to track international oil prices. Implementation of a GST in April 2015 is on track. Other subsidies are being reformed and budget transfers are being better targeted. These moves were timely as well as bold and they will help shield the budget from declining oil and gas revenues and reinforce fiscal sustainability. They will also enhance the efficiency and equity of Malaysia’s fiscal policy. 2014 Budget outturn. Malaysia is on track to meet the 2014 federal budget deficit target of 3.5 percent, down from 3.9 percent in 2013. Revenues have come in higher than budgeted owing to stronger growth and higher oil and gas production, which raised oil-related revenues despite the weakening of oil and gas prices. Over-performance on the revenue side was matched by a higher- than-budgeted wage bill and higher development spending. Subsidy spending was lower reflecting subsidy rationalization. 2015 Budget. The 2015 budget, including the January 2015 revision, stays the course of steady, gradual fiscal consolidation. As originally promulgated in October, it was based on a Brent crude oil price of US$100 and targeted a budget deficit of 3 percent of GDP, reflecting the GST and the reduction of fuel subsidies announced on October 1. It was revised on January 20 and now assumes an oil price of US$55 (average Tapis crude price of US$61) and the dismantling of fuel subsidies announced on December 1. The revised budget deficit target has been changed to 3.2 percent of GDP in 2015, owing to additional expenditures related to floods that recently affected 200,000 people, partly offset by a reduction in lower priority operational spending. The 2015 Budget includes measures to ease the impact of GST, including reductions in individual and corporate income taxes as well as the SME tax of between 1–3 percentage points. As a result, only a small net positive revenue impact from GST is expected in 2015. The removal of fuel subsidies is expected to bring in savings of RM10.7 billion (0.9 percent of GDP). This savings will be offset by lower oil and gas revenues in the baseline scenario. The revenue loss will be lower if oil prices come in higher, in which case it would be important to save the windfall. If Tapis oil prices fall below US$60, the budget would face a net loss, requiring additional measures to meet the deficit target. GST. Staff welcomes the introduction of GST, which will help broaden the base of Malaysia’s fiscal system and reduce its reliance on volatile oil and gas revenues. GST preparations are well advanced and registration of taxpayers for the GST credit-invoice procedure is running ahead of projections; staff encourages the authorities to save any upside GST revenue. Looking ahead, GST effectiveness could be enhanced by gradually narrowing the list of exempt and zero-rated items Page 8 OECD and Selected Asian Countries: Rate at Introduction (In percent) F P w v B G P B F k L K H b z b k v w x k k E G Z w b P L V P b x L z w P w K U which would help raise GST buoyancy. In addition, fewer GST exemptions would allow tax authorities to generate more information through cross- checking of returns, which would raise compliance. There is also room to gradually raise the GST rate as part of the strategy to reduce fiscal dependence on hydrocarbons and balance the budget: Malaysia’s 6 percent GST rate is the lowest in the region (Singapore’s and Thailand’s GST is 7 percent; it is 10 percent elsewhere in Asia). Sources: International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation website; and Deloitte, Global Indirect Taxes , 2013 Subsidy rationalization. Staff welcomes the elimination of subsidies on diesel and RON95 petrol. Fuel prices were floated when the gap between the market and subsidized price was small. Along with the removal of sugar subsidies and a 15 percent increase in electricity prices in January 2014, the authorities are now closer to achieving their goal of eliminating untargeted price subsidies. LPG use in the fishing and transportation sectors is still subsidized at an estimated cost of RM2 billion (0.2 percent of GDP) in 2015. In future, consideration could be given to imposing GST on fuels and also to taking into account carbon content, in order to capture the negative effects on Malaysia’s environment and global climate change. These measures would help support the Prime Minister’s commitment to lowering the carbon intensity of Malaysia’s economy and creating a “new energy economy”. Enhanced protection for the poor Strengthening the social safety net is an integral part of the authorities’ fiscal strategy. Untargeted fuel subsidies were regressive: households in the top two quintiles of per capita consumption received 60 percent of the subsidies while only 3 percent went to the bottom decile. The elimination of fuel subsidies freed up resources that can be redirected to better support the poor. To mitigate the impact of subsidy rationalization and GST, the 2015 budget calls for increased cash transfers to poorer households (those earning less than RM4,000 per month). The authorities are also reviewing overlapping and fragmented cash transfer programs. Medium-term fiscal strategy. The authorities’ goal of balancing the budget by 2020 will help reduce the federal debt to near pre-crisis levels and give them more room to deal with major shocks and absorb contingent liabilities. Balancing the budget will require a continuous effort amidst pressures from oil revenues that are declining in relation to GDP and from rising expenditure commitments. Lower energy prices highlight the need for fiscal consolidation to remain ambitious, to continue with the drive to broaden revenue bases and diversify them away from hydrocarbons, and to increase expenditure equity and efficiency. If the decline in oil prices is permanent more measures would be required over the medium term to meet the fiscal targets which remain feasible in light of GST implementation – a powerful revenue mobilization tool ― and the removal of consumer fuel subsidies. Potential additional measures include broadening the GST base or increasing the rates combined with rationalization of subsidies from public enterprises, for example, electricity and gas, and operational expenditure restraint. The authorities’ commitment to sound public finances allows Page 9 flexibility in phasing the adjustment effort. Automatic stabilizers and countercyclical policies could be employed if the economy slows down by more than expected and the adjustment could be stretched beyond to 2020. Fiscal framework . Malaysia is making important progress in reforming its fiscal institutions. Top-down macro-fiscal control was strengthened significantly with the creation of the Fiscal Policy Committee (see 2013 staff report), while the size of supplementary budgets has been substantially reduced. The move toward performance-based budgeting is welcomed, as is the piloting of accrual accounting in 2015 ahead of full implementation in 2016. The government would benefit from publishing its medium-term fiscal framework; from adopting a fiscal risks management framework and publication of an annual fiscal risks statement; and from reducing further the use of supplementary budgets. And while Malaysia’s federal government and most Government-linked Corporates (GLCs) are increasingly transparent, more proactive communication and greater transparency of business objectives and operations for all GLCs would help. Authorities’ views. The authorities reiterated their commitment to sound public finances and to far-reaching fiscal reforms supported by strengthened fiscal institutions. They emphasized the need for a gradual approach to reducing the deficit and for the need to protect the vulnerable. The change in the budget deficit target announced on January 20 is a timely and pragmatic change in response to sharply lower energy prices than envisaged earlier. Their strong political commitment will help them overcome implementation challenges. And although contingent liabilities are sizable, government loan guarantees have a low probability of being called as they are granted strategically to nonfinancial entities with healthy balance sheets.