. In r e cent years, the Malaysia n economy has undergone significant external reba l ancing, reflecting robust domestic demand (including from large investment projects under the government’s Economic Transformation Program (ETP)) and weak external demand. This has led to a dramatic narrowing in the external current account surplus, which declined to 3.8 percent of GDP in 2013, from 6.1 percent of GDP in 2012 and 11.6 percent in 2011, while the non oil current account balance has swung into a deficit of about 2.4 percent of GDP from 4.2 percent surplus for 2011. From a savings-investment perspective, about two thirds of the adjustment was due to a strong surge in private investment and the large investment projects under the ETP, which bodes well for the medium term growth outlook. Over the past year, the exchange rate has fluctuated more widely than in 2010 2012, but around a fairly horizontal trend. International reserves have decreased slightly and the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric stands at a comfortable 117 percent. The net international investment position was a small positive in 2011 but has turned negative and now stands at –2 percent of GDP. Outlook and Assessment . Looking ahead, over the medium term, increased public sector savings will be offset by sustained private consumption and investment activity and is expected to result in a current account surplus of 3 percent over the medium term. The significant reduction in Malaysia’s current account surplus is reflected in a commensurate narrowing of Malaysia’s estimated external imbalances or gaps (see Appendix 3). Staff views any remaining current account and real exchange rate gaps as reflecting inadequate social protection (beyond that captured by public health expenditure), the need to improve the risk sharing characteristics of the pension system, investment bottlenecks, infrastructure gaps, labor force skill mismatches, and rigidities in the labor market. Staff’s estimate of the cyclically- adjusted current account norm for 2013 is 1.5 percent of GDP, compared to the External Balance Assessment’s (EBA) norm of -0.1 percent. With a projected cyclically adjusted current account surplus of 4.1 percent of GDP, this implies a total current account gap of 2.6 percent of GDP, with the policy gap contributing to the bulk. Malaysia’s real effective exchange rate (REER) is assessed as moderately undervalued by about 9 percent, reflecting savings and investment gaps and consistent with the identified current account gap, with the estimate subject to considerable uncertainty. Staff estimates indicate that every 1 percentage point improvement in the fiscal balance could strengthen the current account by about 0.4 percentage point. Page 24 Policies . Structural reforms aimed at strengthening social protection while safeguarding fiscal sustainability, together with improvements in the investment climate, and population aging should help reduce the saving investment gap over time. However, these changes take time as they involve the creation and reform of institutions. Staff recommended the introduction of unemployment insurance, which the authorities are studying, and which would further strengthen the safety net and reduce precautionary savings. Staff also noted that there is scope to improve the coverage and adequacy of retirement schemes in the private sector in order to provide more effective protection against poverty in old age. These measures should be complemented by continued exchange rate flexibility with intervention limited to dampening excessive volatility, which will likely be associated with a gradual appreciation of the real exchange rate over time and support external rebalancing. Authorities’ views . The authorities agreed with staff that the current account will remain in small surplus for the foreseeable future; however, they disagreed with staff’s assessment of external imbalances, particularly the exchange rate. They questioned the validity of the EBA exercise for Malaysia where there are large unexplained residuals and argued that EBA’s cross-country approach may not fully capture Malaysia's unique characteristics. The authorities questioned the assessment of the exchange rate as undervalued in view of the selloff of the ringgit during periods of financial turbulence. They emphasized that they do not manage the level of the exchange rate but intervene only to smooth excessive volatility. In addition, the authorities questioned the staff’s assessment that the current account surplus is too large in view of the sensitivity of the global financial markets to current account deficits in emerging market economies, as reflected in the vulnerability of deficit countries to capital outflows during crisis periods.