Background Maldives’ geography—while a central attribute for the tourism industry—imposes high costs in terms of public service provision. Over the longer term, the government is considering ways to develop regional hubs and improve transport connectivity which could also encourage voluntary resettlement. This would enable higher quality service provision at lower cost in key areas such as education. However, putting in place such a change will take many years as it requires a broad national consensus, adequate incentives, and compensation. The government is also planning two large infrastructure projects—airport expansion and a road bridge between Male and the airport financed by official bilateral loans. There are environmental challenges from tourism and infrastructure development. The UN is encouraging the development of a comprehensive long-term national climate change adaptation strategy for Maldives which could help mobilize grants and concessional loans. An increased share of renewable energy will help reduce reliance on oil imports. The SEZs are a key part of government’s strategy for diversification into labor intensive sectors such as off-port shipping services, IT and financial services. Youth unemployment is high in Maldives and education attainment at upper secondary level lags behind other economies (Table 6); and consequently the tourism industry typically recruits many workers from abroad rather than from Maldives (due to skills mismatch). The SEZ scheme which will have mixed activity (with a 40 percent limit on activity devoted to tourism) will aim at providing job opportunities for Maldivian workers. However, the details of specific SEZs have yet to be worked out. Careful planning of infrastructure investment scale up will help ensure it adds to Staff’s Position growth. To help maximize the future growth benefits of the planned infrastructure projects and keep down costs, it will be necessary to avoid over-stretching the economy’s construction capacity. Financing arrangements should be carefully assessed so that only quality projects with high social and growth impact are undertaken, with adequate social and environmental safeguards also in place. these initiatives needs to be contained, given debt sustainability challenges. Strict ring-fencing of SEZ tax exemptions is necessary to limit foregone tax revenue and preserve the current relatively Economic diversification into new sectors is welcome but public sector support for Maldives is on track to meet most Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and has already met many of them (Table 6). Efforts on gender equality and empowering women as well as ensuring environmental sustainability and effective adaptation to climate change will need to be sustained to reach these MDGs. Page 21 simple tax system (which has few exemptions), with adequate reporting of tax expenditures. Beyond the SEZs, there is scope to reduce the reliance of tourism on imported foodstuffs by developing links between tourism, traditional fisheries, and small-scale agriculture, in order to raise the domestic value added from tourism and spread the economic benefits more widely. Boosting access to financial services and raising connectivity of renewables-generated electricity for small and medium- size businesses would enhance the business climate and substantially reduce the cost of electricity generation (among the highest in South Asia) and related subsidies. Authorities’ Views Maldives faces unique challenges as small island nation with a dispersed population across many islands. The tourism sector will remain the growth engine, propelled by private sector innovation which has successfully capitalized on the natural beauty of the islands, adapted to new markets and put Maldives on the global destination map. Addressing diversification and climate adaptation requires unorthodox thinking. The SEZs will help link tourism to other industries and services. The authorities noted staff’s concerns about the development of SEZs and emphasized that tax exemptions would be ring-fenced; and regulations would be developed to safeguard offshore financial sector standards and data provision.