The policy stance has eased since the start of 2014 with measures that staff view as Background being aimed at facilitating government financing. The high minimum reserve requirement was cut; the MMA took steps to convert the government’s overdraft (6.8 percent of GDP) into a non tradable long-term bond; administered yields on Treasury bills were lowered; and the MMA halted liquidity absorbing open market operations. Despite lower yields, banks (and Maldives Pension Fund) have continued to purchase Treasury Bills, given limited market development, and in preference to lending. Recently, banks have found it difficult to access correspondent banking services, as overseas banks reassessed their business models; this has made it difficult to obtain letters of credit and process remittances. Staff did not support the monetization of the fiscal deficit and welcomes the Staff’s Position authorities’ commitment to resist this going forward. This would help direct monetary policy at supporting the current exchange rate band. In addition, the MMA should charge rates on government advances and long-term bonds that exceed T-bill yields. As the fiscal position improves, greater use should be made of market based financing of government debt. To promote nonbank participation, the government securities market could be developed, with longer term instruments, primary dealers, and a secondary market. Fuller information on the operation of the foreign exchange market would support policy making. More comprehensive information on money changer activities, with regular data collection, analysis and closer supervision of large fx operators would assist policy decisions. A firmer approach to supervision remains necessary. Banks are broadly in compliance with prudential regulations, though one bank has breached single borrower limits and another foreign currency exposure limits. Nonetheless, the accuracy of financial soundness indicators deserves close scrutiny. The MMA has rightly resisted pressure to count capital held offshore when calculating compliance with single borrower limits. Standards for financial institutions that may in the future set up in SEZs should be equivalent to those onshore, with similar prudential, supervisory and reporting requirements, including with regard to AML/CFT. The authorities were of the view that the MMA measures taken earlier in the year had Authorities’ Views helped tackle the large government overdraft legacy. This had helped put policy on a firmer footing and would make Fiscal Sustainability Law targets attainable going forward. They agreed that public debt market development was a high priority and were working on ways to open up the Treasury Bill market to the non-bank private sector and to develop longer term instruments. Since the beginning of 2014, the MMA had begun to collect more regular information on money changer Page 20 activities. The MMA is also continuously working to strengthen supervision and regulations are being developed to supplement the legislation on SEZs.