The 2015 Budget aims to reverse the rise in the fiscal deficit, resulting from growing Background spending commitments. Public spending has risen by 9.9 percentage points of GDP since 2011 reflecting high spending on wages, subsidies and social welfare, and the spending-to-GDP ratio is high relative other tourism-based economies ( Figures 1, 3). This reflects a combination of new spending initiatives and critical weaknesses in the governing framework for expenditure control. The Budget is largely aimed at revenue raising measures (imposing a green tax, acquiring fees from SEZs and raising import duties), supplemented by some expenditure restraint through a temporary public employment freeze and better targeting of subsidies (Box 2). Page 10 Staff’s Position The fiscal consolidation implied by the 2015 Budget is commendable and significant but may not deliver sufficient savings to place the debt ratio on a sustainable path. Based on baseline forecasts, staff expects the Budget to deliver a significant improvement in the primary deficit of around 4.1 percentage points in 2015, (see Box 2, Table 2), containing the primary deficit to 2.4 percent of GDP over the medium term (consistent with an overall deficit of 7.6 percent in the medium term). Public debt would continue to increase, though at a slower pace and would remain well above the debt anchor of 60 percent of GDP in the Fiscal Responsibility Law (text figure and Debt Sustainability Analysis, Supplement 1). This contrasts with the authorities’ fiscal projections, where they assume additional revenues (in particular from fees related to the acquisition of Special Economic Zones), earlier realization of some measures, and faster GDP and tourism growth. Primary Balance Baseline Alternative Source: MMA and IMF staff estimates. Public Debt: Baseline vs. Adjustment Scenarios, 2010–2019 Baseline Adjustment Scenario Sources: Maldives authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Staff’s view is that an additional and more permanent consolidation, amounting to around 3 percentage points of GDP is needed over 2015-19 to bring debt ratios down. If the authorities’ ambitious capital spending plans are fully realized (see Box 2), then further adjustment would also be needed to offset the fiscal impact. Additional consolidation could be achieved through politically feasible structural measures that build on the 2015 Budget and deliver a more permanent improvement in the fiscal position. Gradually lowering the debt ratio would reduce pressure for monetary financing, strengthen the external position by cutting import demand and reduce crowding out, albeit at some cost to near-term growth. The 2009 fiscal consolidation plan targeted a 30 percentage points of GDP reduction in the deficit in a year was not implemented as essential political support for large scale measures dissipated, especially given a recession that year. Page 11 Box 2. Maldives 2015 Budget Fiscal Adjustment Measures The 2015 Budget passed in December includes measures to reduce the fiscal deficit. Measures are weighted to revenues and include some expenditure restraint (see tables). Staff estimates that the package could help reduce the primary deficit by 4.1 percentage points in 2015. Revenues . Measures are directed at the 2015 Budget Measures tourism sector and imports. The green tax (replacing the bednights tax) is an important source of income from the tourism sector. Import duties on some consumer items are being raised from zero and excises are being increased. The authorities expect significant revenues from the acquisition of land for SEZs and licenses for new resorts. Description of Measure Authorities savings estimate Change from 2014 pps of GDP Revenues Green Tax Import Duties Resort Development SEZ plus land reclamation Expenditures Subsidies Wage bill A tourism "green tax" ($6 per night) replaces the bednights tax ($ 8 per night). Rise in duties on some zero rated consumer items; vehicles duties and tobacco excises. Ten new resorts a year to come on stream generating resort license income. $100 mn from the acquisition of land for a Special Economy Zone in 2015 Targeting electricity and food subsidies.:40 percent cut in subsidies in 2015. The public employment freeze. Expenditures. Measures aim to contain current spending, including a public employment freeze. Stricter control over public sector employment and the wage bill, and targeting subsidies, are both important goals. Previous work by the World Bank found that subsidies could be much better targeted—half the electricity subsidy goes to the highest two income quintiles, and food subsidies were similarly poorly targeted (with subsidies also benefiting the tourist resorts). Capital expenditures. The authorities plan a large increase in capital expenditures (for a Malé- airport road bridge and for airport development) financed by bilateral official loans. Staff project the deficit will be higher than the official target for a number of reasons: the delayed introduction of some measures, uncertainty over revenue realization from the acquisition of land for SEZs, the need for targeting of subsidies to be accompanied by measures to secure safety nets (this will take time, although some conditions are in place for proxy means testing); possible slippage on wages, and a different base, given 2013 estimates. In the other direction, staff expect capital spending to come on stream more gradually than envisaged by the authorities (as feasibility studies for these projects have yet to be completed) reducing the overall deficit. Summary of Fiscal Projections 2015-17: Authorities and Staff (in percent of GDP) Total Revenue & Grants o/w Tax Revenue Import Duties Green Tax Tourism GST o/w Non-tax revenue Resort Lease Rentals/SEZ acquisition Total Expenditure & net lending o/w Current Expenditure Wages Costs Interest Costs Social Welfare Contributions Subsidies & Transfers o/w Capital Expenditure Auth Staff Auth Staff Auth Staff Primary Balance Overall Balance 1/ Staff estimates are based on the baseline scenario; authorities estimates (presented relative to staff's nominal GDP projections, authoriteis project higher nominal GDP). (1.7) (4.6) (8.1) (3.5) (7.3) (2.8) (3.4) (7.9) Page 12 To ensure successful implementation, the size and phasing of fiscal adjustment needs to be relatively gradual and calibrated to avoid a sharp growth slowdown (although fiscal multipliers are likely low) . Evidence from other small economies illustrates the importance of sustaining an adjustment effort over a number of years and focusing on expenditure control (Box 4). To return the debt ratio to the level of 2013 and bring it within reach of the 60 percent limit (text figure and table 5), staff proposes additional savings of 3 percentage points of GDP, beginning in 2016, with just over half of the additional savings deriving from the spending side: Expenditure measures: spending restraint over 2016 – 19 with structural measures to durably contain the wage bill (by establishing a pay body to set consistent rules across the public sector, by reducing the number of paid local councilors, and by embarking on the public service reform already envisaged by the authorities), by containing rising healthcare costs and savings on transport and communications. Saving 1.7 percentage points of GDP. Revenue measures : an increase in the TGST rate from 12 to 15 percent in 2016 would help underpin revenues . Increased revenues: 1.3 percentage points of GDP. Better public financial management is a prerequisite for fiscal sustainability . The recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment identified deep rooted problems with greater fiscal discipline and better prioritization needed across government. Difficulties include: unrealistic budgets with spending allocations insufficient to meet commitments, reshuffling of spending between activities/ministries, and unenforced spending ceilings. Reforms were suggested in many areas, including a baseline review of expenditures (Box 3). Better methods are needed to track payments, including subsidies, in order to design targeting and monitor savings. Compliance with the Fiscal Responsibility Law (which came into force in May 2014) would also support longer term fiscal goals. The Law includes positive features that can helpfully discipline fiscal policy— including debt and deficit limits and strict limits on MMA credit to government (preventing monetization). It could also be used to help anchor a targeted primary balance path. The 2015 Budget includes significant measures, expected to result in a larger fiscal Authorities’ Views consolidation than estimated by staff. The set up of Special Economic Zones would generate fee income from their acquisition and could significantly supplement revenues with no need for further revenue measures. Expenditure restraint, in particular through the public sector employment freeze has political backing and, together with the review of local government pay structures, this would generate sizeable permanent cost savings. They also agreed that a public sector wide pay body could be helpful to ensure consistency of wages and salaries across public service and drive forward public service reform. Strengthening public financial management is a key government priority, and continued technical assistance on the fiscal chart of accounts and budget execution would be valuable. The universal healthcare insurance scheme, Aasandha was introduced in 2012 and covers the whole population. Costs have risen rapidly and the announcement in 2014 of unlimited health insurance will escalate costs. According to the World Bank, savings could be achieved through bulk procurement of essential and generic drugs and by reducing expenditure on overseas treatment through negotiation of close-ended package rates with providers. Page 13 Box 3. Public Financial Management Reform Plan (2015 – 2018) Goal Clear responsibilities between agencies should be established to enable successful reform. Strengthened Budget formulation policies and procedures and establish more realistic Budgets. Actions Convene high level discussion among public financial management agencies to establish agreement on the reform plan, monitoring, priorities and responsibilities. Develop capacity for analysis of budget, fiscal framework and audit reports. Improve policies for setting expenditure ceilings, including identifying multi-year expenditure commitments. Gain commitment to realistic expenditure ceilings at line ministry and agency level at the beginning of the budget process. Strengthen information provision for line ministries and agencies on actual, priority and committed expenditures. Closer coordination between recurrent and capital budgets including unified expenditure plans together with financing plans for capital expenditures. Better cash management. Review baseline expenditures as an input for cash management. Improve reporting and monitoring of budget execution, including commitments. All line ministries to implement commitment control. Develop policy on payment of arrears and preventing their recurrence Strengthen capacity and coordination to improve cash flow forecasting Develop a medium term fiscal plan in line with the fiscal Responsibility Law. Strengthen capacity and develop the analytical information for a medium term framework including projecting credible aggregate fiscal parameters. Develop a simple medium term model. Improve information flow on fiscal policy within and among ministries and agencies.. Update the debt strategy in line with the Fiscal Responsibility Law and ensure it is based on clear risk minimization policies. Gather reliable data, including on guarantees, arrears and domestic securities. Improve procedures for recording information on external grants. Make debt data available to the public Expand primary domestic debt market through the provision of longer term Increase capacity for debt sustainability analysis. instruments and develop a secondary market. Document the accounting and reporting frameworks and introduce streamlined reporting requirements and formats. Use the Chart of Accounts in consultation with key data users Roll out the remainder of the Public Accounting System. Fuller reporting including of major deviations in budget and financial statement For both internal and external audit, review legislation, clarify responsibilities and develop capacity. Make external audits timelier. A medium term fiscal framework should be put in place once macro-fiscal analysis and forecasting capacity is developed. A medium term debt strategy should be established once the information base has improved. Better accounting, fiscal reporting, internal and external audit and monitoring across local government agencies and SOEs. Commitment at the political level by the Majlis (Maldives’ parliament) to the spending envelope and the composition of spending in addition to the budget aggregate would be important. Page 14 Box 4. Episodes of Large Fiscal Consolidation in Smaller States Recent IMF research for the Jamaica Article IV shows that expenditure adjustment measures offer the greatest likelihood of success for durable fiscal consolidation. Work on “Smaller Countries and Large Fiscal Adjustments” by Simard, Lonkeng and Lindow looked at 35 cases of large fiscal consolidation for smaller countries since the 1990s. The analysis focused on countries which reduced public debt through improvements in the primary balance (and did not benefit from a reduction in debt through a HIPC or a debt exchange). Successful fiscal consolidations were defined as those where the debt ratio remained lower four years following the fiscal consolidation episode. Out of the 35 cases: 14 successfully reduced their debt ratio four years out and 11 of these featured a cumulative improvement in the primary balance over a 5 year period. Most countries managed to raise tax revenues during the adjustment period. However, what distinguished the successful cases was a larger reduction in the wage bill (see Charts). The findings are similar to those in earlier work by Tsibouris, Horton, Flanagan and Maliszewski on a wider set of countries. They found that expenditure adjustment was associated with durable adjustment but also that it was best done in a multi-year framework. Tax Revenue (change during consolidation episode, percentage points of GDP) Wage Bill (change during consolidation episode, percentage points of GDP) Percentiles 75th 50th 25th Success Non-success Percentiles 75th 50th 25th Success Non-success ________________________________________________________________ See also Jamaica – Staff Report for the 2014 Article IV consultation and Fourth Review Under the Extended Arrangement Under the EFF. Working Paper forthcoming. A consolidation is defined as an improvement in the primary fiscal balance by one percentage point of GDP or more and lasts as long as the primary fiscal balance does not deteriorate compared to the previous year. “Experience with Large Fiscal Adjustments” Occasional Paper 246, 2006. Page 15