Maldives has rapidly grown into a middle income country, driven by tourism development. Tourism activity—accounting directly and indirectly for around three-quarters of output—underpins the $6740 per capita GDP in 2013. The country’s unique geography, with 200 inhabited islands covering around 90,000 sq.km, high import-intensity, and dollarization, pose policy challenges, alongside the detrimental impact of climate change. With tourist transactions mainly in U.S. dollars, the economy is highly dollarized. Given the weak fiscal position, monetary conditions (under the stabilized exchange rate regime and open capital account) are determined by fiscal policy and the supply of foreign exchange. Low population density (outside Malé) raises the cost of public service provision, results in a lack of employment opportunities and youth unemployment is high (only 40 percent of youth is in employment). Over the past decade, the economy has experienced persistent fiscal deficits, occasionally accompanied by a widening current account deficit and pressure on the exchange rate. Since the 2004 tsunami, Maldives has faced fiscal deficits initially from reconstruction needs, but then from large increases in the public sector wage bill and social spending. These were financed mainly domestically—including through monetization—and led to intermittent pressure on official reserves and the exchange rate, especially since the global financial crisis. Overall Fiscal Deficit 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Source: MMA and IMF staff estimates. By early 2013, official data pointed to large current account and fiscal deficits. At the conclusion of the previous Article IV consultation, the official data indicated a current account deficit of 26.5 percent of GDP and official reserves of $304mn (1.6 months imports) on a declining path. Difficulties financing the fiscal deficit led to some recourse to arrears. Consistent with these conditions, staff recommended policy action, combining fiscal consolidation, exchange rate devaluation and an incomes policy to curb import demand. Some fiscal policy actions were taken. The exchange rate parity was maintained. Two years on, the growth outlook is brighter, and significant data revisions paint a less worrying picture of the external sector position. A recovery in tourism activity has supported growth and exports; and there has been little apparent pressure on the exchange rate. Revisions to official statistics have resulted in a substantial reduction in the current account deficit (Box 1), and nominal GDP has been revised up (Annex 1). The puzzle of large current account deficits and low reserves but well stocked stores has been partly resolved by revised data. However, staff’s analysis points to further underreporting of tourism exports suggesting that the current account deficit may still be somewhat overstated (Box 5). These revisions also imply a stronger private sector saving position than previously estimated. Nevertheless, the fiscal deficit and public debt remain very high and need to be addressed. Page 6