Staff’s Position fiscal consolidation implied by the 2015 Budget takes hold. However, there is upside potential if lower oil prices are sustained. Growth is forecast to remain fairly strong over the medium term, slowing a little as Under the baseline scenario medium term growth is projected to be around 4½ percent, somewhat slower than the average of 6½ percent when tourism development was at its peak. Although the global recovery is uneven, Maldives has proved adept at attracting tourism from a variety of regions (see text figure), new resort openings and the development of the airport will add to capacity, and tourist activity is expected to grow moderately. On the upside, if lower oil prices are sustained, and passed on in lower airline fares; this could provide a further boost to tourism. Tourist Arrivals Composition: 2008 v.s. 2014 Jan-Nov (In percent of total tourist arrivals) 2008 Total Tourist Arrivals: 0.68 million 2014 Jan-Nov Total Tourist Arrivals: 1.1 million 1%2% 2% 1% 2% 3% Europe excluding UK UK Asia excluding China China Africa Americas Oceania Sources: MMA and IMF staff estimates. Middle East and UN passport holders & others Around three quarters of activity is directly or indirectly linked to tourism. Maldives is a high end tourist destination with around 60 percent of resorts in the 5 star and plus category, and demand is relatively price and income inelastic. The authorities expect to lease five new resorts a year. A second runway at the airport will also add to capacity. Page 9 If fully implemented, the authorities’ fiscal adjustment plans would have a mildly negative effect on growth (around ¾ of a percentage point in 2016 17). Staff estimates the fiscal multiplier to be relatively low: Maldives is a high end destination for tourism, demand for which is likely relatively price inelastic; and other characteristics (high trade openness, low labor rigidities high public spending and debt) are consistent with a low multiplier. The recent drop in oil prices has improved the current account and inflation outlook. The current account is expected to narrow over the medium term to around 4.7 percent of GDP by 2019 as fiscal restraint and lower oil prices help constrain imports. Inflation is forecast to be just 0.3 percent in 2015 but to pick up with the increase in import duties and is expected to settle at around 4 percent in the medium term. However, limited policy buffers suggest the economy is vulnerable to fiscal slippages and inward spillovers (Risk Assessment Matrix) In the event of fiscal expenditure overruns relative to the authorities’ targets, borrowing costs and monetization could increase, which could make the external position become fragile. Homegrown risks could also be triggered if there is a period of protracted low growth in advanced and emerging economies. In the face of a large external shock, foreign capital inflows (thought to be primarily inflows from tourism operators) may weaken as occurred during the global financial crisis. If risks materialize, an accelerated fiscal consolidation effort with tough expenditure control would be needed to restore sustainability and stem the erosion of reserves. The authorities expect growth to be stronger than projected by staff with tourist Authorities’ Views arrivals rising robustly, especially as airport capacity is expanded. Real GDP growth is expected to average around 8 percent over the next three years. As a small open economy, Maldives is unavoidably vulnerable to external shocks. They were of the view that boosting growth potential, as has been done in the past with the development of the tourist industry, was the best way to manage shocks. Current plans to improve infrastructure and to develop Special Economic Zones (SEZs) (paragraph 27) would support growth and help build buffers.