The real exchange rate quickly appreciated Background by around 20 percent following the 2011 devaluation as rapid inflation pass through more than offset the exchange rate devaluation. Since the April 2011 devaluation, Maldives has retained a de facto stabilized exchange rate regime. Although the band is wide at 20 percent either side of Rf 12.85 per dollar, the exchange rate has remained at the weakest end of the band (Rf 15.42 per dollar) and operates like a de facto peg. The benefits of the devaluation were quickly eroded by higher inflation in Maldives relative to trading partners. But over the past eighteen months Maldives inflation performance has improved and the real exchange rate has been broadly flat (text figure). Real Effective Exchange Rate, 2010–14 (Index, 2010 Jan=100) Maldives Mauritius Sri Lanka Seychelles External indicators and the current account deficit (following data revisions) look somewhat healthier. The estimated current account deficit, though still quite high, is much smaller than previously reported and is expected to be 8.1 percent of GDP in 2014 (up a little from 2013). Lower oil prices will help narrow the current account deficit in 2015. The MMA has been able to increase its supply of foreign exchange to the market, likely reflecting higher dollar inflows. Gross official reserves have risen to $614mn, but are low compared to standard reserve adequacy indicators (around 2.8 months imports) and usable reserves are just $132mn (0.6 months imports). Staff’s Position The external sector assessment is difficult given the large turnover in the parallel fx market and data issues—but on balance the external sector position seems modestly weak. Standard indicators would point to an external sector position that is moderately weaker than fundamentals and desirable policies and a real exchange that that is moderately overvalued. The Fund’s empirical approaches for smaller countries (EBA lite and a CGER-type methodology) applied to the revised official data point to a current account gap of around 3 percent of GDP and a real exchange rate overvaluation of around 5 percent (Box 5). Low reserves levels also indicate external sector weakness. The de jure exchange rate regime is a pegged exchange rate within horizontal bands. Page 16 Other considerations , point to less of an imbalance (i.e. only modestly weaker). With a low level of reserves, the MMA is only able to supply only a small fraction of foreign exchange demand with the excess satisfied in the parallel market (Box 6), and the premium has remained stable and low for an extended period. Surveys and anecdote suggest that—even after revisions—tourism exports likely remain underestimated; but by how much is uncertain within a wide range from US$100mn-2bn (3-75 percent of GDP), (Box 5). Though if under-recording was very high, imports would also likely be under-reported, significantly offsetting the effect on the current account. Nonetheless, underestimation of tourism revenues could easily be sufficient to eliminate the current account gap. Fiscal consolidation. The loose fiscal stance explains two thirds of the current account gap. Undertaking the fiscal adjustment implied by the 2015 Budget will help halve the gap. Overall, the external sector position looks modestly weaker than fundamentals and desirable policies and the exchange rate modestly overvalued. No exchange rate adjustment is warranted at present. The stabilized exchange rate regime is suitable for Maldives in view of the very high openness of its goods and services market, the dollarized nature of the economy, and the large seasonal variation in tourism revenues. Authorities’ Views The authorities are committed to maintaining the exchange rate within the current band and agree that a stabilized regime suits their needs. They view past exchange rate devaluations as being unsuccessful. In particular, the April 2011 devaluation did not achieve a durable impact on imbalances. Without an effective incomes policy, wages in the public and private sectors rose quickly back to previous real levels and the parallel market premium reappeared. Improving the fiscal position is viewed as the best way to sustain the exchange rate within its current band. The parallel foreign exchange market has been in place for a long time and appeared with the rapid development of tourism in the economy. The premium has fallen back to around 3 to 4 percent but it is structural in nature and unlikely to be eliminated completely. The authorities agreed that there would likely be no change on Article VIII issues until official reserves levels had increased and the fiscal position improved, the data revisions to the current account are based on substantial improvements in methodologies and the new data are much more consistent with other indicators and developments in the economy. The extent of any under-recording of tourism expenditures is likely to be small. Work on microstates suggests an improvement in the cyclically adjusted primary balance of 1 percent of GDP can improve the current account by around 0,4 percent of GDP Endeganew, Amo-Yartey and Turner Jones” Fiscal Policy and the Current Account. Are Microstates Different? WP/12/51. Page 17 Box 5. The Operation of Maldives Parallel Foreign Exchange Market Maldives has a de-facto stabilized exchange rate regime, while the foreign exchange regime is very open, there is a long history of an active parallel foreign exchange market, and the premium is relatively stable. The tourist industry appears to be a key supplier and driver of the parallel market. The scale of the premium has ranged from around 5 to 15 percent, and during 2014 it fell back to just 3 to 4 percent. The relatively steady premium may reflect the oligopolistic nature of the market. There are only a few large suppliers of foreign exchange who are able to adjust supply to the parallel foreign exchange market—based on the observed premium and where marginal costs equal marginal revenue. There is a positive relationship between the premium and supply given the profit motive to benefit from an increased spread. If the suppliers of foreign exchange formed a cartel they could behave as monopolists and drive up the premium. But in practice, as each supplier’s total holdings of foreign currency (in Maldives and abroad) is large and the ability to supply foreign exchange to benefit from any change in the premium is high, the cartel appears unstable and the premium remains bounded within a narrow stability range but it is not arbitraged away. The relationship between the supply of dollars and the premium may be non-linear. Occasional hikes in premia can occur with expectations of a potential devaluation and heightened macroeconomic risk. Since the global financial crisis, the appearance of a parallel market premium and a shortage of foreign exchange at the official rate has continued to give rise to exchange restrictions and a multiple currency practice (MCP). Maldives is an Article XIV member but maintains exchange restrictions and a MCP under Article VIII Sections 2 (a) and 3 which have been in place since 2009. These arise from the MMA’s foreign exchange rationing and greater than 2 percent parallel market premium. Although these measures are non discriminatory, Fund approval is not recommended as they are unlikely to be temporary and would be eliminated only once official reserves levels are higher and the fiscal position has improved. The existing restriction arising from rationing has eased, with the MMA increasing the foreign exchange provided to commercial banks from $3 million to $4 million a week from September See Informational Annex. Staff continues to engage with the authorities in order to finalize its assessment of Maldives’ exchange system. Page 18 Box 6. Estimates of Tourism Spending and External Sector Assessment Estimates of Tourist Spending Per Arrival Anecdotal evidence suggests that tourist spending in Maldives may be underestimated (and the current account deficit overestimated). Unfortunately it is not possible to check the official data against partner countries as these data are not collected for tourism services. To come up with ball park estimates of actual tourism expenditures, staff used three approaches: a) Using the Ministry of Tourism survey to estimate expenditures (from arrivals and individuals’ reported spending habits) points to an estimate as high as $4.3bn (double official estimates). But the survey has drawbacks. It only asks about ranges of spending, it may indistinguishably include airfares and spending in nearby economies such as Sri Lanka, it is conducted for one month in February (high season) each year and the response rate is low (25 percent). Given these caveats, the survey is likely an overestimate of tourist spending. Survey of tourists spending habits (conducted peak season) Estimate that would reduce errors and omissions in the BoP Back of the Envelope based on internet prices Spending Per Arrival US Dollars Estimate $ Millions Annual Revenue Official data Percent Difference from official data b) A sample of internet pricing from a range of resorts also points to spending roughly double the recorded estimates. c) Errors and omissions in the BoP statistics might also indicate the extent to which flows are mis-recorded. In 2013 (after data revisions) errors and omissions were $97mn. This would point to receipts of $2.4bn. However, this estimate would not capture flows kept offshore by residents (that return later as FDI). Tourism Receipts per Arrival (In U.S. dollars) Barbados Maldives Bahamas Sri Lanka Seychelles Mauritius Sources: World Travel and Tourism Council; Authories data and IMF staff estimates. Cross-country comparisons with tourism-dependent small islands suggests that the discrepancy could be relatively small. Comparisons do not point to Maldives as being a big outlier—only Barbados recorded higher spending per tourist in 2013. The range of possible under-recording of receipts is very large from around $100mn to up to $2bn. But if under-recording of receipts was at the high end of these estimates, outflows such as imports would also likely be under-recorded—with a smaller net effect on the current account. Quantified approaches. Using the official data (and an estimate for under-recording of $100mn) staff looked at the standard quantified approaches to assess the external position. Current Account Norm The approaches estimate the current account norm to be between -4.8 to -5.7 percent of GDP. The resulting current account gap is estimated to be in the range from 0.2 to -3.6 percent of GDP. EBA lite, suggests the fiscal policy gap can explain 2 percent of GDP of the current account gap. The corresponding REER estimates range from a small undervaluation to an overvaluation of up to 5 percent. External Sector Position: Baseline Scenario1/ (Percent of GDP) EBA Lite Approach Official Staff data estimate2/ ES Approach Official data Staff estimate Current Account Balance (underlying) Current Account Gap Elasticity 3/ REER overvaluation estimate (percent) Source: IMF staff estimates and projections. 1/ All figures are based on the projection for 2014. Macrobalance approach is the new EBA lite approach. External Sustainabiity Approach based on Vitek 2010. 2/ Staff estimate based on a conservative assumption of underestimation of tourist revenues and partly offset by income flows: that revenues are underestimated by around $100mn. 3/ The trade elasiticity comes from Tokarick 2010 and takes into account exports are likely to be price inelastic Page 19