inflation was contained. Tourist activity picked up with a rapid expansion from Asian markets and a tepid recovery from Europe. Maldives performed well relative to other tourism dependent economies (text figure). Growth was 4.7 percent in 2013 and staff projects 5 percent in 2014 and 2015 (Table 1, Figure 2). Higher tourism exports and subdued global food and fuel inflation helped reduce the current account deficit from its 2012 level to around 8.4 percent of GDP in 2014; and following significant data revisions, it is substantially smaller than previously estimated (Box 1). Inflation was contained at 1.1 percent in November. Lower oil prices have improved the outlook for the current account and inflation in 2015. An increased supply of dollars in the official market narrowed the parallel market premium (to 3 – 4 percent) and gross official reserves rose to $614 mn (2.8 months imports), though net reserves remained low. 1/ Countries include Mauritius, Seychelles, Bahamas and Barbados. Sources: Caribbean Tourism Organization; Authorities data and IMF staff estimates. Maldives Weighted Average of Other Countries 1/ GDP Growth (RHS) Maldives: 2013-14 Authorities vs. Staff Projections 2013 Authorities latest /1 2013 Staff Estimates 1/ 2014 Staff Projection Public debt is correspondingly high. Sustained primary deficits placed public debt (including SOEs, excluding arrears) on a rising path from 52 percent in 2009 to 75 percent of GDP in 2014, above the 60 percent limit in the recently established Fiscal The real growth measure used throughout the report is gross value added at basic prices. Staff estimates for interest costs are in line with public debt levels and effective interest costs. Subsidy and welfare expenditures are in line with beneficiary numbers and benefit levels. Sources: Maldives Authorities and IMF Staff estimates and projections 1/ The deficit is on a 'cash basis' and excludes the build up of arrears. Memo: Outstanding Stock of arraers But the fiscal deficit is thought to have widened sharply in 2014, on the back of spending largesse. Staff estimates the deficit at 7.8 percent of GDP in 2013 compared with official data which report a deficit of 3.9 percent of GDP. The difference reflects higher staff estimates for interest payments, subsidies, and social welfare. Maldives Monetary Authority (MMA) financing data also points to a higher deficit (see table). A sharp rise in recurrent expenditures (pensions, and wages) is likely to have widened the deficit to 11.6 percent of GDP in 2014. The 2015 Budget measures aim to rein in the deficit (Box 2). Total Revenue & Grants Revenue Grants Expenditure and Net Lending Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure Net Lending Arrears clearance Overall Balance Overall Balance Ex. Grants Financing Domestic o/w MMA Tbills banks & other Foreign Page 7 Responsibility Law. The stock of arrears estimated by staff would add 6.3 percent of GDP to the debt ratio. The arbitration ruling over the authorities’ cancellation of the airport operating concession could pose a sizable contingent fiscal liability. Box 1. Data Revisions to the Balance of Payments Significant revisions have been made to the balance of payments data in line with IMF technical assistance recommendations. Estimated current account deficits have been substantially reduced from rates of around 20 percent of GDP to single digits in 2012–13 (text figures). This reflects new data sources, better methods and new data. Higher tourism exports. Data from the Tourism Goods Current Account Balance Comparison and Services Tax (TGST) from the Maldives Inland Revenue Authority (MIRA) has been used to estimate total travel receipts (including new data for 2013) and the bed- nights tax has now been included in the estimate. Net effect: reduces the current account deficit by 2.1 and 9.5 percentage points of GDP in 2012 and 2013 respectively. Lower imports of goods and services. Two partially offsetting revisions were made. Double counting of the import of jet fuel was eliminated and imports of services were revised upwards (using withholding tax data). Net effect : reduces the current account deficit by 3.2 and 4.1 percentage points of GDP in 2012 and 2013 respectively. Higher net income. New improved methods have been used for estimating outward company profits and foreign workers’ remittances. Net effect : reduces the current account deficit by 3.7 and 0.6 percentage points of GDP in 2012 and 2013 respectively. The estimation of the financial account has been improved and gaps reduced using a variety of data sources: (i) annual FDI survey; (ii) use of the MMA’s monetary and financial statistics for bank flows; (iii) Bank of International Settlements data for non banks; and (iv) the IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey database. Further improvement is expected with the new FDI survey launch in 2015. Previous estimates were incomplete. Current Previous from MMA Source: MMA and IMF staff estimates. Breakdown of Current Account Balance Revision (Reduction in percentage points) Higher tourism exports Lower imports Higher net income Total revision of current account balance Sources: MMA and IMF staff estimates. Though large, the revisions are plausible and help partly resolve the external sector puzzle. They reduce the scale of errors and omissions in 2012 ($24mn), though these remain large in 2013 ($98 mn). They go some way to reconciling the puzzle of large deficits yet few signs of difficulty obtaining foreign exchange or imported goods. _________________________________ All data in the second text figure are ratios based on the new nominal GDP data (see Annex 1). In 2012 the authorities cancelled the airport concession contract with GMR and Malaysia Airports Berhad to upgrade and operate Malé airport. In June 2014 arbitration ruled in favor of GMR. Maldives Airport Company Limited (MACL) paid $4mn in immediate costs. Agreement on a final settlement between GMR and the authorities/MACL (has yet to be reached. Page 8 Financial soundness indicators are slowly improving, monetary conditions are easy, but credit growth is subdued. Bank profitability has increased and nonperforming loans in the tourism and construction sectors are falling back from high levels built up during the global financial crisis (Figure 4, Table 6). Base money and broad money have been growing rapidly financed by reserve accumulation and sharply higher NFA of the banks. But private sector credit growth is subdued (0.5 percent in November 2014 year on year) as banks appear to be cautious about lending to the tourism and construction sectors; and large investments are financed abroad (thought to include own funds of tourism operators held abroad). Instead funding is channeled into the MMA’s Overnight Deposit Facility or directed into Treasury bills despite lower yields.