Focus of the Article IV consultation. In addition to the outlook and downside risks, the discussions focused on the following issues: (i) creating fiscal space for priority spending that will foster growth and employment; (ii) boosting the growth potential of the economy, given the results of the assessment of the structural transformation of the economy; and (iii) strengthening the stability of the financial system. There was broad agreement between the authorities and staff on the economic policies required to address these issues. Implementation of recommendations of 2012 Article IV consultation (Box 2). Overall, the authorities’ policies in the fiscal policy area have been in line with recommendations during the 2012 Article IV consultation. Fiscal discipline has been maintained—including in the face of difficult circumstance following the suspension of donor support in 2012—and underpinned by the current ECF-supported program during the last two years. Progress has also been made on tax policy and administration reform, as well as on improving cash-flow management. Energy reforms have also advanced through the elimination of fuel subsidies; in the electricity sector, there has recently been, in effect, a reduction in subsidies as the authorities have not passed lower fuels costs to consumers, but—absent an increase in tariffs—significant untargeted subsidies remain. Progress on financial sector reform has been modest thus far, although there are concrete plans to restructure BHM (see paragraph 19). Page 12 Box 2. Mali: Implementation of Key Recommendations from the 2012 Article IV Consultation Recommendation Status Maintain tight fiscal policy until potential donor aid materializes. Avoid accumulation of new external arrears. Reform tax policy and administration, cash flow management. Adopt reforms in the energy sector (petroleum pricing and the electricity sector). Implement policies to free up fiscal space for increased public investment. Strengthen the financial sector and improve the private sector’s access to bank financing. Implemented. Public finance stability was ensured in a difficult period when donor support was put on hold. Implemented. With improved fiscal discipline, existing external arrears were cleared over time. Partly implemented. Efforts to strengthen these areas are continuing, supported by Fund technical assistance. Subsidization of fuel products has recently been eliminated, following the decline in international prices. In the electricity sector, transparency regarding government subsidies has been improved, but needed tariff adjustment has not taken place and significant untargeted subsidies remain Progress made under the ECF-supported program. The need to increase security and defense spending in the face of the deterioration of the security situation has contributed to the slowdown in the reallocation of funds toward more investment. In progress. Government restraint regarding use of bank financing helped avoid crowding-out the private sector. Progress made in identifying options for restructuring the housing bank. The government is developing a strategy for improving the health of the microfinance sector. See IMF Country Report No. 13/44, Mali: 2012 Article IV Consultation Staff Report.