Political and security context. The political situation stabilized somewhat during the first half of 2015. In January, the President appointed a new government, with a mandate to implement sound public financial management after the governance lapses which delayed the first and second reviews of the ECF arrangement. In June, the government signed a peace agreement with armed rebel groups, involving more decentralization and the implementation of regional development projects, not only in the north but also the in south of the country. The government is preparing a strategy to give coherence to such projects, following the needs assessment conducted jointly with multilateral developments banks (MDBs). Meanwhile, the security situation remains fragile, with continuing guerilla attacks on the UN force (MINUSMA) and the Malian army by jihadist groups mainly in the North. There has also been activity by armed groups in the South, including in in Bamako, where a terrorist attack claimed six victims in March. After an unusually strong performance in 2014, growth is projected to decelerate in 2015–16, but should remain robust. After reaching 7.2 percent in 2014, thanks mainly to a record harvest, real GDP growth is projected to slow to about 5 percent in 2015. Agricultural out q ut is expected to expand as more land is coming under cultivation and thanks to good rainfall, but manufacturing growth should soften. For 2016, growth is expected to rise to 5.4 percent, driven partly by higher public investment and strong donor support. Growth should remain above trend through 2018 on account of the ongoing rebound from the 2012/13 crisis, and then fall back to trend (about 4.5 percent). Inflation in 2015 is expected to rise slightly to 2.1 percent (0.9 percent in 2014), driven by food, and remain below the regional ceiling of 3 percent in coming years. The recent depreciation of the CFA franc against the US dollar (which reached 13 percent during the year ending in September) appears to have had limited effects on domestic consumer prices. The external current account is projected to strengthen in the near term, but weaken over the medium term, mainly as a result of less favorable terms of trade. The current account deficit is projected to decline to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2015 (5.5 percent of GDP in 2014)— significantly lower than previously anticipated—driven largely by lower oil prices and higher volumes of gold exports. However, the deficit is projected to rise to close to 4 percent of GDP in 2016 and continue to weaken in subsequent years as terms of trade deteriorate and gold output declines. The deficits are expected to be financed by public capital inflows and foreign direct investment, in amounts that should still allow a slow improvement in Mali’s imputed international reserve position at the regional central Bank (BCEAO). Monetary conditions remain supportive of economic activity. Commercial banks have continued to take advantage of the BCEAO’s accommodative policy, and expanded credit to the private sector. Credit growth stood at 17.7 percent (year-on-year) in June 2015, after reaching 19 percent in 2014. The BCEAO’s policy has also allowed local banks to finance purchases of Mali’s and other WAEMU countries’ government paper. The depreciation of the CFA franc against the US dollar might also support economic activity, although likely in a limited fashion only owing to Mali’s export structure (with its reliance on gold and cotton) and little-diversified economy. Page 9 The overall fiscal balance is projected to remain contained. On a payment order basis, the overall deficit is expected to narrow to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2015 (4.3 percent of GDP on cash basis as the float is paid off and domestic arrears are reduced), reflecting increased tax collections, notably from fuel, as the authorities have taken advantage of the drop in import petroleum prices to remove the implicit subsidy without affecting retail prices. The deficit would rise to slightly above 3 percent of GDP in 2016–17 to accommodate higher capital spending—partly to support the Peace Accord—before being reduced to the WAEMU convergence criterion of 3 percent of GDP from 2018. This trajectory would be consistent with keeping nominal public debt below 40 percent of GDP (or below 25 percent of GDP in NPV terms) over the medium term. Text Table 1. Mali: Key Economic Indicators, 2014–20 Rev. prog. Proj. (in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP growth Consumer price inflation (average) Revenue of which : Tax revenue Grants Total expenditure and net lending Overall balance (payment orders) Overall balance (cash) Basic fiscal balance Total public debt Current external balance (including official transfers) Overall balance of payments Sources: Malian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. IMF Country Report No. 15/151, Mali: Thrid Review Under the Extended Credit Facility Arrangement. Defined in Table 3, footnote 3. Bank financial soundness indicators appear to have improved somewhat over the last year, although non-performing loans remain high. The latest available data (March 2015) show that banks have strengthened their capital, which remains well above the relatively low regional required minimum (8 percent, Table 8). Non-performing loans (NPLs) have experienced a slight decline over the last year, but still represent 17 percent of total loans and are not fully provisioned. About 30 percent of NPLs date back to more than ten years ago, and are concentrated in three banks, including the state-owned Malian Housing Bank (BHM), which is in the process of being restructured (paragraph 19). Bank liquidity also rose in the year ending in March 2015, partly reflecting the BCEAO’s accommodative monetary policy stance. Bank profitability looks adequate. The macroeconomic outlook is subject to several risks (Box 1). In the event the current Peace Accord does not lead to a permanent improvement in the fragile security situation, there may See IMF Country Report No. 15/100, West African Economic and Monetary Union—Staff Report for Common Policies of Member Countries ( March 2015). Page 10 Box 1. Mali: Risk Assessment Matrix be knock-on implications for consumer, donor, and investor confidence and increased security- related spending pressures. Spillovers from security dislocation in neighboring countries could produce similar impacts. Agricultural output remains vulnerable to adverse weather conditions. High Page 11 dependence on gold and cotton exports (60 and 13 percent, respectively) leaves Mali’s balance of payments—and, to a lesser extent, its public finances— exposed to fluctuations in international commodity prices. Although the new government has made progress in addressing some of the weaknesses in public financial management, new lapses could dampen consumer and business confidence, discourage donors, and drag down growth. Changes to the global environment, in particular lower growth in Europe and China, could have a moderate impact on Mali’s growth and external sector. Given Mali’s limited financial integration with the rest of the world, the impact from tighter global financial conditions would be low, and so would the impact of a stronger U.S. dollar (see paragraph 4). Further declines in oil prices would benefit Mali, which is fully dependent on imports for its petroleum needs.