The banking system continues to face important risks. Stress tests conducted during the regional consultation with the BCEAO and the Banking Commission earlier this year indicated that the concentration of credit on a few large borrowers is the main risk for the stability of the banking sector. At present, this risk remains largely unaddressed. Macro-financial linkages are weak given the small size of the financial sector. However, serious fluctuations in economic activity, as experienced in 2012, do affect the financial sector, especially its profitability and asset quality While bank capital has increased over the last year, there are uncertainties about the valuation of the large amount of real estate not linked to bank operations in excess of the prudential norm on banks’ balance sheet. Staff recommended that the authorities conduct an assessment of the market value of these real estate assets in collaboration with the regional Banking Commission. Such an assessment would provide information to determine whether banks need more capital. Banks’ large holding of real estate is related to the high NPLs, an important share of which is accounted for by three banks, including the state- owned Malian Housing Bank (BHM). Staff encouraged the authorities to address this problem by designing and implementing a plan to extract the related NPLs from the balance sheets of the three banks concerned. The authorities have plans to restructure BHM, the only state-owned bank remaining in the country (MEFP, paragraph 55) . The authorities have changed their approach to dealing with BHM, which initially envisaged outright privatization or liquidation. They now envisage BHM’s restructuring in two stages. In a first stage, to be completed by end-2015, they plan to merge BHM with the stronger and larger Malian Solidarity Bank (BMS). Besides reducing fiscal risks, the merger would establish a new entity with a sufficiently-strong balance sheet to attract participation by private investors in the new bank. In a second stage, the government would divest itself from its equity stake in this new institution. See IMF Country Report No. 15/100, West African Economic and Monetary Union—Staff Report for Common Policies of Member Countries (March 2015). Page 18 Staff encouraged the authorities to strengthen the micro-finance sector. The financial soundness of the micro-finance sector is weak (non-performing loans in the sector stood at 13 percent in March 2015) and its structure is highly fragmented, with over 100 weakly managed and supervised institutions. Although the sector represents only a small fraction (about 3 percent) of banking system assets and does not seem to pose a major risk to financial stability, its weakness undermines confidence by the population in financial institutions and may be a hurdle to raising financial inclusion, and ultimately to economic growth. The mission encouraged the authorities to develop and implement a plan to strengthen the stability of the micro-finance sector—in line with the recommendations of the March 2015 Word Bank developmental FSAP mission—including closing down weaker institutions and paying off their depositors.