Growth in Mali has been relatively low and volatile over the past twenty years. (See Selected Issues paper, chapter I, on “ Growth, Structural Transformation, and Diversification in Mali ”). Despite a lower starting level of income per capita, Mali has grown more slowly on average over the past two decades relative to the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. The majority of Mali’s population is employed in low-productivity agriculture and the secondary sector is underdeveloped. Further structural transformation and diversification of output and exports could yield significant growth dividends. Improving the business environment should be a key policy priority; along with boosting agricultural productivity (possible measures include liberalization of the cotton sector, increasing support for agricultural R&D, increasing land cultivation of semi-arid agriculture, increasing production of export-competitive products, and improving management practices of land and water). With half of the population being less than 15 years old and the population set to double in the next 25 years, the demand for public services and jobs will increase strongly. The authorities are aware that meeting this demand will require steadfast progress in domestic resource mobilization, public financial management, and other structural reforms to promote private sector development and job creation. See Mali—Implementing Fiscal Decentralization (FAD Technical Assistance Report, No. 15/287, February 2015). “Decentralized resources” are those stationed in the regions but reported to the central government in Bamako. See the following FAD Technical Assistance Reports: Mali—Implementing Fiscal Decentralization, No. 15/287 (February 2015), and Mali—Local taxation and Decentralization, No. 15/291 (October 2015). Page 15 Potential Growth Effects from Raising Output Diversification in Mali to benchmark levels (In Percentage Points) Growth Effects from Increased Export Diversification in Mali (Increase in Annual Growth Rate, Average 2001-2010) WAEMU Africa-Benchmark Asia-Benchmark WAEMU Africa-Benchmark Asia-Benchmark Improving infrastructure and increasing human capital are key to raising long-run economic growth. The authorities agreed on the need to address structural weaknesses which hinder the development of new economic activities, such as the lack of infrastructure, electricity shortages, inadequate education and training, limited access to finance, underdeveloped trading networks, a malfunctioning labor market, and poor regulation. While the evidence is mixed concerning the success of industry-focused measures, there seems to be scope for targeted measures in agriculture, such as increased irrigation, better use of fertilizer, and the use of motorized equipments. This is especially important given Mali’s potential for a large increase in the land area under cultivation. These measures could make a substantial difference to growth and poverty reduction, given the large scope for increasing productivity in agriculture and the high share of agricultural employment in Mali. High labor taxation is a drag on formal sector employment and overall economic growth. (See Selected Issues paper, Chapter III, on “ Labor Income Taxation and Its Implications in Mali ”). Staff stressed the need to reduce the high tax wedge to boost formal employment by reducing the number of taxes levied on labor income and shifting the tax burden away from it. The authorities were concerned about the revenue loss that lower labor taxation would entail and were not prepared to move in this direction in the near term. Staff argued that short-term revenue losses would be manageable under plausible scenarios: lowering the tax wedge by one third, for example, would bring it close to Senegal’s level and reduce tax revenue by 0.5 percent of GDP. However, this revenue loss would be reduced as more labor shifts from the informal to the formal sector in response to lighter taxation. Any residual loss Page 16 would be covered by intensifying revenue mobilization—including via reduction of exemptions—as envisaged under the program or greater reliance on indirect taxation (see MEFP, 21–15). Staff also pointed to the potential benefits from increasing women’s participation in the labor market in terms of boosting growth and reducing gender inequality and poverty. (Please see Selected Issues paper, Chapter I, “ Growth, Structural Transformation, and Diversification in Mali ”). It noted that measures that can help reduce gender inequality (e.g., education and increased access to contraception), might also help promote the structural transformation of the economy and harness the demographic dividend. There is thus a case for the government to focus their efforts on them. Improving governance can produce high economic dividends. (See Selected Issues paper, on the Economic Benefits of Reducing Corruption , Chapter II). Governance indicators in Mali generally weakened over the 2007–13 period, including relative to peers in the region. If they had not, Mali could have enjoyed 0.7 percentage points more annual growth over that period. While these are broad, illustrative estimates, there is little doubt that reducing corruption can yield significant growth dividends in Mali. In that respect, the mission encouraged the authorities to continue pushing forward with the implementation of the strategy to address corruption contained in the ECF arrangement. This includes initiatives such as publishing regular reports on remedial measures taken in response to the findings of the Auditor General’s reports; implementing the asset declaration system prescribed by the 2014 law against illegal enrichment; and strengthening the implementation of Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) legislation. The authorities were broadly receptive to these recommendations and agreed to the implementation of the 2014 law against illicit enrichment as part of the ECF-supported program for 2016. Staff also suggested making public the asset declarations by high-ranking government officials (under current legislation, such officials are only required to submit asset declarations to the Supreme Court). However, the authorities were not prepared to commit to this measure at this point, arguing that overall Mali was already moving in the right direction in the area of promoting good governance, including compared to peers in the region. See MEFP, paragraph 58, in IMF Country Report No. 15/151. Page 17