The authorities and staff concurred that increasing tax revenue was key to financing priority spending while maintaining fiscal sustainability. Mali has large gaps in the infrastructure and social sectors that need to be addressed to support inclusive long-run economic growth and reduce poverty. To help finance these needs while maintaining healthy public finances, the authorities plan to continue raising the tax revenue ratio to reach 18 percent of GDP by 2017—three percentage points up from its 2014 level. The authorities recently raised taxes on financial transactions and telecommunication. By keeping retail prices constant, the drop in import prices for petroleum products turned into a windfall for the treasury to the tune of 0.8 percent of GDP in 2015. With the support of FAD, they have been strengthening tax and customs administration to broaden Mali benefits from multi-year technical assistance programs by FAD financed by the Topical Trust Funds in Tax Policy and Administration and in Managing National Resource Wealth (TTFs-TPA and NRWM). Page 13 the base and increase compliance, although with mixed success thus far. Staff argued that the incentive system for tax and customs inspectors, especially the sharing in penalties (just raised to 45 percent for tax inspectors), had potentially distortionary effects and discouraged the adoption of reforms favoring voluntary self-declarations combined with risk-based controls for a maximum number of tax payers. Going forward, the authorities agreed that efforts are needed to further bolster revenue administration (MEFP, paragraphs 22 and 26). Particularly important is the gradual reduction in tax exemptions, which amounted to 4 percent of GDP in 2014. A new automated central registry should help facilitate this. The authorities also concurred that the level of taxation of petroleum products was now appropriate and that future movements in international prices should be passed to consumers in a symmetrical fashion. The authorities target raising tax revenue to 20 percent of GDP over the medium term, as required by WAEMU commitments. Spending reprioritizing may also help meet peace-related needs in the near term. To this effect, the authorities will exploit any scope for expenditure reallocation to cover security and humanitarian needs. However, this may not suffice and a slower fiscal consolidation in 2016–17 may be appropriate, with the overall deficit rising somewhat above 3 percent of GDP. The authorities would bring the deficit to 3 percent of GDP by 2018 (which would imply a basic deficit of zero) to meet the WAEMU convergence criterion and consistent with maintaining fiscal sustainability. This fiscal stance would allow providing better support to the implementation of the Peace Accord and higher capital spending, while avoiding the crowding out of private investment. Strengthening the public expenditure chain from budget preparation to expenditure payment, as envisioned under the ECF arrangement, should also help improve the quality of expenditure and improve its efficiency while helping avoid the accumulation of arrears. Staff supported ongoing efforts to strengthen public financial management. With technical assistance from FAD, AFRITAC, and donors, the authorities are improving public financial management, including budget preparation and execution, treasury management, and public procurement (MEFP, paragraphs 30, 33, 35, and 38). Against this background, the authorities have continued to consolidate the cash held by government agencies in commercial banks into the treasury single account at the central bank, which should help improve cash management and reduce borrowing costs (MEFP, paragraph 45). With technical support from the World Bank, they have adopted a new public procurement code. The government is also putting in place measures to bolster budget transparency and improve the presentation of Mali’s fiscal accounts, including by adopting a presentation based on the 2001 Government Finance Statistics Manual from 2016 onward (MEFP, paragraph 41). The measures the authorities are planning comprise: (i) increasing the compliance with VAT, currently estimated at only 50 percent for large and medium-size taxpayers; (ii) implementing multidisciplinary audits of tax returns, customs duties and government procurement to widen the tax base and identify companies which underreport their income (estimated to have a large revenue cost); (iii) enlisting specialized firms to audit the tax returns of mining companies; and (iv) bringing the Mining Code up to current international standards. See MEFP, paragraphs 27–39, in the IMF Country Report No. 15/151. Page 14 The government is moving gradually on fiscal decentralization. The Peace Accord between the government and the rebel groups in the North (paragraph 1) aims for a transfer of 30 percent of government revenue by 2018 to the country’s 8 existing regions and the new regions which will be created (see SIP on Fiscal Decentralization in Mali and Lessons from International Experience, chapter III). Currently, the central government transfers about 12 percent of budget revenue to local governments and, in addition, spends at a local level the equivalent of about 8 percent of budget revenue (decentralized resources). The authorities plan to help achieve the 30-percent transfer objective partly by reassigning to the newly empowered regions staff currently “decentralized”. While acknowledging the commitments under the peace agreement and the need to foster a higher level of development in the North and other less developed regions, the authorities stressed the importance of building administrative capacity and expenditure control at the local level to ensure expenditure quality—in line with the recommendations from recent FAD technical assistance. They underscored that this would require the transfer of additional resources to the regions to take place gradually, which would also help ease the burden on the public finances and preserve fiscal stability.