Malta has made significant progress in reducing its overall deficit and strengthening fiscal governance since the last Article IV consultation. Stronger than expected growth helped lower the fiscal deficit by almost 1 percentage point to 2.7 percent of GDP in 2013, and debt reached 69.5 percent of GDP, partly reflecting stock-flow adjustments. Fiscal consolidation has continued in 2014, despite rapidly growing current expenditures, financed by stronger-than- expected revenues. Staff estimates the fiscal deficit to decline to 2.2 percent in 2014. The authorities enacted the Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA) over the summer, introducing i) a balanced-budget rule and a debt rule in line with EU requirements; ii) an independent fiscal council to monitor fiscal rules; iii) the Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement and the Fiscal Policy Strategy; iv) a fiscal risk statement; and v) a contingency reserve to be built over the next five years. Staff’s views The budgetary targets for 2015-2017 are welcome but meeting them will be challenging. The authorities aim at bringing the structural deficit to -0.4 percent in 2017, implying Page 9 an annual average fiscal consolidation of about 0.6 percent of GDP. The implied pace of adjustment strikes an appropriate balance between adjusting towards the MTO of balanced budget in structural terms and limiting its impact on growth. However, the authorities’ target for 2015 (-1.6 percent of GDP) is based almost entirely on revenue measures, and the underlying growth projections rely on favorable external assumptions. To ensure that the proposed fiscal targets are met, additional expenditure measures should be considered. These measures should be designed to contain the fast growth in current spending— including through prudent wage agreements and further restraint on public sector employment— while preserving incentives for labor participation and education, and capital spending. Given weaker growth assumptions, possible slippages in the wage bill and subsidies relative to the targets, and lack of specific measures beyond 2015, staff project an overall deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP in 2015 and 1.5 percent for 2017 (Table 2). Staff project debt to reach 69.8 percent in 2015, gradually declining to around 62 percent of GDP by 2020. Low inflation and growth, and contingent liabilities are the key risks (DSA Annex). Broad-based reforms—on expenditures, pension, and healthcare— are critical to contain fiscal pressures going forward. The authorities have started a Public Expenditure Review (PER) process, and the main progress has been made in social security spending. Building on this initiative, a comprehensive spending review would help prioritize and contain spending. In addition, such a review would facilitate improvements in the efficiency of spending, for example on education and health, where outcomes remain weak despite high spending levels. On pension reforms, while a private third pillar pension scheme was introduced in 2014, progress has been limited. Further measures—such as accelerating the planned increase in the retirement age and linking pensionable income to a longer period of working years— are needed to curb the projected increase in public pension outlays. On health care, initial steps in improving medical procurement have been taken, increasing access to drugs and controlling costs. The government is also planning to establish cost centers within hospitals aiming to enhance management practices. However, progress in reforms The retirement age is set to gradually reach 65 years for both genders only in 2027, whereas 16 EU member states will have already reached or exceeded this level by 2020. No further increases are envisaged. While recently revised population projections will likely result in lower projections for age-related spending, there is still a gap between the projected outlays and available resources. EA17GBRAUTBELDNKFRA ITA NLDNOR SWE CHEFINISLIRL MLTPRTESPCYP01020 oo oo Public Expenditure on Tertiary Education per Pupil, PPS Efficiency of Tertiary Education, 2011 Source: Eurostat, OECD, WDI, and IMFstaff calculations Y K II R Z H R K K EE V Change in Age-related Spending, 2010-60 Pensions Health Long-term care Source: Eurostat Note: The age-related spending isgoing to be updated given new populations statistics. New estimates will likely yield lower expected expenditure. Page 10 and its impact on the budget are expected to be modest and gradual. Accelerating the implementation of planned health care measures—such as increasing the administrative efficiency and strengthening primary care— will help contain spending growth. The authorities should continue to push forward with restructuring of state-owned corporations and overall fiscal reforms. Given the extent of ongoing restructuring efforts and implications on the budget, it is important to disclose, analyze, and manage risks to public finances from the state owned enterprises in a consolidated manner. Enemalta’s (the utility company) restructuring, once completed as planned, will bolster public finances, reduce guaranteed debt (16 percent of GDP in 2014, about 60 percent of which is due to Enemalta) and help lower energy costs. As the privatization agreement is at its final stages, a part of the proceeds has been already used to cover the tax arrears, and the rest is going to be used to reduce bank loans. Regarding the infrastructure projects—essential to reduce production costs—the interconnector to Sicily is almost complete, but the completion of one of the power plants, originally scheduled for 2015, is now delayed to 2016. To ensure a sustainable financial position, tariff reductions should be backed by cost containment. The restructuring of Airmalta is continuing (involving a total government injection of €130 million, about 1¾ percent of GDP, to be completed by 2016), but the company is facing challenges in breaking even as planned. Recent nationalization of the public transport company has led to an increase in subsidies (about 1/3 percent of GDP). The authorities are in the process of its re-privatization. Staff encouraged the full implementation of the FRA for the next budget period, which would help manage risks, including from the SOEs, in a multi-year framework. In addition, ongoing initiatives to integrate the revenue administration agencies will help improve the overall budgetary process. Authorities’ views The authorities acknowledged the risks, but were confident that their deficit targets would be met. They noted that the fiscal deficit declined by 1 percentage point in 2013, and additional expenditures in 2014 were concentrated on priority areas, such as health care and education. On SOEs, the authorities anticipate that the expected cost and efficiency gains from Enemalta’s restructuring would cover the tariff reductions implemented in 2014 and 2015. In addition, they noted that SOEs are subject to public scrutiny individually. On pension reforms, the authorities noted that they would wait for the results of the updated projections for pension spending based on new population statistics before taking any additional measures. On fiscal reforms, the authorities intend to implement the FRA for the next budget period, starting with the appointment of a fiscal council. They also noted that the National Audit Office reviewed the macro and fiscal projections for the 2015 budget. On spending review, they emphasized that progress has During recent years, Enemalta’s losses have averaged at around 1 percent GDP, partially met by subsidies, and led to buildup of the guaranteed debt. The authorities signed a memorandum of understanding for a strategic partnership with the Shanghai Electric Power in 2013 and are in the process of completing the deal, selling a 33 percent stake in Enemalta and undertaking energy infrastructure projects. Page 11 been made on social security, and they are considering expanding it to other sectors, including through technical assistance by the IMF.