The 2017 budget aims to reduce the fiscal deficit further, following an over- performance in 2016. Strong economic conditions, lower support to SOEs, and expenditure restraint measures, have led to a marked improvement in the 2016 fiscal position. Based on the outturn through November, staff estimate the 2016 deficit at 0.7 percent of GDP, below the budget target of 1.1 percent of GDP. The deficit reduction implies a structural adjustment of 0.4 percent of potential GDP, supported by higher-than-planned revenue from IIP, which more than offset higher-than-anticipated expenditure on goods and services and compensation of employees. Looking to 2017, the budget targets a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP to be achieved mainly through higher excises, and lower spending on social benefits, subsidies, and interest payment. These measures are expected to deliver an additional structural adjustment of 0.4 percent of potential GDP and contribute to further reduction of public debt. 2016 Est. Malta: Fiscal Estimates and Projections (Percent of GDP) The authorities’ medium-term consolidation plan should be underpinned by specific measures. Malta’s high degree of openness, which increases its susceptibility to external shocks, long-term spending pressures, and elevated level of government guaranteed debt (14 percent of GDP) underline the importance of further reducing the public debt-to-GDP ratio. In this regard, the authorities’ latest projections, which envisage a cumulative structural adjustment of 1½ percent of GDP in 2017-19 such that their Medium-Term Objective of a structural balance in 2019 will be achieved comfortably, appear appropriate as they strike the right balance between the need to sustain growth momentum and build fiscal buffers. However, with measures not sufficiently specified, staff project a slower adjustment pace than the authorities. Under staff’s baseline scenario, the overall deficit is projected to remain at 0.6 percent of GDP from 2017 onwards, thus delivering a cumulative structural adjustment of 0.5 percent of potential GDP in 2017-19. While continued primary surpluses and favorable debt dynamics are projected to gradually reduce Overall balance Structural balance Public debt 1/ These are the authorities’ latest interim forecasts; updated targets will be provided in the Stability Programme following the conclusion of the spring macroeconomic forecasts and revised fiscal projections. Sources: Ministry of Finance and IMF's staff projections. Revenue Expenditure Overall balance Structural balance Public debt The authorities' interim forecasts 1/ Projections Page 18 public debt-to-GDP ratio, contingent liabilities—stemming from SOEs and relatively large banking sector—are a key risk (Annex IV). Efforts to contain fast-growing current spending and enhance revenue collection can support the planned fiscal consolidation. In particular, The public sector’s wage bill and spending on goods and services are relatively high and have increased rapidly in recent years. Measures to restrain these expenditures would help reduce the risk of spending overruns. Furthermore, sustained expenditure rationalization would require incorporation of recommendations of the recent in-depth spending reviews and execution of similar reviews in the broader public sector (Annex III). Real Growth of Goods and Services and Wage Bill, (2007=100) Goods and services, Euro area Wage bill, Euro area Goods and services, Malta Wage bill, Malta Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff's calculations. General Government Spending Average 2011-2015 (Percent of GDP) Goods and services Wage bill B Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Institutional Arrangements EU, excl. CESEE Efficiency of Tax Administration (1-10 scale, 10 indicates the "best practice) The authorities have taken steps to simplify the tax system and improve the efficiency of tax collection, and work is underway to merge various revenue departments into a single government revenue function. Nevertheless, while Malta’s overall VAT gap is relatively low, recent study suggests that VAT compliance could be strengthened further. Efforts should, therefore, focus on: (i) making a better use of IT and online services to facilitate compliance and provide high service standards; (ii) ensuring adequate human resources (i.e., staffing and training), and (iii) enhancing the operational performance of the tax administration. Source: OECD, 2015, “Tax Administration. Comparative information on OECD and Other Advanced and Emerging Economies. Operational performance Organizational Structure Strategic Management IT/Online Services Human Resources Under contingent liability shocks equivalent to 5 percent of the domestic banks’ total assets and 50 percent of the government guaranteed debt, public debt would increase by 18 and 8 percentage points of GDP, respectively. See European Commission study on VAT Gap in the EU-28 Member States. Page 19 In view of the uncertainties surrounding the baseline, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully if growth disappoints while budget windfalls should be used to further reduce the borrowing needs and build fiscal buffers. Reforms of SOEs are progressing, but risks remain. The state electricity provider, Enemalta, has improved its financial standing following internal restructuring and a partial privatization, and posted a profit in 2015 after a prolonged period of losses. Meanwhile, the restructuring of Air Malta, the national carrier, continues to lag behind and, although financial performance has improved recently, the company continues to generate losses. To this end, a faster restructuring of Air Malta is needed to contain fiscal risks. At the same time, Enemalta’s elevated level of government guaranteed debt (about 6 percent of GDP in 2015) calls for continued close monitoring of its operations. Total Health Pensions Long-term care Change in Age Related Spending, 2013-60 1/ Further efforts are needed to reduce long-term spending pressures. Malta is facing rising ageing pressures and is expected to record a significant increase in age-related spending going forward. The recent pension changes adopted by the authorities in the 2016 budget, which included measures to delay retirement, incentivize voluntary savings, and increase minimum pensions for the most vulnerable, are steps in the right direction. Additional measures to align the effective retirement age with life expectancy, better link the pensionable income to life- time incomes, and lengthen the contributory period would further mitigate the associated long-term fiscal risks. Increasing the administrative efficiency in the health sector and strengthening the primary care should also help contain age related spending growth and support the pension reform. Source: European Commission The 2015 Ageing Report. 1/The age-related spending is updated given new populations statistics. New estimates will likely yield lower expected expenditure. O Y B U B K Z K E O H K H V Authorities’ views The authorities confirmed their commitment to continue with fiscal consolidation. They expressed confidence in meeting their 2017 deficit target on the back of continued favorable economic conditions, and prudent macro and revenue forecasts. They agreed that measures to support fiscal consolidation should build on containting current spending, including through the implementation of in-depth spending reviews, though noted that the ongoing public sector wage negotiations with the unions pose uncertainty. They also pointed to continued efforts to enhance tax collection efficiency, including by better use of technology and more efficient risk-based tax audits. They recognized risks from contingent liabilities, but stressed Air Malta received a cumulative capital injection of about 0.6 percent of GDP by the government in 2015- Page 20 that the impact of these risks on public debt is contained, also given the ongoing reforms in SOEs. Finally, they agreed with the need to continue addressing long-term spending pressures from ageing and committed to review the effectiveness of the recent measures periodically.