Malta’s economy has remained resilient since the global crisis . Spillovers from turmoil in financial markets have been contained because of low reliance on external finance by domestic banks and the government. Real GDP has increased at one of the highest rates in the euro area since the crisis, supported by relatively diversified exports and, more recently, by domestic demand. At the same time, unemployment has declined close to its historical lows—among the lowest in the euro area— despite increasing labor participation rates. Growth is strong while inflation has declined along with the euro area trend (Table 1) . The economy expanded by 2.5 percent in 2013, driven by domestic demand. Growth further accelerated to 3.6 percent (y-o-y) in the first nine months of 2014, supported by investment in large scale energy infrastructure projects and consumption. Inflation remained subdued at around 0.75 percent, reflecting lower oil prices, a decline in electricity tariffs, and low inflation in the euro area. Core inflation has been running higher, at about 1.5 percent, reflecting a closed output gap. Malta has made impressive strides in improving its external balances, but unit labor costs are rising faster than in trading partners (Figure 5, Appendix 1) The trade balance reverted from a deficit of 2.5 percent of GDP in 2009 to a surplus of 9.2 percent of GDP in the first three quarters of 2014. Robust export growth after the crisis has reflected a diversified export base, both geographically and across sectors, and rapidly growing exports of services. Exports, however, grew Euro area Annual Growth Rate 1/ (Percent)Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook. 1/Shaded area represents maximum and minimum. Mar-10Dec-10Sep-11Jun-12Mar-13Dec-13Sep-14 Net exports Change in inv. Investment Public consump Private consump GDP Source: National authorities Malta: Contributions to GDP Growth (percent change, year-on-year) Annual HICP Inflation (percent, SA) EA MaltaSource: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations Page 6 only marginally in 2014, partly reflecting a drop in the semiconductor sector. The current account remained positive at 8.1 percent of GDP, mainly driven by lower goods imports and a shrinking deficit in the primary income account. At the same time, unit labor costs have been increasing at one of the fastest rates in the euro area, posing risks for competitiveness when many euro area neighbors are undertaking structural reforms and internal devaluations. Despite a growing economy, credit to corporations has remained weak, and the cost of capital has remained relatively high. Loans to non-financial corporations (NFCs) had been declining and only recently have stabilized at around a zero growth rate. At the same time, NFCs’ lending rates have remained high relative the euro area average—despite the decline in ECB policy rates and a sound banking system—making it difficult for viable firms, particularly smaller ones, to access credit. High lending rates could reflect various factors, including higher funding cost of banks (relative to the ECB policy rates), limited competition, high level of NPL ratios, and relatively high corporate sector leverage, particularly for smaller firms and in certain sectors (Appendices 2 and 3). Lending Rates on Loans to NFCs1/ EA: Total ECB Policy Rate Italy Portugal 1/ Outstanding amounts; EA,Total:EA16, excludingEstonia and Latvia. Source:Haver Analytics. Unit Labor Costs (2005=100) United Kingdom Portugal Greece Cyprus Source: Eurostat Euro area Current Account Balance 1/ Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook. 1/Shaded area represents maximum and minimum. Loans to NFCs1/ (percent change, SA) EA: Total 1/ Outstanding amounts. Source: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 7 Overall, the baseline outlook is strong. In particular: Growth is projected to remain robust, at around 3 percent in 2015–16. The output gap is slightly positive and is expected to close over the next two years. Domestic demand is supported by large scale investment projects in the energy sector and strong household income from rising wages and employment. Lower oil prices are expected to raise growth marginally in 2015. Over the medium-term growth is projected at 2.6 percent, slightly higher than the average since the EU accession on account of increased labor force participation. Inflation is projected to rise slowly as upward pressures from a small positive output gap and higher unit labor costs are expected to be dampened by planned reduction in energy tariffs, the pass-through of lower global oil prices and euro area inflation. The current account surplus will persist, supported by lower oil prices in 2015, the projected gradual recovery in external demand, Malta’s continued competitiveness in the services sector, and the planned transfers of EU structural funds, despite the uncertainty surrounding the primary income account reflecting transactions of international banks (Table 3). Risks to the outlook are balanced (Risk Assessment Matrix). In the short-term, prolonged stagnation and deflation in the euro area would reduce external demand and make fiscal adjustment more challenging. Medium-term risks of delays in implementing energy infrastructure projects and restructuring state-owned enterprises are balanced by the possibility of positive spillovers to private investment and consumption from ongoing large scale investment projects. Broader than expected changes in the EU regulatory framework and tax reforms could erode Malta’s competitiveness especially if implementation of structural reforms in Malta is delayed while many other euro area countries continue to reduce their unit labor costs. Fiscal slippages and a further increase in public debt could feed into higher financing costs, crowding out private investment. Box 1. Exchange Rate Assessment Since the last Article IV consultation, the real effective exchange rate (REER based on INS), is depreciated by about 1.5 percent. Real effective exchange rates remain elevated relative to trading partners, and the gap between the ULC and CPI based REER persists (Figure 5). Nevertheless, estimates of exchange rate valuation are broadly in line with fundamentals. While the macro balance and external sustainability approaches show a small undervaluation, the equilibrium exchange rate approach points at an overvaluation of about 6 percent. Art IV 2012Art IV 2013CurrentMacro Balance-1.7-1.2-3.0Equilibrium RER 2/5.9-0.56.4External Sustainability5.65.0-1.5 Sources: IMF article IV staff reports; and IMF staff estimates.2/ To compute the medium term RER we use data up to October 2014. Estimates of Exchange Rate Valuation 1/ (Percent)1/ +/- indicates exchange rate over/undervaluation; see IMF Occasional Paper No. 261 for details on the methodology underlying the estimates in this table. Numbers are not comparable with previous Art IV due to data revisions. Page 8 Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and risks . Staff’s growth projections are marginally more optimistic than the Central Bank’s, reflecting recent oil price and exchange rate developments, while the Ministry of Finance expected higher growth rates in 2015 and 2016 (3.5 and 3.4 percent, respectively) on account of more favorable external assumptions. Continued strong performance of the tourism industry was also expected to support growth. The authorities saw the external environment as one of the main sources of downside risks, including for the recovery of semiconductor exports. They noted that the downside risk of investment project delays is balanced by the possibility of stronger than expected consumption due to improved confidence and labor market conditions. The risk of loss of competitiveness from changes in regulation and tax reform was seen as modest as the authorities emphasized still-relatively-low labor costs, flexibility and availability of skilled labor, and Malta’s overall diversification and dynamism as the main sources of competitiveness.