Malta exhibited remarkable macroeconomic resilience to global shocks . Its diversified economic structure, flexible labor market, and reliance on domestic funding, helped the economy weather the global financial crisis well, and following a short-lived recession in 2009, growth rebounded strongly, averaging 4¾ percent over 2010-15. Robust growth, accompanied by a continuous decline in unemployment, was also supported by a stable banking system, favorable external conditions, and sound policies, which advanced structural reforms and strengthened public finances. Recognizing the improved economic fundamentals, Standard & Poor’s upgraded Malta’s sovereign rating to A- from BBB+ in October 2016. The strong economic performance took place in the context of a continued structural rebalancing. The economy has experienced a prominent increase in the relative importance of the services sector in recent years, reflecting the emergence of new niche industries and expansion of more traditional sectors. The structural shift has been job-rich and attracted foreign workers, predominantly from the EU. As the growing sectors were largely export-oriented, this rebalancing also contributed to a surge in services exports, improvement in the current account balance, and a sizable increase in the net international investment position (NIIP). 2008Q1 2016Q1 1 / Area refers to the difference between the 5th and 95th percentiles of real GDP among euro area countries. Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. Euro area 2012Q1 2010Q1 2014Q1 Change in Relative Size of the Services Sector (Percent of total gross value added, excluding public administration) Change in relative size of services sector, 2008-2015 Relative size of services sector, 2015 (RHS) H z B K Source: Haver Analytics and IMF Staff's calculations. b x B k w k Malta: Relative Size of Main Sectors (Percent of total gross value added) Change in relative size from 2008 Relative size in 2015 (RHS) & b Source: Haver Analytics and IMF Staff's calculations. & Page 10