The outlook is strong, but risks are tilted to the downside Strong growth is projected to continue, albeit at a more moderate pace. Real GDP growth is projected to remain robust, though decelerate to about 4 percent and 3½ in 2016 and 2017, respectively, on account of a weaker impetus from domestic demand. The completion of large-scale infrastructure projects, notably in the energy sector, and expiration of the previous EU funding cycle will drag investment growth lower while the effect of the recent policy measures to increase disposable income will diminish and lead to a gradual deceleration of private consumption growth. Against a backdrop of loose ECB policy, favorable financial conditions are expected to support household credit growth (see accompanying SIP). The contribution of net external demand to growth is projected to remain low. Over the medium term, growth is projected to decelerate towards an estimated potential of about 3 percent, narrowing gradually the positive output gap, while inflation is set to increase moderately as imported prices recover. Domestic demand will remain the main engine of growth. However, ongoing deleveraging in the NFC sector, completion of infrastructure projects, and structural rebalancing towards services, will keep credit to corporates subdued and dampen the expansion of investment, while the moderation of income growth will restrain private consumption growth. Current account surpluses are expected to persist due to sizable services balances, and less buoyant domestic demand. Malta: Macroeconomic Projections, 2015–21 (Percentage change unless indicated otherwise) 2016 Est. Projections Real GDP Domestic demand Private consumption Public consumption Fixed investment Exports Imports Current account (percent of GDP) Output gap Consumer Prices (HICP, period average) Source: National Statistics Office; and IMF staff projections. Risks to the outlook are skewed to the downside (see Risk Assessment Matrix, Annex II). In view of Malta’s high openness, prolonged weaker growth in key trading partners and rising anti-globalization sentiment would adversely affect exports, erode business confidence, and undermine investment. Rising global interest rates would tighten financial Page 15 conditions, yet the limited linkages of international banks to the domestic economy and the reliance of core domestic banks and the government on domestic funding are mitigating factors (Box 2). Uncertainties surrounding the Brexit negotiations may adversely affect the economy through direct and indirect exposures, while EU-wide corporate tax reform may impact Malta unfavorably. Domestically, recent measures to boost the labor participation rate, completion of infrastructure projects, and efficiency gains in the energy sector could have a prolonged positive effect on growth. However, rising households’ debt could amplify risks from a sharp reversal in house prices, while slower implementation of structural reforms could adversely affect competitiveness and long-term growth. Persistent strength in mortgage lending and housing market may lead to imbalances, and increase risks to the financial system and economic activity. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff on the outlook and the sources of risks. They stressed that Malta’s economic activity is expected to remain robust, supported by sound policies, structural reforms and favorable conditions. While agreeing that external environment poses downside risks, the authorities underscored Malta’s resilience to shocks owing to increased economic diversification, strong domestic demand growth, and reliance on domestic funding. The authorities viewed risks from the Brexit decision as largely contained, in part due to possible relocation of UK-based firms to Malta. They stressed that, while the EU-wide corporate tax reform may negatively affect the economy, there are other factors that make Malta attractive to foreign firms such as the high labor market flexibility, the government pro-business agenda, low cost compared to euro area peers, and the prevalence of English-speaking population. They also argued that stronger than anticipated private investment growth provides an upside risk, and noted that private consumption growth may prove stronger-than-expected on the back of higher incomes and lower saving rate. Regarding the property market, the authorities acknowledged that strong activity in the market may increase vulnerabilities, but noted that house prices are not misaligned at the current juncture. The second phase of the proposed Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base suggests that firms’ profits will be allocated across member states based on a formula intended to reflect the activities in each country. Page 16 Box 2. Balance Sheet Analysis (BSA) for Malta (gross exposures) /1 Figure 1: BSA Matrix in Network Map Form The BSA presents a snapshot of outstanding balance sheet positions (stocks) forming the linkages between different sectors of the Maltese economy, including with nonresidents. The BSA can be used to study macroeconomic imbalances at the individual sector level as well as cross-sectoral linkages between different sectors of the economy. The analysis for Malta is based on a rich source dataset, and thus allows for a from-who-to-whom decomposition of financial assets based on 11 subsectors: (1) Government; (2) Central Bank; (3) Core domestic banks ; (4) Non-core domestic banks ; (5) International Banks (banks with limited interaction with domestic residents); (6) Investment Funds; (7) Insurance; (8) Other Financial Intermediaries (OFIs); (9) Non-financial Corporations (NFCs); (10) Households (HHs); and (11) Rest of the world (ROW). The analysis confirms Malta’s position as a financial hub. The cross-sectoral linkages show that the OFIs hold assets and liabilities vis-à-vis the ROW of approximately 1,950 percent of GDP, mainly reflecting the activity of holding companies, captive financial institutions, and money lenders. Other depository corporations are also very interconnected with the ROW, largely due to international banks’ holdings of asset and liabilities. A smaller, but still significant part of financial services with external linkages is the insurance sector (reinsurance in particular). Potential vulnerabilities from interconnectedness appear low while macroeconomic imbalances are generally small. Figure 1 shows that financial institutions with large exposures to nonresidents are not significantly connected to domestic sectors, suggesting that the risk of external spillovers is relatively low. Additionally, the nodes’ size in Figure 1, which represent the sector’s net position, show that macroeconomic imbalances are generally modest, though the household sector is a large net lender, with wealth mostly deposited at the core domestic banks. The government and NFCs are net borrowers mainly from banks, households, and the ROW. Core domestic banks are at the center of inter- sectoral linkages among domestic residents. They are net borrowers with respect to households, with deposit liabilities almost double compared to loan claims. The excess liquidity not used for lending is mostly distributed between deposits at the central bank and holdings of government and foreign debt securities. Source: Central Bank of Malta and IMF staff estimates. 1/ The OFIs in the chart exclude the insurance sector and investment funds. The nodes’ size represents the size of the net imbalance between funds borrowed and lent by a sector, while the nodes color represents whether a sector is a net debtor (red) or creditor (green). The thickness of arrows from a sector to another depicts the bilateral exposures. Table 1. BSA Matrix, 2015q4 (gross exposures, percent of GDP) Government Central Bank Depository Corporations OFIs NFCs HHs ROW Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Assets Government Central Bank Depository Corporations OFIs NFCs HHs ROW Source: Central Bank of Malta and IMF staff estimates. Prepared by Giovanni Ugazio (STA). Liabilities Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Page 17