(Percent) Core Domestic Banks: Key Financial Soundness Indicators The banking sector appears sound and resilient to shocks. Core domestic banks continued to expand their balance sheets in 2016H1. Profitability remained above levels seen in peers and capital and liquidity positions continued to be strong. Recent stress tests conducted by the Central Bank of Malta indicated that the loss absorption capacity of core domestic banks against adverse macroeconomic conditions remained adequate. The macroprudential framework has been strengthened further with the introduction of the Counter-Cyclical Capital Buffer and buffer for “Other Systematically Important Institutions” in early 2016. Regulatory Tier 1 capital Loan to deposit Return on assets Interest margin to gross income Non-interest expenses to gross income NPL ratio Coverage ratio Loan-to-Value, residential properties Liquid assets to short term liabilities Source: Central Bank of Malta. 2015 2016H1 Euro Area: NPL and Loan Loss Coverage Ratios, 2016H1/1 However, domestic banks face a number of challenges . Legacy NPLs continued to decline, but remained elevated; the loan-loss coverage ratio remains relatively low at about 47 percent with high heterogeneity across banks; and credit growth continued to be sluggish on account of corporate sector deleveraging. Future regulatory changes and uncertain external environment may affect banks’ profitability and their capacity to support growth. Furthermore, persistent pressures in the property market, combined with increased exposure of banks to property market and elevated households’ indebtedness, could pose risks to financial stability. 1/ Data for Malta are for core domestic banks. Sources: IMF's Financial Soundness Indicators and Central Bank of Malta. NPLs to Total Gross Loans (percent) ) ( k B MLT Strengthening the macroprudential framework further would enhance resilience to possible property market swings. Staff’s analysis does not point to a significant misalignment of property prices (see accompanying SIP). However, persistent demand pressures in the housing market could eventually lead to imbalances, particularly given the lagged supply response. With high exposure of core domestic banks to the housing market, a sharp turnaround in housing prices could weaken banks’ financial health—particularly if accompanied by broader economic slowdown and an increase in unemployment—possibly resulting in a negative spiral of low See description of banking sector’s structure in footnote 1 in Table 4. Page 21 lending and investment. While households default rate is currently low and financial wealth is high, their elevated debt, high concentration of assets in real estate, and the prevalence of variable rate mortgages could increase vulnerabilities. Sustained efforts are therefore needed to ensure that imbalances in the housing market will not emerge, including by ensuring that fiscal measures related to the housing market do not amplify the cycle, and by adopting targeted macroprudential measures such as limits on loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios. Closing data gaps, including on borrower characteristics, is critical for the calibration of the macroprudential measures and for identifying risks in a timely manner. The non-financial corporates, particularly SMEs, remain vulnerable to shocks. Staff’s analysis suggests that the financial health of medium and large firms has improved in recent years, but the financial position of smaller enterprises and firms in the construction sector remained generally weak. Furthermore, a decline in profitability and an increase in interest rates would push many firms into a vulnerable state and thus likely result in new defaults and underinvestment (see accompanying SIP). Malta: Interest Coverage Ratio (EBITDA/Interest Expenses) Malta: Interest Coverage Ratio (EBITDA/Interest expenses) Micro Small Medium Large Construction Manufacturing Services Real estate Sources: Orbis BvD and IMF staff calculations Sources: Orbis BvD and IMF staff calculations. A faster cleanup of banks and firms’ balance sheets would improve the credit channel and support investment. High legacy NPLs continue to weigh on banks’ balance sheets. Moreover, they have contributed to high borrowing costs, thus weakening the monetary policy transmission mechanism and undermining investment activity, particularly by SMEs that lack sufficient internal funding. In this regard, the recent regulatory changes, which require banks to submit plans to reduce their NPLs ratios to below 6 percent within five years, are steps in the right direction, given the elevated NPLs ratios for some smaller banks, while efforts to streamline the insolvency framework will help support the resolution process. A further increase in loan- loss provisions would minimize uncertainty regarding future losses and also assist with faster cleanup of banks’ balance sheets. Banks that will deviate from their NPL resolution plans would have to accumulate a “Reserve for Excessive NPLs”. Page 22 Euro Area Spread (RHS) Borrowing Costs for the Non-financial Sector (Percent, outstanding amount) Steps to improve SMEs’ access to finance would support sustained economic development. With high credit risk and lack of competition in the lending market, many SMEs continue to face limited access to bank funding. The recently established central credit register (April 2016) is likely to improve competition by reducing informational monopoly of large banks. In addition, the planned state-owned Development Bank (MDB), expected to commence operations by mid-2017, aims at supporting SME financing by providing long-term loans through commercial banks (Box 3). To this end, the authorities’ commitment to adopt well-designed origination rules to ensure that the MDB’s operations will result in new credit extension to creditworthy SMEs rather than ever-greening existing bank exposures to distressed borrowers is welcome. Robust governance structure, prudent risk assessment, and adequate supervision, are also needed to mitigate contingent liability risks to public finances. Sources: Haver and IMF staff's calculations. 2014 - Jan 2012 - Jan 2010 - Jan 2008 - Jan 2016 - Jan On-going vigilance is needed to contain risks to the integrity of the financial system. Additional resources were made available for AML/CFT supervision, resulting in an increase in intensity and frequency of onsite inspections of obliged entities by the Financial Intelligence Analysis Unit and with the support of the Malta Financial Services Authority as regards to supervision of financial institutions. In light of the growing size of the financial sector, expansion of online gaming activities, and increased demand for IIP, sustained efforts are needed to ensure a robust implementation of the AML/CFT framework in line with international standards, and that the institutions involved have adequate resources for capacity building and operations. Authorities’ views The authorities concurred with staff on the need to enhance the financial sector’s resilience and improve access to finance. They underscored that the banking sector is resilient to various shocks, including from house prices. Nevertheless, they noted that granular financial data are being collected to improve the monitoring of risks related to mortgage lending, and that consideration is being given to the introduction of macroprudential limits as precautionary measures. The authorities highlighted that recent regulatory changes and ongoing improvements to the insolvency framework are likely to expedite private sector balance sheet repair. This, together with the establishment of the MDB and introduction of the credit register, would also help ease SMEs access to finance. They reiterated their commitment to maintain a rigorous compliance with AML/CFT regulations. The two largest core domestic banks provide about 80 percent of the loans to the resident NFC sector. Page 23 Box 3. The Modalities of the Proposed Malta Development Bank The Maltese authorities are actively working to establish a Development Bank (MDB), which is expected to be fully operational in mid-2017. It aims to address the SMEs' financing gap that has emerged in the Maltese economy mainly due to their high risk, insufficient collateral, and required loan duration. The MDB will also co-finance large infrastructure development projects, which otherwise could not be financed entirely by the private sector due to their large size and long maturity. The proposed MDB will be 100 percent government-owned, and, in line with EU State Aid obligations, seeks to complement commercial banks operations where their lending facilities are lacking or insufficient, rather than competing with them. The MDB will be subject to a supervisory board, which is expected to gradually align the MDB with the bank regulatory framework. Funding: The MDB’s funding would be a combination of local issuance of bonds (up to 480 million euros by the fifth year), and direct bilateral loans from international institutions such as the EIB, the CoE Development Bank, and the EBRD. Consideration will be given to private placement of bonds to foreign financial institutions. The government is expected to gradually inject €100 million of equity in the first five years. Projected Loans by Malta Development Bank (Million euros, cumulative) Lending: The MDB is expected to provide up to €780 million (equivalent to about 8 percent of the projected 2016 GDP) in its first five years. About 75 percent of the MDB’s lending will be allocated, via commercial banks, to viable SMEs that experienced difficulties in accessing credit. These loans will be restricted for new lending and mainly directed for both working capital and investment activities. The remaining share of the lending is expected to be allocated to co-financing social/development infrastructure investments. The MDB loans may be provided on state-aided terms (compliant with the EU de minimis Regulation and the General Block Exemption Regulation) and/or on market terms. The infrastructure loans at market rates must be complemented with at least 50 percent of private sector’s participation. Overall, the share of loans that will be covered by government guarantees is projected to stand at 30 percent of the MDB’s total lending, comprising 45 percent for infrastructure loans and about 25 percent for the SME segment. Source: MDB Working Group. Infrastructure SMEs Years