The Maltese financial system remains resilient . Solvency and liquidity of banks remain well above regulatory requirements, and profitability is good (Table 5). Solid performance of core domestic banks reflects their conservative business model, particularly limited external assets and liabilities and relatively low loan-to-value ratios. As a result, the largest banks passed the ECB’s recent Comprehensive Assessment (CA) without a need to raise additional capital. The large segment of international banks has very limited links with domestic residents, and as a result the recent significant deleveraging of some of these banks had minimal impact on the local economy (Box 2) . While there may be some spillovers to domestic financial system from stronger cross- border deleveraging and/or regulatory changes elsewhere, the impact on the economy is likely to be limited. Total assets of international banks declined from about 490 percent of GDP in 2012 to 410 percent o GDP in early 2014. Year-end 2013 CET1AQR-adjusted CET1Adjusted CET1 Ratio after Baseline ScenarioAdjusted CET1 Ratio after Adverse ScenarioBank of Valletta11.2010.7111.938.92HSBC Bank Malta9.919.029.268.91Deutsche Bank (Malta)281.40281.40280.60138.76(cid:160)Average40.2039.5040.7034.00 Malta: Results of the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment (percent) Page 12 Box 2. Malta: Overview of the Financial Sector The Maltese financial sector is very large compared to the size of its economy. As of mid-2014, assets of banks were close to 7 times GDP and assets of non-bank financial institutions (insurance companies and investment funds) were around 2 times GDP. The financial institutions in each of these groups can be classified as either domestic or international, depending on the scope of their involvement in activities with residents. Risks and vulnerabilities related to domestic institutions differ substantially from those related to international institutions. For banks, the Central Bank of Malta (CBM) also separates the category of domestic institutions into core domestic banks and non-core domestic banks. Core domestic banks have a traditional business model of attracting household and corporate deposits and providing loans to the economy. These banks have limited external assets and liabilities, provide around 97 percent of bank lending to residents in Malta, and collect around 94 percent of resident deposits. Two banks account for over 90 percent of both loans to and deposits from residents. Core domestic banks that are subsidiaries of big foreign parent banks have not relied on parent funding for their operations in Malta. As of end-June 2014, the core domestic banks had an aggregate capital adequacy ratio of 14.9 percent and liquidity ratio (liquid assets to short-term liabilities) of 42.6 percent, well above the minimum requirements of 8 percent and 30 percent, respectively. International banks rely mostly on wholesale (including intra-group) funding and nonresident deposits of relatively long maturities. These banks concentrate on activities for the group (custodian services, trade finance, investment banking). While international banks are particularly large compared to the size of the economy, risks to systemic financial stability arising from these banks are rather low. With negligible direct balance sheet links to the domestic economy both from the assets and the liabilities sides, the systemic financial implications in the event of materialization of solvency or liquidity risk affecting international banks would be contained. Furthermore, with abundant capital and liquidity, these banks should be able to absorb significant pressures before the point of non viability. Non-core domestic banks have limited links with the domestic economy and are funded primarily from wholesale markets and non-resident deposits. Unlike the international banks, these banks have some (albeit still small) exposure to residents in the form of loans and deposits. Around 9 percent of assets and 12 percent of liabilities are respectively claims on and due to residents. Therefore, the main risks related to these banks stem from possible cross-border deleveraging pressures and claims on the local deposit compensation scheme in the event of bank failure. The non-bank financial institutions are relatively small, and the main systemic risk arising from these institutions relates to their interconnectedness with core domestic banks. Around one third of insurance companies (with assets of €2.4 billion as of end-2013) and investment funds (with assets of €0.8 billion) are classified as domestic. The insurance sector is dominated by one company, which has a market share of around 60 percent in terms of assets. Assets of insurance companies and investment funds mainly consist of shares and equity holdings, of which over one half is issued outside Malta. Core domestic banks hold a significant shareholding in several domestic insurance companies, while over 10 percent of insurers’ assets consist of deposits held with the Maltese banks. The investment funds have significant investments in local bank equity. The regulatory and supervisory frameworks have recently been strengthened in several areas (Box 3). In late 2013, the Malta Financial Supervisory Authority (MFSA) amended the regulation on loan provisioning, requiring banks to allocate higher provisions for nonperforming loans. As a result, the coverage ratio increased from 39.5 percent in 2013 to 40.3 percent in June 2014, and expected to increase further. The CBM Act was also amended in late 2013, adding the formulation and implementation of macro-prudential policy as an explicit objective of the CBM. In this context, work on developing a macro-prudential toolkit has started. At present, the CBM and the MFSA are conducting research on the macro-prudential toolkit, such as possible use of broad- based and sector-based capital buffers for banks. The Joint Financial Stability Board (JFSB) has Page 13 enhanced inter-agency cooperation on financial stability. In November 2014, the supervision of the largest banks was transferred from the MFSA to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Box 3. Malta: Bank Regulatory and Supervisory Frameworks The Malta Financial Supervisory Authority (MFSA) is a unified supervisor of all financial institutions and markets. The MFSA periodically conducts internal audits or commissions external experts to review compliance of its regulatory and supervisory arrangements with the best international standards. However, there has been no Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) in Malta since 2003. In response to the past recommendations of staff and the EC, the authorities have taken measures to increase loan loss provisions. Following a consultation with stakeholders, the new regulations (Banking Rule BR/09) became effective as of end-2013. The amended regulations require banks to allocate a higher amount of provisions for NPLs, by allocating reserves of 2.5 percent of a bank’s NPLs. The institutional set up for macro-prudential policymaking has been recently strengthened. The amendments to the CBM Act of November 2013 augmented the responsibilities of the CBM by adding the formulation and implementation of macro-prudential policies to the functions of the CBM. A second deputy governor was appointed with a focus on financial sector issues. The amendments also gave a legal status to the JFSB that was set up in early 2013 and made up of representatives from the CBM, MFSA, and Ministry of Finance, the latter as observer. The main objective of the JFSB is to facilitate cooperation between domestic authorities in matters related to systemic financial stability, including the identification and assessment of macro-prudential policy instruments. Staff’s views While noting solid performance of the Maltese banks and welcoming recent legal and regulatory changes, staff pointed to several areas where resilience could be further strengthened. In particular: Although the two largest banks were found to be adequately capitalized under the ECB’s CA, their NPL ratios were revised substantially upwards, suggesting that the NPL ratio for the rest of the banking sector could also be higher under stricter loan classification rules. Swift implementation of the action plans resulting from the CA would be essential. Of particular importance is the need to align definitions of impairment triggers and forbearance used by individual banks with those used by the European Banking Authority and the SSM, and continued efforts to boost provisioning. The MFSA should maintain sufficient resources as needed by the intensity of the regulatory and supervisory work, including in the AML/CFT area. The transfer of supervision of the largest banks from the MFSA to the SSM has been smooth. Continued close cooperation between the MFSA and the SSM is needed to ensure no reduction in supervision of these banks. Page 14 Figure 1. Malta: Non-Performing Exposures, 2014 Enhanced focus of the MFSA on smaller banks is now appropriate, given forthcoming changes in ownership. Two mid-sized core domestic banks (Banif and Lombard) are in the process of ownership change. One of the main risks facing core domestic banks relates to their exposure to the real estate sector. Around two thirds of loans extended by banks are secured with real estate collateral, and mortgages are one of the few segments of bank loans which have been increasing recently (unlike loans to NFCs). It is important to continue mitigating the risk of exposure concentration to the real estate sector by the application of a cautious collateral valuation and conservative loan-to-value ratios. There is also room to enhance the loan foreclosure process by advancing judicial reform. This risk can be exacerbated by the weak performance of the EU countries, generating negative spill-over effects on the Maltese economy and its financial sector. Banif Bank Malta is majority-owned by Banif Financial Group of Portugal and Lombard Bank is 49 percent owned by Popular Bank of Cyprus. The Portuguese and Cypriot banks received state aid in recent years, which—in accordance with the EU rules on state aid—obliges them to sell their overseas investments. As noted by the 2014 World Bank Doing Business report, Malta scores relatively unfavorably compared to the EU average in terms of the time needed for loan foreclosure and recovery rates in insolvency. Page 15 The contingency framework should be strengthened in line with reforms at the EU level. This includes boosting the ex-ante funds of the deposit compensation scheme while lowering the share of banks’ special contribution (ex-post payment commitments). Also, legal amendments are needed to implement the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, establishing a resolution fund and introducing a bail-in requirement. The MFSA and FIAU should continue to aim for high standards in the AML/CFT framework, particularly in light of the large financial and online gaming sectors. To get a fuller assessment of the financial sector’s condition and oversight, an update of the FSAP—which took place in 2003—would be appropriate. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff on the need to adapt the financial sector policy framework to the changing environment. They intend to maintain local laws and regulations on loan classification, macroprudential oversight, deposit insurance, and bank resolution in line with the EU requirements, and stressed that work is under way in all these areas. In particular, there are plans to amend the MFSA Act with the aim to establish a Resolution Board under the auspices of the MFSA. The authorities were positive about the move toward a banking union in the EU, and both MFSA and the ECB emphasized the importance of close cooperation in supervising the largest banks. The MFSA noted that two mid-sized banks are now in the process of asset quality review similar to the one conducted for the largest banks under the ECB’s auspices, and two more banks will be subject to a similar review in 2015. The authorities agreed with the recommendation to ensure high standards in the AML/CFT framework, and indicated that efforts are under way in several areas to address shortcomings noted by the 2012 MONEVAL report. The authorities stated that they would soon request an FSAP update. The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on possible sources of risk to the financial sector . They noted that a slow economic recovery in the EU represents a risk to the domestic economy and financial sector. While they agreed that high NPL ratios are an important challenge for core domestic banks, they expected a reduction going forward as growth picks up. The authorities were less concerned than staff about the exposure of banks to the real estate sector. They were of the view that delinquency rates on mortgages have traditionally been one of the lowest, the exposure of banks to speculative property trading is very small, and household income (the main source of vulnerability for mortgages) is growing at a healthy rate. Currently, the ex-ante contribution paid by banks to the deposit compensation scheme is equivalent to at least 0.2 percent of eligible deposits, while the special contribution is equal to at least 0.8 percent of eligible deposits. In accordance with the 2014 EU Directive on Deposit Guarantee Schemes (Directive 2014/49/EU), the target level for ex-ante funds should be 0.8 percent of the covered deposits. Page 16