The RMI is one of the countries expected to be most affected by climate change and rising sea levels . Climate change is expected to lead to both structural and cyclical fiscal costs. The structural component (2.5 percent of GDP per year) is related to the ex-ante cost of preparing for climate change, including by building coastal protection, and is recognized in the baseline medium- term fiscal projections and the DSA. The cyclical component (10 percent of GDP over 20 years), due to extreme weather events, is recognized as a contingent liability shock in the DSA. Staff supports the authorities’ intensified efforts to mitigate disaster risk and build resilience. Recognizing that most disasters that would hit the RMI would be climate-change related, the authorities have prepared a Joint National Action Plan (JNAP), which includes climate-change adaptation and disaster risk-management strategies comprising both ex ante and ex post measures. The disaster- response costs could be covered by contingency buffers, disaster risk insurance, and emergency support. The RMI has a maximum amount of US$15.6 million (8 percent of GDP) available in ex-ante instruments to facilitate disaster response, and can also access emergency support from relevant U.S. agencies (FEMA/USAID) per the Compact agreement. Staff also recommends explicitly recognizing the adaptation cost in budget and seeking donor funding . Explicit budgeting will help ensure the continuity—despite medium-term fiscal adjustment—and efficiency on both spending and funding fronts. The structural expenditure should incorporate climate-related costs implicit in other line items, including extra construction Risk ManagementMechanism Ex-Ante Self InsureBuild buffersContingency budget (US$ 0.2 mn),Disaster Assistance Emergency Fund (US$ 0.1 mn) Risk TransferRegional poolingPacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot (US$ 15.3 mn, maximum) Ex-Post CopingEmergency response and reconstructionU.S. agencies (FEMA/USAID), Asian Development Bank (AsDB), donors Marshall Islands: Ex-Ante and Ex-Post Resilience Mechanisms Sources: Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PFRAFI); and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 costs for flood-proof structures. Where possible, donor funding (including from the new Green Climate Fund) should be sought, considering fiscal constraints of the RMI. Related, the Ministry of Finance has established a new office—Division of International Development Assistance (DIDA)—to coordinate all international development assistance, including for climate change. The authorities are working with the World Bank on the preparation of a Climate Resilience Project for FY2017, which would help strengthen disaster early warning, improve coastal protection and planning, and provide contingency funds for emergency response to medium-size hazards, including drought and flooding. The Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the benefit of strengthening planning capacity, including by explicitly recognizing climate change related expenditure in the budget . They noted that there were already many related expenditures, for example in the form of climate-proofing the airport and schools, but it was viewed to be difficult to track the exact amount for all such expenditures. The authorities also noted that they would continue to participate in the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) pilot insurance program, which provides coverage against tropical cyclones until October 2018. But they would also seek other recourses—self- insurance, other donors (e.g. FEMA), or other insurance arrangements—that could cover “medium- size” risks such as droughts.