Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside, albeit limited by several mitigating factors (Appendix IV). External risks stem from extreme weather-related events, faster-than- anticipated rise in fuel prices, persistently low rates of return on financial assets in the CTF, and potential loss of a correspondent banking relationship. Domestic risks include delays in the implementation of infrastructure projects and inadequate fiscal consolidation. Finally, DSA analysis indicates that the RMI continues to remain at a high risk of external debt distress, but these risks are mitigated by a number of factors, including concessionality of most obligations, stable flow of funds from Compact grants until FY2023, and future investment income from the CTF (after FY2023). On the upside, a decisive push for structural reforms could stimulate growth (see below). Moreover, if downside risks were to materialize, the authorities could accelerate infrastructure spending, financed by allocated but unused funds for capital spending (cumulated sum of 18.5 percent of GDP by FY2015). Repercussions on the RMI from global developments after the Brexit vote are anticipated to be limited . Due to limited international linkages other than to the United States via the Compact agreement, the RMI remains fairly isolated from spillovers from external developments. Even if U.S. growth were to slow or the currency to appreciate, the U.S. grants to the RMI would remain unchanged at their pre-allocated levels until FY2023. While the RMI’s ship registry business could be affected by a slowdown in global trade, the registry business itself is conducted by an offshore entity which is linked to the domestic economy by a pre-determined annual payment to the RMI government (to be renegotiated in 2019). A possible long-term decline in global asset returns adds to the existing risk factors for managing the CTF. The Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with the staff assessment on economic outlook. Economic activity was expected to pick up in 2016, albeit gradually owing to possible delays in the disbursement of Compact infrastructure grants and the drought in early 2016. They agreed that, over the medium term, the execution of Compact infrastructure projects will help support growth, while also agreeing with the view that long-term growth potential will remain limited in the absence of a decisive structural reform. The authorities agreed that foreign grants would continue to provide stable funding for current account deficits. The authorities considered climate change, social security fund liabilities, and public debt to be the main risks to the outlook . Extreme weather episodes due to climate change, such as droughts, have adversely affected the country in recent years and are becoming more frequent. They noted the large looming contingent liabilities from the social security fund, in the absence of a reform that puts the system on a sustainable path. The authorities also highlighted the still relatively high level of public and publicly-guaranteed debt as a constraint on future prospects. Page 13