SOE reforms will be the first step to facilitating private sector development, a necessity for sustainable growth as external funding declines . The underperforming SOE sector has not only added to the fiscal burden but may also have limited business opportunities for the private sector. The authorities made progress by restructuring the Marshall Energy Company (MEC), and by legislating the State-Owned Enterprise Act in October 2015 (Box 3). The Act, supported mainly by the ADB, purports to strengthen the corporate governance and monitoring framework, and to turn SOEs at least as profitable and efficient as comparable businesses. Staff commends the authorities for the progress made and recommends additional steps: clarifying the justification of subsidies based on the community service obligations (CSOs) of SOEs, and introducing a centralized monitoring unit for SOE performance. By increasing the transparency of the communal and commercial operations of SOEs, these measures would help improve the efficiency of SOEs and reduce government subsidies. And limiting SOE subsidies to CSOs will strengthen the discipline on SOEs, level the playing field for commercially viable businesses and improve the environment for private sector growth. On these grounds, staff advocated upholding the efficiency-enhancing goal of the SOE Act. However, some counterparts expressed reservations about an amendment to the SOE Act in March 2016, which raised the limit on the number of public officials who can serve on SOE Boards from one to three, noting that it may intensify political interference. The environment for investments could be further improved by reducing other impediments to doing business . Based on the World Bank’s ease of doing business survey, Page 17 registering property and resolving insolvency were two major concerns. Land registration reforms can help collateralize properties—thereby improving access to credit—and lower hurdles for long- term land leases by nonresidents—thereby facilitating foreign direct investment (FDI). Introducing an insolvency law will provide a missing legislative framework for bankruptcy. In that context, some private sector representatives expressed optimism on potential niche tourism and aquamarine projects, albeit pending the improvement in tourism-related infrastructure and ease of travel. Staff agreed that the RMI appeared to have potential comparative advantage in those areas. Box 3. Marshall Islands: SOE Reforms SOEs—currently 11 in the RMI—have been incurring losses and receiving government subsidies since FY2004, with significant macroeconomic consequences due to their size. SOEs have total assets of about US$150 million (80 percent of GDP) and generate 7.5 percent of total employment. They had in FY2014 a loss of US$9.9 million and subsidies of US$7.4 million (5.3 percent and 4 percent of GDP).  The Marshalls Energy Company (MEC) implemented a comprehensive reform covering governance and financial performance Through continuous effort and ADB support since 2008, the MEC registered a net operating income of US$0.1 million in FY2014. In 2011, MEC adopted a new tariff template that better aligned the costs and revenues of electricity business. The MEC retired its commercial debt with an ADB loan improving cash flow, improved the efficiency of electricity generation, and retrofitted all Majuro public streetlights to more efficient LED lights (reducing its nonrevenue generation ratio). The recent decline in oil prices was partly passed on to consumers through an electricity tariff cut in December 2014—even lowering CPI inflation—while the tariff rates are still below the cost-recovery level.  The State-Owned Enterprise Act was approved by the parliament in October 2015 . This Act strengthens the corporate governance and monitoring framework, which has been identified as a priority for better performance. Giv en the evidence that good corporate governance rests on a foundation of law and regulation in the long run, many countries are introducing legislation, ownership rules and guidelines, and monitoring structures to place SOEs on a firm commercial footing (ADB, 2011). Four large SOEs that account for 88 percent of total SOE assets are: Marshall Island Ports Authority, National Telecommunications Authority, Marshall Islands Development Bank (MIDB), and MEC. These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, a limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. Page 18 The Authorities’ Views There was general agreement about the need to accelerate SOE reforms, in particular on delineating CSOs and reducing government subsidies . The authorities noted that the clarification of CSOs is key for the legitimacy of continuing SOE subsidies, and was preparing for the creation of a monitoring unit within the MoF. This would need to be reinforced with PFM reforms, in particular in the areas of program audit and budgeting. The SOE Act amendment on the board composition was to retain the flexibility to tap expertise resident in the public sector. While acknowledging that there was limited voluntary participation in land registration, the authorities hoped that registration would get more active with the re-funding of the registry office in FY2017.