The RMI’s external position is assessed to be broadly consistent with underlying fundamentals, with limited risk of external instability due to stable external funding (Box 2). The current account deficit, once adjusted for a temporary factor, is close to the current account A temporary hold had been placed on Compact infrastructure projects, pulling down GDP growth over FY2014–15. Oil re-exports are a major component of the RMI’s exports. Page 10 norm as estimated by the standard Fund methodology. The real exchange rate so far in FY2016 is 7 percent above the historical average (FY2004–15), narrowing the scope of possible undervaluation of the past, and is now assessed to be broadly in equilibrium albeit subject to a sizable statistical uncertainty. The U.S. dollar is used as the legal tender adequately reflecting the small economic size and close economic ties with the United States. The risks from a heavy reliance on external financing are limited by stable funding, including the Compact grants until FY2023. Nevertheless, it is desirable to strengthen buffers, in preparation for the post-FY2023 period, including by building up the CTF balance to a level sufficient for preserving its real value and by shoring up government deposits which are the first recourse for absorbing short-term liquidity shocks. Box 1. Marshall Islands: Implications of Climate Change Marshall Islands is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change and rising sea levels. The related fiscal costs can be large and are explicitly recognized in the macro-framework and the DSA. Many small island states—especially the atoll nations of the Pacific—are among the most vulnerable to climate change and sea-level rise. Because of their low elevation and small size, low-lying atolls (e.g., Kiribati, the RMI, and Tuvalu) are threatened by future rises in sea level. Depending on carbon emissions, the global mean sea level could rise by up to a meter by 2100 according to the 2014 report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). This would pose serious risks to the RMI, as a rise of 1 meter could lead to a loss of 80 percent of the land in the capital city of Majuro (IPCC 2001; Calderon and others, 2015). RMI is already becoming more vulnerable to extreme weather events . With average elevation of just 2 meters above sea level, inundations and large storms are already becoming an increasing threat to the Marshall Islands. In 2008, extreme waves and high tides caused widespread flooding in Majuro, resulting in the government declaring a state of emergency. In 2013, the northern atolls experienced serious drought, resulting in the U.S. President declaring an emergency that activated US$5.5 million (3 percent of GDP) of drought relief from the United States under the Compact Agreement. In February 2016, the government declared a state of emergency, citing severe drought conditions, consequence of a protracted El Niño system that started building up in early 2015, which was followed by a declaration of emergency by the U.S. President, activating support from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In this context, climate change can lead to both structural and cyclical fiscal costs   The structural component (2.5 percent of GDP per year) is related to the cost of preparing for climate change, including by building coastal protection. The relative costs of coastal adaptation vary strongly among regions, but small island states are expected to face costs of several percentage points of GDP a year, since most of their population and infrastructure are in the coastal zone (IPCC, 2014). The ADB has estimated these costs in the order of 1½–2½ percent of GDP annually for the Pacific region (ADB, 2013). We take the higher end of this range for the RMI, given its higher vulnerability. The cyclical component (10 percent of GDP over 20 years) is related to the fact that climate change is a contributing factor to extreme weather events. The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) reports that disaster-related losses and damages of 10 percent of GDP could occur once every 20 years in the RMI (PCRAFI, 2011). The IPCC (2014) models suggest that the costs of sea level rise impacts as a percentage of GDP would be highest for the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau, Marshall Islands, and Nauru in the Pacific and Bahamas in the Caribbean. Page 11 Box 2. Marshall Islands: External Sector Assessment On balance, the external position appears to be broadly consistent with underlying fundamentals and risks to external stability are limited owing to stable source of funding from the United States and other donors. Exchange rate Assessment . The current account balance, once adjusted for the effect of a temporary hold of capital grants (in FY2014–15), is close to the current account norm estimated by the standard Fund methodology (the EBA-lite). While the ELRER approach suggests a moderately weak external position, a larger-than-usual margin of statistical variation may be warranted, given data limitations of the RMI. On balance, the level of the exchange rate is assessed to be broadly consistent with the macroeconomic situation, with little evidence of substantial exchange rate misalignment. Competitiveness. The RMI’s manufacturing unit labor cost has increased steadily, outpacing the United States in recent years. This is due to shortage of skilled workers, aggravated by ongoing migration of workers to the United States, reflecting the wage differential which is a strong incentive for migration for the Marshallese citizens who can work and study in the United States without a separate permit under the Compact Agreement. Such developments do not necessarily worsen external stability as manufacturing exports are already very small and because migration to the United State can increase remittance inflows. Reserves. With no central bank or local currency, government’s deposit serves as the means to absorb short-term liquidity shocks. The government’s deposit was around 0.5 months of imports in 2015, slightly lower than the historical average (0.7 months over 21 years), although the steady flow of external grants has shielded the RMI from liquidity squeezes. External Financing. Current account deficits are financed by a stable source of funding largely from the United States. External debt is expected to decline as concessionary loans are paid down in the coming years. nd und pp ee nd " " ndu nd ee W – – – Page 12