A medium-term fiscal adjustment is needed to achieve long-term sustainability and build buffers against existing vulnerabilities . Staff analysis indicates that a fiscal surplus of 3 percent of GDP by FY2023 could help ensure the long-term sustainability of the CTF by preserving its real value, under the expected nominal return of 5 percent per year. This would entail a cumulative fiscal adjustment of 5 percentages points of GDP over seven years, relative to the baseline under which the fiscal balance would deteriorate to a deficit of 2 percent of GDP by FY2023. An adequate adjustment could strengthen fiscal buffers against vulnerabilities including: an outstanding debt which is one of the highest among Pacific small states, substantial contingent liability from SOE subsidies and social security system, the volatility in CTF returns, and prospective costs from climate change. The staff-recommended surplus target can be attained by undertaking the fiscal adjustment envisioned in the Decrement Management Plan (DMP), complemented by additional reforms. The authorities developed the DMP as an indicative outline in the face of declining Compact grants but have yet to incorporate it in medium-term budget plans. Fully implemented, the DMP can generate a gradual fiscal adjustment of 4 percentage points of GDP over the remaining seven years of the amended Compact agreement. Additional adjustment of at least 1 percentage point of GDP can come from further reducing SOE subsidies, enhancing tax administration and strengthening tax reforms.  Expenditure compression. Major components are cuts in the government’s goods and services current expense, SOE subsidies, and utility transfers, which would add up to savings of 3½ percent of GDP by FY2023 (text table). Staff supports the authorities’ initiative for rationalizing current expenditures (including costs of travel, supplies and personnel) through efficiency improvement. This can be best achieved when implemented gradually—to smooth growth impact—and in combination with public financial management (PFM) reforms. Staff also encourages reducing SOE subsidies—6 percent of GDP in FY2015—further than planned under the DMP. As discussed in Appendix I, a 0.5 percentage point decrease in expected returns would increase the fiscal adjustment need by 1 percentage point of GDP. )( ili tt mm dd Page 14  Revenue mobilization. The DMP incorporates a tax reform with an estimated revenue impact of ½ percent of GDP, while a larger revenue mobilization will be possible once the new tax system is in place. In line with the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC) recommendations, staff encourages the authorities to push ahead with the reform which includes: (i) reforming the personal income tax; (ii) introducing a net profits tax; (iii) introducing a consumption tax to replace the Gross Revenue Tax (GRT); and (iv) replacing the existing import duties on alcohol, tobacco, motor vehicles and fuels with excise taxes. While the tax reform is still under review, the authorities incorporated into revenue a substantial portion of fishing license fees collected by the Marshall Islands Marine Resource Authority—80 percent of surplus revenues beyond US$3 million—starting in FY2015.  To facilitate domestic revenue mobilization further, staff also advocates further enhancing tax administration along the latest PFTAC recommendations, by improving core tax functions such as tax payers’ services, collection of tax arrears and outstanding returns, and the audit function. As a precondition for these medium-term fiscal adjustments to succeed, the social security system needs to be put on a sustainable path and avoid adding a large fiscal drain. Under the current structure, the social security fund (SSF) could deplete its reserves after FY2022. Staff supports adopting a reform plan with the following main elements: (i) raise the normal retirement age from 60 to 65; (ii) phase in a less costly benefit scheme plan over several years, with some grandfathering of current retirees; and (iii) strengthen enforcement of contributions and increase the contribution rates. An increase in government funding may be inevitable during the transition to a new system, but caution is strongly urged to guard against institutionalizing it or delaying the reform. Improving PFM will play a critical role in implementing fiscal adjustment and safeguarding fiscal sustainability. Staff welcomes the authorities’ renewed focus on PFM reforms, including on process and human resources management. It is important to move expeditiously toward the full implementation of this reform, which is much needed given existing weaknesses in tax administration, budget execution, reporting, and planning that can hamper fiscal adjustment. Strengthened tax audits uncovered tax under-reporting of about ½ percent of GDP per year in FY2013–14. The impact on growth will be small, because the direct income effects of later retirement age and higher contributions largely offset each other, while indirect (second-round) income effects would be limited by low fiscal multipliers reflecting the very high openness of the RMI’s island economy. SS Page 15 The Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the need for fiscal adjustment to preserve the real value of CTF . They recognized the necessity to maintain a sizable fiscal surplus and to keep contributing to the CTF, as recommended by the staff. In FY2016, the authorities contributed US$2.2 million to the CTF. The authorities agreed that a comprehensive reform is required to make the SSF sustainable and in May 2016 set up a task force to recommend reform options to the Cabinet and Parliament. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) was focusing on the human resources management improvement plan as a cross-cutting foundation to ensure the sustainability of PFM reforms, while rallying broader and greater support for many other reforms. In particular, tax reform—deemed necessary by the authorities—might require a recalibration that addresses key concerns of the private sector, before being resubmitted to the new parliament.