The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) is a small and sparsely-populated country, comprising low-lying atolls vulnerable to climate change (Box 1). Its economy is highly dependent on external aid, as the base for private sector growth is limited by its small size, remoteness from major traffic routes, dispersion over a vast ocean area, and weaknesses in the regulatory framework. Over the medium term, the country needs to adapt to rising fallouts from climate change, to prepare for a sharp reduction in the U.S. grants in FY2023, and to enhance the platform for sustainable private-sector growth. A new government was formed in January 2016, headed by the first female head of state elected in the Pacific. Most of the budget grants provided under the U.S. Compact of Free Association (Compact grants) will expire in FY2023, posing a major medium-term fiscal challenge. The RMI will receive annual grants averaging US$36 million (20 percent of GDP) over FY2004–23. Thereafter, investment earnings from the Compact Trust Fund (CTF)— currently being accumulated—are intended to replace the expiring portion of Compact grants (12 percent of GDP) as a revenue source. While the projected balance ($550 million in FY2023) is likely to generate investment earnings to replace the expiring grants, it will not be sufficient to preserve the real value of CTF (Appendix I). The preservation of the real value of CTF is needed both to safeguard an important resource for future generations and to cope with the market volatility in investment returns. Relative to the past Fund recommendations, progress has been made including in SOE reforms (Appendix II). Some reforms now await follow-up implementation, while several delayed reforms—tax and social security—need to be resuscitated. Over a longer term, the RMI needs to make progress toward Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), building on the progress with core Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (Appendix III). The RMI’s progress in most MDGs was broadly in line with other Pacific islands, while the two MDGs in health areas were achieved fully. This reflected above-average health (and education) expenditures, partly due to a wide geographical dispersion of the population. The government’s fiscal year ends on September 30 of each calendar year. The amended Compact Agreement took effect in FY2004. This grant amount has already been appropriated by the U.S. Congress and is thus allocated and secured, while annual disbursement follows steps required under the Compact agreement. Kwajalein Atoll related grant Grants (incl. current and capital) Compact Trust Fund Balance (RHS) AnnualGrants Assistance Under the Compact of Free Association (In percent of GDP) Sources: Authorities; IMF staff calculations Page 9