Risks to the outlook are to the downside . In the short-term, further delays in the implementation of infrastructure projects could weigh growth down. The danger of natural disasters A formal CGER-type analysis was conducted. However, that assessment framework is not fully suitable for the RMI due to data limitations and the special characteristics of its economy, most notably the heavy dependence on aid. The analysis points to a real undervaluation in the range of 9–38 percent, as estimated current account deficit norms are very large—due to a significant economic development gap relative to trading partners and negative oil balances— whereas underlying current account deficits are much smaller, reflecting the impact of stable foreign government grants. Page 6 is ever-present. Global oil price shocks would have a detrimental impact on growth and other macroeconomic variables. Longer-term risks include inadequate fiscal consolidation ahead of the scheduled decline in Compact grants, climate change, and continued outward migration of the working-age population. On the upside, a decisive push for structural reforms and additional investment in infrastructure and the fishery sector would support growth (Appendix 1). Due to limited international financial linkages, the RMI remains fairly isolated from spillovers from external financial developments. Spillovers from trade linkages are expected to be limited in the near- medium-term given RMI’s low dependence on tourism and relatively stable fish demand. Box 1. Marshall Islands: Will the Fishing Sector be the Driver of Future Growth? The importance of the fishing sector in the RMI’s economy has grown in recent years. In FY2012 fishing activities contributed 1.2 percentage points to real GDP growth and accounted for about 10 percent of total employment as well as value added. Fish is by far the largest export commodity, constituting nearly 90 percent of total exports (excluding re-exports of fuel). Fishing activities are mostly conducted by private companies, although the RMI government has a 49 percent stake in a joint venture with a local private firm. Fishing license fees increased considerably in recent years, representing nearly 12 percent of fiscal revenues excluding grants in FY2012. This growth was driven by the implementation of the Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) under the Partners to the Nauru Agreement (PNA). Going forward, although the minimum benchmark price for a fishing day is expected to raise, RMI’s benefits are likely to be subdued due to the lack of demand for fishing vessel-days in its Exclusive Economic Zone The fishing sector is projected to continue growing in the medium term, but a number of factors challenge its expansion. Additional expensive investment in fishing equipment is needed for further growth. Low pay, worker absenteeism, and scarcity of fresh water is slowing the expansion of fish processing activities. Furthermore, while fish prices have shown a steady upward trend since 2009, recent data point to a decline. Beyond the near term, climate change poses significant risks by affecting the distribution and abundance of tuna and by causing increasingly frequent and severe storms, which result in high operating costs. Growth in the fisheries sector would also be hampered if additional tuna sustainability restrictions were to be implemented. Employment in Fisheries (In percent of total employment 1/ ) p p g c p g p p g Sources: RMI authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Includes shore based fish processing and vessel support services. Part time workers may be significant. Fisheries Licence Fees Inflows Fishing licence fees Ship registration fees FY2004 FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 FY2009 FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 Sources: RMI authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Frozen Whole Skipjack Tuna Raw Material Prices (In USD per metric ton, Bangkok Landings, WPO) Skipjack tuna raw material price Skipjack tuna raw material price (4mma) Sources: Thai Union Frozen Products PCL; and IMF staff calculations. Oct-13 Page 7 The Authorities’ Views Compared to staff’s projections, the authorities were more optimistic on growth prospects. While they agreed that the resumption of infrastructure projects would be the main driver of growth in FY2014, they saw better growth prospects from copra production in the medium- term. In their view, the new ships from donors will allow higher coconuts collection from producers, and a planned new copra oil refinery will reduce dependence on some imported inputs and raise the value added of exports. The authorities agreed that foreign grants would continue to provide stable funding for current account deficits, and indicated that the use of the U.S. dollar remained appropriate. The authorities considered natural disasters and commodity price shocks to be the main risks to the outlook. Extreme weather episodes due to climate change have adversely affected the country in recent years and are becoming more frequent. Negative shocks to copra prices would affect production and exports, while oil price increases would raise production costs. The authorities also highlighted upside risks from future construction activity and from the fishing sector, as adjustments that are favorable to the RMI are expected for the Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) and the Partners to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) arrangements (Box 1).