Government accounts are set to remain in deficit in the near term and beyond. After FY2015 annual deficits are expected to widen to around 2 percent of GDP and persist in the medium term, financed by bilateral and multilateral development partners. This projection reflects the expected increase in expenditure for social security contributions for public sector employees from the forthcoming pension reform (paragraph 17). The forecast assumes higher subsidies to SOEs, driven also by some called guarantees (paragraph 15). Due to projected deficits, the central government debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to increase, while public and publicly guaranteed debt is projected to remain on a downward path, as SOEs are assumed to continue servicing their government guaranteed debt. Policy Issues and Staff’s Views A clear and bold consolidation strategy is urgently needed. Fiscal balances need to turn back into surplus to secure long-term sustainability and build buffers against existing significant fiscal vulnerabilities. These include substantial fiscal risks from SOEs and the social security system (paragraphs 15 and 17), the end of most Compact grants in FY2023, uncertainty about future CTF returns, and prospective costs from climate change. The fiscal adjustment path and composition should strike a right balance between consolidation needs and short-term growth implications. In view of this, staff recommends a permanent cumulative consolidation of no less than 4.5 percent of GDP by FY2018 compared to the baseline. This implies that the government needs to build up a fiscal surplus of 2.6 percent of GDP (about US$4.5 million in FY2012 prices) by FY2018, which will have to be maintained afterwards. This would help the RMI to achieve long-term self sufficiency as well as create some fiscal buffer (Appendix 2). If the government were successful in implementing structural reforms that would boost real growth, the required fiscal surplus from FY2018 would be somewhat lower. The needed Page 8 adjustment could be achieved through a mix of spending and revenue measures, but that would require strong revenue administration.  Fiscal adjustment will necessitate targeted spending cuts. Containing public wages would be Policy Options for Fiscal Adjustment Estimated savings and additional revenues essential to produce fiscal savings and reduce the large public-private sector wage gap (Figure 1). A freeze on the nominal wage, taking into account the increase in social security contributions from the forthcoming reform, would save 1.1 percent of GDP by FY2018. The proposals of the Comprehensive Adjustment Program group, tasked by the government to review public expenditure, provide options for additional spending reductions. These include curbing allowances to civil servants—with estimated savings of up to 1 percent of GDP—and reducing public sector civil servant numbers by a targeted reduction in the work force. Cut in civil servant number through attrition Freeze on the nominal public wage Reduction in subsidies to SOEs Cut in civil servant allowances (Percent of GDP) Expenditure No estimate available Revenue Comprehensive tax reform (net) Total Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.  SOE reforms should be a policy priority. SOE poor performance continues to be a drain on the budget, requiring average annual subsidies of more than 4 percent of GDP since 2010 (Box 2). Moreover, as of FY2012, the government has guaranteed US$34 million (20 percent of GDP) of their debt, including US$28.1 million debt of the National Telecommunication Authority (NTA). This poses a significant risk on public finances, as the company is unable to meet its repayment obligations and has already defaulted on some monthly payments, forcing the government to step in. Some SOEs are also planning to borrow further in FY2014, with a government guarantee. Staff encourages the authorities to assess thoroughly possible risks from these operations. Furthermore, staff urges the authorities to advance expeditiously SOE restructuring, with support from the AsDB and the World Bank, by addressing the key issues of governance, pricing policies, efficiency, enforcement of customers’ payments and cross-subsidization. In view of the needed fiscal adjustment, the aim should be reducing government subsidies to SOEs by at least 1.5 percent of GDP by FY2018. A larger reduction is warranted and may be necessary if revenue gains from the tax reform are on the low end of the forecast range.  Approval and swift implementation of the tax reform bill is critical to enhance efficiency and equity as well as tax compliance. The comprehensive tax reform bill, currently before parliament, can rectify several weaknesses of the current system. The reform would make the wage and salary tax more equitable by eliminating unjustifiable exemptions, introducing a uniform deduction, and increasing progressivity. Replacing existing import duties and local government sale taxes with a broad-based and modern consumption tax will enhance efficiency and tax compliance. The replacement of the Gross Revenue Tax with a new net profit tax for large businesses will make corporate taxation more business friendly. The creation of a new client focused and independent Customs and Revenue Authority and a more effective IT support Page 9 system will improve revenue administration. By broadening the tax base and enhancing tax administration, the tax reform is expected to generate additional revenues of 0.5-1.8 percent of GDP, depending on compliance. Box 2. Marshall Islands: State-Owned Enterprises: Recent Developments and Prospects for Reform SOEs’ size in the RMI economy is significant, but they have failed to contribute to growth. They have total assets of around US$150 million (85 percent of GDP), and account for nearly 8 percent of total employment. However, between FY2004 and FY2012, SOE cumulative value added growth was only 1.7 percent— merely 1 percent of the increase in total GDP. Most SOEs ran operating losses in FY2012, totaling US$15 million (8.5 percent of GDP)—3.1 percentage points higher than the FY2007-11 average. While operating losses are partly motivated by the need to provide essential services to the outer islands at affordable prices, they are also driven by several deficiencies. Lack of investment and maintenance result in inefficient operation in the public transportation companies, Tobolar, and utility providers. The absence of a comprehensive SOE law and of requirements on directors’ duties and obligations contribute to poor governance and accountability. Tariffs are sometimes unduly kept below operating costs, and one SOE does not pay the public energy company, thus benefitting from cross subsidization. Current subsidies (average, FY2007-11) Operating loss (average, FY2007-11) Current subsidies (FY2012) Operating loss (FY2012) SOEs: Current Subsidies and Operating Losses Some SOEs’ reform initiatives are in train, but the timing of implementation and outcomes remain uncertain. At the authorities’ request, the AsDB undertook a review of SOEs in 2010, and recommended reform actions. With technical support from the AsDB, new SOE legislation was drafted in 2011, and now awaits parliament approval. The Marshalls Energy Company has gone through some restructuring, following the adoption of a comprehensive recovery plan in 2009. The AsDB is also helping to develop and implement strategic plans in other SOEs. The World Bank is working with the authorities on a restructuring plan for the National Telecommunication Authority. Reforms, however, face several challenges, including opposition from SOEs, and may require a long time for approval and implementation. National Telecommunications Authority Marshall Islands Shipping Corporation Kwajalein Atoll Joint Utilities Resources Ports Authority Sources: RMI Authorities. Marshalls Energy Co. Inc. Air Marshall Islands Tobolar Others Public Financial Management (PFM) reforms are essential to address existing weaknesses in budget reporting and planning. The authorities have worked with the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC) on a comprehensive medium-term PFM Reform Roadmap, including measures to strengthen the budgeting framework, the accounting system, debt management, and revenue administration. The plan still has to be finalized and approved by cabinet. Furthermore, a Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Management Act has been submitted to Parliament, stating that fiscal policy has to achieve and maintain prudent levels of debt, and requiring more stringent and periodic reporting of fiscal developments to parliament. Staff welcomes these initiatives and recommends their rapid approval and implementation. Enhancing the medium-term budgeting framework and integrating it into the annual budget would be particularly important for fiscal policy planning, in view of the scheduled reduction in Compact grants. Page 10 Balance after Social Security Reform Effects of Social Security Reform (In Millions USD) Social security liabilities constitute a significant contingent fiscal risk and warrant swift reform. From FY2008 through FY2013, total benefits and operating expenses exceeded contributions by more than US$14 million, forcing the social security administration to liquify assets. Under the current system, the fund would be depleted by FY2022. A reform bill is currently before parliament envisaging an increase in both the employer’s and employee’s contribution from 7 to 9 percent, an increase in the retirement age from 60 to 65 and early retirement from 55 to 60, a 22 percent benefit cut, a rise in the taxable ceiling, and measures to reduce misuses of the benefit system. With the reform, the system is projected to record a surplus until FY2022, but further deficits are likely to arise later on. Approving and implementing the reform is an essential first step toward the creation of a more sustainable pension system. Staff encourages the authorities to explore options for even further reforms that would secure full long-term sustainability of the social security system. The RMI is assessed to have high risk of external public debt distress, although mitigating factors limit near-term risks. Currently the ratios of present value (PV) of external public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt-to-GDP, exports and revenues are all above their respective reference thresholds. RMI’s vulnerability to debt distress is mitigated by the concessionality of most obligations and access to a stable flow of funds from Compacts grants. On the other hand, short-term risks are exacerbated by the uncertainty surrounding SOE reform implementation and their plans to borrow further with government guarantees. Sources: Marshall Islands Social Security System; and IMF staff calculations. Balance before Social Security Reform The Authorities’ Views The authorities recognized the need for fiscal adjustment. They intend to achieve a balanced budget in FY2014 through a 25 percent cut in electricity and travel expenses, and build surpluses over the following years. They agreed on the need to contain wage bills, and noted that nominal wages have been unchanged over the past three years and that no increase is planned going forward. The authorities also intend to reduce personnel through a hiring freeze and natural attrition. They also pointed out that the tax and SOE reform bills currently before parliament will help improve the fiscal accounts. The authorities were keen to improve fiscal planning and public financial management. They noted that with the assistance of the AsDB the Ministry of Finance has adopted a fiscal management model that will be used for budgetary planning. They intend to proceed expeditiously with the finalization and implementation of the PFM reform, for which they have requested IMF technical assistance. The authorities acknowledged the need for further pension reforms. They are considering converting the social security system to a defined contribution scheme and are seeking technical assistance in this area. Page 11