In 2015, Mauritius continued to grow at a moderate rate, reflecting subdued activity in its main trading partners and a challenging domestic environment (Figure 1). Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed somewhat, to 3.4 percent from 3.6 percent in 2014, as weak external demand, a protracted decline in construction, and the collapse of the BAI financial conglomerate group (Annex I), more than offset the positive impact of favorable terms of trade. The unemployment rate hovered around 8 percent, although it was higher among women (11 percent) and the youth (23 percent). With low inflation (0.4 percent in January 2016)—reflecting in part declining oil prices and shipping costs — the Bank of Mauritius (BoM) reduced its key policy rate by 25 bps in November (to 4.40 percent) to support domestic demand. Domestic credit is gradually recovering from the 2014 contraction , in part induced by the adoption of macro-prudential measures to address increasing nonperforming loans (NPLs) in tourism and construction (Box 1). Credit growth remained weak in the aftermath of the BAI group collapse, and while it has ticked-up recently, it is only projected to grow in-line with GDP over the next few years. While the banking sector overall remains well capitalized, as confirmed by the FSAP solvency stress test, there are significant differences across banks and vulnerabilities have increased. Tier 1 capital ratios (above 15 percent at end-June 2015 in aggregate) were significantly lower in two small institutions, which were recently merged into a state-owned bank. Moreover, NPLs have risen to about 8 percent of domestic loans, and provisioning has not kept pace with the deterioration in bank asset quality (Box 1). Fiscal policy turned more prudent in 2015, reversing the deterioration of recent years. The overall consolidated balance and the primary deficit not only remained below earlier budget projections, but also improved relative to 2014 (by almost 1 and by ½ percent of GDP respectively), although this was largely driven by cuts in capital spending . Nonetheless, public debt continued to increase (by more than 2 percent of GDP, to 63.7 percent at end-2015), reflecting the government’s intervention in the financial sector—1.3 percent of GDP, due to capital injections in two ailing banks (0.4 percent of GDP in total) and a line of credit to refund policyholders of single premium products issued by BAI (0.9 percent of GDP) — and the impact of the depreciating rupee on external debt. The balance of payments has improved. Driven by strong exports of goods and lower shipping costs and fuel prices, the current account deficit is estimated to have narrowed to about Early 2016, the Baltic Dry Index of shipping costs fell to a record low since the index started in 1985. The government program included a 6-month bridge-budget to accommodate the reversion to a fiscal year ending June 30. Those that have invested less than Rs 0.5 million in BAI single premium products. Page 11 5 percent of GDP in 2015. International reserves increased to US$4.2 billion by end-2015, supported by continued GBC-related capital inflows. The rupee lost 14 percent against the US$ through end-2015, while remaining broadly stable against the euro. Overall, the baseline medium-term outlook remains favorable. GDP is projected to grow moderately in 2016 (3.8 percent) and hover just above this rate in the medium-term, boosted by the impact of low oil prices and the gradual implementation of important investment programs. On the other hand, the baseline reflects the likely plateauing of domestic credit relative to GDP, due to the need for bank balance sheet repair in a rather saturated domestic market. Reflecting capital goods and cement imports for investment projects, the current account deficit is expected to stay around 5 percent of GDP, accompanied by a moderate gain in competitiveness supported by the planned investment projects addressing infrastructure bottlenecks, and various structural reforms (see ¶34). Under the baseline, the GBC sector is assumed to continue generating substantial (net) inflows, and international reserves are expected to stabilize at around 6¾ months of imports. This baseline is subject to a number of risks (see the Risk Assessment Matrix). Lower-than- expected growth in Europe could adversely affect tourism, trade and FDI. On the domestic side, while risks from the public debt profile should be manageable, given the low external debt with long maturities and favorable terms, vulnerabilities could arise if public debt is not reduced from its relatively high level (about 64 percent of GDP). Most important, external balance and domestic financial stability conditions are crucially dependent on continued funding from non-residents and the GBC sector, which could be affected by a revision of the DTAA with India, and on the absence of adverse spillovers on domestic banks from their large exposure to credit risks on cross-border lending operations (around 100 percent of GDP). There is also a risk that domestic credit growth may be lower than projected should bank balance sheet strains worsen. On the upside, the authorities target more ambitious growth rates (5-6 percent) through further diversification and improvements in a variety of infrastructures. Nonetheless, reaching growth prospects to that extent hinges upon resolutely addressing constraints to factor accumulation and productivity development, and sounder banking conditions supporting stronger credit expansion. Page 12 Mauritius: Risk Assessment Matrix (June 2015) Potential Deviations from Baseline Page 13 Figure 1. Recent Economic Developments Inflationary pressures have declined due to lower international commodity prices. The current account deficit has declined from a very high level, and reserves have built up. After two years of fiscal deterioration, consolidation started in 2015. Growth has been consumption driven in recent years. Private credit slowed down in 2014, but recovered in mid-2015. After edging up at the end of 2014, the REER has depreciated in 2015. Sources: Authorities and IMF staff estimates. oo nd Current Account Trade Balance Reserve assets (right) Page 14 Box 1. Domestic Bank Lending Cycle and the Rise in NPLs Bank lending built-up significantly ove r the pas t decade , increasing from around 70 percent in 2004-05 to the current level of around 100 percent of GDP (Figure 1.1). After peaking at nearly 110 percent of GDP in 2013, credit contracted follow ing the adoption of macro -prudential measures (limits on loan -to-value and debt-to-income ratios for property purchases). Bank lending remained w eak during the problems at the BAI Group, but there are indications that it started to recover after the January 2015 decision to rescind the previously introduced macro - prudential measures. Finally, the lack of property price data hampers commercial banks’ risk management, and systemic risk assessment by the authorities. Figure 1.1 Banking sector credit Figure 1.2 Nonperforming loans (Perc ent of gro ss loans) Figure 1.3 Nonperforming loans by sector, H1 - Figure 1.4 Bank nonperfo rming loans and provisions Sources: Bank of Mauritius; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The credit-to-GDP trend is estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter. The credit boom has led to a rise in NPLs (Figure 1.2). NPLs are highest in construction sector (Figure 1.3), follow ing a period of elevated lending grow th, although NPLs are also high for trading, manufacturing and individuals. NPLs for GBCs (the third largest recipient of domestic credit) remain relatively low . Provisioning has not kept pace: coverage ratios (provisions to NPLs) fell to 40 percent in June 2015 an d un-provisioned NPLs reached 17 percent of bank capital (Figure 1.4). Domestic credit is no t proje cted to grow much faste r than GDP. Bank asset quality has deteriorated, there is a w idespread view among banks that the domestic market is relatively saturated, and banks tend to ask for property collateral, which is limited in supply and w ith low turnover. This all suggests that domestic credit may have reached a plateau relative to GDP. Indeed, banks are increasingly shifting to offshore operations, given the clear tax advantages of cross-border and offshore business relative to domestic lending. This outlook for domestic and foreign credit is incorporated into the baseline projection for a moderately grow ing economy and the expected increase in bank net foreign assets. ( Percentage points )( Percent of GDP ) Privatesector credit(right scale) Trend Credit Gap (left scale) Thresholds 2009201020112012201320142015H1 Domestic Cross-border Total Agriculture& fishingManufacturing Tourism TransportConstructionTradersInformation technologyFinancial & business services GBCsPersonalOther 8101214051015202530Nonperforming loans (percent of gross loans)Lending (percent of domestic credit) 2011Q22012Q22013Q22014Q22015Q2 Unprovisioned NPL Provisioned NPL Unprovisioned NPL to capital (RHS)Billions ofrupees Percent Page 15