International Reserve Buffers International reserve buffers are in-line with standard rule-of-thumb thresholds of reserve adequacy. Indicators such as the coverage of imports, broad money and short-term debt suggest relatively solid foreign exchange buffers. International reserves (US$4.2 billion at end-2015) are equivalent to more than 100 percent of short-term debt; 6.6 months of prospective imports; and 36 percent of broad money. However, international reserve buffers may not be sufficiently strong for the risks that could be posed by the financial sector. Annex IV suggests a tailored reserve adequacy metric, including a role for GBC deposits and taking into account banks’ liquid assets in foreign currency, and compares reserve adequacy metrics in Mauritius to other emerging markets and financial centers. This assessment suggests the need to build stronger buffers against external shocks, by considering insurance mechanisms such as swap arrangements or credit lines with other central banks as well as a revision of reserves requirements for foreign currency deposits . After strengthening the prudential framework for liquidity management, the authorities should also consider creating a limited foreign currency Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) facility mainly targeted at small and medium-sized banks, with strict access limits, at penalty rates, and backed by high quality foreign currency-denominated collateral. The authorities shared the view that the complexity of the financial sector inter- linkages should be taken into account in gauging the adequacy of reserves. They noted, however, that the sterilization costs involved would reduce the appeal of a faster accumulation of international reserves. They agreed with staff that further analysis of foreign-currency liquidity management capacity in individual banks is needed to gauge more accurately risks from a decline in GBC activities on reserves. The authorities are committed to conducting a bank-by-bank analysis to assess the share of foreign currency deposits not secured by liquid assets or credit lines. In parallel, they are considering options to seek insurance against balance of payments shocks. Page 23 International Reserve Adequacy, 2015 (Interna tional Rese rve/Res erve Adequacy Metric, Pe rcent adequate range: 100 – 150 Percen t) Sources: Country authorities, IMF Internationa Financial Statistics, IMF World Econ omic Outlook, and IMF staff estimates. Exchange Rate Policy Staff analysis suggests that with continued GBC balance of payments inflows, the real effective exchange rate (REER) appears broadly in line with fundamentals. Results from the standard exchange rate assessment for developing and emerging markets suggest that the deviation of the Mauritian Rupee from its equilibrium level is limited (less than 5 percent). This result is contingent on continued large inflows from the GBC sector, which, as noted abo ve, contributed more than 7 percent of GDP to Mauritius’ current account balance, and more than 15 percent of GDP to the capital and financial account balance in 2014. The exchange rate assessment is therefore highly dependent on these GBC flows. For instance, as an illustrative exercise, excluding GBC flows from the current account balance would imply other things equal, an over-valuation of the exchange rate by more than 25 percent. Monetary Policy Staff and the authorities agreed that the monetary policy stance is broadly appropriate against the backdrop of subdued inflation, which is expected to continue over the medium-term. Against this background, monetary policy should remain cautiously accommodative, and the BoM should continue to reduce excess domestic liquidity in a gradual fashion to avoid sharp rises or volatility in interest rates. Indeed, despite the authorities’ recent efforts, the monetary policy transmission mechanism remains hampered by excess domestic currency liquidity in the money market. Liquidity accumulated over the past few years, mostly due to the conversion of government’s external borrowing into domestic currency, and to the accumulation of reserves through unsterilized intervention during 2012–14. Since early 2015, the authorities ramped up efforts to mop up the excess liquidity, which has fallen from a peak of more than Rs16 billion in April 2015, to under Rs6 billion in September 2015, though excess liquidity edged up to around Rs 10 billion in December 2015 (Figure 4, panel 1). The decline in excess liquidity has been achieved through the issuance of hu x un ll ADVISABLERANGE OF INTERNATIONAL RESERVES HOLDINGS Page 24 BoM bonds and Treasury bills, as well as sterilized interventions in the foreign exchange market. Interest rates on Treasury bills have started to rise towards the policy rate as e xcess liquidity has fallen (Figure 4, panel 2). Figure 4. Rupee Liquidity and Domestic Interest Rates Bank excess domes tic liquidity Billions of rupees Interes t ra tes dynamics Percent Sources: Bank of Mauritius; and IMF staff calculations. The authorities intend to continue to reduce excess domestic liquidity. They expect that it will help improve the responsiveness of Treasury bill yields—which are closely aligned with bank deposit rates—to changes in the Key repo rate or policy rate (Figure 4, panel 2). Over time, this is expected to improve the monetary transmission mechanism. Nonetheless, declining excess liquidity could affect a range of market interest rates, not just the Treasury bill rate, and overall money market conditions should continue to be monitored as excess liquidity declines.