The balance sheet inter-linkages noted above are a source of systemic vulnerabilities. A decline in GBC or non-resident foreign currency funding, for instance triggered by a significant revision of the DTAA Treaty with India or by an intensification of initiatives against tax base erosion and avoidance, could worsen Mauritius’ balance of payments position, lead to exchange rate pressure, a weakening of reserves, and rising inflation and external debt servicing costs. The associated decline in GBC deposits in domestic banks could create deleveraging pressures , particularly in any small and medium-sized banks with liquidity-risk management systems insufficient to quickly mobilize foreign currency assets. The resulting funding need could trigger a cutback of foreign and domestic credit, and broader confidence effects , which would impact the domestic economy. Indeed several banks operate within financial groups/holdings or mixed AssetsLiabilities Interbankdeposits from non-residents Non-resident deposits GBC depositsDomesticdepositsOtherCapital Interbankloansto non-residents Loans to non-residents Claimson GBC SecuritiesDomesticloans GovernmentOther 32%12%56%LargedomesticbanksForeignbanks Foreign banks LargedomesticbanksOtherdomesticbanksTotal assetsDomestic credit Non-resident GBC Domestic Bankingsystem Largedomestic Otherdomestic Foreign Nominal Size of Total Assets Market share(Bankassetsas a percent of system assets) ( ) Page 19 conglomerates with activities in other domestic sectors. Similarly, the large cross-holdings within the GBC sector could act as contagion channel. There could also be regional spillovers, given Mauritius’ role as financial hub for foreign investments in Africa. Yet, data and non-bank supervisory gaps prevent a full analysis of the GBC sector and the risks it poses. Further integration of the offshore sector with the domestic economy entails benefits, but also increases potential spillover risks. The authorities aim at promoting the GBC sector as a conduit for investment into Africa, while encouraging a greater involvement of the GBC sector in the domestic economy by the introduction of “substantial presence conditions”. Although this greater interconnection with GBCs may have beneficial effects on domes tic economic activity, the strategy also raises the risk of inward spillovers from GBC-related volatility.