SUPPORTING GROWTH The 2015/16 budget implied a continuation of the expansionary trend of the last three years. It involved an overall borrowing requirement of 4.0 percent (compared to 3.8 percent in 2012-14 and 4.4 percent in 2014) and a primary deficit of 2.0 percent of GDP (compared to 1.7 percent in 2014). The budget assumed a generous growth pickup of 5.3 percent in 2015/16, and significant upward pressures on current spending, including social benefits (with the increase of the Basic Retirement Pension, BRP) , wages (with recruitments in the civil services and public wage negotiation round under the Pay Research Bureau report), and purchase of goods and services. Payouts to the remaining BAI policyholders and investors could further worsen the fiscal position. At a cost of Rs4.7 billion per year (1.2 percent of GDP) in the first years, and increasing afterw ards. 10 12 14 12-month movingaverage Bank lending rate Key repo rate Bank deposit rate Treasury bill Page 25 However, budget execution in 2015 involved a welcomed correction in fiscal policy (see ¶6 and Figure 1). This was the result of containment of spending on goods and services, but also of lower-than-planned execution of public investment projects. With a view to build on these encouraging results, the authorities have indicated their intention going forward to further reduce the overall borrowing requirement to 3 percent of GDP from 2016/17 onwards (which would keep the primary deficit under 1 percent of GDP), in order to adhere to the timeframe legally set for reaching the statutory debt target (50 percent of GDP by 2018/19). Measures to reduce the deficit would include: (i) further efforts to improve revenue mobilization and broaden the tax base; (ii) rationalization of spending on goods and services; and (iii) tight control of civil servants’ compensation. In addition, the authorities are preparing a plan for divestiture of public assets targeted at debt reduction. The greater role envisaged for the private sector in infrastructure upgrading would further support efforts to contain public borrowing, thereby increasing the scope for crowding-in private sector investment financing. Despite improved fiscal conditions in 2015, containing the primary deficit under 1 percent of GDP may not be enough to achieve the statutory debt target. Under this scenario, the debt target would be missed by some 4 percentage points of GDP (Text Table 1, baseline scenario). Reaching the 2018/19 statutory debt target would require a more pronounced and frontloaded adjustment. This would involve a further decline in the primary deficit in 2016/17 (to 0.3 percent of GDP, 1/2 percent of GDP lower than the baseline), and gradually improving in subsequent years to reach a small primary surplus (0.3 percent of GDP) by 2018–19. While the order of magnitude of the additional adjustment involved is feasible, it is important to frame it within a quantified medium-term debt reduction plan consistent with preserving growth. On the revenue side, there is space for reducing tax expenditures, and improving the banking tax structure (¶20) and tax administration. An ambitious divestiture effort would also help reduce borrowing requirements and debt. An illustrative fiscal path is presented in Text Table 1. Page 26 Baseline and Illustrative Medium-Term Fiscal Adjustment Paths (Percent of GDP) Source: IMF staff estimates. On the structural fiscal front, there is a need to place the design of budgetary policies within a medium-term fiscal framework. In recent years, the annual budget process has departed from medium- and long-term objectives. Successive budgets have delayed steering public debt towards the statutory debt target, to avoid policy adjustments postponed to the future. Despite introducing a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and Program-Based Budgeting in the late 2000s, Mauritius does not have a binding mechanism to ensure annual budgets’ compliance within a medium-term fiscal framework. The limited involvement of Parliament, beyond voting the annual budget, weakens the accountability of the budgetary process and prevents an assessment of fiscal strategies to contain public indebtedness. Going forward, the new Public Financial Management Act could create the conditions to improve compliance with a medium-term fiscal framework. 201420152015/162016/172017/182018/19Prov.BudgetBaseline scenarioTotal revenue Grants Current spending Capital spending (incl. special funds) Consolidated balance Net acquisition of financial assets (- = divestiture) Overall borrowing requirement Primary deficit (excl. grants) Public sector debt Public sector debt (for debt ceiling purpose ) Nominal GDP (annual percent change) Illustrative scenario (Public debt ratio = 50 percent by 2018/19)Total revenue Grants Current spending Capital spending (incl. special funds) Consolidated balance Net acquisition of financial assets (- = divestiture) Overall borrowing requirement Primary deficit (excl. grants) Public sector debt Public sector debt (for debt ceiling purpose ) Nominal GDP (annual percent change) Memorandum items Cumulative nominal (current) spending reduction-0.8-3.6-7.2 (in percentage of baseline spending) Change in divestiture compared to baseline Change in primary balance compared to baseline Projections Page 27