Growth is projected to accelerate modestly in 2014 consistent with an improving external environment. Staff projects that real GDP growth in 2014 will increase to 3.7 percent, remaining slightly below potential reflecting still subdued demand from Mauritius’ main markets and low investment. Growth could turn out stronger if the implementation of the public investment program is stronger than currently projected or private investment picks up. In subsequent years, real GDP growth is expected to converge to its medium-term growth potential of about 4 percent. CPI inflation is projected to accelerate to 4.5 percent in 2014, still below the traditional implicit inflation target of 5 percent. The current account deficit is projected to narrow gradually, falling to about 6½ percent of GDP by 2019, reflecting reforms to improve external competitiveness. While fiscal consolidation has been delayed, debt related risks appear manageable. After expenditure increases in 2013, the 2014 budget keeps spending at historically high levels, above the levels consistent with achieving the 2018 debt limit. However, the medium-term budget includes fiscal adjustment starting in 2014. While the public debt stock, at around 60 percent of GDP in gross, undiscounted terms, is somewhat high for an emerging economy, exposure to risks are limited by the debt profile—low external debt, generally from multi- and bilateral sources (financed at long maturities and favorable interest rates) and a relatively well developed domestic financial market. Key risks relate to the ability to achieve the targeted medium-term fiscal adjustment and the need to resist spending pressures ahead of elections scheduled for 2015. A protracted period of slower growth in Europe could reduce growth (see Risk Assessment Matrix, Table 7). The main linkages to Mauritius would be through reduced tourism, trade, and FDI inflows. In addition, the persistently large current account deficit is a vulnerability. In both cases, relying on the flexible exchange rate regime should be helpful. Capital and financial flows into Mauritius have been stable compared with larger emerging markets that were affected by the emerging market volatility in 2013 and early 2014. Other international financial flows are an additional source of vulnerability, as large capital flows linked in large part to the GBCs could prove to be more volatile than historically although the impact on the real economy appears small. A revision of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) with India should have a moderate impact on growth and capital flows in part because there already has been some reorientation of GBC flows towards Africa. The authorities broadly agreed with the staff’s assessment of the outlook and associated risks and policy options. They believe a higher growth rate is possible over the medium term, but they are cognizant of the need to advance structural reforms and initiate fiscal consolidation to improve growth prospects and reduce external imbalances. Page 9