The striking feature of Mauritius’ financial system relates to the enormous size of the GBC sector, intrinsically linked to the domestic economy through the balance of payments and the banking system. Profiting from tax exemptions on foreign-sourced income, GBCs have become a key pillar of the economy , and account for assets estimated at over US$630 billion, some 50 times the level of GDP (Figure 2, panel 2). This massive order of magnitude has become evident following the authorities’ efforts, supported by IMF technical assistance, to collect survey data on GBC1s for use in balance of payments (BOP) and international investment position (IIP) statistics. Nonetheless, GBCs’ statistical coverage has still important gaps as GBC2s remain largely unmonitored. The GBC sector plays a vital role in financing the balance of payments, offsetting the large current account deficit for the rest of the economy (13 percent of GDP in 2014). Net capital inflows (15 percent of GDP) and investment income from GBC investments in the rest of the world (10 percent of GDP) are used to finance the large current account deficit of the non-GBC economy, allowing for the observed net accumulation of international reserves. There are also other inter-linkages between the GBCs and the domestic economy. While GBCs’ domestic assets account for only a tiny fraction of their massive total assets (most of GBCs’ activities are with non-residents), they still represent GBC’s Contribution to the Balance of Payments (Percent of GDP, 2014) Source: Bank of Mauritius. close to 100 percent of Mauritius’ GDP—largely in the form of domestic bank deposits. In addition, there are very large (and poorly understood) domestic cross-holdings within the GBC sector (around 300 percent of GDP; Figure 2, panel 4). GBCs also contribute to tax revenues, paying almost Mauritius’ financial system is dominated by banks w ith around 330 percent of GDP of total banking assets at end-2014, w hile the assets of the insurance and pension sectors w ere equivalent to some 34 and 40 percent of GDP respectively. Stock market capitalization w as about 62 percent of GDP. The offshore sector is made of two types of GBCs: GBC1 and GBC2. As of end 2014, the sector comprised approximately 10,300 GBC1s and 10,140 GBC2s. A GBC1 is a tax resident in Mauritius and is often used when overseas income is largely in the form of dividends, royalties, interest and capital gains. A GBC2 is not a tax resident and can carry out business only with non -residents and in foreign currency. It cannot benefit from DTA treaties, but is fully exempt from taxes on w orldw ide profits. The GBC2 license is often used for setting up special purpose vehi cles for holding shares abroad. 510152025Overall Balance of Payments Current Account Balance Capital and Financial Account Balance non-GBC GBC Balance Page 16 1.3 percent of GDP in taxes in 2014 (around 6½ percent of total tax collection; Figure 2, panel 5). In contrast, the GBCs’ direct contribution to domestic employment remains modest (Figure 2, panel 6). GBCs’ foreign currency deposits are a key funding source for banks, which also have other large cross-border exposures (Figure 3, panel 1). GBCs deposits account for 30 percent of the banking sector balance sheet (bank assets stood at around 300 percent of GDP) and bank claims on GBCs represent about 10-15 percent of domestic credit. GBCs can also hold equity stakes in banks. In addition, banks have large exposures to non-residents, with deposits equivalent to 22 percent of total liabilities, and cross-border loans in excess of 100 percent of GDP (mostly to borrowers in India and other countries in Africa and Asia). For the banking system as whole, foreign currency liabilities to GBCs and non-residents are mostly matched by foreign currency assets However, exposures to GBCs and non-residents vary significantly across banks (Figure 3, panels 3 and 4). Under Mauritius’ single licensing regime, banks are free to operate in both Segment A business (domestically-sourced income) and Segment B business (foreign-sourced income, including GBCs and non-residents). Large foreign banks tend to focus on Segment B, drawing deposits from the most reputable GBCs and lending to their global network of customers with established credit records. The two large domestic banks are currently concentrated on Segment A. Medium-sized banks have a mix of Segment A and Segment B operations, potentially constituting a greater channel of spillover to domestic activity. Reflecting the considerable tax advantage for Segment B activities (80 percent reduction in the 15 percent corporate tax rate), many banks are planning to increase their Segment B operations going forward. This is a risky strategy given the challenges associated with assessing the funding risk from GBCs and non-resident sources, and the credit and counterparty risks involved in cross-border lending. More than 95 percent of banks’ asset and liability exposures to GBCs and non -residents are estimated to be in foreign currency. No data are available about currency composition of the entire balance sheet of GBCs, but the GBC’s nature as a conduit of international investments makes it likely that most of the GBCs’ assets and liabilities are in foreign currency. Only about 11–12 percent of bank deposits and borrow ing by domestic residents (non -GBC) are in foreign currency. The balance sheet analysis does not show major currency mismatches in the domestic economy, although there are significant data gaps (see Annex V). Page 17 Figure 2. Global Business Companies (GBCs) and the Mauritian Economy The number of GBCs is substantial and growing . . . 1. Number of GBCs Absolute Number . . . with a balance sheet some 50 times GDP . . . 2. GBC Balance Sheet, 2014 Billions of U.S. dollars Sources: FSC; Bank of Mauritius; and IMF staff estimates. Note: Estimated using data on 2014 balance sheet size, and 2013 figures on types of assets. . . . but there are also assets in the domestic economy. 4. GBC Domestic Assets Billions of US$, and Percent of GDP Sources: FSC; and Bank of Mauritius. GBC’s and related activities contribute around 6.5 percent of total revenues. 6. GBC, Segment B and other Taxes In Percent of Total Tax Revenue Source: FSC. . . . most of which is with non-residents . . . 3. GBC: Balance Sheet by type of Asset, 2014 In Percent of Total (middle) and in Percent of GDP Sources: FSC; Bank of Mauritius; and IMF staff estimates. Note: Estimated using the same method as panel 2. GBC’s direct contribution to employment is modest. 5. Employment In Percent of Total Employment Source: Ministry of Finance. ( O ) GBC1 GBC2 Source: FSC 500600700AssetsLiabilitiesGBC2 GBC1assetswith non-residents GBC1domesticassets Domestic cross-holdings AssetsLiabilitiesGBC2Domestic Foreigndirect investment Portfolioinvestment Other GBC2Domestic Foreigndirectinvestment Portfolioinvestment Other Derivatives Derivatives Cross-holdings Cross-holdings Sources: FSC and Bank of Mauritius. OtherAssets held with residents/cross-claimson other GBCs (304% of GDP)Cash/depositsheld at resident banks (72% of GDP)Non-fin.assets owned and physically located in Mauritius (10% of GDP)Shares inaffiliated enterprises, excl GBC(7% of GDP) Manufact. (20.1%)Wholesale & retail trade; repair of motor vehicles & motorcycles (17.3%) Construction (8.3%)Agriculture, forestry & fishing (8%)Publ. admin. & defence; soc. security (7.4%) Accom. & food service (7.2%) Transportation and storage (5.9%)Education (5.8%)Admini. & support service (5.1%)Health & soc. work (3.6%)Information & comm. (3.4%) Finance & insurance (2.5%)Other (3.5%) Source: Statistics Mauritius managementcompanies andcorp. trustees(0.5%) Professional, scientific & tech. activities (1.9%) offshore (direct tax) offshore (indirect tax) Segment B (corporate tax) other tax revenue Source: Ministry of Finance Page 18 Figure 3. Overview of the Banking Sector The banking sector is large relative to GDP . . . 1. Banking sector balance sh eet, 2015H1 Percent of GDP . . . and has three main types of institutions. 2. Banking system by t ype of bank, 2015 H1 Percent of banking system assets and total credit . . . though this Segment B exposure varies by bank. 4. Banks’ Segment B business Banks are highly exposed to GBCs and non-residents . . . 3. GBC: contribution to banks’ balance Sheet In Percent Sources: Bank of Mauritius; and IMF staff estimates.