The recent collapse of the BAI financial conglomerate highlighted weaknesses in regulation, consolidated supervision, crisis management and resolution. Although the authorities succeeded in averting a systemic crisis, the lack of an ex-ante bank and financial resolution regime and of an explicit deposit insurance scheme (DIS) translated into substantial fiscal costs , and potential moral hazard. This episode also highlighted issues of regulatory forbearance, political leaning, and coordination problems among financial regulators. The consultation discussions noted the systemic importance of mixed conglomerates, of which several banks are part, highlighting the importance to upgrade consolidated supervision and cooperation among regulatory a gencies—in particular between the BoM and the Financial Services Commission (FSC) . The authorities have already taken steps to improve supervisory cooperation. Mauritius’ financial stability framework needs upgrading, commensurate with the scale and complexity of the financial industry. In addition to close cooperation among regulators, a proper assessment of macro-financial risks associated with banks’ large exposures to GBCs and nonresidents requires the availability of timely information and strong technical capacity for risk assessment. The authorities recognize that data gaps and incomplete information hamper The fiscal cost in 2015 w as around 1.3 percent of GDP (0.4 percent of GDP in recapitalization, and 0.9 percent of GDP to refund policyholders; see ¶6). The BoM supervises banks and other deposit taking institutions, while the FSC is overseeing non -bank financial institutions including insurance companies, pension and investment funds, and GBCs. Page 20 their efforts to gauge and respond to these vulnerabilities. In this regard, they also saw the critical need to establish a stronger legal ability for the bank regulator to require all information needed to safeguard financial stability from all financial institutions operating in Mauritius. AML/CFT supervision and customer due diligence measures need to be enhanced in line with FSAP recommendations, in order to further protect the financial sector against money laundering risks. Staff also recommended that the authorities create a macro-prudential authority with a prominent role for the Bank of Mauritius. Due to the size and central role of the banking system and its supervisory mandate over it, the central bank is uniquely placed for systemic risk assessment and mitigation through the deployment of macro -prudential tools. In this context, even before a macro-prudential authority is formalized, the formation of a permanent technical working group spear-headed by the BoM’s Research and Supervision Departments, and including representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the FSC, and the Ministry of Financial Services, should monitor and analyze systemic risks and regularly report its findings and recommendations to the inter-ministerial Financial Stability Committee. In this context, the tax structure affecting banking system activities and uneven reserve requirements for foreign currency deposits are a risk to financial stability and need to be corrected. The significant tax ince ntive for Segment B activities distorts the allocation of resources in favor of cross-border operations, affecting competiveness in the non-GBC sector (see ¶26) . These distorted incentives are likely to be reinforced by differences in reserve requirements and remuneration, favoring foreign currency deposits relative to rupee deposits . The tendency to move toward segment B activities indicates that banks may not be internalizing the negative externality these measures impose on the economy in the form of higher systemic risks. In addition, a special resolution regime for banks reflecting best international standards and, subsequently, a deposit insurance scheme (DIS) should be introduced. Official assistance should be strictly confined to systemic cases and used under clear limitations to be stipulated in the law. An industry-funded DIS, a key part of the financial safety net, should be introduced subsequently, with coverage limited to small resident depositors only, and be given powers to facilitate resolution operations. The authorities recognize that improving the resilience of the banking sector also requires ensuring adequate loan-loss provisioning and promoting better foreign currency liquidity management by banks. Bank Segment A business has a significantly higher tax rate (10 percent special levy on top of the customary 15 percent tax rate) than Segment B business (80 percent rebate on the customary 15 percent tax rate). Banks need to have reserves equal to 9 percent of do mestic deposits and 6 percent of foreign currency deposits. In addition, foreign currency requirements are remunerated (based on central bank interest rates), while local currency deposits are unremunerated. Page 21 Box 2. Key Policy Recommendations from the 2015 FSAP Introduce prudential requirements on domestic and foreign currency liquidity. The introduction of a Liquidity Core Ratio by currency would mitigate liquidity risk, especially in foreign currency, and promote better foreign currency liquidity management by banks. The prudential limits could vary with the quality of banks’ liquidity management practices. Consideration should also be given to setting concentration limits on interbank bank exposures. In addition, to mitigate the risk of systemic foreign currency liquidity stress, specific reserve requirements on GBC deposits could also be considered. Improve the supervisory approach for conglomerates and for consolidated supervision. Amend existing legislation to grant BoM authority over bank holding companies and allow it to monitor intra-group transactions and those between the group entities and related parties. Dedicated joint or lead supervisors should be established for each conglomerate and be given adequate on- and off-site supervisory mandate and resources. Continue to strengthen the BoM’s capacity to monitor the risks associated with banks’ cross-border lending. Increased cooperation with host supervisors is recommended for cross-border operations made through subsidiaries. Where direct cross-border lending takes place, the BoM needs to bolster its capacity to monitor country risks and understand the nature of the business and the reputation of Mauritian bank counterparts. Ensure adequate loan-loss provisioning by banks. Proceed with the planned tightening of prudential norms on loan classification and collateral valuation. Enhance the financial safety net and strengthen the crisis resolution and management framework. Resolution options for systemic and non-systemic cases should be clearly differentiated in the banking law; the law should also specify the circumstances under which liquidity and/ or solvency support can be provided. A comprehensive framework for crisis prevention and management (including the preparation of resolvability assessments for domestic systemically important banks) should be put in place. An industry funded Deposit Insurance Scheme (DIS) consistent with the rest of the components of the bank resolution framework should be introduced. Continue to strengthen the AML/CFT framework to meet the FATF Recommendations. Laws and regulations should be amended to address the remaining shortcomings, and effective implementation ensured. The authorities agreed with the analysis of balance sheet inter-linkages, and are taking steps to mitigate spillovers and financial stability risks. They acknowledged the need to upgrade the supervision of the offshore financial sector. A technical group to enhance systemic risk assessment has been set-up and the authorities will seek a continued dialogue with staff as work progresses. They are also committed to ensuring that that the BoM and FSC work closely together to assess and mitigate systemic risks. The BoM plans to enhance its ability to collect data to monitor financial stability issues. It has also put forward legislation to strengthen regulation by giving the central bank authority to regulate bank holding companies. Legislation on consolidated supervision is also planned. A draft bill on Deposit Insurance is already underway, though this should be aligned with the Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems and good international practices. The authorities have requested Fund technical assistance to support this reform process. Page 22