Mauritius’s strong development record has reflected a remarkable ability to adapt to Labor Productivity and Investment Rates (Indices 20017=100) changing economic and financial conditions. Economic growth has been commendable, and financial stability has been maintained, even under challenging circumstances. After successfully transitioning from an agricultural to a manufacturing and tourism based-economy, the country has continued to develop and diversify with a vibrant financial sector—including a very large offshore industry. A careful macroeconomic policy response helped Mauritius weather the global financial crisis. The economy has remained resilient to the recent increased volatility in emerging and frontier markets, and has benefitted from declining commodity prices. Mauritius is facing the challenge of avoiding the “middle-income trap” and moving to a higher income status. Competitiveness, productivity and investment rates have been declining in recent years, and the labor force is projected to shrink over time. Infrastructure bottlenecks are Global Competitiveness Inde x (GCI) and Real G DP Source: Statistics Mauritius. a constraint to further development, and the authorities envisage large public investment programs with complementary private investment to boost port capacity, transportation, connectivity and other advanced technologies. The country is also seeking a strategic re-orientation of its large offshore sector to channel foreign investment into mainland Africa. Currently, the global business company (GBC) sector is a source of economic dynamism on the back of a Double-Taxation Avoidance Per capita, 2015 Source: World Economic Forum. Agreement (DTAA) Treaty with India, legal and accounting expertise, bilingualism and the record of political stability. Going forward, the authorities seek to position the country as a prime route for foreign investment into Africa and to depart from the tax-centered model to attract capital inflows. This strategy entails even stronger inter-linkages between the GBC sector, the domestic economy and the Under the DTAA, capital gains on sale of assets in In dia by companies registered in Mauritius can only be taxed in Mauritius. The tax on capital gains is set at 3%. Average compensation of employees Labour productivity Unit Labour Cost (MUR) Investment (RHS) Compensation and Indicators of Competitiveness (Investment: in Percent of GDP; Other Series: Indices 2007=100 ) Source: Statistics Mauritius Page 10 financial sector, providing further development momentum but also stronger potential spillovers from volatile external conditions.