AND GENDER EQUITY Mauritius faces important challenges as it seeks to escape the middle-income trap. Mauritius has lost seven places in the 2015–16 Global Competitiveness Report, now ranking 46 among 140 economies (Figure 6). Productivity is eroding, unit labor costs have been rising, infrastructure needs upgrading, and labor regulation is relatively complex. The population (and labor force) is projected to start shrinking in the longer run. In addition, income inequality has been rising: The income share of the top 20 percent earners is nine times as high as that of the bottom 20 percent earners, and gender inequality remains relatively high. A reform program needs to address constraints on factor accumulation including by mitigating the projected decline of the labor force through skilled workers‘ immigration or an increase in female labor force participation—as well as productivity improvement, including by investments in human and infrastructure capital. Income Inequality and Gender Inequality Sources: National authorities; United Nations, SWIID and own estimates The 2015/16 budget outlines several measures to deal with these challenges. To strengthen the business climate, the authorities envisage, among other things, expanding the powers of the Fast Track Committee to expedite the approval and implementation of major investment projects and abolishing a large number of licenses and permits which have become obsolete. The authorities also target to boost infrastructure through a large investment program. As part of their program, smart cities would be developed which are environmentally friendly, highly connected and generate their own energy and water. As part of the authorities’ ambition to create an ocean economy , major investments in the port infrastructure are planned, expanding the connectivity of Port-Louis to other ports. Raising female labor force participation rates could help address the challenges of population aging and enable the attainment of higher income status (Annex VI). Mauritius possesses a large pool of educated women who currently do not participate in the labor market. According to a staff study, this has led to an estimated income loss in the range of 22 to 27 percent compared to a situation witho ut gender gaps in the labor force (Figure 5). The following options may be considered to increase female labor participation: (i) promoting part-time work and flexible work arrangements; (ii) increasing the number of childcare centers compliant with minimum quality standards; (iii) increasing financial inclusion for women by expanding financial literacy training R² = 0.448 UN Gender Inequality Index (Re-estimated) Income Inequality and Gender Inequality Sources: National authorities; United Nations, SWIIDand own estimates. Mauritius Page 28 targeted at micro-enterprises; and (iv) considering the introduction of paternity leave to level the playing field in hiring decisions and pay of women and men. Figure 5. Mauritius: Increasing Female Labor Force Participation to Boost Growth Female labor force participation has increased but remains below tha of upper middle -inco me co untries... ...and if i n the labor mar ket, wo men are mor e likely to be unemplo yed, especiall y when yo ung... Source: IMF staff estimates. The authorities agreed with the thrust of staff’s analysis but pointed to constraints to implement policies related to traditional gender roles. They intend to continue addressing the skills mismatch in the economy and plan large investment programs to mitigate infrastructure bottlenecks. Measures to increase female labor force participation, including through training and employment programs, are ongoing. However, the authorities suggested that some family policies, such as paternity leave, might be difficult to implement.