Balance sheet analysis suggests that the financial system is broadly resilient to shocks. The materialization of some of the downside risks discussed earlier could lead to heightened volatility, pressures on asset prices, deteriorating liquidity conditions, and funding cost increases. Negative feedback loops between tighter financial conditions and weak growth could strain corporate and bank balance sheets. Nonetheless, the recent Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) found that the balance sheets of financial institutions and non-financial corporations would be resilient to severe shocks given high initial capital levels (Boxes 5 and 6). Specifically, a sensitivity analysis of the largest 50 corporations found that only for a handful of companies the interest coverage ratio would fall below one in a scenario of significant further currency depreciation, increase in funding rates, and a decline in earnings. Household indebtedness remains low, although the recent rapid pace of credit growth could create pockets of vulnerabilities if income growth decelerates sharply and unemployment increases. The banking sector stress tests confirmed that banks have adequate capital and reserves buffers to absorb an increase in credit risks from corporate and household lending in a stress scenario. Banks are also resilient to market and liquidity risks. The authorities continue to closely monitor corporate leverage and advise firms to strengthen their balance sheets when needed. Page 25 Box 5. Household and Corporate Sector Balance Sheets: A Health Check Households have low debt and significant positive net assets. The ratio of household debt to income is only 22 percent, and households hold large financial and non-financial assets. Lending to households’ accounts for 37 percent of total bank loans (of which 60 percent are personal loans and credit cards and the rest are housing loans). Consumer loan provisioning is high at 200 percent of NPLs. Household borrowing is denominated entirely in local currency. House prices have increased broadly in line with income growth on average over the last five years, and there is no evidence of an overvaluation. Corporate debt is also relatively low, although about half of it is denominated in foreign currency. Total corporate debt (including that of public corporations) is 35 percent of GDP, lower than in most other Household Debt and Consumer Loans (In percent) Household Debt/GDP Household Debt/Income G7 Banks: Share of Consumer Loans to Total Loans House Price Index (Y/Y quarterly growth) Nominal Real Source: Haver Analytics Source: Banco de Mexico emerging economies (Figure 7). While FX debt is high, comprising half of total debt, most large corporations reduce their exchange rate risks through a combination of natural hedges (sales in foreign currency) and financial derivatives. Financial derivatives provide mostly a temporary protection against exchange rate movements, but stress tests suggest that balance sheets would be relatively resilient even in the absence of financial hedges. Although corporate profitability has weakened in line with the slowing economy, debt servicing capacity remains strong. For the median firm, the interest coverage ratio (earnings/interest expense) is around four. Corporate bonds have long maturities and only 15 percent of total bonds are maturing in 2016-18. In addition, on average, cash buffers increased and the ratio of net debt to earnings declined in 2015. Commercial banks’ provisions are high at 140 percent of NPLs. Banks’ exposure to the commodities sector is small (6 percent of total loans, most of which to PEMEX) and provisions are above 1000 percent of sectoral NPLs. Only one medium-sized company (Empresas ICA) and a small oil services provider (Oro Negro) missed debt interest payments last year. The ICRs for other large companies have not declined notably over the last year. Page 26 Box 5. Household and Corporate Sector Balance Sheets: A Health Check (continued) A sensitivity analysis shows that large publicly-traded Mexican corporates and the banking sector would be resilient to further negative shocks to corporate earnings, the exchange rate, and interest rates (see charts below). Of the 50 largest companies, only three (taking into account natural and financial hedges) to five (with natural hedge only) firms would have difficulty servicing debt (defined as Interest Coverage Ratio below 1). Their debts account for 2.9 to 3.4 percent of total corporate sector debt, and for only 0.02 to 0.22 percent of total bank loans. The 50 largest companies also have large cash holdings, which would provide an additional buffer in case of an adverse shock (the medium firm has a cash buffer of 255 percent of short term debt). In the worst case of no exchange rate hedges, six companies will have ICR below 1 in a stress scenario. Their debts account for 6.6 percent of total corporate sector debt (1.12 percent of total bank loans). In the case of debt default, the banks’ gross corporate NPL ratio could increase by 0.02 to 1.12 percentage points. With high loss-absorbing buffer (15.8 percent of risk-weighted assets), banks would be able to absorb these losses and remain solvent even in the worst case scenario. Banking Sector Gross NPL Ratio (In percent of total loans) Current After Shock Banking Sector Loss Absorbing Buffers (In percent of risk-weighted assets) Current After Shock Regulatory Minimum Sc 1: With “natural” hedges Sc 2: With “natural” and 50% FX hedges Sc 3: No hedges Note: Assuming all corporates with ICR<1 default on their bank loans with no recovery. Sc 1: With “natural” hedges Sc 2: With “natural” and 50% FX hedges Sc 3: No hedges This exercise analyzes the top 50 largest publicly-listed corporations (comprising around 30 percent of total corporate debt), using a combination of balance sheet data and supervisory information. The specific shocks considered are one standard deviation shock to earnings, 30-percent exchange rate depreciation, and 30-percent increase in interest costs. Data limitations prohibit the extension of such analysis to smaller firms, however they have limited access to foreign currency debt and therefore should be less exposed to exchange rate fluctuations. The natural hedges are proxied by the ratio of foreign currency revenues to total revenues for each firm, based on information from the Bank of Mexico. This ratio is 31 percent on average. Financial hedges for exchange rate risk are assumed to cover 50 percent of FX interest expenses (according to supervisory information the current ratio is higher than that for most firms). Page 27 Box 5. Household and Corporate Sector Balance Sheets: A Health Check (concluded) Inter-sectoral balance sheet linkages show that contagion risks remain contained. The main potential vulnerability is the significant net liability position of the public and the nonfinancial private sectors (close to ¼ of GDP each). A sudden reduction in preferences for Mexican assets could therefore be a key channel of transmission of global shocks to Mexico. About ¾ of public liabilities are denominated in pesos, however, reducing exchange rate risks, while most nonfinancial private corporate liabilities consist of equity. Moreover, the central bank holds significant reserves (15 percent of GDP at end-2015), and Mexico has a US$88 billion credit line with the IMF, which should help guard against a tail event. Table 8 contains more detailed balance sheet information. Mexico: Net Intersectoral Asset and Liability Positions, 2015 1/ (In percent of GDP) Central bank Public sector Banks Other financial corporations Nonfinancial private sector Nonresidents Central bank Public sector Banks Other financial corps. Nonfinancial private sector Nonresidents Sources: Standardized report forms for monetary and financial data; External debt and IIP data from Banxico; Public debt from SHCP. 1/ Further details, such as gross positions, are reported in Table 8. The 2016 FSAP recommended a number of enhancements to Mexico’s prudential and crisis-management frameworks. The 2012 FSAP concluded that banking supervision in Mexico was effective. This year’s assessment found that since significant progress has been achieved in strengthening financial sector prudential oversight but some important gaps remain, especially in the governance of the supervisory framework. In particular: It is critical at the current juncture of Mexico’s financial sector development to strengthen the governance of the supervisory agencies and the IPAB, which continue to lack operational independence, budget autonomy, and legal protection, and have multiple mandates, including financial development. The FSAP recommended that budgetary independence needs to be granted to allow the supervisors to allocate resources according to their established priorities and to ensure the adequacy and quality of its staff. Ensuring the financial soundness of the supervised institutions should be the primary mandate for the supervisors; other mandates should remain secondary and narrowly defined. Governance boards need to be composed of independent members with clear rules and process for the appointment and dismissal of senior personnel. The FSAP suggested consolidating the supervisory agencies (responsible for banks, securities, insurance, other financial institutions and pension funds) under a single prudential authority. For further details, refer to the 2016 Mexico Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA). Page 28 There is also a need to strengthen, inter alia, consolidated supervision and improve regulatory reporting for related-party lending. Strengthening the role of the Financial System Stability Council (CESF) in the assessment of financial stability risks, including clear assignment of responsibility for the identification and mitigation of potential systemic risks, would help enhance the macroprudential policy framework. Box 6. Results from Stress Tests of the Financial System from the 2016 FSAP Regulated sofomes , 0.3 , 1.1 Surety companies, 0.1 Commercial banks , 47.3 Unregulated sofomes , 1.7 Brokerage firms, Insurance companies, 7.1 Development banks , 10.7 Mutual funds, General deposit warehouses, 0.1 Popular savings and credit entities Composition of the Financial System (In percent) The recent financial system stability assessment found that the financial system is resilient to a wide range of shocks. Commercial banks. The results of solvency and liquidity stress tests suggest that the commercial banking system can withstand severe shocks, despite large capital losses in some cases (see the 2016 FSSA report). Liquidity buffers are large and all banks meet the minimum LCR requirements. Returns on equity averaged 17 percent over the last three years, and the spread between lending and deposit rates was high at about 10 percentage points. The gross NPL ratio has declined steadily from 3.2 percent in 2013 to 2.6 percent in 2015, and provision coverage is high at 140 percent. Commercial banks’ external debt liabilities amount to only around 3 percent of total liabilities, reducing their exposure to external financial shocks. Development banks. Solvency stress tests conducted on the three largest development banks show that capital adequacy ratios would remain above the regulatory minimum under various shocks. Asset quality is high, although profitability and capitalization have declined slightly (capital adequacy is still very high at 14.1 percent). The gross NPL ratio has remained below 2 percent since 2010, and provision covers 262 percent of NPLs. Insurance sector. The insurance companies are well capitalized, profitable, and liquid. Return of equity averaged 14 percent in 2015, and the ratios of minimum capital guarantee coverage and liquid assets to current liabilities were 1.9 and 3.5 respectively. Insurance investment portfolios are well diversified and solvency ratios would remain above regulatory requirement under a combination of interest rate, exchange rate, and equity markets shocks. Mutual funds and pension funds are exposed to market risk, but have various tools available to manage liquidity risks. In periods of stress, mutual fund managers can limit or suspend redemptions, apply discount to the unit price, and split funds into liquid and illiquid components. Pension funds’ regulatory VaR limits are automatically adjusted based on changes in market volatility. Interconnectedness risks among sectors are limited. Stress tests showed that only several very small banks and brokerage houses would not be able to meet the minimum regulatory requirement in times of stress. The low interconnectedness risk is partly explained by banks’ reduced exposure to foreign financial institutions as a result of stricter regulatory limits on net open positions in foreign currency. Source: Banco de Mexico Pension funds , While credit losses in the stress test are relatively large, banks have high levels of capital and can absorb them. Mexico has implemented new regulations requiring the implementation of Solvency II-type risk-based capital and mark-to-market valuation of assets and liabilities in April 2016 Page 29 The crisis preparedness framework should include comprehensive coordinated contingency plans and simulation exercises to deal with a systemic crisis. The deposit insurance system should be strengthened by transferring legacy debt from the deposit insurance institute (IPAB) to the federal government balance sheet, and building up the ex-ante resolution fund. The incentive structure of development banks should be modified to reduce the risk of direct competition with commercial banks and focus their activities exclusively on developmental objectives. Quantitative credit targets for development banks should be eliminated. Performance assessments could be based in part on indicators of financial inclusion and private sector crowding in. The authorities broadly agreed with the FSAP recommendations, except for those related to the reform of institutional governance arrangements. In particular, they plan to develop formal system-wide contingency plans and perform coordinated crisis simulation exercises. The authorities also intend to phase out the practice of setting quantitative targets for development banks’ credit growth, and replace them with broader indicators, including indicators for financial inclusion. Interest rate caps currently in place for some development bank programs will be phased out by 2018. The authorities do not see a need to combine the supervisory agencies under one prudential authority, as each agency has a clear mandate and issues of common interest are discussed under the umbrella of the CESF. They agree with the need to explore certain flexibility in budgetary issues, but intend to keep the current institutional and governance arrangements, citing a need to maintain a strong involvement of the Ministry of Finance in financial sector oversight. They also prefer to maintain the CESF as a coordinating body in the assessment and communication of financial stability issues without executive powers of its own, in order to avoid conflicts with the mandates, powers, and objectives of the central bank and the technical independence of the supervisory agencies, with the understanding that these agencies follow a comply or explain approach to CESF’s recommendations.