The 2015 budget proposal implies a mild withdrawal of fiscal stimulus next year. In the budget proposal sent to Congress in September, the fiscal deficit in 2015 is projected to narrow slightly relative to 2014 (from 4.2 to 4.0 percent of GDP). The consolidation is smaller than envisaged in last year’s medium-term budget projections, reflecting the authorities’ decision to accommodate a decline in oil revenues of ½ percentage point of GDP. This decline is expected to be temporary as the energy reform is designed to stimulate oil production in the medium term. Improvements in the structural balance and the non-oil fiscal balance imply a mild tightening of the fiscal stance in 2015, with spending projected to decline as a share of GDP. Staff supported the decision to accommodate the temporary decline in oil production, while cautioning against further delays in consolidation plans. Staff strongly supported the authorities’ intention to reduce the fiscal deficit gradually over the next four years. The 2015 budget projects a reduction of the public sector borrowing requirement from 4 to 2½ percent of GDP over 2015–18, which will help stabilize gross public debt at about 49 percent of GDP and put it on a downward path thereafter. The consolidation relies on a gradual increase in tax revenues related to the 2014 tax reform. The reform has been very effective in improving tax collection and creating incentives for small enterprises to join the formal sector, resulting in greater-than-expected tax revenue in 2014. Further increases in the tax intake from newly formalized enterprises and income from an implicit excise tax on gasoline are expected to raise non-oil tax revenues by additional 1¾ percentage points of GDP by 2018. Expenditure is projected to remain broadly stable in percent of GDP in the medium term, which implies a compression of the wage bill to compensate for rising pension expenditure. The consolidation plan is consistent with past staff advice as it broadens the tax base and prevents cuts in capital expenditure. Strong commitment to fiscal prudence will help maintain investor confidence and keep financing costs low. In that context, staff emphasized that it will be important to adhere to the announced medium-term fiscal path, and adjust policies if needed. The fiscal projections assume that the oil production of PEMEX will stabilize at 2.4 million barrels per day starting in 2015, and that production by private companies will commence in 2016 and increase steadily thereafter. Total oil output is expected to reach 3 million barrels per day by 2019, but there are significant downside The implicit tax on gasoline is the difference between the government-administered gasoline prices and international prices. Page 11 risks. Staff and the authorities agreed that, if production levels continue to surprise on the downside, it will be necessary to adjust expenditure or raise non-oil revenues to prevent a trend increase in public debt. Measures would also be needed in the case of persistent shortfalls in tax revenues relative to current projections. Amendments to the Fiscal Responsibility Law, approved by Congress in 2014, strengthen the fiscal framework in several ways. First, the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), which is a broader measure of the public sector balance than the “traditional balance”, was made an official target for fiscal policy. Second, current structural expenditure in real terms would be capped at 2 percent per year in 2015–16, and at the rate of potential output growth thereafter. Finally, a new sovereign Oil Stabilization and Savings Fund was created to manage oil revenues. PEMEX and the private oil companies will transfer to the fund all government dues including profit sharing, royalties, and license fees (except for the corporate income tax which is paid directly to the central government). In turn, the fund will transfer up to 4.7 percent of GDP to the central government every year (equivalent to the amount of oil revenues in percent of GDP in 2013). Revenues in excess of that will be saved in the fund until the balance grows to 3 percent of GDP. Staff welcomed the creation of the new fund, noting that it will provide greater stability in oil revenues for budget purposes, and will ensure that a large share of any future oil income windfall would be saved. Staff recommended several further improvements to the framework to enhance fiscal discipline: It will be important to strengthen the budget approval and execution process to enforce more strictly expenditure appropriation limits set in the budget. In the past, positive growth and revenue surprises have not translated into an improved fiscal position because of expenditure overruns in the execution phase (actual expenditure has exceeded budget plans in each of the past 5 years). Going forward, any higher-than-expected oil revenues will be saved in the new sovereign wealth fund. Therefore, more realistic budgeting of expenditure, combined with stricter controls on execution, will be needed to ensure that limits on the The baseline assumption for oil production implies that the proven reserve replacement rate rises to an average of 159 percent during 2016–19, significantly above the reported average replacement rate for PEMEX of 90 percent in the period 2010–13. In a selected issues paper, IMF staff shows an illustrative downside scenario with production 4½ percent below the baseline on average between 2016 and 2019. Such a scenario will result in a fiscal deficit gap of about ½ percent of GDP by 2019 relative to the current baseline. Structural current expenditure, comprising about 50 percent of total public expenditure, is defined as indirect capital spending plus current spending minus pensions, electricity subsidies, transfers to states and municipalities from oil revenue-sharing agreements, and interest payments. It also excludes the expenditures of Pemex and the state electricity company. After this balance is reached, 40 percent of any additional surplus income will continue to be saved and the rest will be earmarked for various spending categories (10 percent for the universal pension system, 10 percent for research and development and renewable energy projects, 30 percent for infrastructure and oil-related investment, and 10 percent for scholarships and regional development). Once the sovereign wealth fund reaches 10 percent of GDP, the return on investments will be transferred to the federal government, in addition to the 4.7 percent of GDP. Page 12 growth of spending are respected and that PSBR deficit targets will be met. The authorities agreed that stricter control of expenditure is desirable, while noting that, given the cap on current expenditure, in the future positive revenue surprises could only be used to increase capital spending (within the limits of the PSBR target). There was agreement that the escape clause to both deficit targets envisaged in the Fiscal Responsibility Law should be invoked only in the case of a growth slowdown, and that deficit levels should be in line with the estimated output gap. Monetary policy is better-suited to respond to mild cyclical fluctuations. Staff suggested that stronger independent assessment of fiscal policy could also be beneficial. A first step in that direction could be to outsource the calculation of potential output growth and the output gap to an independent group of experts. The authorities explained that they have just published the methodology for calculating potential output growth (the average of actual growth for the last ten years and growth projections for the next five years), which increases transparency and results in a relatively conservative estimate of potential growth. Public communication strategies should aim to promote better understanding of the fiscal framework. Fiscal analysis and reporting will have to start giving more emphasis to the PSBR and the current expenditure targets. Staff welcomed the effort to compile and report historical fiscal data in accordance with international standards (GFSM 2001) in the 2015 budget, and encouraged the authorities to report the fiscal projections in line with these standards as well. The greater independence granted to PEMEX and the Federal Electricity Company (CFE) should help improve the efficiency of their operations. As part of the energy reform, the two large state enterprises will have greater operational independence starting in 2015, including more freedom in investment and operational decisions. They will be governed by Boards that will include representatives of the government as well as independent experts. Their tax regime will be aligned with the tax regime of private oil companies. The federal government has agreed to assume a share of the pension liabilities of PEMEX and CFE, if they reform their pension systems to reduce the net present value of future liabilities. Staff supported this plan, which is in line with past IMF advice, and noted that a gradual move to a defined-contribution pension for the two public companies would align their pension system with that of federal government employees. There was agreement that the monitoring and control of state and municipal government finances need to be strengthened. Several highly-indebted states and municipalities have had to restructure their obligations in recent years. Although total subnational government debt is relatively modest at about 3 percent of GDP, deficits and debt have increased notably since 2008. Moreover, the reported debt understates the overall liabilities of subnational governments as A technical assistance mission by the IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department in April 2014 suggested the introduction of a formal approval process for authorizing significant mid-year changes in the expenditure envelope to enforce compliance with budget appropriations. Page 13 it excludes credit from private sector providers of goods and services. Staff welcomed the introduction of a uniform accounting methodology (set in the General Government Accounting Law) for states’ and municipalities’ finances. Several states have already adopted the new methodology, and the rest are expected to do so by the end of 2015. Staff suggested that the reported data should be audited, consolidated, and made publicly available to provide better information on local government finances. It would also be desirable to adopt a more formal fiscal framework to constrain the deficits of local governments, along the lines of the Fiscal Responsibility Law for the federal government. The authorities agreed and responded that a law on local government finances (Ley Nacional de Responsabilidad Hacendaria y Deuda Pública), which aims to address most of the above issues, has been sent to Congress last year. Finally, staff noted that the pension system for state employees should also be reformed to reduce unfunded liabilities.