Real GDP growth is expected to reach 2½ percent in 2016, supported by strengthening external demand. The baseline scenario assumes continued recovery in U.S. growth, accompanied by smooth normalization of U.S. monetary policy. Under this baseline, positive effects from higher external demand would dominate the negative impact of tightening external financial conditions for Mexico (Box 2). Lower electricity prices and the real depreciation of the currency should also help boost Mexico’s manufacturing production and exports, with positive spillovers to domestic demand. Private consumption growth would continue to be supported by steady wage growth and low unemployment (Figure 6). The proposed budget for 2016 envisages a decline in the PSBR to 3.5 percent of GDP, which would imply a moderate drag on growth. Box 2. Trade and Financial Spillovers to Mexico Mexico has close trade and financial ties to the global economy, and especially with the United States. The U.S. is by far the largest recipient of Mexico’s manufacturing and agricultural exports, and is also the main source of portfolio and foreign direct investment flows to Mexico, explaining the close correlation of the business cycles of the two economies. Focusing on financial linkages, international investors held about half of total government debt in mid-2015 (including 36 percent of local currency government bonds), as well as a large share of corporate bond debt. A structural Bayesian VAR is estimated to quantify the contribution of external spillovers to Mexico’s output growth. The external variables in the system are U.S. real GDP growth, the 10-year U.S. Treasury bond rate, and the J.P. Morgan emerging market bond spread (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 2 for more details). Staff estimates suggest that a 10 percent depreciation of real effective exchange rate leads to 3 percent real growth in non-oil exports over the next two years. A staff study finds that a 10 percent decline in electricity costs increases manufacturing output by 3 percent (Selected Issues Paper 2014). Electricity prices for industrial users have declined by 24 percent year-on year by July 2015, which should boost activity over the next two year by about 1.2 percentage points of GDP (cumulative). Staff analysis suggests that the fiscal consolidation would subtract around ½ to 1 percentage point from growth next year. The estimated average fiscal multiplier over the business cycle is 0.6–0.7 (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 1). However, this impact would be largely offset by the positive effects of lower electricity prices and the real depreciation on manufacturing activity. Private domestic demand Gross non-oil exports Contributions to Real GDP Growth (In percent, NSA)Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 14 Box 2. Trade and Financial Spillovers to Mexico (concluded) External factors explained a significant fraction of the decline in output during the financial crisis and the rebound after the crisis. However, the growth weakness in 2013–14 has been explained mainly by domestic factors (possible explanatory factors include the contraction in the construction sector in 2013, initial uncertainty relating to the tax reform and the simultaneous adoption of a number of structural reforms more generally, and a steady decline in domestic oil production). More recently, the negative contribution of external factors to growth has increased, reflecting tighter global financial conditions. The results confirm that both real and financial spillovers are important. One percentage point increase in U.S. growth (1.8 standard deviations) raises Mexico’s growth by about 1 percentage point. Meanwhile, 100 basis points increase in the EMBI spread (2.2 standard deviations) reduces Mexico growth by 0.7 percentage points. In a separate analysis, the paper finds that a rise in U.S. bond yields that is not accompanied by higher U.S. growth has a negative effect on Mexico’s output. Credit conditions are expected to tighten somewhat, but remain broadly supportive of growth . Strong liquidity buffers would allow corporations to continue to invest even under moderately tighter external financial conditions. In addition, bank balance sheets have space to accommodate stronger credit demand. The annual growth rate of real bank credit over the medium term is projected to be around 8 to 9 percent, reflecting continued financial deepening. Domestic debt issuance is also holding up. Staff analysis finds that even in a downside risk scenario, encompassing a further depreciation of the currency, an increase in funding costs, and a decline in earnings, the large majority of corporations would remain solvent (Box 3). However, if such negative shocks materialize, economic activity may be affected as firms are likely to invest less and banks may reduce credit supply. Source: National authorities; and IMF staffcalculations. United States Mexico U.S. and Mexico Real GDP Growth (In percent) Std(RGDP US ) = 1.9 Std (RGDP MEX ) = 2.8 Corr (RGDP US , RGDP MEX ) = 0.7U.S. and Mexico Real GDP Growth (In percent) U.S. real GDP growth U.S. 10Y bond EMBI spread Internal factors Mexico real GDP growth Historical Decomposition: Mexico Real GDP Growth (Deviations from average, in percent) Page 15 Box 3. Macrofinancial Linkages: Sectoral Balance Sheet Analysis Corporations appear to be resilient to financial shocks due to low debt levels, natural and financial hedges, and large liquidity buffers. However, large negative shocks could lead them to reduce investment. Banks rely mostly on domestic deposit funding, and have sufficient capital buffers to continue to expand lending at a steady rate in the baseline scenario, or to withstand negative growth shocks in a tail risk scenario. The public sector is the most exposed to a change in global risk sentiment, although a favorable debt composition—with long maturities and a large share of debt denominated in domestic currency—should reduce vulnerabilities. Households have very low debt. Mortgage and consumer loans amount to 10 and 5 percent of GDP respectively, and are denominated in local currency. Households hold significant positive net financial assets (in addition to non-financial assets). House prices have been broadly stable in real terms since 2008, and there are no signs of a real estate bubble. Household Financial Position and House Prices Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Corporate debt is also relatively low, although leverage has increased in recent years. Gross corporate debt was around 32 percent of GDP in 2014, of which about 40 percent is in foreign currency (a third of total corporate debt is owed by the public-owned PEMEX and CFE, so private corporate debt is only about 20 percent of GDP). As a result, leverage has increased over the last 7 years (Figure 7). The relatively high share of debt denominated in foreign currency presents a potential vulnerability. However, FX exposures are mitigated by natural and financial hedges, and by long bond debt maturities. Only 10 percent of outstanding corporate bonds mature in 2015–16, and firms have strong liquidity buffers (with a median ratio of cash-to- total debt of 22 percent). 201520162017201820192020>2020 Corporate BondMaturity Profile 201520162017201820192020>2020 Foreign currency Peso PEMEX and CFE Source: Bloomberg,L.P. Gross financial debt: housing Gross financial debt: consumption Net financial position a) Household Financial Position Nominal Real b) House Price Index (Y/Y quarterly growth) Page 16 Box 3. Macrofinancial Linkages: Sectoral Balance Sheet Analysis (continued) Corporate Stress Tests: Financial and Growth Implications Non-financial firms appear to be resilient to financial shocks. Stress tests on listed firms (based on end-2014 balance sheet data), presented in the Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 3, show that a combination of 30 percent exchange rate depreciation, 30 percent increase in interest expense, and 20 percent decline in earnings would reduce debt servicing capacity, but the large majority of firms would remain solvent. Abstracting from any hedging (financial or natural), the median interest coverage ratio (ICR) would decline from 3.7 in 2014 to 1.9, while the median debt- to-equity ratio would increase due to valuation effects. Assuming that firms with an ICR below 1.5 default on bank loans with 15 percent probability, banks’ NPLs would increase by 1.5 percentage points. Bank capital buffers are sufficiently strong to absorb such a shock. The authorities’ own analysis of corporate sector resilience has produced similar results. Overall, the assumed combination of shocks could lower real GDP growth by about ¼ percent. As leverage increases after the shock, some corporations are likely to reduce investment. Based on cross-country estimates of the response of corporate investment to changes in leverage, the above shocks could lower real GDP growth by 0.1 percentage points (the decline in investment rates could be higher if the shocks are magnified by a sudden stop phenomenon in which corporates are unable to roll over debt). Furthermore, a tightening of bank credit could cause an additional decline in growth of about 0.2 percent (based on staff’s empirical estimates of the response of bank credit to shocks to capital). Commercial Banks’ Balance Sheets The commercial banking system remains well-capitalized, liquid, and profitable. Commercial banks’ capital adequacy ratios are close to 16 percent, well in excess of regulatory requirements and among the highest in emerging economies. Mexico adopted the Basel III capital rules in 2013, and the Basel Committee has assessed Mexico as compliant earlier this year. Formal liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) minimum requirements have been in place since January this year (they are being phased in gradually over 5 years and have been set initially at 60 percent). The average LCR of the banking system stood at 170 percent at the end of 2014, though some smaller banks have lower liquidity ratios and will have to increase reliance on longer-term financing to meet the required LCR ratio in the medium term. Non-performing remain low at 3.3 percent of total loans, and are fully provisioned. Domestic deposits are the main source of funding. Commercial banks’ external debt liabilities amount only to 1.5 percent of GDP (3.3 percent of total liabilities), which reduces vulnerability to external liquidity shocks. Page 17 Box 3. Macrofinancial Linkages: Sectoral Balance Sheet Analysis (concluded) Banks are resilient to credit, liquidity, and market risks. A stress test conducted by the bank supervisory authority (CNBV) finds that even under a significant increase in long-term rates, valuation losses will be limited and banks will remain well capitalized. In addition, there are a number of prudential regulations in place to limit foreign-exchange risks, including caps on net foreign-currency open positions (at 15 percent of capital) and strict liquidity requirements to ensure adequate resources in case of temporary liquidity shocks. Credit risks also appear to be contained. The most recent stress tests, conducted by CNBV and the Bank of Mexico, show that the banking system would remain in good financial health even in the unlikely scenario of a sharp decline of economic growth and a significant increase in interest rates (Financial Stability Council, Annual Financial Stability Report, March 2015 and Bank of Mexico Financial Stability Report, October 2014). Linkages Across Sectors Inter-sectoral balance sheet linkages show that contagion risks are contained. The main potential vulnerability is the significant net liability position of the public sector and of non- financial corporations vis-à-vis the rest of the world (22 percent of GDP each). A shock to the risk preferences of non-resident investors, which leads them to reduce holdings of Mexican assets, could be a key channel of transmission of global shocks to Mexico. However, this risk is mitigated by several factors. First, the external liabilities of corporations are largely in the form of equity— private non-financial corporates’ gross external debt is only 8.9 percent of GDP (Table 6). Second, about 75 percent of public debt is denominated in pesos, so the foreign-currency liabilities of the public sector are relatively small, limiting vulnerability to exchange-rate changes. Finally, the central bank has boosted its reserves in recent years (to about 16 percent of GDP), and Mexico has a US$70 billion credit line with the IMF, which should help guard against a tail event of large capital outflows. The external and public debt sustainability analyses suggest that debt would remain sustainable under plausible stress scenarios. Central bank9.1-1.4-0.60.0-16.6Public sector-9.114.911.2-1.322.3Banks1.4-14.9-2.511.30.1Other financial corporations0.6-11.22.5-3.60.0Nonfinancial private sector0.01.3-11.33.622.0Nonresidents16.6-22.3-0.10.0-22.0Sources: Standardized report forms for monetary and financial data; External debt and IIP data from Banxico; Public debt from SHCP.1/ Detailed gross asset and liability positions are reported in Table 8. Mexico: Net Intersectoral Asset and Liability Positions, 2014 1/ (In percent of GDP)Central bankPublic sectorBanksOther financial corps.Nonfinancial private sectorNonresidents Page 18 The structural reforms should raise potential growth in the medium term. Staff estimates that the reforms would boost growth to about 3–3½ percent over the medium term through higher investment, improved access to finance, and a rise in productivity. Some benefits of the reforms are already visible: private investment in natural gas pipelines, electricity generation, and telecommunications has picked up, and the financial reform has helped spur competition in the banking sector. Progress in improving security and the rule of law will be important to allow Mexico to realize the full potential of the structural reforms. The current account deficit is projected to deteriorate in the first few years of implementation of the reforms as imports of machinery and equipment pick up, but should narrow gradually in the longer term as oil production and exports increase. The outlook is subject to substantial risks: Weaker-than-expected trade partner growth. Slower-than-expected recovery in U.S. growth, and particularly in U.S. manufacturing production, is the main external risk to Mexico’s outlook. It could be triggered by a weaker-than-expected impact of lower oil prices on U.S. aggregate demand, the dampening effect of slow global growth and the strong dollar, or a disorderly market reaction to liftoff. A surge in global financial market volatility . This could be triggered by continued uncertainty related to the process of U.S. monetary policy normalization, or by adverse developments in key emerging market countries. Mexico is exposed to a change in investor sentiment given its open capital account and a sizable stock of foreign portfolio investment. The global financial stability map from the October 2015 GFSR report shows that emerging market risks, and market and liquidity risks have increased relative to 2014. A protracted period of high volatility could affect funding costs and access to finance. If this risk materializes, firms are likely to reduce the pace of investment and production. As discussed in the 2014 FCL report, a tail risk scenario of sharp capital outflows would also heighten rollover risks in the large government bond market. The Flexible Credit Line is intended as insurance against tail risks. A lower-than-projected path for oil prices or domestic oil production. A further drop in global oil prices, or a failure of PEMEX to stabilize oil production—the main domestic risk—could increase further the fiscal consolidation burden and affect private investment in the oil sector. More Potential growth has been around 2½ percent historically. Staff estimates of medium-term potential growth have been revised down from last year, reflecting lower projections for private investment in the Mexican oil sector, a lower oil production path, and downward revisions of global growth. Emerging market risksCredit risksMarket and liquidity risksRisk appetiteMonetary and financial conditionsMacroeconomic risks October 2014 GFSR October 2015 GFSR Source: Global Financial Stability Report.Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. Global FinancialStability Map Page 19 generally, slower-than-expected implementation of the structural reforms could lead to lower medium-term growth. The authorities share staff’s view on the near-term outlook and the main risks. They project that growth in 2016 would be in the range of 2½ to 3.6 percent, and view continued volatility in financial markets and shocks to U.S. growth as the main risks. The authorities remain more optimistic about the medium-term boost to activity related to the reforms, and believe that growth could reach 4–5 percent by 2018–20. Staff and the authorities agreed that Mexico’s positive growth outlook and credible policy frameworks increase its resilience and ability to deal with financial market stress. Mexico’s medium-term growth prospects remain more favorable than those of other emerging markets. Monetary policy remains guided by a credible inflation-targeting regime while fiscal policy remains committed to ensuring sustainable debt levels. In addition, Mexico’s deep and liquid financial markets allow foreign investors to hedge exchange rate risk. Altogether, Mexico should remain an attractive destination for foreign direct investment and long-term portfolio flows in the future. These factors have contributed to broadly stable long-term yields on domestic-currency government bonds despite the recent increase in global financial market volatility.