Real GDP growth is projected to remain moderate at around 2¼ percent in 2017. The baseline projections are predicated on a continued steady recovery of the U.S. economy. The impact of tighter domestic macroeconomic policies on Mexico’s growth is expected to be offset by a boost to manufacturing production and exports due to stronger U.S. industrial production, the depreciation of the peso, and lower electricity prices. Machinery and equipment investment and export-related services are also expected to firm up in line with the recovery in external demand. Strong labor market conditions and robust credit growth will continue to underpin private consumption. Staff projections are within the authorities’ projected range for 2017 growth of 2- 3 percent. Financing conditions are expected to remain supportive in the baseline scenario Commercial banks can support continued credit expansion as they remain well capitalized, liquid, and profitable. Banks’ capital adequacy ratio stood at 15 percent, among the highest in emerging markets, and non-performing loans are low. The financial reform has led to greater competition among banks and lower interest rates in some sectors (such as mortgages), although there is room to strengthen competition further. In the baseline, the overall nominal credit growth is projected to remain healthy at around 12 percent in the medium term, reflecting trend financial deepening and strong credit demand. Global financial conditions have eased in recent months and corporations have been able to continue to issue FX bonds at relatively low interest rates. In the baseline, export growth is projected to recover in line with the recovery of manufacturing production in the United States. Historically, exports have been a key growth engine for the economy, with strong spillovers to domestic demand. Due to Mexico’s integration in the North-American manufacturing value chain, the slowdown of global trade could have affected Mexico’s non-oil exports over the last year. The depreciation of the peso The macroeconomic effects of fiscal policy tightening should be manageable with output close to potential and low energy prices (staff estimates the fiscal multiplier to be about 0.7 when the output gap at its current level). A 1- percent decline in electricity costs, a 1-percent increase in U.S. industrial production, and a 1-percent depreciation of the currency in real effective terms lead to an increase in manufacturing output in Mexico by 0.3 percent, 0.5 percent, and 0.3 percent respectively within one year (Alvarez and Valencia, IMF working paper 2015). Analysis presented in Bank of Mexico’s August 2016 Inflation Report suggests that Mexico’s non-auto manufacturing exports to the U.S. are affected not only by U.S. domestic demand but also by the performance of U.S. Page 17 should help boost exports, but the effects could take some time to materialize as it takes time to put in place new production capacity. There are substantial risks around the projected recovery in exports, related to increased protectionism. If export performance remains weak, it is likely to have negative spillovers to domestic demand. Inflation is projected to converge to the 3-percent target by end-2018. Rising fuel prices, in the context of a gradual liberalization of domestic fuel markets, and continued pass- through from the depreciation of the currency are expected to push consumer prices temporarily above the target in the near term. However, inflation is expected to converge to the target by end- 2018 as the effects of these factors taper off. A faster-than-expected dissipation of slack in the economy or a rebound in food prices could lead to a larger overshooting of the inflation target. On the downside, a slower economic growth or further decreases in telecom services prices would put downward pressure on inflation. Growth is projected to strengthen in the medium term due to the positive effect of structural reforms. The implementation of structural reforms in the areas of energy, education, labor markets, competition, telecommunications, and the financial sector is projected to boost growth by about ½ percentage point over the medium term through higher investment, productivity, and improved access to finance. As private investment related to the reforms accelerates, the current account deficit could remain elevated, but should decline gradually in the longer term as oil production and exports increase. There was agreement between staff and the authorities that there are substantial risks around the baseline growth projections. Rise in protectionism. In the near term, uncertainty about the likelihood of increased barriers to trade and financial flows is likely to cause a delay in investment projects. A materialization of this risk could have a major impact on Mexico: exports, FDI in the manufacturing sector, and portfolio inflows could decline, with a negative impact on growth (see Annex 1). Weaker-than-expected global growth, and particularly U.S. growth. Mexico’s outlook is heavily influenced by U.S. growth prospects given the close ties between the two economies. The persistent appreciation of the dollar and weak global demand pose downside risks to the recovery of manufacturing production in the United States. Renewed volatility in global financial markets. Capital flows to emerging markets have rebounded in recent months. However, the risk of sharp reversals remains elevated. Renewed non-auto manufacturing exports, probably due to integration through the North-American production value chain. Therefore, weak global demand and the strong dollar could have an indirect negative impact on Mexico’s exports to the U.S., reducing the positive effects of a weaker peso on export demand. The medium-term growth projections have been revised down by ½ percentage point since the last Article IV consultation in line with the downward revisions in domestic oil production and medium-term growth in the US. Page 18 concerns about a greater-than-expected slowdown in China or other large economies could also lead to a pullback of capital from emerging markets, including Mexico. A lower-than-expected path for oil prices or domestic oil production. A slower-than-expected reversal of global supply factors could lead to persistently lower oil prices. A materialization of this risk would increase the fiscal consolidation burden and discourage private investment in the oil sector. Further declines in PEMEX’s oil production is an important domestic risk. On the upside , a dissipation of the risk of increased protectionism, a stronger recovery in U.S. manufacturing activity, or a faster-than-expected recovery in oil prices could lead to a rebound in exports and stronger growth.