Staff noted that the accommodative stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. Inflation pressures have been subdued: after a one-off adjustment in the price level in the first quarter, core and headline inflation have stayed close to the 3-percent target on an annualized seasonally-adjusted basis. The lack of inflation pressures is partly due to significant reductions in energy and other commodity prices, which have helped keep production costs down both in Mexico and in its main trading partners. A mild pass-through from the exchange rate depreciation has been visible only in durable goods prices, with no signs of spillovers to other prices or wages. In the baseline projection, slack in the economy is expected to diminish only gradually over the next two years, keeping inflation pressures in check. Staff noted that, in this context, continued monetary accommodation would remain appropriate in the near term. If upside risks to inflation materialize, some tightening of the monetary stance would be warranted. Upside risks include a more rapid closing of the output gap accompanied by stronger wage increases, or increasing cost pressures as the effects of the commodity price decline dissipate. Another key risk is that the exchange rate pass-through may intensify as importers seek to restore profit margins, which could put upward pressure on wages and the prices of non-tradables, and affect inflation expectations. The Bank of Mexico remains committed to keeping inflation in line with the 3 percent target. The authorities noted that they consider a number of factors in deciding on the appropriate policy rate, including the evolution of slack in the economy, wage developments, the pass-through from exchange rates to prices, and the relative monetary policy stance between Mexico and the United States. They agreed that demand pressures are likely to remain subdued in the near term. However, they noted that a rise in interest rates in the U.S. is likely to put further downward pressure on the currency, which can lead to higher pass-through and affect inflation expectations. It might also trigger greater capital outflows and exacerbate asset-price volatility, with negative consequences for confidence and growth. On balance, given the strong historical correlation of the business cycle of the two economies and financial stability considerations, they thought that moving Literature estimates of pass-through effect from a 10 percent depreciation of the Mexican peso vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar to headline inflation range from 0.2 to 0.4 after 12 months. These estimates imply that 30 percent persistent depreciation of the peso could lead to an increase in headline inflation by 0.6 to 1.2 percentage points. The low degree of pass-through seen so far could be partially due to the offsetting effect of cost deflation related to the decline in commodity prices. Headline Core Sources: National authorities; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Inflation (Q/Q SAAR growth, in percent) Page 25 in step with the Fed would likely be the best strategy to preserve price and financial stability, unless idiosyncratic domestic developments warrant a different policy stance. The flexible exchange rate should continue to play a key role in helping the economy adjust to external shocks. The authorities’ policy framework gives a central role to exchange rate flexibility, while allowing for temporary foreign exchange intervention to reduce excess volatility. Deep financial markets have allowed investors to hedge foreign exchange risks, while leaving yields on domestic currency debt instruments broadly unchanged. Going forward, the currency depreciation would help boost manufacturing exports. Staff encouraged the authorities to phase out the daily foreign exchange sales, and focus the use of reserves on periods of disorderly market conditions. In the context of relatively orderly market conditions, the daily interventions without minimum price could be phased out to conserve policy space, while continuing to rely on other intervention modalities to reduce volatility during periods of very low market liquidity. Further down the road, gradual reserve accumulation should resume once pressures on asset prices subside to restore reserve buffers. The authorities reiterated their intention to use foreign exchange interventions only on a temporary basis, and agreed that the daily interventions scheme should be phased out once volatility subsides. They also have additional instruments at their disposal to maintain smooth functioning of markets, such as targeted liquidity provision and debt duration management strategies. The FCL arrangement, which the authorities continue to treat as precautionary, remains an important complement to reserve buffers, providing protection against tail risks.