The wave of structural reforms should increase potential output over the medium term. Overall, the broad package of reforms is expected to stimulate growth through increased investment, the introduction of new technologies, reduction of business costs, and a rise in productivity. Preliminary staff estimates, reflected in the baseline projection, suggest an increase in potential growth to 3½ to 4 percent in the medium term (potential growth is estimated at around 2¾–3 percent in 2014, while actual growth in Mexico has averaged 2½ percent over the last fifteen years), (Box 4). The external current account deficit is projected to deteriorate slightly in the coming years as inward foreign direct investment picks up, leading temporarily to higher imports of machinery and equipment, but should narrow in the medium term as export growth strengthens. Both oil and non-oil exports should see a boost, reflecting higher hydrocarbons production and more competitive manufacturing production in the context of lower electricity prices. The authorities believe that the reforms could have an even greater impact, boosting annual growth to the range 4–5 percent. They expect that the energy reform will have a more significant effect on energy costs and growth as investment is likely to increase rapidly and the entrance of private sector companies with new technologies would boost efficiency and productivity. The financial reform could have a large impact given Mexico’s relatively low levels of The large state mortgage lender Infonavit announced in July that it will raise the maximum amount it can lend by 76 percent (to US$65, 700). It will also increase the maturity of its fixed-rate loans to 30 years. The resolution of the three large homebuilders is expected to be completed in 2015, which should reduce uncertainty and increase the availability of credit to the construction sector. Starting in 2015 government-regulated gasoline prices will be raised broadly in line with expected inflation (with the discretion to apply faster increases if world prices rise above those in the domestic market). This is expected to reduce the rate of headline inflation by about 0.4 percentage points (in the past increases have averaged 10– 11 percent a year). See Selected Issues Paper, Chapters 1 and 2. Page 8 bank credit to GDP. Finally, the authorities expressed optimism that synergies across the various reforms will amplify their effects significantly.