Monetary policy accommodation has been withdrawn steadily over the past year. Staff analysis suggests that Mexico’s policy rate is currently close to the estimated neutral rate, which is consistent with a small output gap, headline and core inflation at the target, moderate wage increases, and anchored inflation expectations (Box 4). In the baseline projection, demand pressures are expected to remain subdued over the next year, while inflation would rise temporarily above 3 percent due to relative price changes before converging to the inflation target in 2018. Staff argued that under the baseline forecast for output and inflation, a pause in monetary policy tightening is warranted. Risks to the inflation outlook are broadly balanced. Upside risks to the inflation outlook include a greater-than-expected increase in fuel prices and a possible intensification of pass- through effects from the currency depreciation. However, second-round effects are likely to remain limited as demand pressures are subdued and medium-term inflation expectations are well- anchored. In that context, a temporary move of inflation above the target due to relative price changes in tradable versus non-tradable goods would not necessarily warrant a policy response. On the downside, risks to the growth outlook have increased. If these risks materialize, increasing slack in the economy would ease wage and inflation pressures. Future monetary policy decisions should remain data driven, and clear communication by the central bank will continue to be important in guiding market expectations. OECD (2015) estimates a replacement rate from the defined-contribution pension system of about 30 percent. Formal employers in Mexico are required to contribute 5 percent of their worker’s salary to the national housing fund. In return, employees are entitled to get a mortgage from Infonavit at relatively low rates. Workers may also use their contributions as retirement savings, although the returns have been substantially lower than the returns of private pension funds in recent years. CONSAR estimates that the expected replacement rate from Infonavit savings is about 17 percent for contributors who have not taken out a mortgage loan, bringing the overall replacement rate to 47 percent for these workers. Page 23 Box 4. Evaluating Mexico’s Monetary Policy Stance p e S r a p e S r a Actual Taylor Rule Actual Policy Rate vs. Taylor Rule (In percent) The Bank of Mexico raised its policy rate by a total of 175 basis points to 4¾ percent since December 2015. Two approaches are used to assess the current monetary policy stance: a Taylor rule and a structural estimation the neutral real interest rate based on a small open-economy DSGE model (see Selected Issues Paper for model specification). The results suggest that the monetary policy stance has shifted from accommodative to broadly neutral. The Taylor rule estimates Banxico’s historical reaction function. The recent rate increases have brought the policy rate slightly above what the estimated historical reaction function would suggest. This is consistent with Bank of Mexico’s message that they are tightening policy pre- emptively to rebalance inflation risks and reduce the risk of de-anchoring medium-term inflation expectations in the context of a significant exchange rate depreciation. Estimates based on a small open economy DSGE model suggest that Mexico’s neutral interest rate has come down over the last 15 years. This finding is consistent with the observed decline in the global neutral interest rate, which reflect the aging of the population, higher savings rates, and slower productivity growth in advanced economies. Based on this model, the current real neutral rate is about 1- 1.5 percent. Interest Rates (In percent) Source: IMF staff calculation Real neutral rate p e S r a p e S r a p e S r a p e S r a p e S r a p e S r a p e S Real policy rate r a p e S The authorities noted that they will adjust the monetary policy stance as needed to keep inflation in line with the target. They explained that the tightening over the past year was aimed at rebalancing the risks to inflation and keeping inflation expectations anchored in the context of a sharp depreciation of the peso. Staff and the authorities agreed that, going forward, demand pressures are likely to remain subdued. The authorities noted that certain risks persist, while staff viewed the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly balanced. On the upside, further depreciation of the exchange rate could trigger second-round effects and food prices may increase more than expected. Downside risks include greater-than-expected declines in some prices as a result of the structural reforms. The authorities emphasized that the most recent hike was not the beginning of a tightening cycle. They noted that they will continue to respond flexibly to any changes in the determinants of inflation and inflation expectations, including the pass-through from the exchange rate depreciation to prices, the evolution of slack in the economy, and the relative monetary policy stance between Mexico and the United States. Page 24 There was agreement that the flexible exchange rate should continue to play the role of a key shock absorber should tail risks materialize. A flexible adjustment of the exchange rate will be indispensable to restore equilibrium in response to a permanent shock arising from increased protectionism and rising barriers to trade. The authorities have a wide range of tools to prevent disorderly market conditions, including discretionary foreign exchange interventions, targeted liquidity provision, and debt duration management. The FCL arrangement, which the authorities continue to treat as precautionary, remains an important complement to reserve buffers, providing protection against tail risks.