The economy continues to grow at a moderate pace. Growth is projected to reach 2¼ percent in 2015. Economic activity has been slower than expected in the first half of the year. Manufacturing continues to expand, although exports have been affected by weaker-than-expected U.S. demand, reflecting in part weather-related factors and port strikes early in the year. Construction activity has moderated after a strong rebound in the second half of 2014. Domestic crude oil production has continued to decline, subtracting about ¼ percentage point from growth in 2015 (Figure 1). Inflation pressures remain contained, despite the sharp peso depreciation. The drop in year-on-year inflation since early 2015 has been due in part to a one-off decline in telecommunication service prices, lower adjustment in administered fuel prices, and the reversal of the effect of tax hikes on some food items in 2014. Quarterly annualized seasonally-adjusted headline and core inflation rates have been very close to the 3-percent target since April. The exchange rate pass-through has been very limited so far, and inflation expectations remain anchored. Real wage growth is broadly in line with productivity growth (Figure 2). The price of gasoline and diesel were increased by 1.9 percent in January 2015—compared to around 11 percent in 2014—with no additional adjustments expected in 2015. Page 10 The mix of policies has shifted toward a gradual fiscal tightening, with monetary policy remaining accommodative. The Bank of Mexico has maintained the policy rate at 3 percent since June last year. The public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) is projected to decline to 4.1 percent of GDP this year (from 4.6 percent in 2014, Table 2). Based on fiscal trends in the first eight months, the target is achievable, although it will require compression of spending in the remainder of the year. The sharp decline in oil revenues has been offset by higher-than-expected fuel excises and income taxes (related to the 2013 tax reform), and by the oil-price hedge. Asset prices in Mexico have been affected by the rise in volatility in global financial markets. The peso had depreciated by 30 percent against the U.S. dollar, and by 15 percent in real effective terms between mid-2014 and September. Foreign exchange bid-ask spreads and stock market volatility have increased to levels last seen during the euro area sovereign debt crisis in November 2011 and the taper tantrum, respectively. In response, the Foreign Exchange Commission reactivated two foreign exchange intervention schemes intended to increase liquidity and reduce volatility in exchange rate markets. In contrast, the local-currency sovereign bond market showed few effects of the turbulence: the long end of the domestic-currency yield curve has shifted up only modestly. Total non-resident ownership of sovereign debt has been broadly stable since the end of 2014, though there has been a decline in non-resident holdings of short-term paper (Figure 3). Portfolio capital inflows moderated, but stayed positive in the first half of the year. Higher frequency partial data from ETFs and mutual funds suggest that outflow pressures intensified in July and August, and corporate bond issuance in foreign currency trailed off in the third quarter (Figure 4). Bid-Ask Spread and Financial Market Volatility Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff calculations. Mexico’s government insures its net export oil receipts by purchasing put options at a strike price equal to the oil price assumed in the budget. The income from the hedge is expected to amount to ½ percent of GDP in 2015. The first scheme, activated last December, is a minimum price FX auction of US$200 million triggered when the exchange rate depreciates by 1.5 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar with respect to the previous day (the threshold has been 1 percent since July 30, 2015). The second scheme, in place since March 2015, is a preannounced daily FX auction (initially of US$52 million, raised to US$200 million since July 30) with no minimum price. The two schemes will be active through the end of November. Both intervention modalities have been used in the past. a) Exchange Rate Bid-Ask Spread (Pesos per U.S. dollar) Taper tantrumEuropeansovereign debt crisis Implied FX volatility Stock market volatility VIX b) Implied Foreign Exchange and Stock Market Volatility (Index) Taper tantrumEuropeansovereign debt crisis Page 11 The external sector position remains broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The current account deficit is projected to widen to 2¼ percent in 2015, reflecting a reduction in the hydrocarbons trade balance. Mexico has turned into a small net importer of hydrocarbons in value terms as a result of declining oil production. The 2015 cyclically-adjusted current account balance is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. The currency depreciation reflects in part an overshooting related to the sharp appreciation of the U.S. dollar vis-a-vis emerging market currencies in 2015, and to a smaller extent, prospects for lower-than-expected investment in the oil sector. The real effective exchange rate is assessed by staff to be moderately undervalued (3–12 percent), and the undervaluation is expected to be temporary (Box 1). Mexico’s external position in 2015 is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and Box 1. External Sector Assessment desirable policy settings. The current account deficit is expected to be around 2.3 percent this year. Staff’s view is that the estimated cyclically-adjusted current account deficit is close to the norm determined by fundamentals and desirable policies (it is only ½ percentage point of GDP stronger than the norm estimated using the External Balance Assessment method from the 2015 External Sector Report). The real effective exchange rate has depreciated by about 15 percent by September 2015 relative to its average 2014 value. The depreciation reflects to a large extent a temporary overshooting related to the sharp appreciation of the U.S. dollar against emerging market currencies, heightened volatility of the prices of risky assets, and increased hedging activities by corporations and non-resident investors in the local currency bond market. To a smaller extent, the depreciation reflects some deterioration in fundamentals. In staff’s view, the real effective exchange rate is undervalued by about 3–12 percent. This is consistent with the results from real effective exchange rate levels approach, which finds an undervaluation of 8 percent (Annex II). As the undervaluation is expected to be temporary, it does not call for changes in policies. ____________ The lower path of oil prices is likely to lead to lower-than-expected oil investment and production over the medium term, with negative effects on growth. A decline in oil prices also has a small negative effect on the current account balance because Mexico exports crude oil and imports refined petroleum products. The price of refined oil is less sensitive to global oil prices because of the fixed cost of refining. Staff estimates suggest that a 10 percent decline in crude oil prices reduce the oil trade balance by about 0.05 percentage point of GDP, all else equal. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the highly liquid market for the Mexican peso is often used for hedging other emerging market currency exposures; therefore, movements of the currency during periods of market stress may be unrelated to fundamentals. Staff analysis of the taper tantrum found that the peso was one of the most affected emerging market currencies in the initial phase of the episode; it rebounded at a later stage, when investors started to differentiate on the basis of fundamentals (see Box 1 in Mexico: Arrangements Under the Flexible Credit Line November 2014). Current account gap0.5(Percent of GDP)REER gap, level regression-8.0(Percent)Source: IMF Staff estimates. External Balance Assessment Results Page 12 Box 1. External Sector Assessment (concluded) Mexico’s net international investment liability position stood at 33 percent of GDP at end-2014. Gross liabilities were 75.6 percent of GDP, dominated by portfolio liabilities (37 percent of GDP) and FDI (26.3 percent of GDP). External assets stood at 42.6 percent of GDP in 2015. Mexico remains committed to a floating exchange rate, although the authorities’ framework allows for the occasional use of foreign exchange intervention to prevent disorderly market conditions. The current level of foreign exchange reserves remains adequate according to standard measures, although the 2015 FX intervention has led to a decline in the level of gross reserves from US$195.7 billion at end-2014 to US$182 billion in September 2015 (Figure 9 and Table 6). Commercial bank credit growth has strengthened to 10 percent in the first half of The improvement has been broad-based, driven by the successful resolution of the three home building companies and a recovery in credit demand (Figure 5). The current pace of credit growth is consistent with trend financial deepening: in the last ten years the ratio of commercial bank credit to GDP has increased at a moderate pace, averaging a gain of ¾ percentage point per year (the ratio of total bank and non-bank credit to GDP has grown on average rate by 1.1 percent). Bank balance sheets remain strong, with capital levels well in excess of requirements and low non-performing loans. Overall, the banking system has the capacity to continue supporting steady credit expansion going forward. Implementation of the key structural reforms is broadly on track. Last year, Mexico completed the legislative process underpinning important reforms in the areas of energy, telecommunications, anti-trust, labor market, education, and the financial sector. The focus has now shifted to implementation. The telecommunications reform has led to a decline in service prices, and the opening of the sector has already attracted foreign direct investment. The second auction of oil fields under the energy reform was successful, as the contract terms were adjusted by the government after a somewhat disappointing result from the first auction. Future rounds would feature deep water oil fields, which have higher exploration and production costs, and the outcome could be more sensitive to the outlook for oil prices. For 2015, the projected increase in the ratio of bank credit to the non-financial private sector to GDP is ¾ percentage point, while the increase in total (bank and non-bank) credit to GDP is 0.9 percentage point, in line with trend credit growth. Credit gaps in the chart are computed as percentage-point deviations from an HP-filtered credit-to-GDP ratio (with a smoothing coefficient of 1600) over the sample period 1995–2015. Output gap Total credit gap Bank credit gapSources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Output and Credit Gaps (In percentage points) Page 13