The mission welcomed the authorities’ commitment to continued fiscal consolidation, which is critical to reduce the ratio of public debt to GDP. Staff’s debt sustainability analysis suggests that public debt is sustainable over the medium term (see Annex III). However, gross public debt reached 54 percent of GDP in 2015 (up from 42 percent in 2010). The steady increase in public debt has prompted some rating agencies to place Mexico on a negative watch. The authorities’ plan to reduce the PSBR to 2½ percent of GDP by 2018 would set the public debt-to-GDP ratio on a downward path (Table 2 and DSA annex). Staff and the authorities agreed that continued adherence to the multi-year consolidation path will be important to maintain market confidence in an environment of high financial markets volatility. Staff also noted that setting a more ambitious fiscal deficit target beyond 2018 would help bring public debt down faster, which would prepare the country to deal better with long-term demographics-related fiscal pressures. Mexico has limited fiscal space to respond to adverse external shocks given its relatively high debt level, rising social security spending, a negative watch by credit rating agencies, and likely pressures on funding costs in case of materialization of tail risks. In that context, staff urged the authorities to use positive revenue surprises to reduce the PSBR below the target. Tax revenue has repeatedly surprised on the upside in recent years, increasing the space for discretionary spending in some cases. The Bank of Mexico surplus transfer is a more recent example of a positive revenue surprise, which should be saved. Part of the space created by the transfer (0.4 percent of GDP) was used to reduce the obligations of PEMEX to suppliers to normal levels. Based on the latest projections by the authorities, the overall fiscal deficit Staff analysis presented in a Selected Issues Paper shows that Mexico is particularly sensitive to shocks to emerging market capital flows. Growth in non-oil export so far in 2016 has been smaller than suggested by historical elasticities. Based on staff analysis, 10 percent depreciation of the real effective exchange rate boosts export volumes by 2–3 percent over the medium term. Page 19 in 2016 will improve by ½ percentage point of GDP relative to the original target, implying that part of the windfall will be used to relax the overall budget spending limit. Staff recommended adhering to the budget for overall spending during the remainder of 2016, and using the remaining portion of the transfer (0.3 percent of GDP) to further reduce the 2016 PSBR. This would be consistent with the Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL), according to which public savings should increase by the full amount of the transfer. It would also ease the adjustment necessary to achieve the fiscal target in 2017 and help maintain investors’ trust in the credibility of fiscal commitments. Any additional profit transfer from the Bank of Mexico in 2017 should be used in its entirety for a net reduction of the PSBR. The authorities noted that a large fraction of the 2016 transfer is already being saved for the first time in history, and explained that the rest of the windfall was being used to meet an unanticipated increase in non-discretionary spending (PEMEX support, interest and pension payments, and tax revenue sharing with local governments). They stated that they will follow the FRL regarding the use of future transfers of surplus from the Bank of Mexico, if any. The 2017 budget envisages a further reduction of the fiscal deficit to 2.9 percent of GDP, which is in line with the medium-term consolidation path. The consolidation will be achieved through an ambitious rationalization of expenditure, since overall revenue in percent of GDP is projected to decline in 2017 due to lower oil income and one-off revenues. PEMEX accounts for a large share of the projected decline in public capital spending, and will rely increasingly on production and exploration partnerships with private companies to maintain production levels. More generally, public-private partnerships are envisaged to play a greater role going forward, especially in infrastructure development. This strategy is expected to offset in part the effects of the compression in capital spending envisaged in the fiscal consolidation plan. Staff noted that further revenue measures could be considered in the medium term to avoid constraining capital spending excessively. The authorities explained that the current administration had committed to not raising taxes further to allow the economy to adjust to the 2013 tax reform. Staff suggested that the current low energy prices present an opportunity to eliminate the non-targeted electricity subsidies, estimated at about ¼ percent of GDP. Low-income households could be compensated through well-targeted cash transfers. The authorities noted that the ongoing restructuring of the state-owned electricity company (CFE) will allow a more precise measurement of the subsidies and an assessment of the possibility to make them more targeted. Staff supported the proposed further liberalization of gasoline prices, which will allow them to move IMF technical assistance has identified significant scope for increasing revenues through better tax collection enforcement given large compliance gaps. Page 20 fully in line with international prices. There was agreement that it would be useful to evaluate the benefits and costs of expanding the hedging program to cover oil-price risk from domestic sales. Turning PEMEX into a profitable and efficient company would be critical to maintain market confidence. Staff and the authorities agreed that it is important to present a multi-year business plan, focused on improving efficiency, strengthening core business activities, and divestment of non-core assets and subsidiaries. The board of PEMEX recently approved a business plan which will be made public in the coming weeks. The energy reform increased the autonomy of PEMEX, allowing it to enter into joint ventures with the private sector and shift resources toward more profitable activities. The first auction for a joint venture with the private sector in deep water exploration and production will take place in December, and a second joint venture for shallow water production will be auctioned in March 2017. Additional joint ventures in refining activities and onshore fields are expected to be part of the business plan. Staff welcomed the approval of a fiscal responsibility law for state and local governments . The law strengthens data reporting requirements and is expected to impose greater fiscal discipline at the state and municipal levels. Staff noted that regulations supporting the implementation of the law have to be issued in a timely manner. Continued capacity building at the state and municipal level (including auditing capacity), together with consistent enforcement, are crucial for effective implementation. As discussed in the 2015 Article IV, further enhancements of the fiscal framework would strengthen its credibility. Staff reiterated its recommendation to create a non-partisan fiscal council with a formal mandate to provide an independent expert evaluation of fiscal policy and compliance with the FRL. Staff also noted that it is desirable to have a tighter link between the desired level of public debt and PSBR targets. The use of the exceptional circumstances clauses should be limited to cases of large output or oil price shocks to constrain discretion. The fiscal framework needs to have explicit rules to bring the PSBR to the medium-term target after an exceptional circumstance clause is invoked. The authorities responded that, in their view, the best way to maintain credibility is to deliver consistently on fiscal commitments. Starting in mid-2016, they will publish quarterly updates of the forecast for key fiscal indicators for the current year, which should increase transparency. Population aging will put additional pressure on fiscal spending in the long term. The ongoing shift from a defined-benefit to a defined-contribution pension system will reduce fiscal liabilities over the long term. However, in the transition period, the public pension deficit will increase until about 2040, before gradually coming down (Box 3). Health spending will put In 2015, the authorities introduced a price band of -/+3 percent for gasoline and diesel, as a first step toward a liberalization of the domestic fuel markets. The budget proposes a full liberalization of oil prices starting in January 2017, with some remaining restrictions on charges for transportation costs to be phased out over the next two years. Staff analysis in a Selected Issues Paper finds that the hedging program has led to welfare gains, mostly through lowering borrowing costs for the sovereign. Insuring a larger fraction of the oil production could be beneficial since the volatility of oil revenues will increase once domestic fuel prices are fully liberalized. Page 21 additional pressure on the budget over the long term as the old-age dependency ratio increases. Staff encouraged the authorities to periodically publish long-term projections of age-related spending, and take them explicitly into account when setting medium-term budget targets. Reducing more aggressively public debt levels in the medium term would provide a buffer for addressing long-term demographic pressures. Staff also suggested that the defined-benefit system could be closed to further accumulation of rights in order to save public resources and gradually reduce the inequity between the replacement rates under the two pension systems. Box 3. Pension Issues Mexico has adopted a defined-contribution pension system since the late 1990s. The traditional pay- as-you-go defined-benefit (DB) pension system was replaced with a defined-contribution (DC) system with individual accounts managed by pension fund administrators (in 1997 for private sector workers and in 2007 for most public sector workers). However, individuals who were already participants in the DB system prior to the reform were grandfathered, allowing them not only to retain the entitlements already accumulated at the time of the reform, but also to continue accumulating entitlements thereafter. Mexico’s pension system also includes the national housing fund (unused balances in which are converted to pension savings) and a means-tested noncontributory pension for the poorest. The current system faces a number of challenges, including rising fiscal costs, low coverage, and low replacement rates under the DB system. The shift to a defined-contribution system will reduce fiscal costs in the long run, but during the transition public pension spending will keep increasing until about 2040 due to demographic changes (spending is projected to increase by 1 percentage point of GDP over the next five years). Second, replacement rates of the two pension systems differ significantly: they are 80-100 percent for those grandfathered under the DB system, but expected to be about 30 percent for those in the DC system (corresponding to the low pension contribution rates). Finally, pension coverage is relatively low since a large share of the population is employed in the informal sector. Contributions should be increased to raise expected replacement rates. The low coverage and low expected replacement rates are likely to put pressure on public social spending in the long run. This is already happening in Chile, where low contribution rates to a DC system have led to inadequate replacement rates, and the Chilean government is proposing to increase contribution rates from 10 to 15 percent of earnings. For Mexico, reform options include raising contribution rates, which would reduce deficits in the DB system and improve replacement rates in the DC system (although such increase should be phased in carefully to prevent discouraging formal employment). Replacement rates can also be improved by shifting savings from the housing fund to the private pension funds (which have a high rate of return). To reduce inequities in the replacement rate, the DB could be closed for all future accumulation of rights, honoring only entitlements already earned and leaving affected individuals with a mixture of DB and DC pensions. Separate pension schemes exist for some public sector workers, such as those employed by state-owned enterprises, the states, universities and armed forces. Even after accounting for savings in the national housing fund, the expected average replacement rate for a worker who has not bought a house is only about 47 percent, which is likely to be inadequate for low-income workers Source: IMF staff com pilation from various sources. 1/ The contribution rates include disability and survivor insurance in addition to old age pension insurance. 2/ In addition to social contributions, Mexico also has 5 percent mandatory contributions to INFONAVIT (for a total of 13.7 percent). Pension Contribution Rates 1/ Mexico 2/ Latin America Emerging Asia Emerging Europe Advanced economies Emerging Economies Developing Economies Page 22 Staff recommended raising pension contributions to boost replacement rates under the defined-contribution system. The projected replacement rates under the new defined- contribution system are very low (about 30 percent, or up to 47 percent including additional savings through Infonavit, the national housing fund). The low retirement income is likely to put pressure on public social spending in the long term. Staff recommended considering different policy options to raise the pension contribution rate from its current low level of 6.5 percent of earnings in order to achieve an adequate replacement rate in retirement. The authorities agreed that this was an important long-term issue and that it would be desirable to increase replacement rates, while being careful to avoid discouraging formal employment. They suggested as one option strengthening the integration between the mandatory contributions to Infonavit and the pension system, which would increase investment returns. Staff noted that recent proposals by CONSAR to increase the voluntary retirement savings rate, including through an automatic enrollment of new employees in plans with higher pension contribution rates with an opt-out clause, could also be very effective in increasing pension savings.