The stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. Despite the increase in headline inflation driven by temporary factors, the annualized quarter-on-quarter growth of core prices has remained stable around 3 percent and long-term inflation expectations are well anchored (Figure 2). Continued weakness in the labor market suggests that demand pressures on prices remain contained. Headline inflation is expected to decline toward the 3-percent target in 2015 as tax- related base effects dissipate and gasoline price increases moderate (the combined effect of these two factors would reduce annual inflation by about ¾ percentage point next year). Staff noted that risks to the inflation outlook are mostly on the upside. Slack in the economy may diminish faster than expected. In addition, an eventual increase in the minimum wage could affect wages more broadly, putting upward pressure on prices. The central bank reaffirmed its commitment to adjust the policy rate as needed to keep inflation in line with the target. Following some temporary shocks, the authorities expected inflation to converge to the 3 percent target by mid-2015, in the absence of second round effects arising from the adjustment in relative prices and in view of the current slack in the economy. Nevertheless, going forward they expected There have been proposals to raise the minimum wage up to 20 percent. A commission has been formed to consider the economic implications of a significant increase in the minimum wage. The commission will announce their official proposal in 2015. Meanwhile, bills have been submitted to Congress detailing plans to de-index various contracts (including social security and Infonavit mortgages) that are currently linked to the minimum wage. 7-8-6-4-2024Mar-05Apr-06May-07Jun-08Jul-09Aug-10Sep-11Oct-12Nov-13 Output gap Q/q SAAR core inflation (RHS) Sources;INEGI; and IMF staff calculations. Output Gapand Core Inflation Page 10 the output gap to close as the ongoing economic recovery takes hold. They also noted that the credibility of the inflation targeting regime has brought important benefits, including greater stability of inflation expectations, lower exchange rate pass-through, and a reduction in inflation risk premia that have implied more degrees of freedom for monetary policy implementation.