Mexico’s economy is growing at a moderate pace . Real GDP growth is projected to slow to 2.1 percent in 2016 (from 2.5 percent in 2015). The main driver of activity over the past year has been private consumption, supported by a rise in remittances, robust employment and real wage growth, as well as a pick-up in household credit growth. The labor market remained strong, with steady job creation in services and residential construction. However, weakness in U.S. industrial activity led to lower demand for Mexico’s manufacturing exports, and a slowdown of investment in equipment and machinery in the first half of 2016. On the supply side, the strong performance of the service sector offset the fall in oil extraction and the moderation of manufacturing production (Figure 1). Year-on-year headline and core inflation are now close to the 3-percent target, up from a historical low of 2.1 percent in 2015, with no evidence of second-round effects from the exchange rate depreciation (Box 1). Services inflation has been broadly stable and medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored (Figure 2). Contributions to Growth (Y/Y percent growth, NSA) Discrepancy Inventories Private Consumption GDP Growth Net Exports Gross Fixed Investment Public Consumption Inflation (In percent) Variability interval Headline Core Target Source: Haver Analytics. Source: Haver Analytics. The decline in inflation in 2015 was in part temporary, related to a fall in food, energy, and telecom services prices related to the structural reforms. Page 10 Asset prices in Mexico have been affected by the heightened volatility in global financial markets and uncertainties related to the risk of rising protectionism. As of end- September, the peso had depreciated by about 25 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar over the 2015 average. Foreign exchange implied volatility and bid-ask spreads have also increased. Net portfolio inflows into Mexico turned negative in the second quarter as non-resident investment in short-term government securities declined. More recently, Mexico has benefitted from the strong recovery of capital flows in emerging markets, although the exchange rate remains volatile. The yields on local- currency long-term government bonds have remained broadly stable, and Mexico continues to place sovereign and corporate bonds in international capital markets at low interest rates (Figure 3). b) Exchange Rate Bid-Ask Spread (Pesos per U.S. dollar; as of October 31, 2016) 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 d) Financial Conditions Index 1/ (As of October 28, 2016) a) Exchange Rates (Index: Jun. 2014=100; as of October 28, 2016) Gap (RHS) Mexican peso Emerging market currencies (average) Jun-14 Jun-15 Jun-16 c) Exchange Rate 3-Month Implied Volatility (Index; as of October 31, 2016) Mexico EM avg. ex. MEX n a e m e h t m o r f y a w a s n o i t a i v e d d r a d n a t S 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Source: National authorities; Haver Analytics; Bloomberg, L.P.; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ The index is constructed as the weighted average of a set of financial indicators with weights given by the inverse of the standard deviation of the corresponding variable. The indicators used to construct the index include the bilateral exchange rate, 3-month option implied volatility, net international reserves, 28-day interbank rate, overnight interbank rate, CEMBI spreads, EMBIG spreads, 5-year sovereign CDS spreads, 5-year PEMEX CDS spreads, IPC stock price index, VIMEX index, 2- year government bond yield, 10-year government bond yield, 10-year government bond yield bid-ask spread, exchange rate bid-ask spread, EPFR bond flows, and EPFR equity flows. In August, Mexico issued US$2.76 billion bonds at yields of 3.04 percent (10-year) and 4.37 percent (30-year). In February, EUR 2.5 billion were issued at yields of 1.98 (6-year bonds) and 3.42 (15-year bonds). Page 11 Output and Credit Gaps (In percent of GDP) The growth of credit to the private sector has been strong, despite a moderate increase in funding costs. Lending by commercial banks expanded by 16 percent in nominal terms in the twelve months through August 2016 (Figure 6). Strong corporate loan growth is partly explained by exchange rate effects as about ¼ of outstanding loans are denominated in U.S. dollars. External bond issuance by private companies has also recovered after a dip in mid-2015 (Figure 4). The growth of consumer and mortgage loans has picked up as well, consistent with a strengthening labor market, and greater competition in mortgage markets after the financial reform. Development bank credit continued to grow at a rapid pace, expanding by 19 percent in the twelve months through August 2016. Overall credit expansion (including bond financing) is broadly consistent with trend financial deepening. 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Output gap Total credit gap Bank credit gap Private sector balance sheets remain relatively strong. Total private corporate debt is low at about 25 percent of GDP, and foreign currency exposure is largely hedged through natural and financial hedges. In addition, corporations maintain strong liquidity buffers and have long average debt maturities (Figure 8). Only 15 percent of total debt matures over the next five years. Measures taken by the authorities to support PEMEX have reduced balance-sheet stress for the oil company’s suppliers. Households also have very low debt, and hold significant financial and non-financial assets. Bank are well capitalized, and have high liquidity ratios and low NPLs. The balance sheets of other financial institutions (insurance, mutual funds, and pension funds) are also healthy. See the selected issues paper for an analysis of the transmission of policy rates to lending and deposit rates. The apparent rapid pace of credit growth reflects trend financial deepening, starting from a very low level of bank intermediation (see the 2015 Article IV Selected Issues Paper). The ratio of bank lending to the non-financial private sector to GDP has been growing steadily, from 13.2 percent in 2010 to 17.5 percent in 2016. Actions to support PEMEX’s suppliers included extension of MXN 15 billion (0.1 percent of GDP) in development bank loans to pay outstanding debt to small suppliers, direct financial support to PEMEX (used to reduce liabilities to large suppliers), and exempting banks in five oil-rich states from classifying restructured loans as NPLs for twelve months (until the end of 2016). Page 12 Box 1. Exchange Rate Pass-through Estimates Estimates of the exchange rate pass-through to headline consumer prices for Mexico show no evidence of second-round effects. The estimation was based on monthly data over 2000-15, using as explanatory variables the import-weighted nominal effective exchange rate, international oil and food prices, production costs in trading partners, and the output gap. If absence of second-round effects, the pass- through should be close to the import content of household consumption since the response of inflation to a currency depreciation would only reflect the relative-price adjustment between tradable and non-tradable goods and services. The pass-through in Mexico is low owing to a low import content of consumption and well-anchored inflation expectations. The 2-year cumulative pass-through from nominal effective exchange rate depreciation to headline consumer prices is about 7 percent, slightly below the import content of consumption. In a cross-country comparison, countries with better anchored expectations—and hence with more credible central banks—have empirical estimates of pass-through that are close or even below the import content of consumption, suggesting an absence of second-round effects. Exchange Rate Pass-through and Import Content (In percent) Exchange Rate Pass-through, Cumulative After 2 Years Import Content of Household Consumption MEX LA5 EME Asia LA (other) EME Europe Source: Carriere-Swallow and others (2016). A temporary increase in inflation due to the exchange rate depreciation would not necessarily warrant a policy response. Even with a low exchange rate pass-through coefficient, a large depreciation would lead to an increase in inflation due to the relative price adjustment between tradable and non- tradable goods and services. However, with well-anchored medium-term inflation expectations, such an increase in inflation is likely to be temporary. Credible central banks may have space to allow the price adjustments to take place without an aggressive response to the increase in inflation. Further details are provided in Ch. 4 of the WHD Regional Economic Outlook (2016) and Carriere-Swallow and others, 2016, “Monetary Policy Credibility and Exchange Rate Pass-through.” The external sector position remains broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The current account deficit is projected to remain unchanged at about 3 percent of GDP in 2016, as the reduction in the hydrocarbons trade balance has been offset by stronger remittances and net service exports. The cyclically-adjusted current account deficit is broadly in line with fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Annex II). In real effective terms, the peso has depreciated by about 12 percent in 2016 relative to its 2015 average, reflecting lower oil production and exports, weaker domestic growth prospects, further deterioration in the terms of trade, and increased uncertainty related to rising protectionism risks. In the staff’s Page 13 assessment, the peso is broadly in line with fundamentals (with a gap of 0-10 percent). Looking External Balance Assessment Results ahead, portfolio flows are expected to recover in the baseline: inflows into domestic government paper have already increased in the third quarter of 2016. The net international investment liability position is sustainable at about 40 percent of GDP in 2016, and foreign exchange reserves are adequate according to a range of indicators (Figure 5 and Table 6). Current account gap (Percent of GDP) REER gap, level regression (Percent) Source: IMF Staff estimates Dec. 31, 2015 Jun. 30, 2016 Oct. 31, 2016 Yield Curve of Local Government Bonds (In percent) The stance of macroeconomic policies has tightened. The Bank of Mexico increased its policy rate cumulatively by 175 basis points to 4¾ percent over the past twelve months. The first rate increase of 25 basis points took place in December, 2015, as Banxico matched the move by the Federal Reserve. Subsequently, the policy rate was increased by 50 basis points each in February (outside the normal meeting schedule), June and September 2016. Long- term yields on local currency bonds have remained broadly stable resulting in a flattening of the yield curve. In February, Bank of Mexico shifted to a discretionary foreign exchange intervention strategy and has intervened only once since then. The authorities project that the headline fiscal deficit (PSBR) will narrow to 3 percent of GDP in 2016 (compared with an original PSBR target of 3.5 percent), helped by a one-off transfer of Bank of Mexico’s surplus (amounting to 1.2 percent of GDP) to the federal government. Excluding the Bank of Mexico transfer, revenues are projected to be broadly on target, with the decline in oil income offset by stronger-than-expected VAT, income, and excise tax revenues and the oil-price hedge. The structural primary deficit is projected to improve by about ¾ percentage points of GDP. Source: Bloomberg Months Years This judgement is consistent with the overall results from the external balance assessment, which finds that the current account deficit is close to the norm (0.8 percentage points of GDP wider than the norm, see text chart), and the real effective exchange rate level approach, which shows a small undervaluation of 11.5 percent. Mexico had two rules-based intervention schemes in place in 2015: preannounced daily auctions of U.S dollars and additional auctions when the daily exchange rate depreciation exceeded a certain threshold. The first scheme was suspended on November 19, 2015, and the second was discontinued on February 17, 2016. Discretionary intervention was used only on one occasion in February. The central bank law requires the Bank of Mexico to transfer to the federal government its surplus (including from exchange rate valuation gains) after increasing its capital sufficiently to ensure that it grows at least at the projected growth rate of nominal GDP. When the profits are from unrealized asset price gains (such as unrealized gains on FX reserves), the Bank of Mexico Board has discretion to increase its capital by more than that. The Bank of Mexico is not consolidated in the public sector fiscal accounts, so these one-off transfers affect the headline fiscal deficit. Page 14 PEMEX is adapting to the new reality of persistently lower oil prices. The company’s balance sheet has been affected by a decline in oil production and prices, resulting in a significant increase in its outstanding debt to suppliers (Box 2). The rating agency Moody’s downgraded PEMEX’s debt to the lowest investment grade level (Baa3) in early 2016. A new management team was appointed in February and several measures to strengthen the finances of the state-owned oil producer have been taken in the course of this year. The Federal Government provided financial assistance to PEMEX to improve its liquidity. PEMEX announced permanent expenditure cuts of about 20 percent of its budget in early 2016. The company also restructured its pension scheme, generating savings of 1 percentage point of GDP in net present value terms. In addition, the federal government assumed a fraction of PEMEX’s pension liabilities in an amount equal to the savings from the reform. Implementation of the key structural reforms is broadly on track. On the energy front, auctions of oil fields and electricity permits for generation are proceeding as planned (the first two auctions for electricity permits are expected to lead to an increase of electricity generation capacity of 10 percent). Three rounds of auctions of oil contracts have been completed successfully. The next milestones are the auctions for deep water oil fields and for PEMEX’s first joint venture, scheduled to take place in December. Some positive results from the reforms are already visible. Private investment in natural gas pipelines, electricity generation, and telecommunications has picked up, and the financial reform has helped spur competition in the banking sector. Increased competition in telecommunication services has led to a significant reduction in prices. The education reform is also in the process of implementation, although it has faced resistance in some states. The authorities are taking steps to improve the rule of law. A 2015 constitutional reform created a new National Anticorruption System, the main goal of which is improved coordination among the relevant authorities in the prevention, detection, and penalization of acts of corruption. Secondary legislation, promulgated in July 2016, included financial disclosure requirements for recipients of public funds, creation of a specialized federal court for corruption cases, and stricter penalties and statutes of limitations. PEMEX’s woes have also affected the assessment of the sovereign credit. In March, Moody’s revised the outlook for Mexico’s sovereign credit rating from stable to negative, citing subdued economic growth, continued external headwinds, and the deterioration in PEMEX’s finances. The current sovereign credit rating by Moody’s is A3 (one notch above the BBB+ rating of S&P and Fitch). In August, S&P also changed the outlook for Mexico from stable to negative, while reaffirming its BBB+ rating. The state-owned electricity company (CFE) also reformed its pension scheme this year. The estimated savings from this reform are 0.8 percent of GDP in net present value terms. Similar to the arrangement with PEMEX, the federal government will assume a fraction of pension liabilities equal to the amount of savings from the reform. Page 15 Box 2. Pemex: Key Reforms and Recent Developments (in billions of pesos) Pemex: 2016 Budget Adjustment Exploration and Production Industrial Transformation Logistics Other Subsidiary Companies Corporate Declining oil production and prices have affected PEMEX’s liquidity and profitability in 2015 and early 2016. PEMEX’s equity shrank by 7 percent of GDP between 2013 and 2016Q1 due to rising losses. Its market debt increased from 5 percent of GDP to around 9 percent of GDP over the same period. Moreover, the company accumulated significant debt to suppliers: 0.9 percent of GDP as of end-2015, up from an average of 0.4 percent of GDP over 2009-12. In addition, PEMEX had significant unfunded pension liabilities (8½ percent of GDP as of June 2015). Similar to other oil producers, PEMEX had to undertake an adjustment to return to profitability. The federal government provided financial support to the company in 2016 to ease the immediate liquidity problems, while PEMEX restructured its pension scheme and announced permanent expenditure adjustments. Federal government support. In April, the authorities announced a capital injection, liquidity support, and a reduction of the fiscal burden on PEMEX. Altogether, these measures amounted to 0.6 percent of GDP. Pemex announced in June that it had settled 0.5 percent of GDP of debt to suppliers. Pemex pension reform. Pemex modified its defined benefit pension regime in November 2015, reducing the net present value of its pension liabilities by 1 percent of GDP. In the context of the energy reform, the federal government had agreed to assume a portion of Pemex’s pension-related debt equivalent to the savings generated by the reform (promissory notes were issued to PEMEX in 2015-16 to honor this agreement). Spending adjustment. In February, PEMEX announced cuts of about 0.5 percent of GDP— roughly 20 percent of its 2016 budget. Two thirds of the cuts will be implemented through suspending investment projects. In addition, operating and personnel costs were reduced (the workforce was reduced by 7 percent). It will be important for PEMEX to strengthen its efficiency and profitability. Compared to other oil companies, PEMEX has a relatively low pre-tax profitability. The company should therefore focus on more profitable activities and use the opportunity provided by the energy reform to engage in joint ventures to improve productivity and efficiency. Operating margins differ substantially among its various operations: PEMEX’s petrochemicals and refining subsidiaries had a negative EBITDA over 2010-2015, while the EBITDA for Exploration and Production was 105 percent. Note: Asset turnover is calculated as a ratio of total sales (revenue) to total assets. Pre-tax margin is calculated as a ratio of pre-tax income to total assets. Sources: Wall Street Journal, Forbes, and staff calculations. Generate efficiencies and reduce costs Defer / reconsider investment Adjust capex and opex The retirement age for workers with less than 15 years of service was raised from 55 to 60 years, with full benefits received only by employees with minimum 30 years of service. More senior employees were grandfathered, while new employees will be under individual defined contribution accounts. Page 16