The near-term growth outlook remains subject to significant risks. The U.S. economy appears to be on a steady path to recovery, which is positive for Mexico. However, the risk of renewed volatility in financial markets remains elevated, recovery in the euro area and Japan has stalled, growth in many large emerging economies is slowing down, and geopolitical tensions have increased. A surge in global financial market volatility. The baseline growth projection is predicated on a smooth process of U.S. monetary policy normalization, accompanied by strengthening activity in the United States (Box 5). However, a resurgence of financial market volatility cannot be ruled out. Potential triggers include an earlier or sharper-than-expected rise in U.S. interest rates (for example due to an unexpected rise in inflation or a rapid decompression of U.S. term premia), increasing geopolitical risks, or investors’ reassessment of sovereign risks more generally. A materialization of this risk could lead to capital flow reversals from emerging markets (including Mexico), reduction of market access, and a sharp increase in the volatility of asset prices. A protracted period of financial market instability could also affect the confidence of long-term investors, lead to lower-than-expected FDI inflows, and slow the implementation of structural reforms. Domestic risks. Domestic risks are mostly on the upside in the near term: business and consumer confidence may recover faster than expected, boosting domestic demand. In the medium term, the main risks relate to the implementation of structural reforms and their effect on growth. Staff and the authorities concurred that, while Mexico’s integration in global financial markets confers important benefits, it also increases exposure to external shocks. Gross capital inflows have increased significantly in recent years, particularly portfolio inflows. Foreigners now hold 37 percent of all local-currency public debt (and about 55 percent of the most liquid segment of local-currency denominated sovereign bonds, Mbonos, and short-term paper, Cetes). The rise of foreign participation in the local market has helped reduce funding costs for both the government and corporations, providing an impulse to growth. Nonetheless, staff analysis suggests that foreign mutual funds active in Mexico have been somewhat more prone to herding behavior during past episodes of market stress than domestic investors (Box 6). Shifts in investors’ portfolios could induce heightened volatility in asset prices. Nonetheless, Mexico’s credible policy frameworks and adequate buffers strengthen its resilience and ability to deal with financial market stress. There was agreement that Mexico’s There is substantial uncertainty about the degree of slack in the U.S. labor markets, reflected in significant dispersion of the federal funds rate forecasts among FOMC participants. See Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 3. Page 9 bright growth prospects and prudent macroeconomic policies would help sustain investor confidence. The authorities reiterated that Mexico is fully committed to maintaining strong policy frameworks, including a flexible exchange rate and an open capital account, a credible inflation targeting regime, and fiscal discipline underpinned by the Fiscal Responsibility Law. In case of renewed bouts of volatility in financial markets, exchange rate flexibility will continue to act as an effective shock absorber. Staff agreed that foreign exchange intervention, liquidity provision, and debt duration management strategies would remain useful tools in cases of significant currency overshooting or dysfunctional market conditions. The current level of reserves (about US$190 billion) can provide a buffer against temporary stress in foreign exchange markets. The FCL arrangement is an important complement to the country’s buffers, providing insurance against tail risks. The authorities also highlighted their continued efforts to encourage the development of financial markets and provide a broad range of instruments to allow investors to hedge exchange and interest rate risks, which should reduce incentives to disinvest from Mexican assets.