Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to a gradual fiscal consolidation, which is critical to maintain confidence in the strength of public finances. The 2016 budget maintained the commitment expressed in last year’s budget document to reduce the PSBR by about ½ percentage point per year from 4.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 2½ percent of GDP in 2018, despite a significant decline in oil prices and a downside revision of the oil production path. This deficit path will initially stabilize the ratio of public debt to GDP at around 52 percent of GDP, and then set it on a downward path in the medium term (Table 2 and Figure 8). Delivering on these fiscal commitments would be important to restore fiscal buffers, and continue to maintain investor confidence and keep financing costs low. The fiscal consolidation effort relies both on expenditure and revenue measures. A rise in non-oil tax revenues due to the 2013 tax reform and higher fuel excises have largely offset the 4 percentage points of GDP decline in oil revenues over the last two years. Starting in 2016, the consolidation relies mostly on expenditure rationalization. The 2016 budget envisages a decline of public spending of 1 percentage point of GDP next year, with further reductions of about The path of oil production has been revised significantly down over the medium term (relative to the 2015 budget), reflecting a persistently lower production path for Pemex and a slower pace of private investment in exploration and production. As a result, oil revenues would remain permanently lower, rising modestly in the coming years with the projected recovery in oil prices. Page 20 ¾ percentage point in the medium term, equally split between current and capital spending. By 2018, the ratio of expenditure to GDP is projected to return to its 2007–08 level. The 2016 budget also includes temporary tax incentives for investment, which should help support domestic demand next year. The decline in public investment is expected to be compensated by increased reliance on public-private partnerships. The state-owned oil company (Pemex) is bearing the brunt of the fall in public capital spending, and it is expected to rely increasingly on production and exploration partnerships with private companies. Public enterprises, including Pemex, will also be able to securitize assets and use equity financing for some of its operations, which is welcome, as long as the operations are recorded transparently in the public accounts. More generally, public-private partnerships (PPPs) would play a bigger role going forward, including in infrastructure development. Staff noted that, based on international experience, successful PPPs require thorough evaluation and good governance structures to minimize fiscal risks and contingent fiscal liabilities. Staff strongly endorsed the authorities’ proposal to allow gasoline and diesel prices to move more closely in line with international prices, and to fix the excise taxes per liter of fuel. The current variable excise tax is the difference between the regulated domestic price of gasoline and an international benchmark price. The proposal to fix fuel excises per unit of fuel is in line with staff’s recommendation to increase carbon taxes in Mexico to levels commensurate with the negative health and environmental externalities associated with fossil fuel use. The proposed tax levels for gasoline and diesel are close to the optimal levels based on staff’s analysis (Box 4). In addition to helping reduce Mexico’s carbon emissions, this measure will help stabilize tax revenues in the medium term relative to the current scheme of variable excises. Box 4. A Carbon Tax Proposal for Mexico As of 2014, Mexico had the lowest carbon taxes on fossil fuels among OECD countries. Mexico has a system of administered fuel prices, with an implicit subsidy (or tax) arising when the domestic price differs from international prices. Between 2006 and 2014, the system resulted in a positive subsidy to domestic consumers. The government has gradually reduced the subsidy in recent years by raising prices at a double-digit rate through the end of 2014. Under the current regime, the difference could be positive or negative, resulting in a tax or a subsidy, depending on relative price movements. W PP Implicit Carbon Tax Rate (U.S. dollars per ton of CO ) Source: OECD. Page 21 Box 4. A Carbon Tax Proposal for Mexico (concluded) After the sharp drop in international prices since the end of last year, domestic fuel prices are now higher than international prices, resulting in positive tax revenue. The 2016 budget proposes to fix the excise tax per liter of fuel at its current level, and gradually allow fuel prices to move in line with international prices (to smooth the transition, initially prices will fluctuate within a band yet to be defined by the government). The proposed excise tax levels for gasoline and diesel are in line with staff’s estimates of optimal carbon taxes, and would help Mexico meet its carbon emission reduction goals. The estimated optimal taxes reflect the measurable negative environmental, health, and traffic-related externalities associated with fossil fuel use (chapter 4 of the Selected Issues Paper). Adoption of the proposed measure would stabilize fuel excise revenues. It would also help Mexico achieve its Paris commitments: setting carbon taxes at the proposed levels would reduce carbon emissions by 6 percent relative to the baseline. Staff pointed out that the current low fuel prices provide a window of opportunity to eliminate inefficient electricity subsidies, while protecting vulnerable households. Electricity subsidies are projected to decline from ½ percent of GDP in 2014 to about ¼ percent of GDP in 2015, reflecting the decline in oil and natural gas prices. Staff encourages the authorities to eliminate these non-targeted subsidies permanently, while compensating low income households through existing well-targeted cash transfer programs. The authorities agreed that a gradual replacement of these subsidies with more targeted support could be desirable in the medium term. They noted that the overall energy subsidies have already declined substantially with the phasing out of gasoline and diesel subsidies in recent years, and emphasized that the policy focus now is the approval and implementation of the fuel excises, which would eliminate fuel subsidies permanently. 120140Natural GasCoalDieselRegular gasolinePremium gasoline Current/2016 Budget Adjusted Optimal Current Fossil Fuel Excises in Mexico (Pesos per GJ, 2015)Source: Chapter 3, Selected Issues Paper. With Variable Excises Maintained Optimal (Baseline) Fiscal Revenues from Fuel Excises (In percent of GDP)Source: Chapter 4, Selected Issues Paper. Page 22 Staff proposed several enhancements to the fiscal framework to enhance its role as a commitment device for fiscal discipline. The 2014 amendments to the fiscal responsibility law (FRL) improved the fiscal framework in several dimensions, but it commits to a specific PSBR target only one year ahead and has no long-term nominal anchor. In addition, the exceptional circumstances clause can be invoked even under mild negative shocks (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 5). First, the fiscal responsibility law could be modified to include an explicit ceiling for the PSBR, corresponding to a desirable path for the public debt. For example, the law could specify a fixed ceiling of 2.5 percent of GDP for 2019 and beyond. In addition, the use of the exceptional circumstances clause should be explicitly limited to cases of large output or oil price shocks to help constrain discretion. When these clauses are invoked, the fiscal framework should define explicit rules to bring the PSBR below the ceiling. The authorities argued that public finances are going through a structural change due to the energy reform. In their view, it would be appropriate to wait until the transition is over, and there is greater certainty about the medium- term growth potential, before tightening the parameters of the fiscal responsibility law. Staff also pointed out that international experience suggests that the creation of a non-partisan expert fiscal council can inform the public debate of fiscal issues, and improve accountability and fiscal discipline, by providing an objective evaluation of fiscal policy. The authorities noted that the Congressional Center for the Study of Public Finances (CEFP) already executes some of the typical functions of a fiscal council. They agreed that it would be desirable to strengthen the role of the CEFP in assessing fiscal policy by ensuring that it has non-partisan professional staff and a formal mandate to assess the sustainability of fiscal policy. The proposed fiscal responsibility framework for local and municipal governments is in line with best international practices. A recent constitutional reform and secondary legislation—currently in Congress—have introduced a set of rules to ensure fiscal sustainability at the local government level (see Box 5). However, implementation challenges will be significant particularly in terms of capacity building at the local government level. On a separate issue, staff noted that the proposed education infrastructure bonds, backed by future transfers from the federal to the local governments, are a fiscal liability of the states and therefore should be recorded as public debt according to international accounting standards. This recommendation is in the spirit of the original fiscal responsibility law, which set a zero deficit as the target; however, the definition of the “traditional” budget balance has changed over time, eroding its role as a nominal anchor. If the PSBR target is fixed at 2.5 percent after 2017, gross debt would fall to 50 percent in 2020, and would continue to decline very gradually thereafter (assuming a constant output growth rate). A stochastic simulation presented in the selected issues paper (which accounts for possible shocks to output growth) shows that setting the deficit ceiling permanently to 2.5 percent of GDP would help keep debt below 50 percent of GDP with 82 percent probability in the long term. A more ambitious ceiling of 2 percent would bring debt down faster in the baseline, and would reduce further the risk of high debt levels even in a persistent low-growth scenario. Page 23 Box 5. Proposed Fiscal Responsibility Framework for State and Local Governments Constraints on debt issuance: Subnational governments can incur new debt only to finance investment, rollover existing debt, or finance the reconstruction costs of natural disasters, subject to local congress’ approval by two-thirds majority. The Federal government will monitor compliance with debt limits. Short-term debt is allowed only for liquidity management purposes and cannot exceed 6 percent of total revenues. In addition, short-term debt has to be repaid three months before the end of the local government’s term in office. Early warning system: A publicly available early warning system will be applicable to all subnational debt, classifying it in one of three categories: stable debt, debt under surveillance, or high debt. The issuance of new debt is limited to 10 percent of non-earmarked revenues when debt is stable; 5 percent of revenues when it is under surveillance; and no issuance is allowed when it is classified as high. Subnational governments with high debt should sign an agreement with the Federal Treasury specifying an adjustment program to return to sustainable public finances. Federal guarantees: The Federal government can provide guarantees to subnational governments provided that they sign an agreement with the Federal Treasury approved by local congress, and earmark future federal transfers (under the revenue-sharing agreements) for debt repayment. Federal guarantees cannot exceed 3.5 percent of GDP (at the aggregate level), and 100 percent of disposable income (at the subnational level). Violation of the agreement leads to sanctions, including non-eligibility for future guarantees. Other fiscal discipline rules: All subnational government liabilities, including those related to public-private partnerships, will have to be reported to a single public debt registry, which would be published on the Federal Treasury’s website. The reported information should comply with the Law of Public Sector Accounting. Budgets should follow a performance-based approach, with large investment projects and public-private partnerships (PPPs) requiring a cost-benefit analysis. The budget must include five-year projections and identify main fiscal risks and potential mitigation measures. The law introduces a “sustainable budget balance” notion, based on specific debt limits determined by the law. Deviations from the sustainable budget balance are permitted only under specific adverse circumstances. In addition, the law requires subnational budgets to include a reserve fund to cover contingencies arising from natural disasters, and future payments under PPPs. The law also sets limits on the wage bill and arrears, and allows the use of excess revenues only for infrastructure spending or savings. Unused earmarked revenues under federal transfers are to be returned to the Federal Government. Page 24