Progress in the implementation of the financial reform is welcome. The credit-to-GDP ratio in Mexico has been rising steadily in recent years, though it remains low compared to other emerging markets (see Box 6 and Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 7). The financial reform aims to address some of the structural impediments to credit supply, and several measures have been implemented so far. All credit providers are now required to report to the credit bureaus, the process of transferring accounts between banks and refinancing mortgage loans has been made easier, and consumer protection has been enhanced through requirements for better disclosure of information on financial products. Staff urged the authorities to complete the implementation of a remaining important aspect of the reform, namely that more federal courts hear mercantile matters, which should improve the speed and efficiency of the judicial process in contract enforcement, including the repossession of collateral. Staff analysis suggests that recent intervention announcements have had a modest effect on the level and volatility of the exchange rate. The peso appreciated by 1 to 3 percent on impact, though widening standard errors over time make it difficult to establish whether the effect is temporary or permanent (see Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 6). Page 26 Box 6. Financial Deepening in Mexico Mexico has relatively low credit to the private sector as a share of GDP. Total bank credit to the private nonfinancial sector is only 17½ percent of GDP, about a quarter of the average level in other emerging markets. Bank credit to households has been rising steadily, but remains low at 7.5 percent of GDP, and even total household debt (including credit from the publicly owned mortgage lenders Infonavit and Fovisste) is low at 15 percent of GDP. Bank credit to firms has also been rising more recently, reaching 10 percent of GDP, which is still much lower than before the Tequila crisis. Only a fraction of small and medium-sized firms have access to banks credit. Large firms rely heavily on bond issuance for financing. Even accounting for market financing, total credit to the private sector is relatively low. A history of banking crises, a large informal sector, and an inefficient legal system are the main reasons for the low level of bank intermediation. The Mexican banking sector has had a tumultuous history, with two major banking crises since 1980, which ended up with a significant restructuring of the banking system. This history is likely to have had lasting effects on trust in financial institutions, through the early 2000s, both for savers who lost deposits in the crisis of the 1980s and for borrowers, who faced difficulties due to rising interest rates in the 1990s. Difficulties in collecting collateral have also limited the rate of expansion of bank lending. Another explanation for the low degree of financial intermediation is the large size of the informal sector. Finally, the level of financial education is quite low. The 2014 financial reform aimed to address some of the impediments to credit expansion Its main components are: (i) shifting more mercantile matters to federal courts to ease the process of collateral collection in case of default; (ii) improved information sharing among all credit providers through the credit bureaus; (iii) strengthening financial education and transparency (by establishing an entity to collect and share comparable information on bank products; and 020406080100120140160180200MexicoBrazilEMAEUnited States Bank credit Other credit Credit to the Private Sector, 2014 Sources: BIS; and Banxico. 202530354045505560Small firmsMedium Firms Mexico LAC Average World Average Firm Access to Credit (Percent of firms with a bank loan or line of credit)Source: World Bank Group Enterprise Surveys. Firms Households Private sector Public sector Recipients of Banking System Credit (Percent of GDP)Sources: BIS; and Banco de Mexico. Page 27 Box 6. Financial Deepening in Mexico (concluded) (iv) supporting competition through provisions to facilitate the portability of bank accounts and mortgages across banks. Most elements of the reform have been implemented on time, but the important shifting of more mercantile matters to federal courts remains outstanding. The key challenge going forward is to achieve gradual financial deepening without jeopardizing financial stability. This will require maintaining high credit standards, and strong regulatory oversight. The pace of credit growth in recent years has been appropriate, resulting in a gradual increase in the credit-to-GDP ratio. Bank credit is projected to continue to grow at a nominal rate of about 11–12 percent in the medium term, implying a rise in the credit-to-GDP ratio of about 1 percentage points per year. Such rate of credit growth would provide a mild boost to potential output growth (of about 0.05 percentage points per year). Development bank credit has expanded rapidly in recent years. The reform also expanded the role of development banks in credit provision, with the goal of stimulating lending to underserved sectors. While development banks account for only 10 percent of total loans to the non-financial private sector, their credit to the nonfinancial private sector has increased 31 percent year-on-year as of June. Staff cautioned that such high rates of credit expansion may strain the capacity of development banks to evaluate credit quality. The authorities responded that development banks are subject to the same regulatory oversight as commercial banks, that rapid growth poses little risk given the low base, and that credit growth rates will slow down going forward. They viewed development banks as playing an important role in improving access to finance through programs such as guarantees for credit to small and medium enterprises, small loans to women, and others. The non-bank financial sector remains sound. Pension funds, which are the most important player in local financial markets with assets of about 16 percent of GDP, maintain a conservative investment profile. The insurance sector is relatively small (6½ percent of GDP) and is well capitalized and profitable. A Solvency II-type regime was adopted in April this year, and insurance companies meet minimum capital requirements comfortably under the new regime. Top- down stress tests conducted by the authorities showed that market risks associated with potential interest rate increases remain limited for both pension funds and insurance companies.