Mexico has completed the legislative process underpinning its comprehensive structural reforms agenda. Important reforms have been approved in the last year and a half in the areas of energy, telecommunications, anti-trust, labor markets, education, and the financial sector. Secondary laws for the energy and telecommunication reforms were recently approved by Congress, clearing the way for implementation. The energy reform opens the door to private investment in the sector, ending a 75-year state monopoly in oil and gas production and distribution. The first round of bidding for oil and gas fields will be launched in early 2015, with contracts expected to be awarded starting in the second half of that year. By enhancing competition, reducing labor market frictions, and encouraging investment, the reforms are expected to boost the annual growth in output over the medium term to 3 ½ –4 percent. After a sharp slowdown in 2013, growth is projected to recover to 2.4 percent this year. Real GDP grew 1.1 percent in 2013, reflecting weak external demand and a decline in construction activity. After a slow start of the year affected by a bad winter in the United States, economic activity has accelerated in recent months. The strong recovery in the US in the second quarter of 2014 has triggered a rebound in Mexico’s manufacturing production and exports (especially in the automotive sector). In addition, construction activity is firming up, supported by a rebound of residential investment and an increase of government spending on infrastructure (Figure 1). The recovery is increasingly broad-based, with activity in the service sectors picking up as well. Labor market indicators suggest that the economy continues to operate below potential, helping to contain inflationary pressures. Total employment has grown only modestly, by about 1 percent year-on-year in the first half of 2014, although there has been a notable shift from informal to formal sector employment. The unemployment rate has inched up since early 2013, and real wage growth has been subdued. Headline inflation rose to 4½ percent year-on-year in January 2014, reflecting one-off effects from tax changes (estimated at about 40 basis points). It is expected to stay around 4 percent in the remainder of 2014, driven by increases in livestock and government-administered prices, before declining gradually in 2015. Core inflation remains close to 3 percent and long-term inflation expectations are well anchored (Figure 2). Macroeconomic policies have turned more accommodative. The Bank of Mexico reduced the policy rate by 50 basis points to 3 percent in June 2014 in the context of limited inflationary pressures. Fiscal policy is projected to be neutral in 2014, with the structural fiscal balance broadly unchanged from 2013. The fiscal outturn for the first half of 2014 has been broadly in line with the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) budget target of slightly over 4 percent of GDP. On the revenue side, stronger-than-expected VAT and import tax collection in the first half of the year has The structural fiscal balance adjusts the overall balance for the effects of the economic and oil price cycles. Page 6 more than offset weaker oil revenues due to declining oil production. The higher revenue has been matched by higher-than-budgeted public investment spending (Figure 3 and Table 2b). Mexico’s external position remains broadly consistent with fundamentals. The current account deficit widened to 2.1 percent of GDP in 2013, reflecting higher net factor payments, while the trade balance remained stable and moderate. The current account balance and the real effective exchange rate are broadly in line with fundamentals and desirable policy settings according to staff’s assessment (Box 1 and Annex I). In 2014, the current account deficit is projected to remain unchanged with an improving trade balance offset by a continued increase in factor payments. The nominal and real effective exchange rates have depreciated modestly since end-2013. The current level of foreign reserves is adequate for normal times according to a range of standard reserve coverage indicators (Table 6). Gross portfolio inflows have rebounded after a sharp slowdown in Q2 of 2013. Private corporations and the government have taken advantage of the renewed investors’ risk appetite to issue foreign-currency bonds at favorable rates (Figures 4 and 5). In February, Moody’s raised Mexico’s foreign currency sovereign rating to Aa3, citing the expected positive impact of structural reforms on potential growth. Looking forward, the structural reforms in energy and telecommunications are expected to attract significant foreign direct investment. Commercial bank credit growth has moderated. Commercial bank credit growth slowed down to about 8 percent year-on-year in nominal terms in the first half of 2014. Among corporate borrowers, the deceleration has been concentrated in construction: banks reduced sharply lending to the sector after financial difficulties of the three largest builders surfaced last year. On the household side, consumer credit growth moderated to 8 percent (from 16 percent last year) (Figure 6). Growth of mortgage credit by the publicly-owned institution Infonavit (which accounts for more than a half of the mortgage market) has decelerated to 2 percent in 2014, as lending for new low-income houses declined over the last year (Box 2). In contrast, lending by the publicly-owned development banks is growing rapidly. The financial sector reform has given the development banks a new mandate of promoting more actively micro-financing and lending to underserved sectors, including small and medium-sized enterprises. As a result, credit and guarantees extended by these banks have grown rapidly though from a low base (currently development banks account for only 15 percent of total bank lending or 3¼ percent of GDP). Page 7