The near-term outlook for growth is favorable but inflation will likely rise. Growth is projected to remain in or near double digits in 2013 and 2014. Mineral GDP will be boosted by the start of commercial operations at the Oyu Tolgoi (OT) copper mine and expansion of coal production from the Tavan Tolgoi (TT) mine. Non-mineral GDP growth is projected at 11 percent in 2013, supported by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies. Non- mineral GDP growth in 2014 depends in part on the pace of DBM disbursements for investments in public investment projects and the extent to which the BOM’s stimulus programs are continued. Inflation is projected to move above 10 percent and remain there through late-2014. In the context of continued strong growth of domestic demand, and notwithstanding the BOM’s continued operation of the price stabilization program, the depreciation of the exchange rate observed in recent months will likely spill over into higher inflation. However, continuation of current policies could lead to a highly vulnerable situation. The important policy decisions facing the authorities are highlighted by a comparison of a “strong policy scenario” with a “weak policy scenario” (see Table 1 on next page): In the strong policy scenario, which is quantified in more detail in Tables 2–7, the medium-term budget framework is consistent with the FSL. On-budget fiscal operations observe the FSL starting with a 2014 budget based on realistic revenue projections. The off-budget program of public investment projects is phased out by the end of 2015. To help ease demand and BOP pressures further, the BOM’s stimulus programs are phased out by mid-2014. The weak policy scenario illustrates the risks of a continuation of current policies amid continued weakness of FDI inflows and coal exports. In this scenario, it takes the government two more years to bring on-budget fiscal operations in line with the FSL. In addition, the government continues to pursue its development strategy through the implementation of off- budget public investment projects. This would be broadly in line with the medium-term budget framework for 2014-16 which was approved in May and envisages continued large international bond issuances. Finally, the BOM’s stimulus measures are phased out only gradually (by 2015). In this scenario, non-mining growth in 2014 would be higher than in the strong policy scenario. However, Mongolia would run a progressively more serious risk of a BOP crisis. In case of crisis, the required large adjustment of absorption would cause a cumulative non-mining output loss of about 20 percentage points, compared to the strong policy scenario, over a 4 year horizon (calibrated on cross-country experiences summarized in WP/08/224 and the Board Paper on “Assessing Reserve Adequacy”). The larger exchange rate depreciation (compared to the strong policy scenario) would add to inflationary pressures. The implications of the weak policy scenario for key indicators of public external debt public are illustrated in the Debt-Sustainability Analysis. In addition to the risks posed by the continuation of current policies, the outlook is subject to other downside near- and medium-term risks (see Risk Assessment Matrix, Appendix I): Page 9 G L Table 1. Strong Policy and Weak Policy Scenarios, 2010–18 Strong policy scenario Weak policy scenario Real sector (change in percent) Real GDP growth Mineral growth Non-mineral growth Consumer prices (end-period) Fiscal accounts (in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Overall balance (in percent of GDP) 1/ Structural balance (FSL, in percent of GDP) 1/ Non-mineral balance (In percent of non-mineral GDP) Non-mineral revenue (In percent of non-mineral GDP) Total expenditure (In percent of non-mineral GDP) Total public debt (in percent of GDP) of which : Domestic debt External debt NPV of public debt Monetary accounts (Change in percent) Broad money Reserve money Credit to the private sector External accounts Current account balance (percent of GDP) Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) (in months of imports) Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (in billions of togrogs) Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) Government expenditure (in billions of togrog) Government expenditure (growth in percent) DBM spending (in percent of GDP) Sources: Mongolian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Includes DBM spending. T E R T L E T R Y F U Page 10 Spillovers from weakening external demand for commodities could further dampen mining export revenues. Advanced economies will eventually exit from the very supportive monetary policies implemented in recent years. China’s economy is expected to rebalance away from a mostly investment-based growth model toward a more consumption-based growth model. Both these factors will likely have significant spillovers globally and especially in the region. China accounts for more than 90 percent of Mongolia’s exports and the recent World Economic Outlook identifies Mongolia as one of the most vulnerable countries to a rebalancing of demand in China. Slowing growth in China would affect Mongolia via trade and FDI channels. External shocks and/or the continuation of current policies could expose vulnerabilities in the banking system , exacerbating a negative shock to growth and financial stability. Mongolia’s medium-term prospects remain promising. Mongolia’s large natural resource endowment and its proximity to the fastest-growing economies in the world provide ample opportunities for development. The start of copper production at the OT open pit mine, the development of the OT underground mine, and the ramp up of coal production from the TT mine are projected to keep the growth of mineral GDP at about 16 percent per annum, on average, during 2013-17. Activity outside the mining sector is also projected to remain buoyant, although this would need to be supported by continued reforms to strengthen the foundation of the economy and the business climate. Authorities’ Views The authorities expressed optimism about continued strong growth alongside a strengthening of the BOP in the course of 2014 and over the medium term . The centerpiece of their development strategy was scaled-up public investment, including in transportation infrastructure, financed by foreign borrowing, to be sustained by continued rapid economic growth and a recovery of export earnings. They pointed at their achievements, despite the external shocks, including continued double-digit economic growth, buoyed by sharply rising domestic investments, with inflation kept at manageable levels. The authorities projected the economy to grow by 15 percent per annum, on average, during 2013-2016. They expected mining and non-mining output to record average annual growth of 32 percent and 11 percent, respectively. The authorities acknowledged the downside risks to the external outlook but indicated they were taking steps to address prevailing BOP pressures . Government spending was being curtailed for the remainder of the year (¶22). The BOM was discussing plans to unwind some of the monetary stimulus (¶30). The recent exchange rate depreciation was dampening the demand for imports (¶31). And Parliament passed a new Investment Law aimed at boosting FDI and domestic investment (¶38). New foreign borrowing in the coming months and an anticipated rebound in coal exports starting in the last quarter of this year would help holding immediate BOP pressures at bay. On that basis, the authorities did not consider necessary at this time an additional package of macroeconomic adjustments and reforms as outlined in the “strong policy scenario.” Page 11