Comprehensive policy adjustment is urgently required to address external and fiscal imbalances and stabilize the economy. Public debt is too high and inflation above target, but the most pressing concern is the severe BOP pressure that the country continues to face. Fiscal and monetary tightening, along with exchange-rate flexibility, is needed. Much the same advice was offered during the 2013 Article IV consultation, with limited takeup (see Annex V). Policies on investment, social protection, and banking also need to be strengthened. Summary of Key Policy Recommendations Budget / DBM Cut consolidated deficit to 4½ percent of GDP in 2015 and to around 2 percent by 2017. Consolidate all DBM spending into budget and strengthen DBM governance. Monetary Exchange Rate Investment Social Protection Banking Slow credit growth. Transfer unconventional easing programs to budget. Limit deficit monetization. Strengthen BOM governance. Keep XR flexible. Limit intervention to combating excessive volatility. Implement structural measures to boost investment. Improve investment climate. Move ahead with major mining projects. Ensure protection of most vulnerable in society, including through enhanced income- targeting of subsidies. Enhance provisions and capital. Strengthen supervisory framework. Phase out forbearance. The authorities have taken policy steps in the right direction, but further measures are needed 2015 Supplementary Budget. Facing likely revenue shortfalls, the authorities revised down the revenue target and correspondingly cut expenditure in a 2015 supplementary budget, passed in January. Non-commercial spending of DBM was brought on budget, and the consolidated deficit targeted at 5 percent of GDP. This target, however, will be difficult to reach as revenues are still over-estimated. Amendments to Fiscal Stability Law. Recognizing that public debt had exceeded the ceiling enshrined in the Fiscal Stability Law (FSL), the authorities in February 2015 amended the FSL and enacted a new Debt Management Law (DML) that narrowed the coverage of debt as previously defined in the FSL. The new legal framework also raised the debt ceiling and set a path to bring debt (albeit more narrowly defined) and the fiscal deficit down to the previous limits by 2018 (which will be hard to achieve on current policies). To be precise, the FSL amendments and new DML implement the following: (1) non-commercial DBM spending is brought onto the budget and thus included in the calculation of the structural fiscal deficit; (2) structural fiscal deficit limits are temporarily raised (5 percent of GDP in 2015, 4 percent of GDP in 2016, and 3 percent of GDP in 2017) but kept at 2 percent of GDP for 2018 and beyond; (3) the definition of debt is narrowed from public to general government debt (with the new definition, SOE debt and government guarantees that are fully secured by government securities are excluded); and (4) debt limits are temporarily raised (58.3 percent in 2015, 55 percent in 2016 and 50 percent in 2017) but remain at 40 percent for 2018 and beyond. Page 11 CMAP. Parliament on February 18, 2015 approved a “Comprehensive Macro Adjustment Plan” (CMAP), which comprises macro-financial adjustment and structural policies. CMAP retains the target fiscal path in the supplementary budget. It envisages phasing out the BOM’s Price Stabilization Program (PSP) and transferring remaining PSP loans to the government. The CMAP does not, however, comprehensively transfer all of the BOM’s easing programs—including funding for new mortgages and financial support at the request of commercial banks for their corporate clients—to the budget. On the structural front, CMAP calls for steps to strengthen social welfare, enhance the investment climate, facilitate FDI inflows, promote exports, and encourage import substitution. Staff recommended a stronger package of macro policy measures, as follows Fiscal policy: A new budget amendment for 2015 would be needed to bring the consolidated deficit (including all DBM spending) down to around 4½ percent of GDP this year. The deficit would continue to fall until reaching around 2 percent in 2017, and it would be possible to move toward fiscal surpluses a few years after that. (Staff analysis does not find grounds for loosening the long-term deficit target specified in the FSL (see Annex VI), nor do staff support the redefinition of debt in the DML.) Within the overall budget envelope, total spending by the DBM (commercial and non-commercial) would be limited to around 2½ percent of GDP in 2015 and would decline thereafter. Furthermore, authority over the budget and the DBM—including its “commercial” spending—would be unified in the Ministry of Finance, and reporting would be consolidated. Reforms to strengthen governance of the DBM could also be enacted. Capital expenditures are very high in international comparison, and while part of this is explained by existing infrastructure deficiencies and the country’s low population density, substantial cuts nonetheless appear to be possible; moreover, given the openness of the economy, the associated fiscal multipliers are likely to be small. At the same time, there is scope to cut current expenditure and raise revenue: large, untargeted subsidies should be phased out in favor of programs (like food stamps) that more directly reach the poor. Moreover, recent growth in the public wage bill could be addressed and procurement inefficiencies reduced. Some social benefits could be made taxable and customs duties increased. Going forward, a new budget law amendment could be considered to restrain Parliament’s ability to increase the aggregate budget envelope. Monetary policy. The stance should be tightened without delay, including by restricting deficit monetization, and credit growth should be further slowed, following the harmful credit boom in recent years (see Annex VI). The BOM’s unconventional programs (PSP, The scenario also assumes that banking, structural, and social protection reforms are also undertaken—see below. Page 12 mortgages, and financial support at the request of commercial banks for their corporate clients) should be transferred to the budget, where—in a transparent manner and with Parliamentary oversight—they can compete with other spending priorities for limited resources. The nature of BOM operations should change—unconventional easing programs targeting particular industries or providing financial support at the request of commercial banks for their corporate clients should be ruled out, while open market operations may need to be enhanced to ensure sufficient liquidity in the banking system. Further BOM governance reforms should also be considered, such as giving Monetary Policy Committee members a vote on BOM decisions. Exchange rate flexibility. The BOM would limit its involvement in FX markets to preventing excessive market volatility, and as a result, the exchange rate would move more flexibly. The strategy is to contain further sharp depreciation through adequate macro policies, and to limit intervention to addressing excessive volatility. These policy efforts would help stabilize the economy, but reserve buffers would remain thin, suggesting the need for additional financing. As shown in Tables 5-9 and Figure 5, growth in this adjustment scenario would slow somewhat in 2015 given the policy tightening, and inflation would rise by a moderate amount for several years, given exchange-rate pass-through. The fiscal adjustment would also put public debt on a more sustainable path. Imports would moderate, and strengthened policies would support market confidence and facilitate rollovers of several large bonds maturing in 2015 and 2017 (a total exceeding $2 billion). As a result, foreign-exchange reserves would stabilize at around 1¾ months of imports for several years (before rising in 2019– 20). This is substantially stronger than in the baseline but still lower than desirable, suggesting the need for additional financing in support of the adjustment effort. Looking ahead, prudent macroeconomic management must be maintained to ensure that resource wealth can be harnessed effectively. Many resource-rich countries have failed to realize the promise of prosperity. Avoiding procyclical fiscal policy, saving resource revenues and investing them wisely, ensuring cautious monetary policy, and maintaining a competitive exchange rate to avoid the effects of Dutch Disease, are all essential components. Mongolia has a relatively large resource endowment compared to some other resource-rich economies, and managing that wealth wisely is of critical importance. Authorities’ Views The authorities saw the benefits of additional fiscal adjustment. They agreed that the fiscal path in the supplementary budget and CMAP faced risks and that further measures were thus needed. They expressed their intention to cut budget spending further via a government resolution, supported by another supplementary budget later in the year, and to reduce DBM spending as well, with total cuts amounting to around 5 percent of GDP. They also saw an important role for additional financing to bridge short-term BOP difficulties. The current account deficit narrows in dollar terms relative to the baseline scenario; but since the adjustment lowers GDP, the CAD in percent of GDP rises. Also, the CAD still worsens for a few years within the adjustment scenario, on account of OT’s geological conditions and the start of OT-2 construction. For further background, see IMF Departmental Paper No. 13/2 (August 28, 2013), “Boom, Bust, or Prosperity? Managing Sub-Saharan Africa’s Natural Resources Wealth.” Page 13 The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on monetary policy going forward. The BOM noted that they had intentionally been phasing out their unconventional programs, and the government also expressed its agreement with this objective. The BOM envisaged transferring the outstanding program loans to the government by end-June. They noted that the Price Stabilization Program had basically achieved its goals, as supply-driven inflation had continuously been low and stable over the past 26 months, and the economy had achieved a soft landing. They continued to see the mortgage program as highly beneficial, noting that it aimed to make households’ expenditures more efficient and to boost middle-class savings. They believed that this program should be continued as part of the government’s long-term saving policy, in conjunction with ongoing structural reforms of the pension fund. Finally, they suggested that it would be more appropriate to consider changes to the central bank law only after economic conditions had improved. On exchange rate policy, they noted that they are fully committed to the flexible exchange rate regime.