A sharp investment slowdown has dampened economic growth. Declining FDI, continued uncertainty about OT-2, problems in the coal sector, and the contractionary impact of depreciation (see below) have weighed on growth, which slowed from 11½ percent in 2013 to 7¾ percent last year. While investment has fallen, consumption has remained robust, growing at nearly 9 percent, reflecting continued loose policies. Growth is expected to slow further, to around 4 percent during 2015-17 as OT-1 enters a relatively mineral-poor layer of earth, and then pick up sharply, particularly from 2020, when OT-2 enters production Inflation rose substantially in 2014, given currency depreciation and policy stimulus, peaking at over 15 percent in July, and while it has since eased, it remains substantially above the target of 7 percent. While the current account deficit has narrowed, the overall BOP remains weak. Exports are up, largely on account of OT-1, which began production in mid-2013. At the same time, equipment imports have decreased sharply, tracking the continued decline of FDI. Other imports, however, have been robust despite currency depreciation—mirroring the strength of consumption—and building materials are up significantly, reflecting policy stimulus to the construction sector. Although a trade surplus was registered in 2014, the overall BOP stayed in substantial deficit on account of service account outflows related to OT and weak FDI. At end-2014, gross reserves at the BOM amounted to 3¼ months of imports, equivalent to 75 percent of short-term debt, 29 percent of broad money, and 62 percent of the IMF’s risk- based metric. On existing policies, Mongolia’s external finances are expected to stay under pressure (see baseline scenario in Tables 1–4). Exports will likely weaken for a few years as the OT project faces unfavorable geological conditions, and imports are expected to rise on the start of OT-2 construction. There may also be difficulties in rolling over maturing public- and private-sector debts (around $2 billion in 2017 alone, excluding the PBOC swap line which also matures that year). Given continued easy macroeconomic policies, the current account deficit should average 15 percent of GDP over the medium term, and staff analysis suggests the currency is overvalued by 10 to 15 percent (see Annex II). The overall BOP is expected to remain in substantial deficit through 2017, implying continued pressure on reserves and the exchange rate. Fiscal deficits remain large. With revenues falling short of target, the on-budget structural deficit registered 4¼ percent of GDP in 2014, exceeding the 2 percent limit laid out in the Fiscal Stability Law (FSL). In addition, the DBM undertook significant spending—much of it on fiscal activities such as public infrastructure projects— outside the budget, pushing the consolidated deficit to 11 percent of GDP (see Annex III). In 2015, a supplementary budget has brought much of the DBM’s spending on budget and Page 8 targets a combined deficit of 5 percent. This, however, depends on several unrealistic assumptions, and it also excludes 2½ percent of GDP in so-called “commercial” DBM spending which should also be considered fiscal. All told, the overall deficit is expected to approach 10 percent of GDP, only slightly down from 2014. The authorities are considering additional expenditure cuts on the order of 5 percent of GDP, and, if successful, these would move the fiscal accounts toward staff’s “adjustment scenario” (see below). Public debt has risen sharply and is now extremely high. On the authorities’ definition—i.e., in NPV terms, and excluding the PBOC swap drawings—debt amounted to 55 percent of GDP at end-2014, in excess of the FSL’s 40 percent limit. Subsequent FSL amendments laid out a path to return to the 40 percent debt limit by 2018 (and to the 2 percent deficit limit as well), while the recent Debt Management Law departed from international best practice by redefining debt to exclude state enterprise debt and certain government guarantees. On staff’s definition—in nominal terms, and including the PBOC swap—public debt reached 76½ percent of GDP last year (for the entire public sector, including state enterprises) and, given ongoing deficits, is expected to peak at 92½ percent of GDP in 2017, before declining rapidly as mining growth picks up. As detailed in the accompanying DSA, the key debt indicators exceed the relevant thresholds for a few years, and Mongolia is thus assessed to be at high risk of debt distress. At the same time, debt is not on an ever-increasing path, and it is relatively small compared to the country’s resource wealth, if the latter can be realized. Monetary conditions have tightened but are still too loose. Over the past year, the BOM has hiked the policy rate by 250 basis points, to 13 percent, which is within the range suggested by a Taylor- rule analysis and substantially positive in real terms. Reserve money growth has been close to zero, reflecting the decline in NFA. Structural liquidity in the banking system—excess reserves on MNT deposits plus amounts mopped up on a short-term basis—is tight. Credit growth, including securitized mortgages, has slowed substantially (though it was still high at 23 percent y/y at end-2014). And the exchange rate has continued to weaken, which is likely to be contractionary in an economy so dependent on imported inputs, and where the export sector is largely dollarized. Still, growth of NDA on the BOM’s balance sheet has been substantial, on account of increasing net credit to government as well as unconventional easing programs, and with inflation and the BOP both remaining under pressure, further tightening is needed. Project and borrower selection criteria are difficult for staff to evaluate, and given the DBM’s track record, a cautious approach is desirable. Moreover, standard statistical principles do not allow for a portion of an agency’s spending to be carved out and treated differently. Even without OT-2—and thus with lower growth—debt would be on a declining path from 2018, as shown in an alternate scenario in the accompanying DSA. Mineral wealth—most of which, of course, has not been converted to financial wealth—has been estimated at up to $3 trillion, which would be nearly 150 times Mongolia’s total external debt and more than 300 times its gross public debt. Because of the weakness of monetary transmission through the interest-rate channel, care should be taken in interpreting a Taylor rule for Mongolia. Page 9 As the economy has cooled, banking-system vulnerabilities have become apparent. Banks’ balance sheets have doubled in just two years, driven by the BOM’s large stimulus programs, while foreign currency lending was substantial (a quarter of the banks’ loans). On the back of weak underwriting standards, credit risks increased significantly. In 2014 nonperforming loans (NPLs) as well as loans past-due by less than 90 days were up by 48 percent and 131 percent y/y, respectively. Although the reported NPL ratio remains low at 3.1 percent, asset quality problems seem to be understated especially given the inadequate classification of loan restructurings at some banks. The real estate market is cooling, further increasing credit risk, and, as noted above, liquidity is becoming tight. Stress tests suggest that some banks are vulnerable to economic shocks and that capital buffers should be strengthened in recognition of the balance-sheet deterioration that has already occurred as well as possible future deterioration given the risky environment. Risks are to the downside . Elevated BOP pressure constitutes a major threat to economic stability. Prolonged delay of OT-2 could further undermine business confidence, slow growth, and worsen both external and fiscal indicators. Banking-sector conditions could worsen. Externally, a further slowdown in China could reduce Mongolia’s export demand, and surges in global volatility could also affect Mongolia’s ability to borrow externally (see Annex IV). Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that the economy had gone through a difficult period because of severe BOP shocks and argued that the policy response had stabilized the situation. Some interlocutors argued that Mongolia had faced massive external shocks that could have led to a BOP crisis, a credit crunch, and economic contraction. These dire outcomes, however, were avoided on account of the countercyclical policy response, which helped the economy to achieve a “soft landing.” As for the outlook, the authorities had a more benign view than staff. While the baseline scenario was developed jointly by the IMF team and the technical staff of the MOF and BOM, the authorities expected that their policy responses (see below) would be sufficient to turn the situation around, combined with other options for managing BOP pressure, including additional borrowing from the international market as well as donors. Finally, they noted that about 50 percent of DBM spending, which includes the projects with government guarantees, was included in the budget and opined that DBM commercial spending should not be included. The loans under the BOM easing programs were exempted from capital charges (zero-risk weighted) and from limits on large exposures and industry concentrations. Page 10