Structural measures are needed to boost investment and growth, and an enhanced effort is needed to protect the poor. To return the economy to a sustainable, rapid growth path, a focused effort is needed to improve the investment climate, which was harmed by previous policy changes, boost FDI, and move ahead with large mining projects. Many of these are included in the authorities’ CMAP. Given resource constraints, subsidy programs should be targeted better to protect the poorest and most vulnerable in society. The authorities are redoubling efforts to boost investment. The CMAP, now approved by Parliament, includes reaching agreement on OT and TT as key goals, and a former prime minister has been appointed minister in charge of “mega projects,” charged with moving those negotiations forward. The government has also proposed a host of measures—under the CMAP and through other initiatives—to increase investment, boost exports, and support appropriate import substitution. Finally, the tax law is being amended to improve clarity and avoid conflicts in the judicial system with foreign investors. Special efforts must be made to ensure that the most vulnerable in society are adequately protected. Compared to other similarly placed countries, Mongolia has a large budget for subsidies and transfers, amounting to some 8 percent of GDP. Most of these are targeted to different categories of the population—mothers, children, the elderly, the disabled, et al.—without regard to income. Economic adjustment policies, while necessary for medium-term growth and stability, will create short-term dislocations, and it is vital that policies be designed to protect the poor. In the short-term, the income-targeted food stamp program could be expanded, and looking forward, the proxy means-tested subsidy programs currently under design should be implemented expeditiously. The World Bank has done significant work in this area (see Informational Annex), and there exists sufficient technical capacity to improve targeting. Page 14 Authorities’ Views The authorities noted that, as a policy matter, income targeting of subsidies is controversial in Mongolia. They had proposed this in the first supplementary budget for 2015, but Parliament rejected many of the relevant measures. Cultural values prioritize children and the elderly, regardless of income level. That said, they firmly agreed on the need to protect the poorest, which may require difficult choices given hard budget constraints.