Mongolia has been one of the world’s fastest growing economies as a result of large FDI in the mining sector. In 2011–12, FDI averaged 40 percent of GDP and annual growth exceeded 15 percent, and over the past decade, growth averaged 9 percent. One project alone—the Oyu Tolgoi (OT) copper and gold mine—brought more than $6 billion (50 percent of GDP) in investment during its first phase of development, with another $5 billion planned for the second phase, and ongoing negotiations over the Tavan Tolgoi (TT) coal mine could potentially yield $4 billion in investment over the next five years (see Annex I). Per capita income has reached $4,000, and with mineral wealth estimated at $1 to $3 trillion for a population of just 3 million, the future looks bright. Within 5 years, when OT-2 comes into production, Mongolia should be in a position to start running large fiscal surpluses and accumulating savings for future generations. Mongolia’s narrow economic base has, however, left the country highly vulnerable to shocks. Minerals account for 90 percent of all exports, and 90 percent of these are bound for China. This lack of diversification has made the economy prone to repeated boom-bust cycles, with the balance of payments falling under intense pressure twice in the past five years, and public finances remaining vulnerable despite a fiscal framework intended to reduce procyclicality. Meanwhile, there have been symptoms of Dutch disease—the REER appreciated by nearly 30 percent from mid-2009 to mid-2013 (though this has now been reversed), and non-commodity exports have performed anemically. Over the past two years, the economy has faced sharp declines in FDI and coal exports. FDI related to OT slowed as the first phase was completed and the second phase was caught up in a contentious dispute between the two main partners, Rio Tinto and the government. The dispute on the country’s premier project also cast a pall on the general investment climate, which had already suffered a blow when a moratorium on new mining exploration licenses—since reversed—was introduced in 2010. As a result, FDI fell by half in 2013, and again in 2014. Compounding this situation were China’s slowdown and weakness in the coal sector—prices are down almost two-thirds from their 2012 peak, and volumes are down 8 percent—and more recently copper prices have also fallen sharply. (These declines have been offset only partially by the decline in oil prices). In response to these shocks, the authorities resorted to expansionary policies to tide the economy over until FDI and exports could recover. The fiscal expansion had already started in 2012 when the government implemented universal transfers to the population and the new Development Bank of Mongolia started to promote infrastructure development. When FDI inflows tumbled and coal prices fell in 2013, the authorities maintained expansionary fiscal policy in an effort to sustain growth as well as boost infrastructure spending to realize the country’s potential. During 2012-14, combined on- and off- budget public capital expenditure averaged nearly 15 percent of GDP, the consolidated deficit averaged nearly 10 percent, and debt surged to more than 75 percent of GDP, most of it external and Page 6 The authorities’ approach soon proved unsustainable. With FDI falling, a growing share of the nonconcessional. Monetary policy was loosened substantially: the policy rate was cut by 275 basis points and easing programs amounting to 20 percent of GDP were introduced (at an average cost to banks of 4 percent while the policy rate was 10½ percent). Credit growth surged to 54 percent y/y by end-2013, keeping GDP growth above 11 percent and the current account deficit at around 25 percent of GDP, and sowing the seeds for banking asset-quality deterioration. current account deficit has been financed by a drawdown of reserves. From more than $4 billion (almost 6½ months of imports) in early-2013, reserves are now down to $1¼ billion (two months) even after substantial drawing from a swap line provided by the People’s Bank of China (PBOC). The currency has weakened against the U.S. dollar by almost 15 percent over the past year—and by more than 40 percent since 2013—and as a result, inflation was well into double digits during most of 2014. The credit boom has strained the financial system, with reported gross NPLs rising substantially and liquidity pressures emerging. These developments have been noted by global markets—Mongolia has suffered sovereign rating downgrades, and its spreads have widened sharply. Although growth has now slowed and the current account deficit has narrowed, the overall balance of payments remains under pressure. A durable solution to Mongolia’s economic challenges requires significant macro policy adjustment. The economy is still relatively small, and one or two developments—such as new FDI or portfolio inflows sparked by agreements on OT-2 or TT, offers of substantial, new financing from donors, and/or a sharp rise in commodity prices—could materially change the outlook, at least temporarily. But such developments cannot be counted upon, and the economy would, at any rate, remain vulnerable to future shocks. Instead, the centerpiece of any strategy to close financing gaps should be macro policies that keep the current account deficit at a sustainably financeable level, and that strengthen the fiscal position. Such policies would still promise prosperity, though perhaps at a somewhat slower pace, and with reduced risks of a crisis along the way. Political conditions are now more conducive to decisive economic policymaking, but they are still far from easy. Following a long period of uncertainty, a new government took office in November 2014, vowing to fix the economy, and backed by a grand coalition of the major political parties. The authorities have already taken important steps to strengthen fiscal, monetary, and other policies, but further adjustment will be needed. The new Prime Minister’s SMS-based referendum revealed public support for moving ahead with negotiations on large investment projects including OT and TT, but achieving the necessary political consensus, both for these deals and for further macro policy reforms, will remain challenging, with general elections scheduled for mid-2016. Against this backdrop, the Article IV discussions focused on policies needed to stabilize the economy and achieve sustained growth over the medium- to long-term. Policy discussions centered The Fiscal Stability Law, which went into effect in 2013, required that the structural on-budget fiscal deficit be kept below 2 percent of GDP, but the government created the Development Bank of Mongolia (DBM), run by a new Ministry of Economic Development, and channeled an extra 8 percent of GDP in capital spending through it. Page 7 on an adjustment scenario, with a package of economic and financial-sector measures to eliminate financing gaps and stabilize the economy and banking sector. They also covered the medium-term fiscal policy framework, policies to boost FDI and support growth, and efforts to ensure that the most vulnerable in society are protected.