The Mongolian economy has continued to grow very rapidly. The economy expanded by 12½ percent in 2012 and by 11½ percent in the first half of 2013. Growth has been buoyed by a relatively mild winter boosting agriculture and highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. The latter have been deployed to compensate for the marked slowdown in coal exports and FDI-financed mining development—key drivers of growth in recent years. However, BOP pressures have intensified and inflation is bound to rise Negative shocks to FDI and coal exports increased BOP pressures from mid-2012 onwards. These pressures have been compounded by highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies that are boosting the demand for non-mining imports. Inflation fell to a two-year low of 7 percent in July thanks to moderating food prices and the Bank of Mongolia’s (BOM) price stabilization program. However, the depreciation of the togrog of the past three months is likely to push up inflation in the coming months. Monetary policy has been highly expansionary . To cushion the impact of declining FDI and to boost credit growth, the BOM took a two-pronged approach: it cut the policy rate three times by a total of 275 basis points to 10.5 percent; and it lent substantial sums to banks at below-market rates, including for on-lending to selected sectors through the price stabilization and mortgage programs (Box 2). If it wasn’t for a large decline in its international reserves, the BOM’s balance sheet and hence reserve money would have more than doubled in just 6 months. Commercial banks have been taking advantage of the large provision of cheap BOM funding, and private sector credit growth accelerated to 47 percent in August (y/y). Fiscal policy has remained highly expansionary The overall fiscal deficit (including DBM operations) rose to 10.9 percent of GDP in 2012 6 percent of GDP higher than in 2011:  The 2012 budget outturn recorded a deficit of 7.5 percent of GDP . Revenue growth decelerated on declining FDI inflows. On-budget expenditures rose by 20 percent, in part due to large increases in civil servants’ wages. Page 7  Off-budget spending by the government-owned DBM amounted to 3.4 percent of GDP in . This spending should also be included in the assessment of the fiscal policy stance. The DBM’s debt is guaranteed by the government and has to be serviced by the government budget. A large part of DBM spending is on non-revenue-generating public investment projects such as roads. For several of the “revenue-generating projects” there is a substantial risk that the DBM will not be repaid, e.g. the US$200 million it has provided to the loss-making state-owned coal producer Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi. Government spending continued to rise sharply during the first 8 months of 2013. Spending by the budget was unchanged from a year ago. However, including the more than MNT 1 trillion (6½ percent of GDP) spending by the DBM, total government spending rose by 30 percent compared to the same period last year. Public debt has been rising rapidly . Excluding an additional foreign bond issuance under discussion, public debt is projected to reach 67 percent of GDP by the end of 2013, up from 39 percent just two years ago. Moreover, the cost and risk profile of the public debt have become less favorable. The share of concessional loans has declined, the bulk of the debt is denominated in foreign currency, and substantial refinancing risk has emerged for 2017. The IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) now indicates that Mongolia is at moderate risk of debt distress. BOP pressures caused by the external shocks and expansionary policies have been absorbed by BOM foreign exchange sales financed from external borrowing and, more recently, increased exchange rate flexibility . Gross international reserves currently amount to US$2.4 billion (about 3.7 months of prospective imports), about the same level as a year ago. External borrowing has helped keep reserves at this level. For instance, the government deposited the sovereign “Chinggis” bond proceeds at the BOM. This helped to raise the BOM’s Gross International Reserves (GIR) to a record US$4.1 billion at end-2012. As a result of persistent sales of foreign exchange in the spot and forward market, GIR subsequently fell to US$2.4 billion (Figure 3). Over the past year, the exchange rate has depreciated by 22 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, with most of this occurring in the last four months. International financial markets are becoming more concerned about developments in Mongolia . The key selling points for Mongolia’s successful maiden sovereign bond issuance in late- 2012 were the new fiscal policy framework anchored by the FSL becoming operational in 2013 and the imminent start of exports from the Oyu Tolgoi (OT) copper mine. However, sentiment subsequently suffered with downward pressures on international reserves, the uncertain external outlook, and the Savings Bank failure. By mid-September, as yields on relatively risky assets rose in anticipation of the US Federal Reserve System starting to taper its asset purchases, Mongolia’s sovereign spread had widened about 140 basis points more than the average for emerging markets since the issuance. With the postponement of “Fed tapering”, the “excess spread” has narrowed again (Figure 3). Page 8