Good progress has been made in strengthening banks’ capitalization and liquidity, and reported non-performing loans are low (Box 5). The higher capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of 14 percent for the four largest, systemically important banks that was achieved by mid-2013 is providing welcome additional buffers. Moreover, the higher minimum paid-in capital requirement (MNT 16 billion) and higher Tier 1 capital ratio (9 percent) are helpful for the relatively more vulnerable small- and medium-size banks. Nevertheless, as illustrated by the recent failure of Savings Bank, the banking sector harbors significant vulnerabilities . There is a need to strengthen corporate governance practices and enforcement of regulations, including single borrower limits. Mongolia’s loan-to-deposit ratio and level of dollarization are among the highest in Asia. Surging credit growth is likely to have posed a challenge to prudent underwriting practices and supervision. The currency depreciation of the past four months could adversely affect credit quality of foreign currency-denominated loans. In light of the relatively undiversified nature of the economy, the banking system also remains vulnerable to a downturn in the mining sector and a deceleration of government spending. To contain financial sector risks, the regulatory and supervisory framework should be strengthened further The BOM should strictly enforce the existing prudential regulations and continue to improve prudential indicators. The existing lending limits on a single borrower and a bank-related party should be rigorously enforced. Focus should also be on strengthening underwriting practices as well as on addressing deficiencies in loan classifications and NPL recognition. The BOM should consider phasing in a more forward-looking provisioning scheme that takes into account the risks of losses on performing loans. The newly expanded State Bank should be recapitalized promptly and plans should be developed toward its privatization. The supervisory and bank resolution regimes should be enhanced. Following up on the implementation of the 2010 FSAP recommendations, a strategic plan should be developed to Page 15 implement a robust supervisory regime and strengthen the bank resolution framework. In addition, there is a need to develop a legal framework for prompt corrective actions that mandates progressively stronger supervisory actions as a bank’s capital declines. The recently established Deposit Insurance Corporation and the BOM, in collaboration with other appropriate entities, should develop a comprehensive framework to address standalone resolution requirements, as well as a systemic financial crisis. Lending dollarization should be discouraged. Mongolia’s relatively high dollarization, in conjunction with the relatively small size of non-mining exports, suggests that the non-bank private sector may have a considerable foreign currency mismatch with attendant risks. Yet the 2010 FSAP recommendation to establish guidelines for foreign exchange lending still has to be followed up. Ideally, banks should only be allowed to lend in foreign currency to hedged borrowers. Alternatively, consideration could be given to additional prudential measures such as higher risk weights on foreign currency-denominated loans and caps on individual banks’ foreign currency loan-to-deposit ratio. Efforts to strengthen the Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework need to be stepped up. In October 2013, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) designated Mongolia as a jurisdiction not making sufficient progress in implementing the agreed action plan to enhance its AML/CFT framework. There is a risk that, absent sufficient progress by February 2014, the country will be placed on the FATF blacklist, which would lead to heightened due diligence from foreign financial institutions regarding transactions with Mongolia Authorities’ Views The authorities expressed broad satisfaction with their management of financial sector risks . Following the failure of Savings Bank there were no more banks under a Supervisory Action Plan. Adequate safeguards had been built into the mortgage program (e.g. minimum down- payment requirements and maximum loan-to-value ratios). The authorities also pointed out that the bulk of unhedged foreign-currency loans were to larger, more-diversified corporations who they considered able to internalize the foreign currency risk. They further noted that the timing was not right to adjust the provisioning regime.