A comprehensive approach to addressing problems in the banking system is needed to contain systemic risks . The BOM has taken some good steps, but more needs to be done (and the IMF stands ready to support the authorities with further TA, as needed). Risk weights for unhedged FX loans were increased in August 2014, and the 1-percent general provision for performing loans was restored, though only for new loans. Nevertheless, loan classification is heavily reliant on days overdue rather than on more qualitative assessments of borrowers’ creditworthiness and future cash flows, while the prudential treatment of restructured loans is weak. The banking system has already seen balance-sheet deterioration, and it remains vulnerable to a further deterioration of economic conditions and the crystallization of hidden losses. As a priority, provisioning and capital buffers need to be reinforced (see Annex VII for a detailed list of banking-sector recommendations). The level of provisions (70 percent of NPLs) appears to be low given the likely understatement of NPLs, the inadequate treatment of loan restructuring, the uncertain value of recoveries (certain Civil Code provisions make foreclosures difficult, and there is significant uncertainty regarding the valuation of collateral, and the cooling of the real estate market. Thus, current capital levels (e.g., a system-wide Tier 1 ratio of 12.5 percent) are likely overstated. The BOM should take immediate measures to increase provisions and capital across the banking system, and particularly for the most vulnerable banks. This could usefully be informed by an independent asset quality review of the major banks. The BOM should eliminate forbearance and strengthen risk recognition. Asset- classification and provisioning regulations should be enhanced by introducing a stricter treatment and regular reporting of restructured loans. The rules should also be changed to embed more qualitative and forward-looking assessments of the borrower’s condition, including hedging capacity against foreign-exchange risk. The 1-percent general provision should apply to the entire stock of performing loans, and the BOM should discontinue forbearance vis-à-vis loans made under the Price Stabilization Program (PSP). Capital requirements for systemically important banks should be raised—the Tier 1 ratio should be increased to 10.5 percent—and targeted additional capital requirements should be imposed on banks that have large concentrations (loan, deposit, and foreign exchange). The BOM should move quickly to resolve non-viable banks, if needed. Page 15 The supervisory and the crisis preparedness frameworks need to be strengthened. Legislative changes are needed to secure for the BOM flexible powers for early intervention. Current supervisory assessments (CAMELS) should be turned into robust and forward-looking tools for early identification of risks and prompt corrective action. Finally, the Supervisory Committee should be empowered as the key decision maker. Cooperation on financial stability and crisis preparedness matters should be strengthened via the Financial Stability Council, which should be expanded to include the Deposit Insurance Corporation. The legal framework should prevent the reversal of resolution actions and provide early and flexible intervention triggers as well as better safeguards against misuse of public funding. Emergency liquidity assistance should be provided only to solvent and viable banks, and should be priced at penalty rates. AML/CFT. In 2011, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) designated Mongolia as a jurisdiction not making sufficient progress in implementing the agreed action plan to enhance its Anti-Money-Laundering / Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework. Since then, with the support of ongoing IMF TA, Mongolia has strengthened its framework considerably, and it is no longer subject to the FATF’s on-going global AML/CFT compliance process. Authorities’ Views The authorities welcomed staff’s suggestions on strengthening the banking system. They considered that the recent tightening of policies, including in the area of prudential regulations, would help contain the risks in the banking system. Looking ahead, the BOM agreed that further policy attention should be devoted to monitoring and pre-emptively responding to potential risks in the banking sector, and welcomed the recommendations of the recent Fund TA mission, which could be integrated into the Medium Term Supervisory Strategy.