The monetary policy framework has been strengthened . Earlier this year, the BOM introduced a policy interest rate corridor. The auctioning of treasury bills was modernized. And the adoption of the new Securities Law should facilitate secondary market trading of treasury bills. These measures are important in strengthening the interest rate channel of monetary policy. Page 13 However, the large monetary and quasi-fiscal stimulus provided through three new BOM programs creates risks and distortions, and should be unwound. The three programs loosen the monetary policy stance, creating inflationary and BOP pressures (Box 3). They also heighten banking sector vulnerabilities and could give rise to contingent liabilities for the public sector (Box 2). Exchange rate flexibility has increased in recent months . The floating exchange rate regime and auction system should be maintained. Intervention should be limited to smoothing excessive exchange rate volatility. To support medium- and long-term external stability and the exchange rate regime, appropriate fiscal and monetary policies are key, along the lines recommended above. The real exchange rate is assessed to be moderately overvalued, even in the strong policy scenario which assumes a tightening of monetary and fiscal policy (Box 4). The overvaluation, and the risk of a further large adjustment of the nominal exchange rate, would become more pronounced in case the loose fiscal and monetary policy implemented so far this year continued. This assessment takes into account the full development of the OT and TT mines. While the current account is projected to continue to show a large deficit over the five-year projection period, the long-term prospects are favorable, as the current account is expected to gradually move to a surplus. Even though international reserves have been on a downward trajectory, they are still adequate for precautionary purposes based on traditional assessment criteria . A recently developed risk-based metric of reserve adequacy (see SM/11/31) suggests that Mongolia may need to hold more reserves than it currently does. Moreover, the declining trend in net international reserves—taking into account the deposits taken from commercial banks and the BOM’s increasing foreign liabilities—is not sustainable, underscoring the need for policy adjustment. Authorities’ Views Reserves Assessed Under Different Approaches (In millions of U.S. dollars) Implied GIR Actual GIR at end-September 2013 150 percent of metric coverage 3 months of imports 100 percent of short-term debt 20 percent of broad money Import Cover Broad Money Short-term debt Risk Metric The authorities explained that countercyclical monetary policy had been implemented to prevent a serious economic downturn and a credit crunch. They noted that Mongolia faced a difficult economic outlook in late-2012, owing to the negative shocks to FDI and coal exports. The BOM’s stimulus programs had succeeded in reviving demand and supporting growth while keeping inflation on a downward trajectory. The intention is to phase out the monetary stimulus programs over time. The BOM deposits placed with commercial banks would be pulled back in the coming months. The new mortgages sold by banks would be taken off their books through securitization operations, and Page 14 banks would be obliged to repay the freed-up funds to the BOM. The authorities were confident that the implications for banking-sector liquidity were manageable and that refinancing risks were not an issue, pointing at commercial banks’ large holdings of central bank bills. The BOM would continue to operate the price stabilization program pending the development of market-based, efficient warehouse financing with private-sector participation. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to the floating exchange rate regime. They expressed broad agreement with staff’s assessment of the exchange rate and reserve adequacy. While the exchange rate depreciation in July and August was due to a string of bad news, including with regard to the ongoing discussions among OT shareholders, the authorities noted that its dampening effect on import demand was already visible.