Some encouraging steps have recently been taken to tighten fiscal policy. These steps would moderate spending growth during the remainder of 2013 and provide a good foundation for the preparation of the 2014 budget: The Minister of Finance announced plans to reduce budgetary spending by almost MNT 1 trillion (6 percent of GDP) so as to keep the 2013 budget within the FSL’s 2 percent of GDP ceiling for the structural fiscal deficit. During the remainder of 2013, the DBM will not receive additional funding from the Chinggis- bond proceeds currently held by the government at the BOM. The DBM would pay out the cash it currently has on hand (MNT 0.4 trillion) on ongoing public investment projects. The Ministry of Finance has initiated work on the 2014 budget based on a relatively conservative projection for government revenue. However, given the sustained BOP pressures and the uncertain outlook, staff argued that further steps were needed. Even with the measures listed above, the fiscal deficit including DBM operations in 2013 would top last year’s level (10.9 percent of GDP) and public debt (including BOM external borrowing) would reach about 67 percent of GDP. This raises doubts about the consistency of fiscal policy with the FSL DBM operations should be included in the budget starting with the 2014 budget . The DBM was founded after the FSL was adopted, and the FSL is not clear about whether the structural deficit rule applies to public sector off-budget activities. Lack of clarity on this issue in the FSL has led to off-budget public sector activities being excluded from the rule. However, the main purpose of the FSL is “ensuring fiscal stability” (Article 1), and the law envisages comprehensive coverage of public debt (Article 4.1.8). On that basis, off-budget activities through the DBM should be reflected in the calculation of all FSL requirements. An ambitious and credible fiscal consolidation plan should be drawn up, consistent with the FSL. Budget operations and the operations of the DBM taken together should meet the 2 percent of GDP ceiling for the structural deficit in due course. Given the sustained BOP pressures, the planned adjustment needs to be adequately frontloaded, spearheaded by streamlining Page 12 subsidies and transfers and reprioritizing capital spending. Even so, the overall deficit (including DBM operations) and the public debt would likely exceed the FSL limits in the next 2–3 years, which should be transparently explained to Parliament. Over the medium term, and given also current economic conditions and vulnerabilities, the FSL ceilings for the deficit and public debt remain appropriate and should anchor adjustments to a sustainable policy path. DBM spending should be re-phased and re-prioritized. DBM spending is projected to amount to 9 percent of GDP in 2013 and has contributed considerably to BOP pressures. To help ease these pressures, the Ministry of Economic Development and the DBM should prepare a prioritized list of capital expenditure items in their portfolios and only implement the projects with the highest payoff in terms of contributions to medium-term growth. The Social Welfare Law (SWL) should be implemented. The 2012 SWL envisages replacing existing costly universal cash transfers with means-tested benefits that would reach the poorest households. This would help increase fiscal flexibility and reduce inequality. The set up of a sovereign wealth fund (SWF) should be completed . The establishment of a SWF would be an important complement to the FSL’s countercyclical fiscal policy. Technical work on setting up a SWF should be finalized, building on technical assistance provided by the World Bank and the IMF. Authorities’ Views The authorities confirmed their commitment to observe the 2 percent of GDP ceiling for the structural deficit for on-budget operations in 2013 and 2014. Cuts of current and capital spending for the rest of the year had been decided through a Cabinet Resolution and would be reflected in a supplementary 2013 budget to be discussed by Parliament in November. Discussions on the 2014 budget had started based on realistic revenue projections. They noted that DBM spending represented a key policy instrument to boost growth in the short- and medium term. DBM spending was approved by parliament and bringing it on- budget could be done in different ways. In view of the uncertain economic outlook, the authorities were not ready to commit to a target date by which the overall fiscal deficit including DBM operations would observe the 2 percent of GDP structural deficit ceiling. They were looking to issue another international bond to finance additional DBM spending until an expected pick up in exports and growth would kick in. The authorities expressed an interest in further discussing with staff the appropriateness of the FSL debt and deficit ceilings and the treatment of DBM operations under those ceilings.