The authorities have taken some steps to contain underlying fiscal pressures. They expressed their commitment to managing debt vulnerabilities in the period ahead. Some notable initiatives include: New fiscal rules have converged toward Maastricht criteria, and the authorities’ Economic Reform Program (ERP) acknowledges the need to stem the acceleration in public debt. Pension reforms adopted in 2011 have increased the average starting age for receiving pensions and decreased the volume of disability pensions. Page 13 The government has fully divested from the aluminum plant KAP. Government guarantees are currently mostly directed to infrastructure and SMEs, although the pace of their recent increase (by two thirds, to 14 percent of GDP) raises concerns that they might be misdirected. The authorities intend to improve local government finances, citing room to reduce overstaffing. The 2016 budget shows improving fiscal balances over the medium term. Revenues are expected to increase, although more slowly than nominal GDP. Nominal expenditures will increase substantially from 2016 onwards: new pension provisions and social allowances for mothers with three or more children will add approximately 1¼ percent of GDP in spending; a recently-adopted bill increases public wages by 5–15 percent in 2016; and legislation to tackle the grey economy is still pending. Expenditure levels are assumed to be nearly constant from 2016 onwards across most items. Precise policies to restrain expenditures over the medium term—including on public wages and pensions—are not identified. Taking into account likely budget pressures, staff projects a substantial deterioration in the public finances. Notwithstanding the steps taken to contain fiscal pressures (¶11), the budget will be stressed by expenditure pressures (¶12), and the reduction in the crisis tax rate will further erode the revenue base. Staff expects the general government deficit to increase to 7½ percent of GDP in 2015 and to increase further in the medium term with increased highway spending. With substantial refinancing needs, staff projects public debt to reach 80 percent of GDP within three years. Staff’s projected deficits and debt are larger than those of the authorities, reflecting slightly weaker average growth and higher nominal deficits. The depreciation of the euro since the signing of the contract has sharply increased the cost of the project. Over the medium term, the euro is expected to appreciate slightly, somewhat offsetting these cost increases, but interest expenditures are assumed to revert to previous levels. Page 14 Fiscal Balance Projections IMF staff Authorities 2015f Sources: Montenegrin authorities and staff calculations Funding needs 2010-2020, in percent of GDP Primary balance Amortization domestic Interest Amortization external Public Debt Projections IMF Authorities 2015f Sources: Montenegrin authorities and staff calculations Effective interest rate, Interest expenditure (in percent, in percent of GDP) Effective interest rate - LHS Interest expenditure - RHS 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Sources: Montenegrin authorities and staff calculations Sources: Montenegrin authorities and staff calculations Infrastructure projects could substantially affect fiscal developments. Growth projections are highly sensitive to the profile of highway spending, given the scale of the expenditures. The authorities intend to raise the remaining 15 percent of the cost of the highway from a combination of offsetting spending cuts, concessions, and tolls. The 2015 eurobond issue was substantially oversubscribed; nonetheless, if new debt financing is needed for the rest of the highway or new projects, then pressure could be placed on sovereign interest rates. To limit risks and maintain favorable conditions for funding, staff recommends additional consolidation . In addition to containing fiscal risks, fiscal consolidation is also important for improving the country’s external debt position, especially as the economy lacks independent monetary policy. To illustrate the scale of consolidation that would be needed, staff calculates that new measures from 2016 delivering an extra 1½ percentage point of GDP (with respect to staff’s baseline path) and a 1½ percentage point primary surplus sustained after the Highway spending (adjusted for pre-payments) is projected to be EUR 40, 240, 240, 224, and 65 million from 2015 to 2019. Operating risks could be mitigated by financing via Public-Private Partnerships (PPP), but only if contracts ensure the private sector bears financing, construction and demand risks. Note that debt incurred from a PPP would stay on the public balance sheet to the extent that the government gains the rewards from the asset (in terms of GFSM 2014: if the contract is an “operating lease” instead of a “financial lease”). Page 15 completion of the highway would bring debt back to 60 percent of GDP by 2026 (the blue lines in the figures below). Alternative Fiscal Scenarios 2016-2031 (Public debt, percent of GDP) Alternative Fiscal Scenarios 2016-2031 (Primary balance, percent of GDP) Baseline projection Additional 1.0 ppt consolidation Additional 1.5 ppt consolidation Additional 2.0 ppt consolidation Baseline projection Additional 1.0 ppt consolidation Additional 1.5 ppt consolidation Additional 2.0 ppt consolidation Sources: Montenegrin authorities and Staff estimates Achieving such a consolidation would require addressing weaknesses in social expenditures, public sector wages, and the tax system. With government spending approaching 50 percent of GDP, durable expenditure control is essential, particularly over public sector wages and pensions, which together account for more than half of total spending (Figure 4). Revenue shares are already high, suggesting limits from increasing taxes, but options exist to boost revenues without creating a drag on growth. Revenue, 2014 (Percent of GDP) Composition of revenue PIT VAT Excises Social security Nontax revenue Other Sources: Montenegrin authorities and staff calculations ALB MKD SRB HRV MNE BIH Avg. Baltics Avg. WB Avg. CEE Avg. EU-15 Sources: World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations. Pensions and Social Expenditures: The pension system is unsustainable on current demographic and labor market trends. Reintroducing a pension freeze would help in the short run, but achieving sustainability will require some combination of accelerating increases in the average retirement age, reducing payments, or increasing contributions (Box 2). New pension and social protection provisions have been passed into law, which worsen the structural deficit; the laws should be revoked. Montenegro has a fiscal rule that notionally adopts the Maastricht criteria of 3 percent deficit and 60 percent gross general government debt. However, there are no automatic spending caps, and no deadlines for implementing fiscal measures. Page 16 Box 2. Pension System Viability The pension funding gap is large —around 4 percent of GDP—and dominates Montenegro’s structural fiscal deficit. The pension system is stretched by high levels of early retirement and low labor participation rates and levels of formal employment. Pressures will increase as population aging depresses an already low dependency ratio to around 1.4 by 2050. Reforms to improve sustainability have been undermined . A 2011 law phases in a higher retirement age to 67 for both men and women (from 65 and 60, respectively), to be fully enforced by 2024 for men and 2041 for women. More rigorous assessment procedures have been applied to disability benefits. However, early retirement has often been allowed for selected groups, undermining these efforts. Indeed, the growth of old-age pensioners from 2010 to 2014 was more than three times what would have been expected based on demographic trends alone. Dependency Ratio (number of employed vs. number of retirees) Sources: MONSTAT, PIO, and Staff calculations. Pensionable Population Actual Old Age Pensioners vs. Eligible Population (Growth in percent) Sources: MONSTAT, PIO, and Staff calculations. Raising the average retirement age is the most efficient policy response. Stabilizing pension spending will require some combination of increasing the average retirement age; increasing payroll taxes; and/or decreasing benefits. The most growth-friendly option would be to raise the average retirement age, which could be facilitated by accelerating the phase-in of higher retirement ages or preventing early retirements. However, progress to raise the retirement age would be slow, as many early retirees are already in the system. In the interim, a pension indexation freeze—to be lifted when a broader pension reform strategy is implemented—should be introduced to contain fiscal pressures. _____________ Currently, the de facto average retirement age is only 61 years for men and 59 years for women. This is based on the authorities’ demographic projections and assumes employment grows at the average rate prevailing in the post crisis period (2008:Q3–2015:Q2). For example, the recent pension law grants early retirement to employees of bankrupted state-owned enterprises. Page 17 Public sector wage bill: The public wage bill is high even compared with regional peers. Staff recommends freezing public wages in the short run, formalizing a 3–1 attrition rule that has intermittently been in place, and reducing numbers of local government employees. Taxes: Regional competition to attract investment limits the scope to raise corporate income taxes, while keeping personal rates low assists the authorities’ efforts to raise participation from very low levels and combat informality. Nonetheless, there are alternatives: small increases in tourist taxes and VAT could bring immediate revenue gains, and tax exemptions for “strategic” sectors should be revoked. Recent decreases in the crisis tax rate could be partially reversed without significant damage to the labor market. The tax base could be broadened by addressing substantial deficiencies in tax administration, such as taxpayer registration, filing and payment enforcement, tax debt management, and taxpayer appeals. Consolidation objectives could be immediately met with a combination of expenditure and revenue measures. Table 1 shows a number of feasible options to meet and even exceed consolidation of 1½ percentage points of GDP. To achieve immediate savings, some revenue measures would be needed, but targeting expenditures—particularly the public sector wage bill and social security expenditures—would be crucial to ensure a durable consolidation. Small value added, tourism, and property tax increases could yield immediate gains of about ½ percent of GDP. Restoring the crisis tax rate from 11 percent to its original level of 13 percent—still less than the recent rate of 15 percent—would yield gains of about ⅓ of a percentage point. Pension reform, although essential for long-run solvency, would likely have very modest effects over the projection period. But repealing the new social provisions in the 2016 budget would bring substantial savings. Immediate gains could also be achieved through freezes on public sector wages and pensions; these, with the addition of cuts to transfers to public corporations, could deliver fiscal savings of about 1¼ percent of GDP over the medium term. The authorities are supporting their growth strategy with a wide range of giveaways on taxes on and social security contributions from “strategic” sectors. This raises concerns about fairness, in addition to those about the direct fiscal costs and creeping subsidization of private business. Raising VAT to a uniform rate of 19 percent could notionally yield gains of 1½ percent of GDP. Subsidies are significant, but are mostly directed at ensuring EU compliance, so are not assumed to be cut. Page 18 Scope for additional fiscal consolidation (percent of staff baseline projection GDP) Taxes Improved collection VAT Property tax increase Tourism tax increase Reinstating PIT crisis rate to 13% Wage freeze (2016) Social security transfers Pension freeze (2016 & 2017) Repealing social laws 1/ Reducing other transfers 2 / Budgeting for one-off payments 3/ (0.5) (0.9) (0.2) (0.7) (0.3) (1.5) (0.5) (0.9) (0.2) (0.7) (0.3) (1.3) (0.5) (0.9) (0.2) (0.7) (0.3) (1.3) (0.5) (0.8) (0.2) (0.6) (0.3) (1.1) (0.4) (0.8) (0.2) (0.6) (0.3) (1.1) Primary balance 1/ New pension provisions and social allowances for mothers with three or more children 2/ Incl. transfers to public corporations 3/ Arrears, guarantees New measures should be spelt out in detail in annual medium-term fiscal plans. Such plans should reflect the most likely fiscal revenue and expenditure outcomes of policy measures; anticipate their direct, indirect and hidden costs; and articulate contingency plans to deal with unanticipated shocks. Furthermore, to bolster fiscal credibility and maintain access to funding on the most favorable terms, they should specify how public debt is to be restored below 60 percent, in line with the fiscal rule. In support of these plans, fiscal transparency and oversight would be strengthened by establishing an independent fiscal council, developing effective fiscal risk management, introducing program/performance budgeting, and moving to accrual accounting and associated reporting. Authorities’ views The authorities acknowledged risks to the public finances and believe them to be manageable. The budget foresees expenditures remaining nearly constant in nominal terms after 2016; discussions focused on the potential for more specific plans to support the budget. The authorities clarified that they expect current expenditure to be kept below current revenue, per the fiscal rules adopted in the budget Law. Staff and authorities discussed key assumptions behind fiscal projections. In addition to different views about prospects for expenditures, the authorities expect growth to Page 19 average around 4 percent per annum over the medium-term, higher than in staff’s projections, and bringing higher revenues than in previous years. The authorities presented their views on debt management. Based on market demand seen earlier in the year, they expect continued strong demand for Eurobond issuances, albeit with higher yields over the medium term. However, they would not rely exclusively on raising new debt; in particular, concessions and toll revenues could generate revenues for infrastructure projects and debt repayments.