The government has adopted a major growth initiative to boost economic development and connectivity . This follows a consensus reached between Western Balkan and European leaders in Berlin in 2014 and is viewed by the authorities as a vital complement to Montenegro’s EU accession plans. The authorities want to exploit comparative advantages in tourism, increase strategic transport linkages, and build capacity as a regional energy hub. The highway is but the first of a series of large infrastructure projects to be completed over the next 15 years. Growth is expected to increase, but so too is public and external debt. Staff projects growth of 4.1 percent in 2015, accelerating further in 2016 as highway expenditure increases. Page 11 Gross Domestic Product (in euro millions) Scenario without Highway Project Scenario with Highway Project Real GDP Growth Scenario without Highway Project Scenario with Highway Project 2015f 2015f Sources: MONSTAT and Staff projections. Sources: MONSTAT and Staff projections. Tourism and capital-intensive projects will continue to be the main drivers of growth. The highway is assumed to have direct and indirect effects on demand and, when completed, on the level of potential output (Appendix 1). In the baseline, credit conditions are expected to gradually ease as these projects boost aggregate demand in the rest of the economy, improving bank profitability and allowing more lending to be extended as bank balance sheets strengthen. Credit is therefore expected to increase in line with aggregate demand. Ratio of Private Credit to GDP Sources: Staff estimates Low import prices due to recent falls in commodity prices and high unemployment will likely restrain price pressures and help prevent external competitiveness from deteriorating. Gross general government debt is expected to increase substantially, from 66 percent of GDP currently to a peak of 80 percent in 2018 (Annex I). As the baseline only includes spending on the first stage of the Bar-Boljare highway and no other major infrastructure projects, debt falls thereafter. Additional projects would affect growth and potentially debt, depending on financing. Funding needs average 12 percent of GDP from 2016 to The first stage of the highway is the only infrastructure project that can be costed at the time of writing. Other yet-to-be quantified projects (such as the mooted Trans-Adriatic highway and the second thermal plant at Plevlja) are not included in the projections. All references to public debt henceforth refer to gross general government debt. This refers to total funding needs, not unidentified funding needs, and includes highway financing. Without the highway loan, average needs are [9] percent of GDP. Page 12 The current account deficit is expected to average 18 percent of GDP over that period, because of the heavy import content of infrastructure projects and low private saving rates. Hence, external debt is also expected to increase, from its estimated current level of 152 percent of GDP to above 160 percent over the medium term (Annex II). Growth is subject to external and domestic risks (RAM p.32). External risks are largely to the downside: large public financing needs and reliance on foreign capital expose the country to changes in financial conditions, especially over the next three years as debt escalates. Montenegro is also vulnerable to fluctuations in external demand, especially to tourism, which is substantially dependent on incomes in Russia, Serbia, and the euro area. Domestic risks: The growth outlook is very sensitive to the implementation of large investment projects. On the downside, delays in their implementation—as seen recently—would undermine growth. However, more investment projects—such as new public infrastructure projects—would boost growth. Such projects could add further pressure on public finances. If sovereign risk premia were to increase; the credit recovery and private investment could be crowded out. Failure to clean banks’ balance sheets could also constrain a recovery in credit. Alternatively, a recovery in lending could be associated with an increase in concentration risks, to the extent that banks extend credit to a limited number of credit-worthy clients. Fiscal discipline could wane in the run-up to elections, and public guarantees could severely stress public finances if called.