Growth momentum has slowed, but is expected to pick up over the medium term. Growth is projected to be only 2 percent in 2014, but converges to an underlying growth rate of 3¼ percent by 2019. The expenditures on the highway add more to growth in the near term. Inflation pressures will likely remain negligible given low international commodity prices and subdued EU inflation. The current account is expected to widen as the base effects of strong electricity exports last year dissipate. Montenegro faces a number of external and domestic risks (see Risk Assessment Matrix): Tourist numbers were down in June and July, but recovered in August, suggesting the downturn might have had more to do with poor weather. The highway is assumed to add about 2 percentage points to GDP growth in 2015, with corresponding base effects as work finishes in 2018. The increase reflects the assumed domestic value added from the extra spending on the highway, with a small contemporaneous spillover to aggregate demand. As this first stage of the project does not connect the coast to the Serbian border, and population density is low in the area of construction, significant effects on potential growth are not assumed. 0510152025303540200920102011201220132014F Net FDI CA Deficit Current Account Deficit and FDI Flows (in percent of GDP)Sources: MONSTAT and staff estimates Net FDI Portfolio Investment Other Unidentified Financing Change in Reserves (+ is decrease) Errors and Omissions Financial Account Current Account Deficit Financing of Current Account Deficit (in percent of GDP)Sources: CBCG and staff estimates Scenario without Highway Project Scenario with Highway Project Real GDP Growth (in percent)Sources: MONSTAT and Staff projections. Page 8 External risks are mainly to the downside Montenegro is vulnerable to a downturn in external demand, especially from the euro area, Russia, and Serbia, which exacerbate existing competitiveness problems (see ¶30). Given euroization, the economy is liable to import “lowflation” from the euro area. Low oil prices could lower inflation further, while also improving external balances, lowering production costs, and boosting real incomes. But they could also signal even weaker external demand that could counteract terms of trade benefits. If very persistent, they could also drive down electricity prices (on which Montenegro is highly dependent). Reliance on inward capital flows, and substantial public financing needs (even in the absence of the highway project), expose Montenegro to shifts in risk aversion and disruptions to global financial markets. Public debt will increase substantially as a result of the highway spending, and could escalate substantially in the event of negative growth shocks, and cost overruns on the highway could generate higher financing needs (see also ¶14 and Appendix I). External private debt is also large and projected to increase further, making the country vulnerable to growth and terms of trade shocks (Appendix II). There are upside and downside domestic risks: Growth could be substantially higher if some large-scale investment projects start earlier than anticipated and their spillovers to the domestic economy are greater. Conversely, delays to the highway and an undersea power connection with Italy could undermine growth. Demands for higher pensions and public sector wages have so far been resisted, but there is a risk that fiscal discipline could relax (¶14).