Pressures The draft 2015 budget shows spending restraint. Compared to the 2014 budget: nominal (central government) non-highway capital spending is reduced by 23 percent (around EUR 24 million, which would result in a 0.8 percentage point improvement in the overall balance), with cuts focused on non-essential spending (e.g., sports centers rather than infrastructure); transfers for social protection fall as a share of GDP by 0.4 percentage points (0.3 percentage points from the fall in pension and disability, 0.1 percentage points from redundancy payments), though they increase in nominal levels; and there are increases in transfers to institutions, individuals, NGOs and the public sector (0.1 percentage points), and reserves (0.1 percentage points); no new revenue measures are introduced, although the authorities intend to continue measures against the informal economy. Planned VAT changes are revenue neutral, but an additional tax bracket makes the system somewhat more complicated. Staff estimates that the expenditure measures would result in a 0.9 percent improvement in the overall balance when excluding highway spending (and assuming revenues stay constant as a share of non-highway GDP). However, the highway places a large burden on the public finances, more than undoing the improvement in the fiscal balances over the past two years. Assuming that revenue and non-highway expenditure policies in the 2015 budget are maintained through to 2019, staff projects public debt to increase to around 69 percent of GDP in 2017, and to gradually decline thereafter. The debt profile is particularly sensitive to the timing of expenditures—if highway spending were to be more back-loaded, the peak debt ratio would not only be later but lower. Tax revenues increased by 1ppt of GDP in 2013. The effects of administrative measures intended to reduce informality, a VAT rate hike, and the post-crisis recovery are difficult to separate. The current system has a standard 19 percent rate, a discounted 7 percent rate, and a full-exemption bracket. The planned changes add two intermediate rates of 5 and 10 percent instead of the current 7 percent rate. The highway will be exempt from VAT payments, fuel excise will apply at the lower rate, there will be no excises on the import of machinery, and there is no requirement to pay PIT or contributions for foreign employees. Note that rounding means that these numbers do not add up to the contribution of 0.9. The profile of highway expenditures has not been finalized. Staff projections are based on the latest announced schedule (EUR 206 million in 2015, EUR 253 million in 2016, EUR 303 million in 2017, and EUR 47 million in 2018). In the absence of the highway, a primary surplus of 2.7 percent would have been expected from 2015; with the highway, deficits of around 3 to 5 percent are incurred through 2015–2017. Page 10 Medium-term funding needs are large. Substantial repayments of Eurobonds and commercial bank loans to the state are due over the next five years, peaking at 8–9 percent of GDP a year in 2015, 2016 and 2019. Demand for domestically-issued debt has been increasing, but Montenegro will remain highly dependent on external funding. With the additional burden from the highway, gross financing needs exceed 15 percent. Important progress in divesting from state-owned industries has been made, but is not yet complete. Consistent with Fund advice, the authorities have finished payments arising from KAP guarantees (amounting to 0.8 and 3.2 percent of GDP in 2012 and 2013), and have sold the loss-making aluminum producer, KAP, but privatization payments have not been fully received. The state is still involved in a number of smaller companies that it has tried, as yet unsuccessfully, to sell, and other guarantees amounting to almost 10 percent of GDP remain. Hence, the public finances are subject to numerous risks: Growth: Real GDP growth has historically been highly volatile, a particular concern for a unilaterally euroized economy (Box 2). The accompanying DSA shows that debt would increase to 86 percent of GDP following a one standard deviation shock to growth. The historical sample includes the boom and bust; hence, the shock is large—4.9 percentage points—and arguably not useful as a guide to likely future shocks. A 1ppt shock—as seen over the past year—would increase debt to 72 percent of GDP. Local company Uniprom signed a contract to buy KAP for EUR 28 million in June, and took over in July. However, it received a two-month extension on payment at the time, and another six-month extension in September when it paid EUR 4 million and provided a guarantee from BNP Paribas Bank for the remainder. Public debt incl. highway excl. highway Projected primary balances incl. highway excl. highway Source: Montenegrian authorities and staff calculations. Page 11 Box 2. Fiscal Policy in a Unilaterally Euroized Economy Using another country’s currency provides for a strong monetary anchor and reduces administrative costs associated with running an own currency. However, the arrangement puts a premium on disciplined fiscal policies and flexibility to adjust to external shocks. With this in mind, some stylized facts of economies that have unilaterally adopted another currency are notable: First, Montenegro, along with other euroized and dollarized economies, has benefited from relatively favorable interest rate-growth differentials. However, it has also experienced greater volatility of growth rates. This is of particular concern as even brief, one-off growth shocks can erode much-needed fiscal buffers and can have a lasting negative impact on debt sustainability. Second, public revenues are more volatile in dollarized economies than in their non-dollarized peers. Regression analysis suggests that primary balances have typically not responded to debt or economic conditions in dollarized economies. As boom years were not used to build sufficient buffers, these countries often had to resort to pro-cyclical cuts, for instance in reaction to difficulties in market access. Hence, dollarized and euroized economies have faced large increases in debts since the crisis. These economies differ greatly in many respects, so caution should be exercised when drawing inferences about policy. Nonetheless, their experiences suggest that they should aim for larger fiscal buffers than their emerging market peers. Fiscal policy should also become more responsive to the business cycle, in particular by using boom years to create policy space. ___________________ The countries in the “dollarized” sample include Montenegro, Kosovo, Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama. “Floating EMs” includes Albania, Serbia, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico, and Peru (for the years for which they were classified as floating or free floating). “Western Balkans” includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia. meanstandard deviation Real interest rate (percent) MNE dollarized floating EMs Western Balkans meanstandard deviation Real GDP growth (percent) Source: World Economic Outlook. Note: Averagesover 2000-2013. The real interest rate is calculated from the effective nominal interest rate on gross government debt, deflated using the GDP deflator. Page 12 Financing : The successful issuance of a Eurobond earlier in 2014 alleviated short-term pressures. However, Montenegro’s high reliance on foreign financing makes it vulnerable to changes in market conditions as it rolls over existing loans. Financing needs for the highway are mostly met by the ExIm loan. Political economy: The government is coming under increased pressure to relax the freeze on pensions and increase public sector wages. Highway costs: Experiences of other highway projects show that delays are common and that cost overruns can be sizeable. The dollar denomination of the ExIm loan creates exchange rate risk that will be costly to hedge. The offsetting measures in the draft 2015 budget are appropriate, given still-fragile growth, but a long period of strong fiscal discipline will be needed. The measures should be at least maintained through the highway construction period, as assumed in the Staff projections. This would result in a primary surplus of 2.7 percent of GDP in 2019, after highway construction is finished (if no downside risks eventuate). Staff advises maintaining current spending discipline and revenue measures after the A EUR 280 million Eurobond was issued in May 2014, at a coupon of 5½ percent, of which EUR 195 million was used for budget financing and EUR 85 million to retire Eurobonds from 2010 and 2011. Domestic issuance of Treasury bills totals EUR 180 million so far this year. Hence, estimated financing needs of EUR 343 million in 2014 are covered. However, staff estimates financing needs to be higher in 2015, even aside from the highway. For example, the Albanian section of the Albania-Kosovo highway cost more than double its initial estimate. Financing Total financing, of which Foreign financing Domestic financing Interest rate -growth differential (real interest rate -real GDP growth) Source: Montenegrian authorities and staff calculations. PB constant at 2.7% PB constant at 1.9% PB constant at 1% Public debt paths under different scenarios 2019-2030 Page 13 highway spending ends, while restoring the non-highway capital budget, to allow for other essential infrastructure projects. This would imply a surplus of 1.9 percent of GDP, to reduce debt below 60 percent within ten years. To reduce risks and improve funding conditions, the authorities should lay out long- term fiscal plans. A credible and reliable consolidation requires fundamental expenditure reform, especially of the pension system, which is persistently underfunded, and the public sector wage bill, which is high by regional standards (Figure 3). Elements of a long-term plan would include: Further pension reform, to show how pension costs can be contained over the near term. Further cuts in the public sector wage bill (including through rationalizing employment), which would also reduce the relative reservation wage and help improve competitiveness. Identification of and budgeting for essential non-highway capital budget items. Staff does not favor substantial and permanent increases in taxes, but there is potential to raise VAT revenues in the near term. Revenues are relatively high for the region, a low PIT rate is appropriate to avoid further disincentives to formalization, and a much higher CIT rate risks deterring investment. However, there is potential to raise more revenues from VAT, for instance by eliminating exemptions, and unifying rates, which could increase compliance and yields. The 2011 pension reform increases the pensionable age to 67 only by 2025 for men and 2041 for women. Key needs include infrastructure to support the sustainable development of the tourism sector and investment in the energy sector, as losses in energy distribution are significant. The current top rate of 19 percent is lower than many peers, and exemptions bring the average effective rate to 12–13 percent. Page 14 Additional measures would be needed in the near term if risks eventuate. The authorities should also lay out additional consolidation plans that would be applied in the event of unanticipated shocks to growth or refinancing and highway costs. The first recourse should be to cut or delay spending on the highway. The fiscal framework should be bolstered. A fiscal rule was approved in April to embrace the Maastricht 3 percent of GDP deficit and 60 percent of GDP debt limits. Enforcement is, however, weak: there are no automatic spending caps, no deadlines for implementing fiscal measures, and the exception for “strategically important projects” undermines its credibility. The authorities should also strengthen controls in the broader public sector and refrain from providing more support to enterprises, whether direct or indirect. The authorities acknowledged the risks to the public finances from the new highway and aim to manage them through a combination of revenue gains and expenditure restraint. If the deficit or debt exceed the 3 and 60 percent, respectively, the government has to submit a proposal of corrective measures to the parliament within 60 days, but there is no deadline by which the deficit/debt has to be below the limit again. Main revenue sources (as % of GDP) PIT VAT Excises Social security Non-tax Other Main expenditures (as % of GDP) Gross salaries Goods and services Interest payments Social security Other transfers Capital expenditures Subsidies Other Revenue Compensation of employees Note: Datarefer to 2013.Source: World Economic Outlook, Montenegrian authorities and staff calculations. Page 15 The authorities pointed to conservative revenue estimates in their budgets, and further gains from on-going efforts to address informality (mainly through administrative measures, such as changing the criminal code to treat the payment of wages without corresponding payment of taxes and contributions by employers as a criminal offense, and similarly, treating the payment of wages in cash as a criminal offense). They pointed to the strong demand for the Eurobond issuance in May 2014 (which was heavily oversubscribed), and saw good prospects for continued market access at favorable terms. The authorities expect large growth benefits from the highway to tourism, transport, trade and regional development, which in turn would boost social cohesion. They consider the highway loan’s terms to be very attractive, despite the exchange rate risk. The authorities hope to raise toll revenues of EUR 17 million (0.4 percent of projected 2018 GDP) per year on completion of the highway in 2018, increasing to EUR 60 million in 2047, based on expectations of high traffic flows.