Moderate growth is continuing. After contracting by 2½ percent in 2012, real GDP rebounded by 3¼ percent last year, supported by increased hydro electricity production, growth in tourism, and the commencement of several tourism-based investment projects. Preliminary data indicates a sharp growth slowdown beginning in the second quarter of 2014. Construction activity has decelerated, associated with delayed infrastructure projects (including the highway project). Manufacturing production has contracted over the year to date, while electricity production has slowed to more normal levels (Figure 1). The nominal side of the economy is weak. The CPI decreased steadily in 2014 through October, mainly because of low international energy and food prices and weak inflation pressures in the euro area. Average net earnings have been broadly flat since 2011 and bank credit has retrenched through the first three quarters of 2014. In what follows, “highway” denotes the first stage only, unless otherwise stated, not the complete highway (which has not yet been contracted or budgeted). CPI inflation Wages Monthly 1/ Wages (12-mth moving average) 1/ Wage and Price Inflation (in percent, yoy) Sources: MONSTAT and staff estimates 1/ Excludes taxes and contributions. Jan-09Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14 Private Credit (Year-on-year percent change Total Credit to households Credit to enterprises Page 6 Box 1. Montenegro’s Highway Project The Bar-Boljare Highway is a project to connect Bar, Montenegro’s main seaport, to the border of Serbia. The authorities see major economic and non-economic benefits arising from the project, including regional development, trade, road safety, and national security. The authorities selected China Road and Bridge Cooperation (CRBC) and China ExIm Bank as the main partners for the first stage of the project, to link the capital city Podgorica with the northern municipality Kolašin. The agreement signed with CRBC stipulates a construction period of four years and 30 percent of the investment to be subcontracted to domestic companies. Construction was to start in 2014, but is now expected to begin in the spring of 2015. ExIm Bank will provide 85 percent of the financing (EUR 688 million) as a 20 year loan, denominated in dollars, with a fixed 2 percent interest rate and a six-year grace period. The government will provide the remaining 15 percent of the project’s financing, from revenue over-performance, cuts in non-highway capital spending, and/or additional borrowing. The government also intends to rely on tolls once the highway is completed. Laudable fiscal adjustment was achieved in 2013, but public debt continues to increase (Figure 2). Personal income tax (PIT) and value-added tax (VAT) rate hikes, a freeze on pensions, efforts to increase tax compliance, and recovering economic activity contributed to a fiscal adjustment of nearly 3 percent of GDP in 2013, despite large repayments of guarantees to the aluminum producer KAP. This reduced the overall deficit to 3.3 percent of GDP and the primary deficit to 1.1 percent (an overall balance of 0 and a primary surplus of 2.1 percent excluding the repayment of loan guarantees). Nonetheless, public debt increased to 58 percent in 2013, double the level of five years ago. Revenues in 2014 are expected to be higher than (conservatively) budgeted; however, so are expenditures. Balances for the year as a whole will depend on expenditure restraint in the last quarter. Underlying vulnerability in external balances remains. The economy has a narrow production base and very high import penetration—the trade imbalance was 40 percent of GDP in 2013. The current account deficit has widened in the first nine months of 2014 by 1.2 percent of GDP, mainly as a result of a worsening income balance, which deteriorated by about 1¼ percent, and transfers, which fell by ½ percent. The deterioration of the net exports of goods was more than offset by net increases on the service side. Net FDI inflows, which historically cover about 70 percent of the deficit, decreased by 7 percent in the first nine months of 2014. Page 7 The effects of the weakening Russian economy on the Montenegrin economy are as yet unclear. Russians comprise almost ¼ of total foreign tourists, yet tourist arrivals have increased by 1¼ percent through 2013:Q3. However, capital inflows associated with real estate—the bulk of which historically originate from Russia—have fallen by 11 percent in the first ten months of 2014.