The collapse of the lending boom resulted in a long period of deleveraging (see Analysis of Macrofinancial Linkages, Appendix II). Only now does the level of credit appear to be in line with those seen in Western Balkan peers, and the level of private sector indebtedness remains elevated, potentially inhibiting credit demand (Appendix II, section C). In more recent years, banks have sought to restore profitability by raising spreads of lending rates over deposits; hence, lending rates have remained elevated even as deposit rates have fallen. More recently, interest rates have started to fall, but credit growth remains subdued. Ratio of Private Credit to GDP MNE Western Balkans (excluding MNE) Bank Lending Rates and Interest Margins (in percent, weighted average) Effective Lending-Deposit Rate Spread Effective Average Lending Rates (RHS) Sources: IFS, WEO and Staff calculations. Sources: CBCG and staff calculations Staff analysis shows that output and credit growth are highly correlated , and the effects of credit shocks on growth are higher than for other Western Balkan and emerging European peers (Appendix II, section D). That said, output growth is largely driven by fluctuations in tourism and foreign direct investment that “bypass” domestic credit conditions. Hence, tight credit has not prevented the recent recovery, but growth could have been stronger if credit conditions were easier. Nominal GDP, Tourism, and FDI Developments (in percent change) GDP Overnight Stays FDI(-1), RHS 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Page 20 The authorities regard easing credit conditions further as crucial for growth. They are concerned with persistently high levels of NPLs and average lending rates, which they regard as evidence of market failure. Evidence for excessive rates is mixed. Average lending rates and margins are not out of line with the region. Across individual banks, the four largest banks account for ¾ of the loan market, and some have higher margins than average, suggesting some market power. But in terms of actual credit conditions, lending rates from larger banks tend to be lower, reflecting relatively lower funding costs and scale efficiencies (Figure 5). Policies to boost credit may have unintended negative consequences. The authorities have adopted a voluntary debt resolution framework and drafted a law that caps interest rates on new loans at no more than 33 percent above the six-month weighted average lending rate. They are of the view that encouraging new banks to enter the market would boost competition. Many countries have employed interest rate caps, mostly against exploitative rates on unsecured consumer loans. When used as a device to stimulate credit, the effect has often been to reduce formal lending and drive riskier borrowers to unregulated lenders. Concerns over excessive or usurious interest rates call for consumer protection measures rather than general lending rate restrictions. Increased bank competition could per se reduce lending margins, but might also induce banks to lend imprudently to preserve or gain market share. With these financial stability concerns in mind, the supervisor should continue to pay rigorous attention to banks’ business plans, capital levels, and lending concentration risks. The voluntary restructuring law could usefully spur restructuring, but it only applies to a small subset of debtors, which might slow reorganization plans that need to involve all claims. Complementary measures—such as fast-track provisions—could boost the effectiveness of the law. There are currently 14 banks operating in Montenegro, up from 11 in 2013, for a population of 625,000. A th bank license application is under review. Some new banks are entering the market to provide local banking services for firms from the parent’s economy making large direct investments; others see long-term returns as the economy expands and are seeking to establish brand presence. The larger incumbent banks show little appetite to take over smaller banks, indicating that any consolidation of the banking sector will be slow. See “Interest Rate Caps Around the World”, World Bank Policy Research Paper 7070. A centralized reporting system of bank-specific lending rates on the central bank’s website could increase transparency and foster competition, as was successfully done in Ecuador. Page 21 New consumer bankruptcy legislation could impede credit supply and should be amended or repealed. A new law has been passed to increase protection for borrowers. However, the law is now delayed due to the lack of supporting institutional and regulatory infrastructure. Staff is concerned that, if implemented in its current form, the law could undermine the rights of secured creditors, including with regard to enforcement on a bankrupt debtor’s house, creating moral hazard and significantly deterring new secured lending (Appendix III). Sustainably reducing lending rates will require reducing lending risks. Staff encourages further progress to reduce lending risk premia that arise from difficulties in assessing the credit-worthiness of potential borrowers and recovering collateral. An encouraging example is the introduction of Public Enforcement Officers (PEOs), who focus only on enforcing court decisions; this has been associated with a significant reduction in enforcement times and is widely regarded by lenders as a significant step to reducing lending risk premia. Lenders indicate that reducing the frequency of changes to laws affecting lending and more consistent and predictable enforcement of existing laws would reduce lending risk premia still further. Authorities’ views The authorities recognized the potential risks from measures to boost credit growth but indicated that all options to improve lending conditions should remain “on the table”. Discussions covered factors affecting lending: The authorities acknowledged that the voluntary restructuring law applies to a narrow range of impaired loans, but believe the current laws provide room for restructuring of packages of loans. They pointed to a steady reduction in the level of NPLs. Staff expressed concerns that interest rate ceilings could further restrict bank lending to small businesses. The authorities consider interest rate caps to have a potentially useful role to play, citing increased lending and declining rates when caps were previously imposed in 2012. Officials emphasized that the draft law is intended to address usurious lending rates. The supervisor clarified that the approval of bank licenses depends on meeting licensing conditions. Nonetheless, the authorities recognized staff’s concerns about focusing purely on compliance and the potential for new entrants to under-price risks, and judged there to be scope to give greater weight to financial stability considerations when considering applications for new licenses. In the first nine months of public enforcement officer (PEO) operations, 20381 cases were closed out of 60561 total active cases; 15 percent of EUR 231 million total claims (6½ percent of 2014 GDP) were collected. Page 22 The authorities agreed that legal ambiguities in the new consumer bankruptcy legislation and a lack of enabling regulations are problematic and should be corrected. The authorities also agreed that structural factors could affect lending premia. They cited progress in reducing risks, such as procedures that cut down the time taken to enforce court orders and secure collateral. Montenegro is taking steps to enhance its AML/CFT framework but deficiencies exist. The revised AML/CFT law significantly strengthens customer due diligence obligations, and practical steps have been taken to improve the reporting of suspicious transactions. However, reporting requirements are narrowly focused on “transactions,” rather than “funds.” Adequate and timely information on the beneficial ownership of legal persons is lacking. Due diligence measures should be further enhanced to require reporting entities to establish sources of wealth of beneficial owners on a risk basis. The lack of provisions prohibiting criminals or their associates from holding a significant or controlling interest in certain non-bank financial sector institutions and their functions is problematic.