Montenegro is a small economy facing a number of challenges to secure durable and stable growth. Output is concentrated (mainly in tourism, energy, and hard commodities), exposing it to fluctuations in external markets and terms of trade. The economy also depends heavily on external financing. A rigid labor market restricts the capacity to absorb shocks, while unfavorable demographics and low labor participation hamper growth and pension solvency. Policies are constrained: fiscal space is limited, the Bar-Boljare highway project (Box 1) will substantially increase public debt, and euroization implies no independent monetary policy. Montenegro is seeking EU membership, and a general election will be held in 2016. Box 1. Montenegro’s Highway Project The Bar-Boljare highway will connect the main seaport of Bar to Serbia. The authorities see major benefits from the project, including regional integration, strengthened trade, and road safety. Only the first 40 km segment connecting the outskirts of Podgorica with the less-developed northern municipality Kolašin has been costed and budgeted. Construction has been contracted to the China Road and Bridge Corporation (CRBC), at a cost of EUR 809 million (23 percent of 2014 GDP). Payment to the CRBC is to be made in U.S. dollars at the euro/US exchange rate at the time the contract was signed; this implies a fixed cost of USD 1.1 billion, with the foreign exchange risk to be borne by Montenegro. (Euro depreciation since the agreement was struck is estimated to have increased costs in euros by about 5 percent of GDP.) The remaining 136 km of the highway has not yet been costed, but is expected to cost less per kilometer as the first segment presents the most difficult engineering challenges. China’s ExIm Bank will finance 85 percent of the first section (henceforth “the highway“) through a 20-year loan, denominated in dollars, with a fixed 2 percent interest rate and a six-year grace period. The authorities have indicated that the remaining 15 percent of the cost will be financed through a combination of cuts in non-highway capital spending and/or additional borrowing, with toll revenues used to help fund repayments once the highway is completed. Construction officially started on May 11, 2015. The highway will be constructed over a 48-month period. 30 percent of the investment is to be subcontracted to domestic companies.