Economic activity has rebounded. The tourist season has been buoyant, and construction has been strong after infrastructure investment delays the previous year. Staff forecasts growth to be just over 4 percent in 2015, compared with 1¾ percent in 2014. Inflation averaged 1½ percent last year, after deflation in 2014. But the labor market is not performing as well: nominal wage growth has been flat since 2011, and unemployment and participation rates are around 18 and 55 percent, respectively (Figure 1). Page 9 Banks’ health has improved, but some deficiencies remain (Figure 2). Capital buffers appear adequate on average, but with a high degree of heterogeneity across institutions. Liquidity is ample; many banks now have loan-to-deposit ratios well below 100 percent. But despite high net interest rate margins, profitability remains weak due to high operating costs. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) have declined, but remain high at 14¾ percent of gross loans, or about 40 percent inclusive of loans transferred to asset management companies. Financial conditions are slowly improving. Lending to the private sector increased by 2¼ percent on average in 2015, after a sustained contraction in credit since 2008. Nonetheless, credit growth appears weak when compared with the rebound in growth and high liquidity. Lending rates have fallen in recent months, but margins over funding costs remain elevated on average. Banks remain risk averse, citing persistent problems securing and selling collateral, limited lending opportunities, and weak accounting and reporting practices that make assessing credit-worthiness difficult. External imbalances have narrowed. The current account deficit decreased by about 3 percentage points of GDP in the first three quarters 2015, due to an improved service balance from robust tourism that more than offset a deterioration in the merchandise trade deficit (associated with machinery imports for the highway construction and deteriorating terms of trade). FDI flows have also been robust, at 19½ percent of GDP year to date—almost double that 2014. Official data on external stocks are not available for recent years; staff estimates that external debt will have decreased modestly to 152 percent of GDP by the end of 2015. Revenue gains have slowed, and expenditures continue to stress the public finances (Figure 3) Sizable revenue overperformance in 2014 was matched by equally sizable expenditure overruns of 3 percent of GDP. Implementation of the 2015 budget has also slipped: non-highway expenditure overruns are estimated at 1½ percent of GDP, compounded by modest revenue underperformance. Unanticipated expenditures (e.g., from activated guarantees and arrears that include unanticipated legal rulings against the government) are a persistent problem. Excluding receivables (which include deposits with other banks) average total loan growth is estimated at about 1 percent. Notable contributions to the loosening of spending in 2015 came from unfreezing pensions, reducing the emergency consolidation tax rate, and new subsidies for strategic sectors, all of which are set to continue in 2016. Highway construction delays imply under-spending of planned highway expenditures of around 1 percent of GDP in 2015; this will add to spending over in the following years. Page 10 Expenditure Overshooting Relative to Budget Targets Capital expenditure Public Wage Bill Pensions Other Total Arrears Expenditure: Budgeted vs. Observed Budgeted Observed 2015f 2016f 2017f 2018f Sources: Montenegrin authorities and staff calculations Sources: Montengrin authorities and staff calculations Real Estate Prices (Index 2007=1) The downturn in Russia and the refugee crisis in Europe have had limited impacts. Russia is a major consumer of tourism and purchaser of real estate. Property prices have continued to fall from their crisis peaks, in part because Russian buying has fallen. But foreign visitor stays, including from Russia, have increased by 15½ percent in the year to date; the authorities believe tourists have chosen Montenegro over more volatile destinations. The country has not faced significant numbers of refugees, mainly because geography makes transit more difficult than through other Western Balkan countries. Sources: CBM,MONSTAT and Staff calculations Resale Property Index New Property Index