Financial sector vulnerabilities appear low overall, but with exceptions. The mission reviewed key findings of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) that was conducted alongside the Article IV consultations. The FSAP assessed system-wide solvency and liquidity indicators as broadly sound. Vulnerabilities relate mainly to high levels of NPLs and/or low provisioning levels. Some banks—mainly domestic—are weakly capitalized and vulnerable to shocks, such as an economic slowdown (see FSSA). Increased bank competition is compressing profitability, with the risk that some banks could lend imprudently to gain market share. Emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) capacity is limited (Annex III). Low provisioning and weak banks are key concerns (Figure 6). Low IFRS-based provisions by some banks suggest overly-positive collateral valuations, and some bank audits have been qualified. Domestic supervisors lack a formal framework that would equip them with the tools to challenge collateral valuations of banks. An Asset Quality Review (AQR) of all banks by independent internationally recognized auditors is recommended to review loan classification and provisioning practices. In the interim, time-bound supervisory action plans (including capital injection by shareholders) should be developed for “at risk” banks. Work on resolution plans— with the objectives of maintaining financial system stability, protecting insured depositors, and minimizing cost to taxpayers—should continue. Although the legal, regulatory, and supervisory frameworks for banking are robust in many respects, there is scope to achieve more effective supervision. This includes improving the identification, measurement, and management of nonperforming assets and Investment management companies, pension fund management companies, or stock brokers. Page 23 liquidity risk. Banks’ ability to reclassify problem assets on the basis of the type of collateral is problematic and greater clarity and consistency in the prudential categorization of restructured loans is needed. Priorities for strengthened supervision also include reducing operational, funding, and credit risks, and strengthening banks’ governance frameworks for risk management. Euroization presents challenges for safeguarding financial stability. Montenegro has unilaterally adopted the euro as currency and unit of account. It is outside of the euro system, and the central bank cannot independently create liquidity on its own. This significantly constrains the ability to provide lender-of-last resort funding in cases of emergency. As it stands, the banking system currently appears capable of handling modest liquidity pressures. But liquidity conditions can deteriorate quickly, and liquidity support from parent banks—another potential liquidity buffer—cannot be counted on in times of crisis (Appendix V). Options to bolster ELA capabilities include a dedicated sub-account set up by the finance ministry for use by the central bank, together with objective and quantifiable criteria for public funding in a crisis situation. The EU accession process offers an opportunity to develop a macroprudential policy framework. Macroprudential policies are important given the lack of other monetary policy instruments; currently, reserve requirements are the only actively-used instrument and are of limited effectiveness. Convergence to the EU and European Systemic Risk Board’s policies in advance of EU accession is advisable. Staff recommends that the macro-prudential framework be broadened and made fully operational. The potential toolkit should include powers over loan-to- value, debt-service-to-income, and debt-to-income ratios; sectoral capital requirements; and capital buffers. Lending concentration limits should be carefully monitored. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with the main weaknesses identified by the FSAP and endorsed many key recommendations. They clarified: All banks are subject to annual on-site inspections; however, the authorities intend to proceed with an independent AQR of banks and take appropriate actions as needed. Supervisors closely monitor banks’ classifications of loans, with a particular emphasis on the borrowers’ capacity to repay, and limit the extent to which collateral assessments can be used to improve loan classifications. Including sector concentration and concentration through collateral. Alternatives such as bank fees and pooled liquidity would likely add to costs and be passed on to lending rates (see FSSA and Appendix V). Further analysis is needed to determine the appropriate size of the sub account. Page 24 The central bank agrees that a broader supervisory framework is needed to monitor and address NPLs. It has drafted a law to extend its supervisory remit to factoring, leasing, and credit and guarantee operations. The authorities regard euroization as a vital anchor for price and economic stability. The authorities intend to align the central bank law with EU regulations by end 2016 that, because of EU state aid rules, would preclude boosting ELA reserves through an MOF sub account and prevent direct liquidity assistance from the authorities to banks. The authorities saw merit in clarifying and establishing new macroprudential tools in advance of EU accession.