Financial conditions remain tight. Lending rates remain high and have increased in real terms. Interest rate spreads are around 7½ percentage points, near their historical peak, despite deposit rates falling to around 2 percent. Notwithstanding a modest increase in lending to households, overall credit contracted by 3 percent (yoy) through October. The picture for banks’ health is mixed (Figure 4): Banks’ capitalization has improved, although it is relatively low compared to those in the rest of Eastern Europe. In terms of funding, deposits continue to grow, and liquidity appears sufficient, at 30 percent of short-term assets. On average, banks have reduced the ratio of loans to deposits since the crisis to a more sensible 100 percent, although this figure conceals wide heterogeneity across banks. Banks calculate regulatory capital based on Basel 1. Deposit to Lending Rate Spread (Basis points)Sources: Central Bank of Montenegro and Fund staff calculations. Page 16 Asset quality remains a problem. Over the course of 2011–12, some EUR 600 million in NPLs were shifted to the balance sheets of factoring companies. A change in classification at the end of 2012 further reduced reported NPLs, but the level remains high at 17 percent of total loans for the banking system as a whole. Banks with high levels of NPLs are naturally more risk averse and hesitant to lend and/or charge high effective lending rates Regulatory provisions exceed the required levels under IFRS accounting standards but do not necessarily lead to losses being recognized. System-wide regulatory provisioning is 68 percent. The regulatory environment is reinforced by annual onsite reviews, coupled with stress tests. However, regulatory provision levels exhibit a wide range across banks, from 33 percent to 85 percent. Given that banks in Montenegro have very similar business models and have experienced the same lending environment, this raises questions about whether all banks follow classification rules properly (e.g., whether they have been “evergreening” loans). Further, banks report significantly lower levels of provisioning in their IFRS financial statements than under the regulatory provisioning rules, which might reflect overly optimistic collateral valuations used to offset loan impairment. Hence, banks might be understating losses implied by regulatory provisions in their income statements and avoiding writing off bad loans. Greater transparency, simplicity, and oversight could bring useful benefits. Reporting : Currently, Montenegro misses potential benefits from its relatively strict regulatory provisioning environment, as the provisions are not reported publicly (only the provisions per IFRS standard are published). Quarterly Reports on banks are prepared but not published. Nor does there appear to be a published policy on collateral valuations. An enhanced reporting regime could expose problems and increase incentives to resolve bad loans. External asset quality reviews could be considered as an independent assessment of banks’ financial health and a means for boosting confidence. Regulatory classifications : The regulations specify seven categories of loan performance for provisioning purposes, but data on the values of loans in the “B1” and “B2” and “C1” and “C2” subcategories are not available. Simplifying to five categories (A, B, C, D, and E) would make corroboration easier, and greater automaticity of classifications might prevent evergreening practices. Oversight of factoring companies : The supervisor lacks any oversight over factoring companies, which further reduces the transparency of the financial system as around EUR 600 million have been effectively transferred out of the oversight of regulators but remain in the system. Staff urged progress on the draft law on factoring companies, which should grant the supervisor Nonperforming Loans (Percent of gross loans)Sources: CBCG and Fund staff calculations. Page 17 powers of direction over the use of factoring companies and create transparent and verifiable standards for recording assets held by such vehicles. The authorities are considering a number of measures: The authorities have tabled a law before parliament on voluntary restructuring—the “Podgorica Approach”—that aims to encourage out-of-court workouts to resolve impaired loans. The approach is potentially useful for solvent firms with temporary cash flow or liquidity problems. In response to what the authorities perceive as lack of competition in lending rates, new bank licenses have been approved, bringing their number to 12, and the authorities have indicated a willingness to grant more. Policies are needed to address credit risk. Staff analysis suggests that lending spreads reflect structural lending risk premia, which commends reform of legal processes and enforcement. The Montenegrin banking system does not show typical signs of lack of competition: the number of banks is high, and profitability is relatively weak. Widening spreads could reflect the wish to rebuild profitability. Going forward, lending spreads could remain high to cover lending risks arising from difficulties in reliable credit information, securing collateral, and inconsistent application of regulations (e.g., tax administration) (Box 3). The recent introduction of dedicated public enforcement officers could facilitate the resolution of some claims, but further progress will depend on more timely court decisions, with penalties for delays, and improved administration. Reserve assets appear adequate. Montenegro is euroized. Hence, traditional reserve metrics normally applied to countries with fixed exchange rate regimes—such as the coverage of a certain number of months of imports or a percentage of short-term external debt—are not very useful. As an economy without lending of last resort operations, a better metric is to look at reserves as a ratio to deposits. On these terms, Montenegro ranks fairly well against other dollarized or euroized economies, and the ratio has been broadly stable. The authorities also discussed lending rate caps as a measure to boost credit growth but have opted not to pursue such measures, which would risk reducing credit availability to newer and smaller enterprises. Although net lending has been contracting, household lending has been expanding, which might be due in part to lower lending risk: the law allows creditors to directly garnish wages for past due debts. Page 18 Box 3. Interest Rate Spreads High lending spreads over funding rates could be explained by large operational costs, weak profitability, and high credit risk, the last in turn reflecting structural factors such as institutions, legal frameworks, and the rule of law and its outcomes. To look at which of these could be significant for Montenegro, lending spreads in a sample of central and eastern European economies are correlated with a range of indicators. For example, nominal GDP—a proxy for economies of scale—is inversely and significantly correlated with lending spreads, suggesting that smaller economies might face inherently higher borrowing costs. (However, spreads are uncorrelated with the level of bank concentration.) Contract enforcement is cited as a key risk to lending by banks in Montenegro. Likewise, the data indicate that structural factors are likely to be important for credit risk. For example, lending spreads are positively and significantly correlated with the number of procedures to enforce a contract. Similarly, higher recovery rates are associated with a significantly lower price of lending. Lending spreads are also positively correlated with the average time needed to enforce a contract and the cost of enforcing a contract, while measures of the strength of investor protection are negatively correlated, indicating that a higher level of protection would generally be associated with lower markups. However, given the small sample for which data are available, these latter correlations are not significant at conventional levels. The results suggest that policy measures that address the time and cost of securing collateral and the predictability of legal outcomes would help lower borrowing costs. Such reforms will have long run effects in lowering the structural risk premia being paid by borrowers. _____________ The sample of countries includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Kosovo, Latvia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, and Serbia. All measures are from the World Bank’s Doing Business survey. ALB BIH BRGHRVHUNKOSLVAMDAMNEROMSRB 55345678910Deposit Spread Deposit Spread and DB Procedures to Enforce Contracts (X-axis: Percentage points; Y-axis: Number of procedures) Page 19 The authorities have undertaken measures to increase oversight of AML/CFT issues. Banks are responsible for identifying politically exposed persons and beneficial owners. In practice, there are problems with data issues, owners of foreign firms can be difficult to trace, and banks might be reluctant to jeopardize relations with clients. The authorities are thus encouraged to closely monitor the implementation of risk management systems that identify politically exposed persons and ultimate beneficial ownership. A new law in 2014 shifted the responsibility for initiating violation procedures to the central bank. However, fines appear low, being limited by law to EUR 25,000. The authorities regard the large stock of NPLs and high prevailing interest rates as key policy challenges. They expressed confidence that the set of policy initiatives underway hold the potential to make progress in both these areas. In particular, the authorities indicated that: The draft law on restructuring will help align incentives and facilitate a substantial reduction in NPL levels. The authorities also indicated that a law granting the supervisor oversight of factoring companies was imperative to enhance transparency and the smooth functioning of the financial system. Ensuring adequate competition in the banking sector is essential, as lending premiums reflect a broader market failure. The recent introduction of public enforcement officers marks an important step to strengthen contract enforcement, but it is pre-mature to assess the effectiveness of the program at this stage. There is scope to increase penalties banks face for breaches of AML/CFT regulations, and the authorities are currently reconsidering the laws governing the limit on bank penalties. 4681012141618MNEUVKECU 1/SLVPANTLS Gross Reserve Holdings of Dollarized/Euroized Economies (2013, in percent of GDP)1/ Net reserves.Sources: WEO, Staff Reports, and staff estimates. Percent of bank deposits Percent of nominal GDP Gross International Reserves Sources: CBCG, Haver Analytics, IFS, and staff calculations Page 20