Growth is expected to increase gradually and the external position to remain strong in the medium term: In 2017, growth should rebound to 4.4 percent due mainly to the base effect on agricultural activity. In the medium term, it is expected to reach 4.5 percent, with potential output increasing by an estimated one percentage point relative to 2016, driven by higher capital accumulation and a pickup in productivity (Annex III). This latter trend assumes that the current government’s reform commitments are implemented, including improvements to the business environment, agricultural modernization and industrial diversification, and further integration into global value chains. Inflation is expected to remain low at 1.2 percent in 2017 and to increase to about 2 percent over the medium term. Consistent with the envisaged investment and GDP growth path, credit growth should pick-up over the medium-term to an average of 5 percent. In 2017, the current account deficit is expected to decline to 2.3 percent of GDP. In the medium term, it is projected to remain in the range of 1.5–2 percent of GDP. Export growth would be driven by emerging sectors and stronger external demand, and a gradual recovery of phosphate prices. Imports would grow steadily, with low (but rising) oil prices. Tourism receipts would accelerate while remittances would remain robust. Sustained FDI inflows, in line with the dynamism of new industrial sectors, would also contribute to bring reserves over 115 percent of the ARA metric (151 percent of the adjusted metric) by 2021. Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside (see Table 1). Despite increased economic diversification, growth will remain susceptible to agricultural output volatility. Weaker growth in the euro area, or in other emerging and frontier economies, could affect external demand. Adverse geopolitical developments in the Middle East and Europe, and their impact on tourism, also remain significant risks. Finally, more volatile financial conditions, together with protracted uncertainty about global trade policies, could affect investor confidence and banks’ correspondent relationships, with potential impact on financial intermediation, notably for trade credit and remittances. In terms of outward spillovers, the subsidiaries of Moroccan banks in SSA are systemically important in some host countries. On the domestic front, the new coalition government may make changes to some policies. The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and characterization of risks in the RAM and the external sector assessment (Annex II), but viewed the impact of some of these risks as less severe , including risks of rising nationalism in large economies, fragmentation and security dislocation, and slower than expected pace of reforms. They also noted that there is upside growth potential as economic activity in Europe strengthens and current structural reforms bear fruit and help increasing diversification and moving up the value chain. They agreed that a higher growth path would require significant gains in productivity. Page 15 Figure 1. Morocco: Real Sector Developments Economic activity is expected to slow significantly in 2016… Morocco and Euro Area Growth (Annual percent change) Morocco Overall Morocco Non-agricultural Proj. Euro Area Overall Source: WEO. Domestic demand was a key growth driver in the first half of 2016. Contributions to GDP Growth (Annual percent change) Public Consumption Investment Private Consumption Net Exports H Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Other high frequency indicators point to stronger activity in the real estate and tourism sectors. Tourism and Cement Sales (Annual percent change, 12m moving average) Cement sales Tourism: arrivals Tourism: nights S l y v S l y Sources: Bank Al-Magrib; and IMF staff estimates. …and output is well below potential. E K hc TFP Gap GDP Potential Morocco: Potential GDP, Actual GDP, and GDP Components, 2000-16 (Annual percent change) 2001-7 2008 Sources: Penn World Tables; WEO; and IMF staff estimates. Note: K = capital; hc = human capital; E = employed labor force; TFP = productivity. Household and business industrial surveys point to stronger activity in the second half of 2016. Household and Industry Confidence Surveys (Indices) Industry survey: capacity utilization (percent, RHS) Household confidence survey (LHS) Industry survey: new orders (12m mov. avg., RHS) l S v Sources: HCP; and IMF staff estimates. Note: For the industry survey indices: greater than 100 indicates above average, less than 100 indicates below average. y v S Food prices have surged, but core inflation remains low. CPI Core CPI Food CPI General Index Inflation (Annual percent change) Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 Figure 2. Morocco: Fiscal Developments Fiscal consolidation continues as planned. Public revenues remain resilient. Government Revenue (Percent of GDP) G&S Tax Income Tax Other Grants Proj. Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Cyclical and structural fiscal balances have improved. Cyclical and Structural Balance (Percent of GDP) Cyclically adjusted balance Structural balance Budget Balance and Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Budget Balance (LHS) Proj. Public Debt (RHS) Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Public expendures are well contained. Government Expenditure (Percent of GDP) Wages G&S & Other Subsidies Investment Proj. Proj. Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Sources: IMF staff estimates. Sovereign spreads have declined in 2016. CDS Spreads (Basis points) Markit 5-yr MAR Sov. CDS Spread EMBI Global Spread (RHS) v y y Sources: Bloomberg; and Markit. y v v y v y v Public debt is sustainable and projected to decline gradually. Evolution of Predictive Densities of Gross Nominal Public Debt (Percent of GDP; Symmetric Distribution) Baseline: Percentiles: 10th-25th 25th-50th 50th-75th 75th-90th Sources: DSA; and IMF staff estimates. Page 17 Figure 3. Morocco: Financial Sector Developments Banks have adequate capital buffers despite a decline in profitability until recently. NPLs have continued to increase, driven by the non- financial corporate sector. Indicators of Bank Profitability (percent) Return on assets (RHS) Cost of risk as a percent of credit Interest rate average spread 2015 Sep-16 Source: Bank Al-Maghrib Provisioning is rising while liquidity conditions are adequate … Indicators of Bank Liquidity (percent) Liquid assets to total assets Specific provisions to total loans 2015 Sep-16 Source: Bank Al-Maghrib Household lending has supported credit growth. Contribution to Credit Growth (Annual percent change) Non-Financial Corporates Households Public Sector Private Financial Institutions Distribution of Non-Performing Loans (Millions of Dirhams, unless otherwise noted) Other banks Private Businesses Households NPLs to Total Loans (percent, RHS) v S l y v Source: Bank Al-Maghrib. ... and loan to deposits ratios continue to improve Loans and Deposits (Annual percent change) Private credit growth Deposit growth Loan to deposit ratio (RHS) Sources: Bank Al-Maghrib; and IMF staff estimates. Lending rates have declined in line with the monetary policy rate. Bank Lending Rates and Interest Margin (Percent) Lending rates CB policy rate Lending-deposit rate spread Sources: Bank Al-Maghrib; and IMF staff estimates. Sources: Bank Al-Maghrib; and IMF staff estimates. Page 18 Figure 4. Morocco: Structural Reforms Morocco fares relatively well at the regional level in terms of overall business climate and competitiveness… Doing Business vs. Global Competiveness Indices, 2017 …but there is room to further improve business regulations. Doing Business Distance to Frontier (100 = better) Overall Jordan EMDC Algeria Egypt Morocco Tunisia Resolving insolvency Enforcing contracts Trading across borders Starting a busisness Dealing with construction permits Getting electricity x d I s s v i m C l G l ) s i f i k ( Doing Business 2017 Index (ranking out of 190 countries) Sources: World Bank Doing Business; and World Economic Forum. Further progress is also needed on education, the functioning of the labor market and financial market development. Global Competitiveness Index (Rank out of 152 countries, 1 = best) Business sophistication Market size Technological readiness Financial market development Institutions Infrastructure Macroeconomic environment Health and primary education Higher education and training Labor market efficiency Goods market efficiency Sources: WEF Global Competitiveness Index. On labor market, progress is needed to increase women’s labor force participation and to reduce regulatory rigidities Paying taxes Protecting minority investors Registering property Getting credit Source: World Bank Doing Business 2017. On education, efforts should focus on teacher training, secondary education enrollment and the quality of the educational system. Higher Education and Training (Rank out of 152 countries, 1 = best) Extent of staff training Availability of research and training services Secondary education enrollment Tertiary education enrollment Quality of the education system Internet access in schools Quality of math and science education schools Sources: WEF Global Competitiveness Index. Quality of management Progress is also needed to facilitate access to finance. Labor Market (Rank out of 152 countries, 1 = best) Labor market Financial Development (Rank out of 152 countries, 1 = best) efficiency Country capacity to attract talent Country capacity to retain talent Women in labor force Professional management Labor-employer cooperation Hiring and firing practices Flexibility of wage determination Effect of taxation on incentives to work Pay and productivity Redundancy costs Sources: WEF Global Competitiveness Index. Legal rights index Regulation of securities exchanges Soundness of banks Financial market development Affordability of financial services Services meet business needs Financing through local equity market Venture capital availability Ease of access to loans Sources: WEF Global Competiveness Index. Page 19 Figure 5. Morocco: External Sector Developments Export growth has been driven by emerging manufacturing sectors… …while imports have declined due mainly to low oil prices Exports by Type of Good (in US$ billions) Mining products Food products Finished goods Semi-finished goods Other The declining trade deficit, and sustained tourism and remittance receipts, helped improve the current account. Current Account Components (Percent of GDP) Merchandize balance Income Transfers: Remittances CA/GDP (RHS) Services: Tourism Services: Other Transfers: Other 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016e Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Morocco’s reserves coverage has further improved along several reserve adequacy metrics. Morocco: Reserve Adequacy Metrics (In US$ billions) Reserves Standard metric Adjusted metric 3 months imports 20% of broad money Reserves/(ST debt + CA deficit) 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016e 2017p 2018p 2019p 2020p 2021p Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates Imports by Type of Good (in US$ billions) Energy Food products Capital goods Raw materials Semi-finished goods Consumption goods FDI plays a key role in financing the current account. Current Account Financing (In US$ billions) FDI Public borrowing Portfolio Current account Private borrowing Reserves (RHS) 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016e The real exchange rate has appreciated recently, due to the strengthening of the US dollar. Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rates, 2009-2016 (Index, 2010=100) NEER REER Page 20