The authorities remain committed to their fiscal deficit objective of 4.3 percent of GDP in 2015. As noted, a revenue shortfall of about 0.7 percent of GDP is expected for 2015, due mainly to lower-than-anticipated grants from Gulf countries. However, the impact would be offset by the significant under-spending expected due to continued wage bill control and reductions in subsidies and transfers. Therefore, the authorities appear to be on track to meet 2015 deficit target. Staff encouraged the authorities to engage with donors to secure the expected disbursements, and the authorities were confident that they could achieve this before the end of 2015. The proposed 2016 budget continues the consolidation effort of previous years, based on strong revenue performance and modest growth in current spending . The fiscal stance, as measured by the structural fiscal deficit, will remain broadly neutral. The overall deficit is projected to decline to 3.5 percent of GDP, in line with projections at the time of the second review of the PLL arrangement. This would reflect a rapid growth in tax revenues (by more than 8 percent, or 0.6 percent of GDP), due mostly to the introduction of new corporate tax brackets (while new VAT measures would induce a net loss of 0.3 percent of GDP). At the same time, current spending would increase modestly (3.7 percent), as the authorities plan to further reduce subsidies while maintaining a relatively rapid growth in public investment spending. Staff supported the 2016 budget objectives, while noting that, like in 2015, the reliance on grant financing may require contingent measures to control public expenditures. In this regard, the authorities noted that they had already identified the sources of grant revenues for 2016 budget which should mitigate this risk. Page 15 Box 1. Morocco: Implementation of Past Fund Advice Policy implementation has been broadly in line with past Fund advice: Fiscal policy. The authorities continued subsidy reform. The promulgation of a revised organic budget law was a critical step in improving the fiscal framework; it will start being implemented with the 2016 budget. Pension reform is now expected to be implemented in early 2017. Monetary policy. Inflation remains low and inflation expectations are well-anchored. BAM has maintained its main policy interest rates unchanged at 2.5 percent in 2015. Preparations for a more flexible exchange rate have progressed, including with technical assistance from the Fund. Financial policies. Solid progress has been made in upgrading the financial policy framework, including moving to Basel III norms and implementing the new banking law. Most regulations to implement the new banking law are expected to be in place by end-2015. The new central bank law has not yet been adopted. Structural reforms. Morocco has made progress in Doing Business indicators, but much remains to be done to further improve the business climate, competition, governance and transparency. Strengthening further the functioning of the job market and the quality of education will be key in order to increase competitiveness, growth, and employment. Given the existence of capital controls, the central bank has some room for maneuver to conduct monetary policy under the exchange rate peg. In the second half of 2014, BAM lowered its policy rate (unchanged since March 2012) by 0.5 percent to 2.5 percent, and has left it unchanged since then. In recent months, as noted, BAM has continued to provide liquidity and foster greater (V)SME access to credit, but such liquidity injections have been reduced overall, in line with decreasing liquidity pressures (which, on current trends, may disappear in 2016). Going forward, staff noted that in the baseline scenario, where the output gap closes only gradually, the current monetary policy stance would remain appropriate. However, in addition to the large credit support already provided by BAM, further monetary easing may be needed should non-agricultural growth stall and reserves continue to improve, and as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored. The authorities agreed but noted that BAM’s main objective is inflation, which had recently risen to close to 2 percent, and that credit growth had not increased noticeably as a result of the last two reductions in policy rates. Page 16