The authorities continue to implement gradual fiscal consolidation despite recent shortfalls in grant revenues. The fiscal deficit objective of 3.5 percent of GDP for 2016 is estimated to have been met, including due to spending cuts (such as in wages and subsidies) to offset the grants shortfall observed again in 2016 (about 0.4 percent of GDP). In 2017, the deficit is expected to decline further to 3 percent of GDP, in line with projections at the time of PLL request. This would reflect: (i) reduced spending (in percent of GDP), primarily through contained spending on public wages and goods and services; and (ii) stable tax revenues, due mostly to weaker growth in 2016 and increased VAT refunds. Staff supported these objectives, which will allow to reduce public debt while preserving growth-friendly expenditures, and encouraged the authorities to identify short- term measures for 2017 to compensate for any grants shortfall. While sustainable, public debt should be placed firmly on a downward path. The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that public debt, which rose from 47 percent in 2009 to 64.3 percent in 2016, remains sustainable and resilient to various shocks (Annex IV), and below the debt burden benchmark of 70 percent of GDP for emerging markets. Still, there are significant fiscal risks, including potential delays in reforms to raise potential growth in the years ahead. Staff and the authorities agreed to maintain the objective of reducing public debt to 60 percent of GDP by 2020, in order to increase fiscal space gradually, without affecting growth. Reducing public debt will require fiscal reforms to bring the fiscal deficit to about 2.4 percent of GDP by 2020. Following important reforms to rein in public spending in recent years, including through energy subsidy reforms (and associated stronger social safety nets), the new organic budget law, and public pension reform, fiscal consolidation efforts going forward should focus on a few key reform areas: Taxation. The authorities are implementing tax reforms in line with recommendations from the 2013 national tax conference (Box 2). Staff welcomed recent efforts, such as regarding the Projections of taxes on income, profits, and capital gains are based on last year’s revenues. The authorities project an increased VAT refund from 5.2 billion dirhams in 2016 to 7 billion dirhams in 2017. Page 21 taxation of self-employed and liberal professions. Staff recommended that tax reforms, which could yield about 1.5–2 percent of additional public revenues over the medium term, be accelerated. A key priority is to broaden the tax base, including through fight against fiscal fraud, and reduced VAT and other tax exemptions (especially for large agricultural firms). In general, better communication on tax reforms, providing context for specific changes to the taxation regime, would also help make such reforms better accepted and more impactful. The authorities agreed that there is room to broaden the tax base and are committed to this reform. Fiscal decentralization . The authorities are shifting increasing amounts of public resources to the regional level as part of their regionalization initiative. They are aware that there are important fiscal risks associated with fiscal decentralization, and that proper administrative capacity and checks and balances have to be in place to ensure sound public financial management at all levels. Indeed, they have taken action to strengthen local operational structures for regional development planning and project management, and to reinforce budgetary and financial procedures and controls for regions (Box 3). Staff supported these efforts, and welcomed the authorities’ interest in receiving Fund TA support on local taxation, capacity development, and fiscal management. Civil service. The authorities intend to keep the public payroll below 10.5 percent of GDP over the medium term so as not to compromise priority spending. Several reforms have been pursued to achieve this objective, such as the recent introduction of contractual employment and increased personnel mobility across ministries. Staff welcomed these efforts and stressed the need for a comprehensive reform of the civil service in order to generate savings on public wage spending while increasing the efficiency of public services. Staff highlighted some options for this reform, including changes to civil service statutes aiming for more merit-based career progression, as well as changes to public wage structures. The authorities agreed that a comprehensive reform is needed. Public enterprises . The authorities have taken steps to address potential state owned enterprise (SOE)-related fiscal risks for which specific provisions are missing from the Organic Budget Law. A draft law to reinforce the governance and oversight of public enterprises has been submitted to the cabinet for approval. The authorities also work on a consolidated SOEs balance sheet. Staff welcomed these plans while stressing the need to advance them expeditiously. The accommodative monetary policy stance remains adequate. The policy rate cut in March 2016 was instrumental in supporting the nascent credit recovery, suggesting that monetary transmission is effective. Staff noted that in the baseline scenario, the current monetary policy stance would remain appropriate as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored. This is the case in particular for 2017, when inflation is expected to remain moderate reflecting a weather-related decline in food prices while economic activity is above potential. Since SME credit could be hampered by demand or supply constraints, staff supported continued initiatives by the authorities to provide SME credit guarantees and to address potential obstacles to SME credit access. The authorities noted that BAM’s main objective is inflation, and that credit growth has started to pick up while liquidity conditions are adequate. Page 22 The financial system is resilient but key risk exposures require continued vigilance and reforms NPLs. The authorities intend to move forward in the first half of 2017 with several reforms consistent with FSAP recommendations, including: aligning loan classification and provisioning rules with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), and formalizing and harmonizing the criteria for inclusion in supervisory “watch lists” (and implementing related tighter provisioning requirements). In addition, the future legal framework for collateral execution should help increase recovery rates. Concentrated credit exposures . The authorities agree that large credit exposures continue to pose a risk and are taking action to reduce them. They issued a new directive in June 2016 requiring corporate groups to prepare consolidated financial statements including all existing debt, and specifying future borrowing plans. In addition, they are considering a further tightening of risk weights for large connected exposures. More broadly, continued improvements to the financial sector policy framework are underway. Changes in the financial system, including its increasing complexity, the cross border expansion of Morocco’s banks, and the forthcoming exchange rate flexibility, require increased supervisory resources and a continuous shift to more risk-based and forward-looking supervision: Supervisory capacity and resources . Efforts to increase supervisory resources and capacity are progressing, in line with FSAP recommendations. In addition to new recruitment, organizational changes were made in 2016, including the creation of specialized units dedicated to the oversight of systemic banks, cross-country exposures, and bank recovery plans. In preparation for the exchange rate transition, the authorities requested Fund TA support in assessing banks’ readiness to manage currency risks. Macro prudential policy. This policy framework has been enhanced with the creation of a dedicated department at BAM, inter-agency discussions of financial stability issues at the level of the Systemic Risk Surveillance and Coordination Committee (CCSRS), and the introduction of the legal power to impose countercyclical capital buffers. Going forward, priorities include filling key data gaps for macro-prudential surveillance, such as sectoral data on loan-to-value ratios and debt-service-to-income ratios, and designing capital surcharges for systemic banks. Crisis management and bank resolution . The authorities will start upgrading the legal framework for bank resolution, while ensuring its compatibility with broader Moroccan law. This effort will introduce key changes consistent with recent FSAP and Fund TA recommendations (including the “least-cost” principle, changes to the deposit guarantee scheme, and bail-in powers), but it is likely to take several months. As a result, BAM’s designation as the resolution authority will not be introduced in the central bank law to be approved in the next parliament session in 2017—but the new emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) framework will. Page 23 Cooperation with host country supervisors. Such cooperation, aiming to supervise the cross border activities and exposures of Moroccan banks, has intensified. Formal arrangements have been established with bilateral and regional supervisory bodies (such as at the BCEAO and CEMAC) and supervisory colleges for all main banks are in place. The authorities also upgraded supervisory requirements for cross border activities, including in terms of country and sovereign risk management. AML/CFT framework . The authorities are preparing for the evaluation of AML/CFT-related risks by the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENAFATF) in 2017. They are currently reviewing the potential need to adjust current legal frameworks in various parts of the financial system, in line with the latest changes introduced by the FATF. In particular, the authorities should continue to strengthen risk-based AML/CFT supervision, improve the availability of beneficial ownership information and enhance monitoring tools to mitigate cross-border AML/CFT risks, especially in the context of the banking sector’s expansion to the SSA region.