Morocco has made important strides in rebalancing the economy, but higher and more inclusive growth is needed to reduce poverty. A significant reduction in vulnerabilities was achieved over the past two years (Box 1). The authorities should consolidate gains in stabilization and “aim higher and try harder” to build a better future. Well managed, the current period offers an opportunity to enter a virtuous cycle of growth, confidence, and investment. This requires pursuing an appropriate policy mix, adapting the policy framework to strengthen the economy’s resilience and adaptability, and implementing a vigorous program of structural reform to boost Morocco’s potential beyond the pre-crisis level. The present Article IV consultation therefore focused on three main themes: (i) the policy mix to sustain the ongoing stabilization; (ii) the policy framework for a more resilient economy; and (iii) structural policies for higher and more inclusive growth. Box 1. Implementation of Past Fund Advice Policy implementation has been broadly in line with past Fund advice. Fiscal policy. The authorities removed subsidies on all liquid petroleum products, thereby eliminating risks to the budget linked to the volatility of oil prices, while they expanded support to the most vulnerable through dedicated social programs. A new organic budget law was adopted by the parliament, which will help strengthen the budgetary framework once comments from the Constitutional Council have been addressed. The parametric reform of the public pension system is expected to be implemented in 2015. Monetary policy. Inflation remains low and inflation expectations are well-anchored. Given low inflationary pressures, low growth and improving reserve position, BAM lowered its main policy interest rates to 2.5 percent in December 2014. Preparation for a more flexible exchange rate has progressed, including with technical assistance from the Fund. Financial policies. A new banking law approved by the parliament in November 2014 will help strengthen the regulatory, supervisory and macroprudential frameworks, including with respect to the international activity of Moroccan banks. However, more work is needed on cross-border banking resolution. Structural reforms. Morocco made progress in doing business indicators, but much remains to be done to further improve the business climate, as discussed below.