The authorities have entered the final preparatory phase for the introduction of greater exchange rate flexibility in 2017. Greater exchange rate flexibility will increase the shock absorption capacity of the economy, particularly given current constraints on fiscal space. It will also help preserve competitiveness and better incentivize the reallocation of productive resources between the tradable and non-tradable sectors within the economy (Box 4). The authorities and staff agreed that the current conditions in Morocco offer a unique window of opportunity for such a transition . While not without risks in a global context of volatile financial conditions, key pre-conditions are in place to ensure that Morocco can move from a position of strength, including: strong macroeconomic buffers and comfortable reserves; recently enhanced fiscal, monetary and financial policy frameworks; alignment of the exchange rate with fundamentals, which reduces the risk of large exchange rate adjustments; limited currency risk exposures in the economy, including low level of foreign currency-denominated public debt; relatively low estimated pass-through of exchange rate movements to consumer prices; and a pre- existing exchange rate market that already helps operators to manage the dirham’s volatility vis-a- vis individual currencies. In preparation for the transition, the authorities have benefited from extensive Fund technical assistance, and they are now ready operationally . Technical assistance has helped the authorities prepare for the implementation of key technical and operational aspects of the transition, including: macro-economic modelling; forecasting and policy analysis; communication strategy; legal, institutional and regulatory structures; and foreign exchange market development. Staff supports the authorities’ gradual approach, consisting in introducing an adjustable horizontal band, which will progressively dis-anchor the dirham from the current currency basket, foster the deepening of the foreign exchange market, and allow for monetary policy decisions to be increasingly based on inflation forecasts. Staff highlighted the importance of timely communication Page 24 to manage economic agents’ expectations regarding the sequence and modalities of the transition. The authorities noted that their roadmap incorporates these aspects, including through regular meetings and outreach to banks, corporations and the general public. Staff agreed with the authorities that the adoption of fully-fledged inflation targeting should be envisaged in the later stage of the exchange rate transition. In the meantime, maintaining the current monetary policy regime will help avoid any major conflict between the adoption of a formal inflation target and the existence of a still narrow exchange rate band. There was also agreement that restrictions on capital outflows by residents should not be eliminated in the short run, in order to minimize risks during at least the initial phases of the transition.