Public Finances General Government Gross Debt for Emerging Market While sustainable, Morocco’s public debt should be placed firmly on a downward path and reduced to at most 60 percent of GDP over the medium term. Public debt rose from 47 percent of GDP in 2009 to 63.6 percent of GDP by end 2015, and is expected to peak at 64.4 percent of GDP in 2016. The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that debt remains sustainable and robust to various shocks (Annex II), as the primary fiscal balance is projected to gradually turn positive in the medium term. However, Morocco’s public debt level is relatively high for an emerging market, and generates significant public and external financing needs. Staff and the authorities agreed that gradually reducing public debt to at most 60 percent of GDP by 2020 would allow more fiscal space. Based on analyses of the fiscal multiplier in Morocco (Box 2), staff noted that this would not significantly weaken growth prospects. 1/ General government gross debt except when not available. and Middle Income Countries 1/ EME Average EME MENAP Average The above public debt path will require bringing the fiscal deficit down gradually to about 2 percent of GDP by 2020. Following important reforms to rein in public spending in recent years, consolidation going forward would have to rely more on structural tax measures, including because grant revenues are expected to decline after 2017. Specifically: Tax reforms. In line with recommendations from the 2013 national tax conference, the authorities have initiated reforms to make the tax system more equitable and better able to support competitiveness, as reflected in the 2016 budget proposal. Such reforms include removing tax exemptions on large agricultural firms, simplifying the VAT regime, gradually introducing progressivity in corporate taxation, and better enforcing tax payments from self- employed and liberal professions. Staff supported these reforms, and encouraged the authorities to pursue them expeditiously, as they could yield about 1.5–2 percent of GDP of additional public revenues over the medium term. Pension reform. Implementing the proposed parametric reform, as planned under the medium term fiscal projections, remains urgent in order to extend the sustainability of the pension system. Staff stressed the urgency of implementing this reform, since the gap between contributions and benefits will continue to widen in the near term and, absent reform, could Page 17 exhaust pension reserves by 2022. The authorities reiterated their strong commitment to this reform, and expect that it will be approved soon and implemented at the beginning of 2017. Subsidies reforms . Subsidies on all liquid petroleum products (diesel, gasoline, fuel) have now been eliminated, and the authorities plans to gradually reduce subsidies on food beginning in 2016. The timing of butane subsidies reduction is still under discussion. Staff welcomed these plans while stressing the need to protect the most vulnerable populations from their impact. The authorities agreed and noted that the reduction in fuel subsidies has been accompanied by an expansion of social programs in health and education, and the introduction of a number of mitigating programs. Box 2. Fiscal Multiplier in Morocco Morocco’s strong policy action on wage bill containment and subsidies reforms contributed to reduce the overall fiscal deficit from a peak of 7.3 percent in 2012 to 4.9 percent of GDP in 2014. This work assesses the impact of such a fiscal deficit reduction on aggregate demand, looking at the effects of government consumption on the economic activity. Methodology We estimated the size of fiscal multiplier for Morocco and explored factors explaining their magnitude. Using the Ilzetzki et al. (2012) empirical approach based on quarterly data and the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) structural identification methodology, we estimate a SVAR on government consumption, the GDP, the trade balance and the reel effective exchange rate. We then use the SVAR impulse functions to assess the size of fiscal multipliers (the change in the real GDP caused by one unit increase in the government consumption). We mostly focus on the impact multiplier (i.e., the change in the GDP at the moment the impulse to the government consumption occurs) and the cumulative multiplier (the change in the GDP over the period the impulse to government consumption vanishes). Main conclusions Fiscal multipliers for Morocco are relatively small: the impact multiplier varies between 0.095 and 0.3, and the cumulative multiplier is estimated to be around 0.6. The SVAR suggests that a government consumption shock would worsen the trade balance, lead to real appreciation, and raise output. However, while the impacts on the trade balance and real effective exchange rate are statistically significant, the impact on real GDP appears limited. The magnitude of the fiscal multipliers could be affected by several factors, including the degree of exchange rate flexibility, the openness of the economy, the monetary policy stance, and the public debt level. Household behaviors are critical in determining the size of fiscal multipliers. Specifically, a high propensity to consume and import foreign goods dampens the impact of a government spending shock on real GDP. Overall, the analysis tends to suggest that well-designed fiscal consolidation (i.e., tilted to public consumption) would reduce public debt with limited contractionary effect on growth. See 2015 Selected Issues Paper on “Fiscal Multiplier in Morocco.” For fuller discussions of the pension reform, see the staff reports for the 2012 and 2014 Article IV consultations. Page 18 Ongoing institutional reforms remain critical to stronger fiscal outcomes, and the decentralization initiative will need to be designed and implemented carefully. The new organic budget law (OBL) will strengthen Morocco’s fiscal framework starting in 2016, since most of its provisions enter into force in January 2016 (especially with regard to fiscal performance management and transparency, and parliamentary approval process), and the remaining ones are gradually introduced by 2020. The authorities confirmed that the OBL was being implemented according to plan. In parallel, they are pursuing a major decentralization initiative that will lead to transferring a range of political and administrative responsibilities to the regional level. Key objectives are to increase efficiency in the allocation of public resources, improve governance, and facilitate economic growth and poverty reduction. The proposed 2016 budget increases the proportion of income tax revenues allocated to regions from 1 to 2 percent. Staff discussed the authorities’ intentions and noted that while such reforms may yield benefits, they also entail significant risks, including from a fiscal standpoint. Staff also noted that Morocco could benefit from cross-country experience in terms of key requirements, such as for coordination between different governmental levels, tax collection, spending and debt controls, and local implementation capacity and accountability. The authorities were well aware of the risks associated with fiscal decentralization, and welcomed staff suggestion to provide Fund TA support in the above areas. Financial Stability The FSAP assessed that risks to financial stability are limited, although rising NPL levels and concentration risks need to be monitored. Banks are well capitalized and profitable, and benefit from stable funding sources. FSAP stress tests show that aggregate capitalization levels would remain adequate under adverse scenarios, and that, at this juncture, spillover risks related to Moroccan banks’ expansion into SSA remain marginal. However, as noted, NPLs have been rising (although NPL provisioning levels, averaging 66 percent, are high), and concentration risks arising from single or group exposures are significant. Staff emphasized some of the key FSAP recommendations regarding the need to continue monitoring bank asset quality closely, including through periodic comprehensive asset quality reviews for systemic banks, a review of national loan classification and provisioning rules, and an impact study of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) implementation (Table 8). The authorities noted that they were in the process of gradually reducing overall levels of concentration risk in the system, broadening the coverage of their NPL “watchlists,” and increasing related bank provisioning requirements. Bank supervision is effective and has kept improving, but will require more resources going forward. A new banking law was introduced in 2014, further implementing Basel III, and enhancing systemic risk surveillance. While a lot of progress has been made, there is still room for improvement in the following areas: See “Macro Policy Lessons for a Sound Design of Fiscal Decentralization,” IMF, July 2009. See 2014 Selected Issues Paper: “The Sub-Saharan Expansion of Moroccan Banks: Opportunities and Challenges for Cross-Border Oversight” (FO/DIS/14/198). Page 19 Central bank law . The draft law, which is being discussed in the government and has yet to be sent to Parliament for adoption, would further strengthen BAM’s independence and transparency, and extend its supervisory powers, in line with best international practices. Staff encouraged the authorities to move expeditiously, and the authorities indicated that the draft law would likely be submitted to Parliament in early 2016. Supervisory resources . BAM needs additional supervisory resources in order to effectively handle its existing and new responsibilities, especially given the increasing complexity and cross border expansion of Morocco’s banking system. The authorities endorsed the FSAP recommendation and noted that they already have plans to reinforce supervisory resources. Macroprudential policy framework . The 2014 banking law set up a macroprudential policy committee, the Systemic Risk Surveillance and Coordination Committee (CCSRS) in which BAM plays a leading role. However, the powers, instruments and voting arrangements of the CCSRS need to be clarified. In addition, a counter-cyclical buffer should be implemented, and the current toolkit should include targeted sectoral instruments such as provisioning requirements or loss-given-default floors for risky and nonperforming cross-border loans. The authorities agreed with these recommendations and have started implementing them. Financial crisis management and safety net . Significant progress has been made in improving the institutional framework, but the new banking resolution regime remains untested and its legal framework needs to be strengthened, including by designating a resolution authority, incorporating the “least-cost” principle, introducing bail-in powers, and clarifying the hierarchy of creditors’ claims. The emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) framework should also be enhanced. The authorities intend to seek technical assistance from the IMF and World Bank in these areas.