Growth should strengthen gradually in the medium term. In 2016, growth will be affected by a base effect following the good 2015 agricultural season, but a gradual recovery is expected in 2017, supported by improving prospects in Europe and domestic confidence, and low oil prices. Growth is expected to get close to 5 percent by 2020, slightly lower than estimated previously. This revision reflects weaker global growth prospects due to lower capital stock growth and potential output in many developed and emerging economies, which could affect capital investment levels and productivity gains in Morocco. Staff and the authorities agreed that raising potential growth and reducing unemployment will require steadfast efforts in a range of reform areas, including human capital and labor participation, labor market efficiency, access to finance for very small, small and medium enterprises, and the broader business environment. Headline inflation is expected to remain low at 1.6 percent in 2015 and 1.5 percent in 2016, and to stabilize around 2 percent thereafter. The external position is also expected to improve over the medium term. With oil prices projected to remain low and external demand to strengthen, solid export performance (especially in new and fast-growing industries such as automobiles) should help reduce the current account deficit further to 0.7 percent of GDP in 2016, and stabilize it around 1.3 percent of GDP over the medium term. FDI inflows should remain strong, helping raise the reserves position above 150 percent of the ARA metric over the medium term. Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside, but have decreased somewhat. Staff and the authorities agreed that external risks include lower-than-expected growth in Europe, volatility in global financial markets, and geopolitical risks resulting in oil price volatility. Weak growth in Europe, in particular, would affect export revenues, and FDI and remittance inflows. Higher volatility in global financial markets would affect global growth and Morocco’s growth and borrowing costs. Given Morocco’s high dependence on oil imports, increases in oil prices may also reverse some of the recent improvements in the current account. However, relative to 2014, oil prices are now much lower and Europe’s growth outlook has improved. As such, the impact of the See World Economic Outlook , April 2015. See The Global Competitiveness Report, 2015-2016, World Economic Forum. Page 12 above shocks would also be less severe than in 2014. On the domestic front, there is a risk of lower appetite for reforms as the 2016 parliamentary elections loom. Figure 1. Morocco: Real and External Developments Non-agricultural growth has been sluggish in 2015, while the euro area recovery remains uncertain. Domestic demand and net exports have contributed positively while investment remains subdued. Morocco and Euro Area Growth (Percent change, y-o-y) Morocco Overall Morocco Non-agricultural proj. Euro Area Overall Inflation has remained low despite increases in food prices. Inflation (Percentage change, y-o-y) CPI General Index CPI Core CPI Food F F F F ...and the current account, while FDI inflows remained strong. (Percent of GDP) Current Account FDI proj. Sources: Moroccan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Contributions to GDP Growth (Percent) Net Exports Public Consumption Investment Private Consumption Exports have grown faster than imports, in part due to the recent decline in oil prices, improving the trade balance... Trade Balance (Percent of GDP) Exports Imports Trade Balance (RHS) proj. This has helped support reserves recently. Gross reserves (in billions of euros) NIR at program rates Page 13 Figure 2. Morocco: Fiscal and Financial Market Developments Fiscal consolidation continues as planned... ...and subsidy expenditure decreased in percent of GDP. Government Expenditure (Percent of GDP) Investment G&S & Other Subsidies Wages Est. Credit growth has remained low. Contribution to Credit Growth (Percent change, y-o-y) Private Financial Institutions Public Sector Households Non-financial Corporates Spreads remain relatively low. Markit 5-yr MAR Sov. CDS Spread MAR Sovereign Bond Spread Revenue remained broadly resilient although it has been slightly decreasing. Government Revenue (Percent of GDP) Est. Grants Income Tax Other G&S Tax The loan-to-deposit ratio has moderately declined. (Percentage change, y-o-y) Loan-to-deposit ratio (RHS,) Private credit growth Deposits growth Sources: Moroccan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 14