The authorities reiterated their intention to move to a new exchange rate and monetary policy regime. A more flexible regime would help absorb external shocks and preserve competitiveness. The improved external and reserves position, together with the insurance provided by the PLL arrangement, would allow Morocco to move from a position of strength and to ensure a gradual transition While not without risks in a global context of volatile financial conditions, staff and the authorities agreed that the current situation was appropriate for a move (Box 3): The key requirements are in place : economic and external diversification has progressed and Morocco could benefit from a more independent monetary policy (i.e., less aimed at targeting the exchange rate); fiscal, monetary and financial policy frameworks have been strengthened (including through recent subsidy reforms); and the dirham’s alignment with fundamentals reduces the risk of a large adjustment. The Fund has contributed to the preparations through intensive technical support, including for a move to an inflation targeting regime. Page 20 The economy is seen as resilient to potential exchange rate volatility. The FSAP analyses indicate that the direct effect of a dirham depreciation would be positive as banks have a positive FX open position. The indirect effects on credit quality are also likely to be limited because the share of foreign currency loans in total loans is below 4 percent (and some foreign currency borrowers hedge their foreign currency exposures). Options for a gradual transition. In staff’s view, the authorities could choose among several options, such as a horizontal band to be widened gradually (possibly in several steps); or a flexible band (moving up or down depending for example on the authorities’ required balance in supply and demand in the FX market). The latter option is more robust to different scenarios as it allows movements in both directions, depending in particular on market pressures. Staff will continue to support the authorities in implementing their preferred option. Staff also recommended decoupling the exchange rate transition from the removal of remaining restrictions on capital outflows by residents, which would add unnecessary uncertainty. As part of the transition to a new monetary regime, continued financial market deepening will help further improve monetary policy transmission . Under a more flexible exchange rate regime, the monetary policy transmission mechanisms would play a key role in supporting the authorities’ objectives of price and macro-economic stability. Reforms in the last decade led to enhanced independence and operational capacity of the central bank, stronger financial intermediation, and more developed domestic Treasury securities market. This also allowed to improve monetary policy transmission, including by helping better align the policy rate and the money market rate (Box 4). Going forward, ongoing deepening of domestic capital markets will help bring about further improvements in monetary transmission. See “Rethinking Financial Deepening: Stability and Growth in Emerging Markets,” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/15/08. Page 21 Box 3. Morocco: Transition Toward a More Flexible Exchange Rate and Monetary Policy Framework This Box summarizes the main steps already taken by the authorities and the preparatory work contributed by the Fund to help the authorities finalize their plans on the next steps in the transition toward greater exchange rate flexibility. Morocco meets the necessary preconditions Supportive macroeconomic policies. Fiscal, monetary and financial frameworks have been strengthened (such as, recently, through subsidy reform) and would be supportive of a move toward more flexibility. Foreign exchange market. As the dirham is pegged to a EUR/USD basket rather than to a single currency, changes in bilateral rates have already incentivized banks and corporations to put in place systems to manage exchange risk. An active foreign exchange market has already developed as result. Operational exchange rate management. Options in designing a policy framework for foreign exchange market interventions and operational management were extensively discussed during past Fund technical assistance. Operational framework for monetary policy. An alternative anchor to the exchange rate is in place to some extent: BAM’s use of interest rate instruments and its focus on inflation have already led economic agents to focus on inflation rather than the exchange rate. The Fund has provided technical assistance to help BAM in strengthening its macro modeling capacity; building a new forecasting and policy analysis system; and using the models for macroeconomic projections, policy advice, and communications with the public and financial markets. The move is not without risks, but risks appear contained and manageable Pass-through . The potential pass-through of exchange rate movements to consumer prices is expected to be relatively low on average. Staff estimated at end 2013 that such pass-through elasticity was about 0.25 in the short term and 0.18 in the long term. Banks . The direct effect of a 30 percent dirham depreciation on bank balance sheets would be positive because banks have more FX assets than liabilities. The indirect effects on credit quality are also likely to be limited because the share of foreign currency loans in total loans in the economy is below 4 percent (and foreign currency borrowers may hedge their FX exposures). Public debt : Public debt is sustainable and its foreign currency denominated share is limited (and actively managed in terms of currency and interest rate structure), and therefore it does not constitute a major source of risks. Capital outflows : Greater exchange rate flexibility is unlikely to lead to large-scale capital outflows due to the existence of capital controls limiting the ability of residents to convert dirham balances into foreign currency or to move funds offshore. Page 22 Box 4. The Yield Curve in Morocco: Links with Macroeconomic Policies The monetary policy framework and fiscal policy actions in Morocco have evolved over time and their impact on the economy is transmitted in particular through the yield curve. This work documents such dynamics in Morocco and draw relevant policy implications. We analyzed the relation between macroeconomic policies and the yield curve in Morocco. Changes in the monetary policy framework and reforms of the government security market in the mid-2000s have made the yield curve more responsive to macroeconomic policies. Using a Nelson- Siegel model, we derived the factors that characterize the yield curve. We then used a vector auto- regression (VAR) model to explore the link between the factors of the yield curve and different variables of macroeconomic policy. Main conclusions and policy lessons: Improvements in the monetary policy and fiscal/debt management frameworks have help improved the functioning of the government securities market, as demonstrated by the tighter range of interest rates at short and long maturities. The VAR estimation suggests that policy transmission channels work properly. Monetary policy autonomy has been enhanced by the improved credibility of the central bank. Improvements in the fiscal position result in improvements in the financial sector, lower interest rates and higher growth, albeit with a delay. Financial deepening would improve monetary policy transmission. Overall, the monetary policy framework should keep improving so as to reinforce the credibility of the central bank, particularly as Morocco contemplates a move to a flexible exchange rate regime. See “Dynamics of the Yield Curve in Morocco: Links with Macroeconomic Variables,” by Ahokpossi, Garcia-Martinez, and Kemoe, forthcoming IMF Working Paper.