Growth is recovering and should reach 4.7 percent in 2015, but non-agricultural activity remains sluggish. The 2015 agricultural season was particularly good, while construction activity showed signs of recovery. However, the European recovery is slower than expected, rising geopolitical risks in the region have affected tourism, and activity in several traditional sectors (such as the food or textile industries) is slower than expected. In light of these recent developments, staff’s growth projection for 2015 has been revised to 4.7 percent (against 4.9 percent at the time of the second review under the PLL arrangement). The current output level is estimated to be slightly below potential, and inflation remained low at 1.6 percent in September. Poverty rates, unemployment and inequalities have declined, but much remains to be done to secure higher and more inclusive growth . Unemployment increased to 10.1 percent in the third quarter of 2015, and is still very high among the youth (21.4 percent) and in particular in urban areas (39.3 percent). Multidimensional poverty is above the average for oil-importer countries in the region. Continued efforts are needed to reduce structural unemployment, increase female labor force participation rates (which have been below 28 percent since 2006), reduce the gender gap, and address social and regional disparities. In particular, better healthcare and medical coverage, improved access to quality education (the average number of schooling years is about 6 years) and increased literacy rates (currently of about 65 percent) are crucial to achieve more inclusive growth and higher potential output. While the fiscal deficit has declined in recent years and fiscal developments have been positive so far in 2015. In the past several years, external shocks have affected public finances, with the overall fiscal deficit rising to 7.3 percent of GDP in 2012, putting public debt on a rising path. The authorities responded to these developments with strong policy actions, including subsidy reforms, which brought back the overall fiscal deficit to 4.9 percent in 2014, although public debt continued to increase and reached 63.4 percent of GDP (against 58.3 percent in 2012). In 2015, there See Oxford Poverty & Human Development Initiative : multidimensional poverty is a poverty index including access to living standards, nutrition, child mortality and education dimensions, weighted by the intensity of deprivation. For further discussion of poverty and gender and social disparities in Morocco, see the staff report for the 2014 Article IV consultation. Page 10 have been improvements, including a further reduction in subsidy spending, which was sufficient to offset the lower–than-projected tax revenues and grants. Overall, the fiscal outturn through September suggests that the authorities are on track to meet the projected annual deficit of 4.3 percent, corresponding to a primary balance that would stabilize public debt at a sustainable level of less than 64 percent of GDP (Annex I). External stability has strengthened further . Staff analyses suggest that the exchange rate of the dirham is in line with fundamentals, reflecting improvements in the external position over the last two years (Annex II). The current account deficit narrowed further in 2015 and is projected to be about 1.5 percent of GDP (against 5.7 percent of GDP in 2014), as low oil and food prices and the good agricultural season reduced fuel and food import bills, while automobile exports and remittances remained robust. Capital inflows are strong and stable, and external debt is relatively low. International reserves have increased and represent about 110 percent of the Fund’s Assessing Reserve Adequacy (ARA) metric, and 154 percent of the metric adjusted for capital controls, at end- 2015. Morocco’s net international investment position started to improve in 2015: after deteriorating from -50 to -67 percent of GDP between 2010 and 2014, it is projected to reach -64 percent of GDP at end-2015 and -56 percent of GDP over the medium term. Overall competitiveness has strengthened somewhat in recent years, with Morocco now being ranked at the median in the sample of 140 countries included in the Global Competiveness Report (GCR). Credit has remained subdued under stable policy rates and monetary conditions. Bank- Al-Maghrib (BAM) has kept its policy rate unchanged at 2.5 percent in recent months, taking into consideration mixed economic developments, a moderate increase in inflation, and an uncertain economic outlook. Banking liquidity has continued to improve due to increased foreign reserves and the reduced fiscal deficit (bank liquidity needs were estimated at 30.4 billion dirhams in August 2015, against 69.2 billion dirhams at end 2013). While bank lending grew at a modest rate of 1.1 percent in September 2015 (year-on-year), there is no evidence that bank credit supply is a significant constraint to credit growth, given the soundness of the banking system, continued slow non-agricultural growth, and lower imports. Lending rates declined but other lending conditions (including collateral requirements) remained tight, especially for corporations, in view of increased credit risks. Acknowledging that the current economic environment could be particularly difficult for very small, small and medium enterprises (VSMEs), BAM raised its support to VSME credit by increasing its range of eligible collaterals and through the VSME funding support program. Overall, the banking system is sound despite financial strains in parts of the corporate sector. In recent years, Morocco’s banking system has deepened, with total bank assets reaching 140 percent of GDP, and become more complex, including through a rapid expansion in Sub- Saharan Africa. In aggregate, the regulatory capital adequacy ratio stood at 13.8 percent as of end- The dirham is pegged to a currency basket including the euro (60 percent) and the dollar (40 percent). Morocco ranks favorably in terms of quality of institutions, infrastructures and macroeconomic environment, but lower in the areas of education, health and labor market efficiency. Liquidity injections under this program increased from about 6 billion dirhams at the end of 2013 to about to 15 billion in October 2015 Page 11 2014, well above Basel III requirements, and bank profitability has been stable despite slow lending activity. However, the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio has been rising since 2012, due to weak economic activity and strains in parts of the corporate sector, reaching 7.5 percent in August 2015. The highest NPL ratios are observed in sectors most affected by weak growth in Europe, such as tourism (with a NPL ratio of 21 percent in the hotel and restaurant sector), as well as transport and communications, agriculture, trade, and construction. Many corporations face liquidity difficulties due to payment delays that affect their cash flow situation. A recent decree on public procurement will limit payment delays by public enterprises to 60 days starting in January 2016.