Public debt has been on the rise, but remains sustainable (Annex II). As the fiscal deficit widened, public debt rose from 47 percent of GDP in 2009 to an estimated 66.4 percent of GDP in 2014. It is expected to peak at about 68 percent of GDP in 2015—a relatively high level for an emerging market—before decreasing to about 63 percent of GDP by 2019. The debt sustainability Page 15 analysis (DSA) shows that debt remains sustainable and robust to various shocks and that the primary balance is projected to be higher than its debt-stabilizing level, putting debt firmly on a downward path. However, relatively large public and external financing needs are a source of vulnerability under certain shocks, and debt sustainability is also dependent on growth materializing at the expected level and on continued fiscal consolidation. The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment that the debt remains sustainable. They stressed that while financing needs were high, the domestic debt market was liquid and capital controls limited rollover risks, given the lack of alternative options for investors. The authorities have embarked since 2013 on a fiscal consolidation aimed at external adjustment and fiscal sustainability, while seeking not to compromise growth . In response to rising public debt and widening external imbalances, the authorities have aimed to gradually reduce the fiscal deficit to 3 percent of GDP in 2017. After a sharp reduction in the deficit in 2013, the pace of adjustment slowed in 2014 in face of lower growth. The fiscal deficit objective of the 2015 budget (4.3 percent of GDP) is consistent with the authorities’ medium-term objective. The cyclically- adjusted primary balance is projected to improve by ½ percent of GDP in 2015 and cumulatively by 2.2 percent of GDP between 2014 and 2017. The strengthening of public finances is expected to come mainly from a reduction in expenditure, as tax revenue as a share of GDP is already among the highest in the region. Staff supported the authorities’ planned fiscal path for 2015–17. It considered that this path was consistent with the need to rebuild fiscal buffers, including putting the debt firmly on a downward path and reducing financing needs, while avoiding being a significant drag on growth. It noted the need to sustain efforts to further lower the fiscal deficit beyond 2017 to ensure a continued reduction of the debt-to-GDP level. To promote higher and more inclusive growth, it will also be important to ensure that the fiscal space created by actions to lower the cost of subsidies and efforts to reduce wage bill translates into higher capital and social spending. Staff noted that the 2015 budget misses an opportunity in that respect, as goods and services expenditure are set to increase by 0.3 percent of GDP while investment is to decline by almost one percent of GDP. As fiscal consolidation is pursued, the central bank has appropriately loosened monetary policy. Although the exchange rate is pegged, the existence of capital controls provides some scope for monetary policy. In a context of low inflation, low growth, slowing credit growth, still-negative output gap, weak domestic and external demand, and improved reserves position, BAM’s recent cuts in interest rate were appropriate and are expected to help support credit demand See also 2013 Article IV report. 6Change 2010-2012Change 2012-2015 Change in Expenditure G&S and Grants Wages Investment Other Generalized Subsidies Page 16 by fostering lower lending rates. Other measures put in place by BAM to ease liquidity pressures and foster greater access to credit, including the intervention under the VSME funding program, are expected to help support bank lending to the private sector while remaining consistent with low inflation, as pressures on consumer prices are set to remain subdued. In the context of the current exchange rate peg, the overall policy mix remains consistent with strengthening macro-stability. Further monetary loosening may be considered should the timid recovery stall and reserves continue improving; however, BAM should remain vigilant, in case second-round effects on inflation stemming from the subsidy reform materialize, or external risks worsen.