Economy As the economy recovers from the global crisis, adapting the policy framework will help increase its resilience . The current policy framework has served Morocco well, but the recent period of global and domestic economic stress has tested its limits. A stronger fiscal and financial policy framework will help contain existing or potentially new sources of fiscal, external, and financial risks, while adapting the exchange rate and monetary regime would make the economy more nimble. The authorities have embarked on important reforms to this end. A new organic budget law (OBL) is expected to strengthen the budgetary framework A new law was adopted by parliament in November 2014. However, the Constitutional Council ruled in late December that some provisions were unconstitutional, partly for procedural reasons. These relate to the dates of implementation of the new law as well as a provision that stated that only finance law could modify tax or custom legislation. The government intends to resubmit the law to parliament in its Spring session to address the Council’s comments. Once definitely adopted, and as its provisions gradually enter into force over the next few years, the new OBL will introduce multi- year and program budgeting, establish a golden rule to limit new net borrowing to the financing of capital spending, make binding the ceilings on wage appropriations, and restrict the carryover of investment appropriations from one budget to the next. The last two features address budget framework weaknesses observed in 2012. Staff looks forward to the final adoption of the law, once the Constitutional Council’s comments have been addressed, as it will modernize the fiscal framework, enhance its efficiency, and increase transparency and financial control. Staff noted that some provisions could have been strengthened to further reduce fiscal risks, for example, tighter restrictions on the creation of new special treasury accounts or adding an escape clause to the golden rule. The new provisions of the OBL are expected to be introduced gradually between 2016 and 2020. The Fund stands ready to provide technical assistance (TA) to support a prompt and successful implementation of the new law. Staff supports the authorities’ intention to transition to a more flexible exchange rate with accompanying changes in the monetary policy framework . Although the peg has provided a useful nominal anchor for the economy in the past, a more flexible regime would better support the ongoing diversification of trade and financial flows, help preserve competitiveness, and facilitate the absorption of external shocks. The Fund is supporting the preparation of this transition by Page 17 providing TA on options for and operational management of a more flexible exchange rate regime. It has also provided TA to strengthen BAM’s macro-modeling capacity in preparation for a new monetary regime, such as inflation targeting. In staff’s views, a gradual transition could start with a widening of the band around the peg and a reexamination of the weights in the currency basket to which the dirham is pegged. The improvement in the external and fiscal positions offers an opportunity to transition to a new exchange rate regime under better conditions. Staff and the authorities agreed that once the forthcoming FSAP is completed, which will further assess the preparedness of the financial sector to withstand greater exchange rate fluctuations, the various strands of TA and surveillance work in this area could usefully be pulled together to inform further decisions in this area. The financial supervisory and regulatory framework is being further strengthened . A healthy financial sector is crucial to macro-stability, and supports more inclusive growth by facilitating access to finance. In turn, sustained financial system health depends on the quality of the regulatory and supervisory framework. The authorities are committed to further strengthening financial regulations and supervision. In this connection, they are gradually integrating the norms of Basel III. Furthermore, parliament approved in November 2014 a new banking law, which strengthens BAM’s supervisory and regulatory powers, upgrades the macroprudential framework (an area where the Fund is also providing TA), and provides the framework for the development of Islamic finance. A new central bank law was submitted to the general secretariat of the government. It aims to strengthen BAM’s independence and extend the scope of its supervisory powers. Staff supports these efforts and encourages a timely completion of the revision of the central bank law. The FSAP update, for which the main mission is scheduled in April 2015, will offer an opportunity to take a comprehensive and in-depth view of financial stability and development and of the evolving policy framework. The evolution of the financial policy framework is also taking into account the challenges posed by the international expansion of Moroccan banks. Three major Moroccan banks have rapidly expanded their operations in sub-Saharan Africa, mostly through acquisitions of local banks. The international activity of the Moroccan banks constitutes about 19 percent of total volume of activity of the sector (17 percent for activity in Africa alone). This expansion brings new opportunities for Morocco and host economies but also comes with challenges and opens new spillover channels. Staff and the authorities concurred on the main steps needed to tackle new supervisory challenges, and staff welcomed progress already made in that area. In particular, a supervisory college for one of the three cross-border banks was already established and plans for setting up the other two are well advanced. In addition, one of the cross-border banks has already started simplifying its structure, which had become increasingly complex as the bank expanded internationally. The authorities also noted that the new banking law and the forthcoming new central bank law will significantly strengthen BAM’s supervision and crisis resolution abilities. Looking ahead, it will be important to implement the Basel framework for dealing with domestic systemically important banks through an assessment methodology and higher loss-absorbency capital requirements; to continue encouraging reliance of subsidiary operations on local funding; and to ensure that cross-border banks have strong risk management frameworks including strict Page 18 controls on their subsidiaries. Progress on cross-border crisis management and resolution mechanisms is also crucial, though, as recognized by staff and the authorities, inherently more difficult given the many actors involved in the home and host countries.