Growth slowed in 2014, but is showing signs of recovery (Figure 1). After a bumper crop in 2013, agricultural growth contracted in 2014. Furthermore, weak demand from Europe and low business and consumer confidence affected nonagricultural output, mainly in the manufacturing and construction sectors in the first half of the year. Nonetheless, there have been recent signs of recovery in activity, and exports from newly developed aeronautics and automotive industries are booming. Overall GDP growth is expected to have decelerated to about 3 percent from 4.4 percent in 2013, with agricultural activity contracting by 1.3 percent and other sectors growing over 3½ percent. Inflation remained low at 0.4 percent on average and 1.6 percent year-on-year in 2014, as a decline in food prices helped offset the direct and indirect impact of the price increases of some formally subsidized petroleum products and of electricity tariffs. Unemployment has remained high at 9.6 percent (October 2014), especially among the youth (20.6 percent, up from 19.6 percent at end 2013). In 2014, the overall deficit contracted by 0.3 percent of GDP and reached 4.9 percent of GDP, following a significant adjustment (by 2.2 percent of GDP) in 2013 Weaker economic activity hurt tax revenue, which is estimated to have fallen by 0.8 percent of GDP from 2013, to 22.2 percent of GDP. Nonetheless, higher disbursements of grants from Gulf countries and a significant reduction in energy subsidies contributed to containing the fiscal deficit despite some increase in the use of goods and services and grants. The lower subsidy bill mostly reflected the full year impact of measures taken in 2013 as well as further reductions in 2014 in the per-unit subsidies of some products. Lower international oil prices did not generate significant saving to the budget as, since September 2013, the retail domestic prices of gasoline, diesel and fuel, have been indexed on international prices (Box 2). Public debt is estimated to have risen by close to 3 percent of GDP to 66.4 percent of GDP. See companion staff report for first review under the PLL. The 2013 fiscal deficit was revised downward from the previous estimate by 0.3 percent of GDP to 5.2 percent of GDP as data related to certain revenue from local government became available with a lag. Page 6 Figure 1. Morocco: Real and External Developments Sources: Moroccanauthorities; and IMF staff estimates. Morocco's Nonagricultural and Euro Area Growth (Percent change, y-o-y)MoroccoEuro Area Net Exports Investment Public Consumption Private Consumption Contributions to GDP Growth (Percent) CPI General Index CPI Core CPI Food Inflation (Percentage change, y-o-y) Trade Balance Exports Imports Trade Balance (RHS) Current Account FDI(Percent of GDP) D D un Gross reserves (in billions of US dollars) NIR at market rates Non-agricultural growth slowed in 2013, but is slowly picking up in line with developments in the euro area... ...supported mainlyby domestic demand. Inflationhas remained low. ...and the current account, while FDI inflows remained strong. Exportshave grown faster than imports, improving the trade balance,This has helpedsupport reserves recently. Est. Page 7 Figure 2. Morocco: Fiscal and Financial Market Developments Est. Sources: Moroccan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Grants Other Income Tax G&S Tax Government Revenue Investment Subsidies G&S & Other Wages Government Expenditure Budget Balance (LHS) Public Debt (RHS)(Percent of GDP) Private Financial Institutions Public Sector Households Non-financial Corporates Contribution to Credit Growth (Percent change, y-o-y) (Percentage change, y-o-y)Private credit growth Deposits growth Deposit-to-loan ratio (RHS) Markit 5-yr MAR Sov. CDS Spread MAR Sovereign Bond Spread Revenueremained broadly resilient althoughit has been slightly decreasing of late ... ...whilesubsidy expendituredecreased in percent of GDP Thefiscal deficit decreased after peaking in 2012.Creditgrowth has remained low. The deposit-to-loan ratio has remained broadly stable Market confidence is reflected in relatively low spreads. Page 8 The current account deficit contracted significantly. It decreased from 9.7 percent of GDP in 2012 to 7.6 percent of GDP in 2013 and is estimated to have declined further to about 5.8 percent at end-2014. This result is owed in part to the trade balance, which improved by 6 percent in January–December relative to the same period in 2013, reflecting a surge in exports (6.1 percent, in nominal dirham) against a slight decline in imports (-0.2 percent). Exports of goods were driven by automobile (26.2 percent) and electronics (26 percent). Imports of petroleum products contracted by 10.1 percent owing to the drop in oil prices. For the year as a whole, it is expected that oil imports will have decreased by 1½ percent of GDP, contributing to about ¾ of the reduction of the current account deficit. External stability has improved, but vulnerabilities remain (Annex I). The diversification of export products achieved over the last decade has mitigated the decline of traditional exports, notably textile and phosphates. Owing to recent improvements in the current account, the external balance assessment (EBA) indicates that the real effective exchange is in line with fundamentals. Financial inflows dominated by FDI and loans, remain broadly stable in percent of GDP. They were buoyed by corporate and sovereign bond issuances in the second quarter of 2014 and the delivery of financial assistance by development partners. External debt, though on the rise, remains relatively low and is sustainable. However, standards shocks (exchange rate depreciation or a shock to non- interest current account) would result in a significant increase in debt-to-GDP ratio. Reserves have increased and now exceed five months of imports or 93.6 percent of the assessment of reserve adequacy (ARA) metric at end-December, an adequate level given existing capital controls. However, such a level would not be comfortable enough to withstand significant external shocks. Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM) recently lowered its policy rate in consideration of weak growth, improving reserves, and low inflationary pressures . BAM lowered its policy rate to 2.5 percent with two cuts of 25 basis points each, in September and December 2014. The policy rate had remained unchanged since March 2012, although BAM had already lowered the reserve requirement ratio from 4 percent to 2 percent in March 2014 in response to tight bank liquidity As a result of this action, but also reflecting the better international reserves position and the lower fiscal deficit, bank liquidity has improved. BAM’s 7–day advances decreased by 45 percent in November 2014 compared to the previous year. By contrast, longer-term interventions (3 months) have increased, in the context of a program to support lending to very small, small, and medium-sized enterprises (VSME). After reaching a decade-long low of 3.8 percent in 2013, credit growth has slightly increased but remained subdued at 4.3 percent in November 2014. Low credit growth resulted from weaker demand in the context of protracted low growth in Europe and low domestic confidence, together with supply-side factors including still relatively tight liquidity conditions, slow deposits growth, and rising nonperforming loans (NPLs). The financial system remains sound overall . At end-June 2014, overall capital-adequacy ratio remained well-above the Basel III requirement. BAM is in the process of implementing the new definition of prudential capital and, according to provisional data, the new regulatory capital-to-risk- weighted assets ratio slightly increased to 13.5 in June 2014. Banks’ profitability remained adequate despite slow lending activity. It benefited from the appreciation in the fair value of the T-bills trading Page 9 portfolio as the market yield dropped and from activities in sub-Saharan Africa, which constituted an important source of revenue for the three major banks. Reflecting the weaker economic activity, NPLs continued to increase reaching 6.9 percent of total loans in November 2014, but they remained adequately provisioned. Poverty has decreased considerably over the past decade but many challenges remain to supporting higher and more inclusive growth (Figure 3). GDP per capita has increased significantly since 1990, more so than the regional average. Broader indicators of poverty and living standards have also improved, as illustrated by improvement in the UNDP’s Human Development Index. While higher growth explains a large part of this achievement, policy action also played a key role, as shown, for example, by the increased public spending on health, better access to sanitation, and greater reach of financial services. In these areas, progress has been significant and higher than in other oil-importing countries of the region. Nevertheless, poverty persists, particularly in rural areas, and inequalities have slightly increased. Despite the efforts already made, more is needed to reduce structural unemployment, increase female labor force participation and reduce the gender gap, improve healthcare, and reduce regional inequalities. Shortcomings in the quality of education are also widely recognized as a key impediment to improving social and economic indicators. Improvements in those areas are crucial to achieving more inclusive growth and reaching a higher potential output. See also Selected Issues Paper “Inclusive Growth in Morocco: Stylized Facts and Policies,” Davide Furceri, January 18, 2013 (SM/13/14). SSAAsiaMENAPOIMoroccoCCALACMENAPOE 1990s 2000s PPP GDP PerCapita (Average US Dollars) Source:World Bank, World Development Indicators. 1990s2000s1990s2000sMorocco39.340.87.17.4 Caucasus and Central Asian Countries (CCA)39.334.98.85.7Asia33.837.95.47.2Latin American Countries (LAC)53.853.620.419.7Middle East Oil Importers, Afghanistan, and Pakistan (MENAPOI)33.032.95.15.0Sub-Saharan African Countries (SSA)44.842.710.59.6All Regions37.639.97.78.7 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.*The Income Ratio is estimated from the distribution of national income by quintile. Gini indexIncome Ratio Highest/Lowest Quintiles* Page 10 Figure 3. Morocco: Inclusive Growth Note: All regional averages are weightedby population. MENAPOE = Middle East Oil Exporters. d d Poverty has decreased considerably over the past decade and social indicators improved. 1990s 2000s Source:UNDP. Human Development Index ll R ... and better access to financial services. 2000s Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators. Access to Bank Services (commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults) but also policy action, as illustrated by higher health expenditures, ... Change in Health Expenditure, 1995-2012 (percent-point change in GDP share, all countries) Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators. Morocco ... better access to sanitation, ... Source:World Bank, World Development Indicators. Rural-to-Urban Access to Improved Sanitation (number of rural persons with access for every 100 urban) Real GDP Growth per Capita (percent change y-o-y, average) 1990s 2000s Source:IMF staff estimates. This partly reflects higher growth... 30.00.05.10.15.20.25CCAMoroccoLACMENAPOIAsia V ne ab pu on ( pe en ) d en I nde x MPI -Urban MPI -Rural Urban Vulnerable Rural Vulnerable Nevertheless, poverty remains high, mostly concentrated in rural areas. Source: Alkire, Conconi, and Seth Multidimensional Poverty Index (2014 ) Multidimensional Poverty Page 11 Figure 3. Morocco: Inclusive Growth (concluded) k ll R CCC Source: Barro-Lee Dataset. Average Years of Schooling (population age 15+) Female to Male Labor Force Participation (100=1:1, population 15-60, all countries) Source: ILO,Key Indicators of the Labor Market. ... and female participation in the labor force is very low. Adult Literacy Rate (percent of population age 15+, all countries) Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators. Youth Unemployment Rate (population 15-24) Source:ILO, Key Indicators of the Labor Market. AA Global Gender Gap Index, 2006-13 (composite index, 1=greater equality) Source:World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report (2013). ... and reduce the gender gap. Youth unemployment remains high ... Better quality of education and higher attainment are needed ... Infant Mortality Rate (per 1,000 live births, all countries) Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators. ... and more is needed to improve health outcomes ... Page 12