Growth is expected to rebound in 2015 and remain robust in the medium term. Building on the recovery observed in most recent indicators in 2014, overall growth should accelerate close to 4½ percent in 2015, supported by improved external demand, strengthened domestic confidence, and a return to normal agricultural output. Over the medium term, the ongoing modernization of the agriculture sector, the continued expansion of Moroccan firms to new markets, the growing importance of newly developed sectors, as well as higher investment in infrastructure and human capital are expected to lift growth above 5 percent, assuming continued steadfast implementation of structural reforms. Inflation is expected to stabilize at about 2 percent. The reduction in the fiscal deficit and improvement in international reserves are also expected to continue to improve liquidity conditions which, together with the strengthening the financial policy framework, will help support continued adequate financing of the economy. The external position is expected to improve over the medium term (Annex I). In 2015 and over the medium term, the current account deficit should continue to narrow and the reserve position to strengthen, benefitting from the growth in newly developed export sectors, recovery in the other sectors, stronger external demand and, in the near term, also by a large positive terms-of- trade shock mostly triggered by the fall in international oil prices. The latter will help reduce oil imports by more than 3 percent of GDP in 2015. The capital and financial accounts are expected to remain strong, particularly FDI, as political and social stability and relatively strong economic performance make Morocco an attractive destination. The external debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 32.1 percent at end-2014 and is expected to stabilize at that level over the medium term. However, stress tests show that 30 percent exchange rate depreciation or a shock to non-interest current account would result in a significant increase in debt relative to GDP. The net international investment position (NIIP), which deteriorated significantly following the global financial crisis, is expected to stabilize over the next few years as external buffers strengthen. Risks have declined but remain substantial. A protracted period of slow growth in advanced economies, in particular Europe, would affect the economy through low exports, FDI, and remittances. An increase in world energy prices resulting from geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and Russia/Ukraine could worsen the current account deficit. An abrupt surge in global financial market volatility would increase interest rates and raise the cost of financing and indirectly affect Gross Capital Formation: Total Gross Capital Formation: Nongovernment Gross national Savings: Total Gross National Savings: Nongovernment Page 13 external demand and FDI. On the domestic front, looming local elections (mid-2015) and parliamentary elections (2016) risk affecting the pace of reforms in a volatile regional environment. Source of Risk A protracted period of slow growth in advanced economies. Heightened risk of fragmentation/state failure in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices, with negative spillover on the global economy. Sustained tensions in Russia/Ukraine that depress business confidence and heighten risk aversion, amid disturbances in global financial, trade, and commodity markets. A surge in global financial market volatility, as investors reassess underlying risk. Risk Assessment Matrix Up/ Downside Likelihood Impact Policy Response High High High Allow more flexibility in exchange rate. Accelerate structural reforms. Diversify the sources of energy to reduce the economy’s dependence on oil. Continue the subsidy reform to minimize the impact on the budget of higher gas and food prices. Continue the diversification of the economy to reduce exports dependency on commodity prices. High Continue rebuilding external and fiscal buffers. Slower-than-needed pace of Build consensus on the necessity to reforms. reduce vulnerabilities and foster higher growth and on the role of reforms in achieving these goals. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in staff’s view). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff’s views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 14