PERFORMANCE Robust growth and low inflation continued in 2015, though at a somewhat lower pace than historical averages Growth decelerated to 6.3 percent in the first half of the year, owing to floods in early 2015, a slowdown in the mining sector, reflecting lower international commodity prices, and the delay in the approval of the 2015 budget. Despite the sizable depreciation of the metical against the US dollar, 12-month inflation stood at 2.4 percent in September because of a more moderate depreciation against the South African rand, low food prices, and stable administered prices (fuels, public transportation, and utilities). The depreciation and increases in administered prices (bread and electricity) in October- November are likely to push end-2015 inflation to around 5 percent. The new administration has been implementing the fiscal consolidation agreed under the PSI program . Following election-related fiscal slippages in 2014, the 2015 budget started to place public finances on a more sustainable path through a reduction of about 1½ percent of GDP (excluding one-off factors in 2014) in public spending. For the first nine months of the year, spending was broadly in line with program targets while revenues underperformed by a small margin. However, in June, the government made a lump sum payment of about $100 million (0.6 percent of GDP) to fuel distributors to compensate them for past losses generated by regulated fuel prices, which reflected under-budgeting for fuel subsidies. In addition, delays in donor flows, and the fact that the bulk of government securities received by companies as reimbursements for outstanding VAT credits (MT 8.2 billion) was discounted, pushed net credit to government (NCG) above target at end-June and September. Nonetheless, the government expressed a commitment to restrain spending in the last quarter to ensure that the program fiscal targets and NCG ceilings are met. This should be feasible if donor flows for the rest of the year proceed as planned. 201320142015 (proj)2014H12015H1 Current account deficit (megaprojects) Current account deficit (non-megaprojects) (In millionof US dollars) CPI inflation (12-month change) Real GDP growth rate Mozambique: GDP growth and CPIinflation projections (percent) Page 13 While the overall current account is improving due to a decline in import-intensive megaproject investments (given the end of the gas exploration phase), the non-megaproject current account has continued to worsen, intensifying pressures in the foreign exchange market. Foreign exchange market pressures, first experienced in late 2014 and early 2015, subsided during April-July but have since re-emerged. The non- megaproject current account deficit largely drives these pressures in the domestic foreign exchange market. During July 2014-June 2015, this deficit worsened by $1.7 billion compared to the previous 12 months. This deterioration was caused by lower commodity prices and declining FDI and external aid, while imports remained dynamic owing to strong domestic demand fueled by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. The depreciation of the metical has so far not had a noticeable impact on import demand. The net international reserves (NIR) of the Bank of Mozambique (BM) continued to decline. In an attempt to stabilize the foreign exchange market, the BM intervened heavily during late 2014 to early 2015, resulting in a $700 million decline in NIR. The BM has virtually stopped discretionary intervention since April and allowed the exchange rate to adjust (with a 33 percent year-on-year depreciation against the US dollar by mid-November 2015, the second largest depreciation in sub-Saharan African countries during the same period), but its longstanding commitment to supply US dollars to cover fuel imports and the government’s payment of EMATUM debt service falling due in September drove NIR down to $2.1 billion by end-October. The BM kept reserve money growth in line with commitments in the 4th PSI review, resulting in a gradual deceleration of credit growth, to 23 percent in September compared to 28 percent in end-2014. Capital flows associated with megaprojects are often used to finance imports. Megaprojects are often exempt from FX legislation and are also allowed in some cases to keep a large share of their dollar earnings offshore. This is a commitment made by the BM at the time of the 2008-09 global crisis to inject confidence in the thin foreign exchange market. The government guaranteed the $850 million bond issued in 2013 by the state-owned enterprise EMATUM. This borrowing financed the purchase of tuna fishing boats and maritime security equipment. Subsequently, $500 million out of the total $850 million was incorporated into the budget and became public debt under the responsibility of the treasury. The remaining amount ($350 million) remains on EMATUM’s balance sheet. K g T z h f g z m b q Z m b Nominal depreciation of selected currencies versus the US dollar (Percent ; US dollar per national currency -November 14, 2014-November 16, 2015) Page 14 Performance under the PSI through September 2015 was less than satisfactory. The assessment criteria (AC)/indicative targets on NCG, NIR, external arrears, and government revenues for June and September were missed (see above), while those on reserve money, nonconcessional borrowing, and the stock of short-term external public debt were met. The structural reform agenda is being implemented broadly as scheduled: of the ten structural benchmarks falling due before January 2016, 3 have been met, 3 have been completed with slight delays, 2 are expected to be met in time, and the other 2 are experiencing some delays (see paragraph 42). June 2015Sep 2015ACITAssessment CriteriaNet credit to the government Stock of reserve money Stock of net international reservesNonconcessional external debtStock of short-term external public debt External payments arrearsIndicative Targets Government revenue Priority spending … … met not met Program Performance Page 15 Figure 1. Mozambique: Impact of Global Developments Mozambique’s growth outlook remains robust, outperforming other SSA countries. …while the metical has sharply depreciated since the beginning of 2015. The current account deficit remains large, but continues to reflect sizeable investment imports by the natural resource sector since 2011-12. Terms of trade gains reversed since 2011 due to weakening international commodity prices… While overall trade deficit has narrowed, the non- megaproject trade deficit has increased due to lower export prices and sizeable fuel imports. The overall reserve cover declined markedly in 2014, but a large fall in megaproject imports kept reserve coverage (excl. megaprojects) at a still reasonable level. Sources: Mozambican authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections Mozambique Sub-Saharan Africa Real GDP Growth (Percent)Advanced economies Terms of Trade Index (2005=100) an r- ep an r- ep an r- ep Nominal effective exchange rate Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates (Index, Average 2010=100) Real effective exchange rate Exports by megaprojects Other exports Imports by megaprojects Petroleum product imports Other imports Merchandise Trade (Millions of U.S. dollars) Proj. Current transfers Net income flows Trade balance (G&S) Current account balance, after grants Foreign direct investment Proj.Current Account Balance and Foreign Direct Investment Private foreign capital inflows ,US$ bil, (left scale) Proj Reserve cover, months of projected imports (right scale) Private Foreign Capital Inflows and Reserve Cover Reserve cover, months of projected imports, excluding megaprojects (right scale) Page 16 Figure 2. Mozambique: Inflation and Monetary Developments Inflation has remained well-contained since 2012… Strong private sector credit growth signals financial deepening, but loose money growth since 2012 may have aggravated import demand and inflation. The Central Bank’s policy rates and the T-bill rates had been stable before the BM raised policy rates in October. supported by favorable developments in international food prices. The Mt/$ exchange rate started to depreciate in 2014Q4, while the rate against the rand remained stable. The BM’s liquidity management kept reserve money below its program target in September 2015. Sources: Mozambican authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections Metical/South African rand Metical/ U.S. dollar Bilateral Exchange Rates FoodFuel (rhs)-60-40-20020406080-10010 CPI Core (Non-food exc. transport and energy) CPI and Components (Percentchange, year-on-year) Fuel price Food price-60-50-40-30-20 International Food and Fuel Price Change (Percent change, year-on-year) Proj CPI, eopCredit to the economy-10 Reserve money M3 Money, Credit and Inflation (12-month percentage change) 3-month T-Bill 1-year T-Bill Interest Rates (Percent per annum) Standing Deposit Facility (BM)Standing Lending Facility(BM)1-Year Bank's Lending 1-Year Bank Deposit Reserve Money (MT billions) Actualaverage reserve money Reserve money ceiling Actual average currency in circulation Page 17 Figure 3. Mozambique: Selected External Sector Developments Significant exchange rate pressure emerged in the foreign exchange market in 2014Q4 … … and partly reflecting the global strengthening of the US dollar, … … partly due to a substantial fall in traditional exports,… … while dollar deposits in the banking system remained broadly stable. The central bank’s recent intervention was mainly for its commitment to finance fuel imports…. … but the level of international reserves continue to fall. Sources: Mozambican authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections Interbank rate Nominal Exchange Rate (Metical/U.S. dollar)Central bank rate 12002013H12013H22014H12014H22015H1 Cotton Sugar Tobacco Banana Wood Crustaceans Other exports Selected Traditional Exports (Millions of U.S. dollars) K T z g h f z m b q g Z m b Nominal depreciation of selected currencies vs. US dollar (Percent ; between December 2014 and October 2015) 1,650 1,700 1,750 1,800 1,850 Banks Foreign Currency Deposits (Millions of U.S. dollars) Net Central Bank Foreign Exchange Sales (Million of U.S. dollars) 6-monthmoving average Net International Reserves (Millions of U.S. dollars) Page 18 Figure 4. Mozambique: Fiscal Developments Public Debt has been rising fast, although 2015-16 increases are mainly driven by metical depreciation. …when large windfall revenues in 2013-2014… Fiscal consolidation started in 2015 after the overall fiscal stance deteriorated markedly in 2014… ... were used to finance a sharp increase in expenditure. Sources: Mozambican authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Total Debt Domestic Debt External Debt Total Public Debt Composition Proj. Budget support grants Budget support loans Domestic primary balance Net domestic financing Overall balance, after grants Budget Financing Proj. Domestic taxes on goods and services Taxes on income and profits Other revenue Windfall capital gains tax Proj. Revenue Collection Current expenditure Capital expenditure Net lending Total Expenditure and Net Lending Page 19