Mozambique’s economic outlook remains robust. Growth of 6.3 percent is expected in 2015 (i.e., a 0.7 percent downward revision), and remains below potential at 6.5 percent in 2016, mainly due to a stagnant mining sector and substantially tighter fiscal and monetary policies. Over the medium term, growth is projected to recover to 7½-8 percent, supported by massive investment in natural gas projects and higher coal production if key agreements can be reached for coal and gas sector development. Inflation is expected to increase towards the BM’s medium target of 5-6 percent, due to the recent depreciation of the metical and adjustments in administered prices. Economic risks are substantial. In the short term, construction of liquefied natural gas (LNG) plants could be significantly delayed if the ongoing negotiations between the authorities and gas companies are not completed by the end of the year. Over the longer run, persistently weak international commodity prices and significant slowdowns in China and other key economies might delay the expansion of coal mining projects and dampen growth. If these risks materialize, the recovery of growth to 7-8 percent could be delayed by a few years, while the growth rate would remain above 6 percent owing to the expected growth of non-mining sectors. In the natural gas sector, such agreements between the government and concessionaries would trigger massive FDI in LNG processing facilities (starting from the second half of 2016) and pave the way for LNG exports by 2021. In the coal sector, agreements need to be reached to unlock financing for the completion of the Nacala rail corridor, which would triple coal export volumes by 2017. In the latter part of October, negotiations between the government and the investors were in full swing. Bread prices were adjusted in October and electricity prices in November, with an estimated average increase of about 20 percent in the latter case. Mozambique: Mining Sector Indicators 2002-1120122013201420152016Average Proj.Proj. (In percent, unless otherwise stated) Mining GDP (nominal, in MT million)3,30113,08115,23024,92128,23532,743Mining GDP (share in total nominal GDP)1.23.03.24.74.74.9Mining real growth20.967.915.743.77.89.8Mining contribution to total GDP growth (in percentage points)0.21.10.41.20.30.4 Total real GDP growth7.77.27.17.26.36.5Non-mining real GDP growth7.66.26.96.26.26.4 Sources: Mozambican authorities, and IMF staff estimates and projections. MEFP ¶4 Page 20 As a tail risk event, low international gas prices could cause significant delays in the gas projects for several years, although the oil and gas companies still remain confident in the feasibility of their projects. In addition, new concessions awarded in October 2015 could generate additional investment in the oil and gas sector. The depreciation of the metical has heightened Mozambique’s debt vulnerability, implying a need for cautious future borrowing. With most public debt issued in foreign currency, the depreciation raised the present value of external debt to almost 40 percent of GDP at end-2015 (from 30 percent at end-2014). The updated DSA shows that Mozambique’s external debt rating remains moderate, but debt level indicators are now closer to a high risk rating, and the risk to overall public debt is now heightened. Maintaining debt sustainability will require vigorous fiscal discipline in line with the authorities’ program, a strong focus on contracting debt mostly on concessional terms, and increased prioritization among investment projects. Such prioritization is also important as debt service has started to increase sharply with the start of repayments on EMATUM debt, even if it remains manageable overall. The present value of debt is expected to decrease somewhat below 40 percent of GDP during 2016-19 before declining to less than 20 percent by the mid-2020s because of a higher GDP (LNG production). The sizable current account deficits projected in the medium term are driven by large gas projects financed by FDI and private debt. It will not pose a significant BOP risk to the extent that the implied imports are financed directly by these inflows. The Debt Sustainability Framework applies a method based on probabilities of default to borderline cases within a range of +/- 5 percent of the threshold values. According to this alternative method, Mozambique’s probability of default is clearly moderate, implying that its overall moderate rating is maintained. Page 21 Box 1. Mozambique: Risk Assessment Matrix Nature/Source of RiskLikelihood in the next three years Expected impact on the economy Time HorizonPolicy ResponseExternal Protracted period of slower growth in key advanced and emerging economiesMHShort TermAccelerate policies to diversify exports and structural reforms to boost competitivenessSharp growth slowdown and financial risks in ChinaLLShort TermAccelerate policies to diversify exports and structural reforms to boost competitivenessPersistently low global commodity prices affecting Mozambican exports (especially coal and gas)MMMedium TermExchange rate flexibility as first line of defense, and automatic stabilizers while preserving debt sustainability Domestic Significant delay in LNG projectsLHShort Termprudent fiscal policy to maintain debt sustainabilitySocial unrest in connection with lower than expected benefits from natural resource managementMMShort TermFoster inclusive growth and intensify public communication on the long term social benefits of natural resourcesSignificant aid declineLMShort TermContinue to seek donor support and maintain consistent policies, with an emphasis on good governance and transparencyClimate disastersMHMedium TermAccelerate prevention and risk management policies. Automatic stabilizers and targeted spending initiatives. Supportive monetary and exchange rate policiesInfrastructure bottlenecks hampering exports and economic growthMMMedium TermEnhance project selection and financing consistent with debt sustainabilityExcessive borrowing leading to unsustainable external public debtMHMedium TermEnhance debt management, project selection and assessment process The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff‘s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding he baseline. The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with authorities. Page 22