GROWTH Myanmar lacks a well-developed private sector and is currently short of public goods and social services to support inclusive growth. The authorities’ Framework for Economic and Social Reforms (FESR) appropriately targets infrastructure development as a priority, as lack of infrastructure services, particularly electricity supply, is a major constraint on business activities. Expenditure on health and education, another well-identified priority, has increased in recent years, but public resources devoted to this area are well below in those found in peer countries. At the same time, access to finance is limited, particularly for the vast rural population and small and medium-sized enterprises, and Myanmar’s regulatory regime imposes heavy burdens on businesses. Staff’s Views Myanmar needs to implement well-focused reforms to foster inclusive growth. Given the current circumstances, policies should aim to mobilize and make the best use of public resources available, strengthen regulatory and supervisory framework for the financial sector, and continue to improve the business environment to create the enabling condition for private enterprise to flourish. Building institutional capacity is critical to moving forward in these areas. Page 16 Building fiscal space and improving spending efficiency Revenue mobilization remains a top priority to increase public resources available for promoting inclusive growth. Tax revenue has increased significantly over the last three years, but it is still well below levels in most peer countries because of a narrow tax base, exacerbated by extensive tax incentives and weak administration. Staff recommends that as an initial step to reduce tax incentives, tax expenditure be estimated and presented as part of annual budgets. Preparatory work on the introduction of a value added tax (VAT) by 2020/21 should begin in earnest, including by passing the special commercial tax bill. The extractive industry fiscal regime should be reformed with a view to centralizing collection of gas-related revenue and increasing transparency, along with continued progress toward the membership of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) (see Selected Issues Paper 1). On tax administration, staff welcomes the operation of the Large Taxpayers Office (LTO) with the introduction of self-assessment on income taxes. However, more budgetary resources need to be allocated to the field offices and Internal Revenue Department (IRD) headquarters to boost their capacity, including through staffing and ICT improvement. The extension of self-assessment to medium taxpayers should be delayed until new procedures and systems, especially for effective audit, are put in place in the LTO. Sources: Authorities' data; the World Bank ; and IMF staff estimates Tax Revenue H K S H H K Myanmar should continue to prioritize expenditure on infrastructure and social programs and improve public financial management. In this respect, the cut in capital spending budgeted for 2015/16 is neither desirable nor consistent with the authorities’ stated expenditure priorities. While it is important to raise public sector wages to retain and attract talents, the pace and structure of wage increases should be implemented in conjunction with a public service reform. Staff also encourages the authorities to assess the impact of expected increases in inflation on the poor and consider introducing well-targeted social programs as needed, such as free school meals to pupils attending compulsory education in public schools and free hospital treatments to pregnant and nursing women and elderly individuals In the area of public financial management, the government should adopt a medium-term fiscal framework and consider introducing, over time, a fiscal rule to smooth spending against volatile gas revenues. The reform of state economic enterprises (SEEs) should be accelerated with a view to improving their efficiency and profitability in order to minimize contingent liabilities. This includes revising MOGE’s financial requirements to reflect its role in collecting natural gas rents on behalf of the government. Given the limited fiscal resources and huge spending needs, it is all the more important that Myanmar maintain fiscal discipline to ensure debt sustainability. Myanmar’s risk of debt distress remains low (see the DSA), but overall public debt is projected to rise over time given the large financing needs for development. This highlights the importance of keeping deficits low and Page 17 pursuing prudent external borrowing with an emphasis on concessional loans. Based on debt sustainability simulations, staff advised the government to lower its fiscal deficit target from 5 percent of GDP to 4½ percent of GDP over the medium to long term in order to safeguard fiscal sustainability. Government Spending Education S H H H K K Public Spending on Health, H S H K K H Capital Spending, 2012 H K K S H H Sources: Authorities Data; the World Bank; and IMF staff calculations. Improving financial inclusion and promoting private enterprise Improving financial inclusion will require safeguarding financial stability as well as broadening funding sources and reducing costs. Staff welcomes recent progress in preparing the Banks and Financial Institutions Law, the Investment Law and Company Law, and looks forward to their early approval by parliament. The enactment of these laws will help clarify the regulatory environment and make it more attractive to FDIs. The CBM should speed up approval of investment and other capital inflows consistent with these laws while maintaining appropriate capital management measures (such as setting annual ceilings of new borrowings) to safeguard financial stability. In addition, the CBM should consider allowing foreign exchange swaps and forwards to enable financial institutions and companies to hedge exchange rate risks and promote money market development. Foreign micro-finance institutions (MFIs) should be allowed to raise domestic kyat funding to facilitate more stable access to credit in the sector. Myanmar should take full advantage of the presence of nine foreign banks by end-September to modernize its banking sector while minimizing associated risks, such as volatility in capital flows (Selected Issues Paper 2). Reforms of state banks should be accelerated, and policy banks, cooperatives, and MFIs need to be properly regulated and supervised (Box 4). Staff welcomes progress being made in the diagnostics of state banks with assistance of the World Bank and encourages the authorities to move expeditiously in formulating a reform plan to redefine the role of state banks and reduce financial and fiscal risks. One option would be to consolidate these banks and the many policy banks into one or two development banks with clear development mandates and a modern Page 18 governance structure. Proper prudential regulations need to be applied to policy banks, cooperatives and MFIs, and their risks exposure, including foreign currency risks, should be monitored closely. Over time, the authorities should consider reducing fragmentation of financial supervision, with supervision power being consolidated in the CBM as its capacity develops. Continued efforts will be needed to improve the business environment and external competitiveness. It is important to continue with regulatory reforms to reduce the cost of doing business, particularly in the areas of contract enforcement and business start-up, where Myanmar lags behind most of its peers. Myanmar has a great opportunity to leverage its participation in the ASEAN Economic Community to improve the business environment, as well as to take advantage of the dynamic regional market and value chains to implement its export-oriented development strategy, which entails export diversification to promote manufacturing activities (Selected Issues Paper 3). Raising labor productivity through education and training will be important to improve competitiveness, including in agriculture. Ease of Doing Business: Overall Ranking and Its Components Overall Ranking Singapore Malaysia Thailand Vietnam Philippines Brunei Darussalam Indonesia Cambodia Lao, PDR Myanmar Doing Business by Topics 2/ Starting a Business (189) Resolving Insolvency (160) Dealing with Construction Permits (130) Enforcing Contracts (185) (103) Trading Across Borders Getting Electricity (121) Registering Property (151) (116) Paying Taxes Getting Credit (171) (178) Protecting Minority Investors Cambodia Vietnam Lao PDR Myanmar 1/ Economies are ranked on their ease of doing business, from 1–189. A high ease of doing business ranking means the regulatory environment is more conducive to the starting and operation of a local firm. The rankings are determined by sorting the aggregate distance to frontier scores on 10 topics. These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, a limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. 2/ The number in () indicates Myanmar’s raking for each topic. Source: World Bank Doing Business (2015 Doing Business Report). Authorities’ Views The authorities attach great importance to promoting inclusive growth. They are fully aware of the need to raise revenue but have noted that their efforts are often hampered by capacity constraints. To build up human capital and reduce poverty, the 2015/16 budget provided an extension of the free basic education program and more resources for medical education to train Page 19 more healthcare professionals. The authorities are also planning to increase hospital coverage in rural areas and provide free books in primary and secondary public schools. The authorities recognize the need to improve the regulatory and supervisory framework to safeguard financial stability when promoting financial inclusion. Their approach to improve the business climate includes setting up special economic zones to make localized improvement in infrastructure and the regulatory regime.