Myanmar is undergoing a historical political transition. On November 8, the country is scheduled to hold its first general elections since the start of reforms in 2011. Also of historical significance is the ongoing peace process. The Myanmar government has recently signed a draft ceasefire agreement with 16 armed ethnic groups, and negotiations to reach a final agreement before the elections are continuing. Favorable outcomes on these two fronts would pave the way for greater political and social stability and underpin continued economic transition. Myanmar has made impressive strides in economic reform but the country continues to face daunting development challenges. Trade and financial liberalization has moved forward rapidly with the dismantling of trade barriers and the opening of the banking sector. This year marks the entry of nine foreign banks and the operation of the Thilawa Special Economic Zone (SEZ), which will provide an initial platform for Myanmar’s export-oriented growth. Despite these advances, Myanmar remains the poorest country in Southeast Asia and its development indicators are well below its peers in the region (Table 6). Moreover, Myanmar’s capacity for economic management is low. The authorities have received considerable technical assistance from the Fund and have made good progress in implementing Fund policy recommendations, although much remains on the reform agenda (see the Appendix I). The key challenge in this election year is to maintain macroeconomic stability. Following three years of strong growth supported by loosening financial conditions, the economy is running into supply constraints, including shortages of infrastructure services (e.g., electricity) and skilled and semi-skilled labor. While productive capacity will increase over time with continued structural reforms and investment, policy adjustments are necessary to slow the growth of aggregate demand in the short run. This is all the more important in the face of lower commodity prices which make it difficult to sustain current policy settings without jeopardizing macroeconomic stability.