STABILITY The authorities’ 2015/16 budget projects an overall fiscal deficit of just under 5 percent of GDP. Staff’s projections show a deficit of 4¾ percent of GDP after incorporating more plausible revenue and expenditure outcomes in contrast to the authorities’ very conservative revenue projection and an ambitious and perhaps unsustainable reduction in capital expenditure. Nevertheless, the budget represents a fiscal expansion of nearly 2 percent of GDP from last year, largely reflecting a substantial wage increase for public sector employees, albeit from a very low base (a little over 2 percent of GDP). Credit to the private sector has been growing by 50 percent annually on average during 2011/12–2014/15 and is expected to increase by about 45 percent this year. Much of Page 12 the credit has been provided to trade, manufacturing, construction (including real estate) and agriculture, which collectively account for more than two-thirds of total credit. Over 90 percent of the credit is extended through loans for 12 months or less, which are routinely rolled over with capitalization of interest. Loans through hire-purchase are also rising, although they still account for less than 10 percent of total loans outstanding. Meanwhile, most banks are under- capitalized and data on loan quality and provisioning continue to pose difficulties for proper analysis. AGR/LVSTK TRADE CNSTR OTH 2/ MNF/PRD TRSPT SERV Total (growth, RHS) Private Banks: Credit by Sector and Growth 1/ (left: percent of GDP; right: percent, y/y) 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 1/ It does not include credit to private sector by state-owned banks. 2/ Other includes credits to local stores and specialized shops. Sources: Authorities' data; and IMF staff calculations. Myanmar is facing challenges in implementing anti-money laundering/combating financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) measures. It remains listed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as a country that has not made sufficient progress in implementing its action plan to address its significant AML/CFT shortcomings. Without progress, Myanmar banks’ correspondent banking relationships in major financial markets could be adversely affected if the FATF calls for countermeasures against Myanmar. It is thus urgent that the authorities promulgate FATF–compliant AML/CFT laws and regulations and implement them effectively. Staff’s Views Myanmar’s top policy priority in the near term is to address increasing macroeconomic imbalances and the resulting vulnerabilities. This calls for a tightening of monetary and fiscal policies along with exchange rate flexibility. Given the ongoing pressure on the kyat, early action to tighten policies and enforce prudential measures is needed to address the underlying causes of the growing macroeconomic imbalances. Reducing the fiscal deficit and terminating CBM financing Reducing the fiscal deficit is urgently needed to contain immediate inflationary pressure and anchor exchange rate expectations. Staff recommends that the fiscal deficit be reduced to about 4 percent of GDP in 2015/16, which would constitute a countercyclical measure to address the growing macroeconomic imbalances. This target can be achieved through a combination of measures in revenue mobilization and expenditure reprioritization in the upcoming 2015/16 supplementary budget expected in coming months. The budget should implement the collection of the commercial tax on telecom Fiscal Deficit: Baseline vs. Adjustment Scenarios Baseline scenerio Adjustment scenario Projections 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 Sources: Authorities' data; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 13 services which was postponed earlier this year and reduce low-priority current spending, including on goods and services, and travel expenses. While expenditures on health, education and infrastructure should be protected, transfers to Regions and States should be contained in line with their implementation capacity and spending responsibilities. Over the medium term, a new fiscal rule aimed at addressing volatile gas revenues can be considered (see paragraph 24). Fiscal Adjustment Baseline NFCPS budget deficit Adjustment NCPS budget deficit Recommended adjustments: Tax revenue measures Expenditure measures Transfers to States and Regions Other non-wage non-interest spending Source: IMF staff calculations. Automatic CBM financing of the residual gap in the fiscal deficit should be terminated and replaced by issuance of government securities. Staff welcomes the establishment of the Treasury Department in September 2014 and the launch of T-bill auctions in January 2015. To attract substantially larger volumes of bids that are needed to meet the CBM’s reserve money target, it is urgent that the Ministry of Finance allows the interest rate at T-bill auctions to rise. Continued efforts will also be needed to integrate the auction with budget execution and cash management. In particular, the volume of fortnightly T-bill sales needs to be spread out to reduce pressures to issue large volumes of T-bills to the CBM at the end of the fiscal year. In addition, like domestic banks, foreign bank branches operating in Myanmar should be allowed to purchase government securities to broaden the government's funding base. This will also provide better options for bank liquidity management and aid the development of the money markets. Tightening monetary policy and ensuring exchange rate flexibility Reserve Money: Baseline vs. Adjustment Scenarios (Percent, y/y) The CBM should tighten monetary condition to contain inflationary pressures and support the Kyat. The CBM should mop up liquidity by scaling up deposit auctions and transition to the recalibrated reserve requirement (which, in contrast to the current requirement, excludes government bonds from liquid assets) by the set target date of early October. The CBM’s reserve money target should be tightened while being flexible enough to accommodate the seasonality of structural liquidity. Access to the CBM discount window should be revamped by shortening the maturity to overnight to prevent the facility from being used as a de facto revolving credit facility. Staff 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 Sources: Authorities' data; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Baseline scenerio Adjustment scenario Projections Page 14 continues to encourage the authorities to convert the CBM’s legacy debt portfolio to marketable government securities that can be used for open market operations. As inflation is expected to rise over the course of 2015/16, the CBM and government should consider increasing the current regulated minimum deposit and maximum lending rates, the CBM discount rate, and the fixed rates offered on Treasury bonds to improve the attractiveness of the instruments. Staff welcomes the CBM’s recent bold move to close the exchange rate gap by aligning its reference rate with parallel market rates. Exchange rate flexibility is critical to maintaining external stability. The current downward pressure on the kyat is largely a result of macroeconomic policy inconsistency—monetary and fiscal policies are too loose to anchor the exchange rate expectations, although external shocks have also played a role (Box 1). Under the current macroeconomic policy settings, resisting depreciation pressure could lead to a quick rundown of reserves. A priority import window for supply of FX to importers of fuel and cooking oil was introduced in late-June, prior to the recent realignment of the reference rate and parallel market rates (Box 2). Staff is examining any jurisdictional implications arising from the operation of the window. The authorities noted their intention to phase out the window. Strengthening prudential measures Prudential measures, as well as liquidity tightening, are needed to arrest credit expansion and minimize financial sector risks. Because of the uncertainty over the sustainable pace of financial deepening, prudential measures will need to be introduced quickly and measures already in place should be enforced and tightened where needed to ensure credit to the private sector grow at a safe pace. In this regard, a top priority is to finalize and issue the remaining six out of the eight instructions on prudential regulations. This would help empower the supervisors to ensure that all banks meet capital and liquidity requirements in a reasonably short timeframe, that prudent loan classification and loss provisioning are followed and that loans are sound before they are rolled over. The authorities should also strengthen monitoring of hire purchase and credit funded by foreign loans, and start to prepare a bank resolution framework. Reducing risks and improving growth sustainability Two alternative scenarios prepared by staff illustrate the importance of taking concerted actions to tighten macro policies and strengthen prudential measures outlined above (Box 3). The (policy) adjustment scenario highlights the potential benefits of taking early action to address the imbalances identified in the baseline. The result of tightening policies and strengthening prudential measures would be reduced vulnerabilities and improved policy buffers. Real GDP growth would be somewhat lower than in the baseline because of less expansionary macroeconomic policies, but this growth path would be more sustainable. In contrast, the adverse scenario provides a stress test of a situation where fiscal policy slippages and deteriorating prudential standards further increase credit expansion (as reflected in the rising money multiplier), to around 60 percent compared with 45 percent in the baseline. If Myanmar were also hit by further declines in the price and production of natural gas and lower FDI inflows arising from elections- related uncertainty, growth would be slower and economic vulnerabilities would rise further. In Page 15 particular, the fiscal deficit in 2015/16 could rise to over 6 percent, the current account deficit widen to 10 percent, and CBM reserves fall to 1 ⅓ months of imports, with a further decline to less than 1 month in 2016/17. Authorities’ Views The authorities were in broad agreement with staff’s policy recommendations. They pointed out that they have been able to keep fiscal deficits lower than budgeted in recent years. While acknowledging the need to raise interest rates at T-bill auctions, they were concerned about increases in interest costs to the budget. They indicated that cutting maintenance cost and capital spending in the 2015/16 budget is necessary to meet the deficit target. The authorities indicated that increased transfers to sub-national governments are part of a political process for federalism. The authorities recognized the need to tighten monetary condition and intended to scale up deposit auctions to reduce liquidity and anchor exchange rate expectations. The CBM has operational autonomy to mop up sufficient amount of liquidity. The authorities’ initial reluctance to allow the CBM reference rate to align with the market rates was out of concerns over a potential downward depreciation-inflation spiral once the CBM reference rate is allowed to reflect market conditions. The authorities also recognized the need to implement prudential measures and strengthen monitoring of banks’ balance sheets. In areas where prudential instructions are yet to be issued, the CBM has been using moral suasion to influence banks’ behavior.