Real GDP Growth, Fiscal and Current Account Deficits Growth remains strong, but macroeconomic imbalances have increased significantly over the past year. Real GDP growth for 2014/15 (April/March) is estimated to have reached 8½ percent (Table 1). Growth picked up pace in manufacturing, construction, tourism, and natural gas production, which more than offset a slowdown in agriculture. Inflation reached 8 percent (y/y) in May, up from 4 percent in October (non-food inflation rose from 3¾ percent to 6 percent), reflecting mainly strong domestic demand, with import volumes growing by 28½ percent in 2014/15. Real GDP growth (percent, RHS) Current account deficit (percent of GDP) Fiscal deficit (percent of GDP) Sources: Authorities' data; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 10 The 2014/15 fiscal deficit is estimated at 3 percent of GDP, but the underlying deficit is estimated at 5½ percent once one-off receipts from telecom and gas companies are excluded (Table 2). The current account deficit widened to over 6 percent of GDP, largely reflecting a rapidly rising trade deficit, which increased from 4½ percent of GDP to 8¼ percent (Table 3). Since late 2014, the kyat has come under pressure to depreciate, and its value against the U.S. dollar has declined by about 20 percent. At end-March 2015, the Central Bank of Myanmar’s (CBM) foreign reserves covered around 3 months of imports, well below the estimated adequate level of 5 − 6 months of imports. Credit to the private sector continued to grow strongly at 35 percent (y/y) in March, albeit lower than the 53½ percent in 2013/14 (Table 4). Staff’s Views Percent of GDP (RHS) Growth (percent) Loan to deposit ratio Credit to Private Sector and Loan to Deposit Ratio The Myanmar economy is set for strong growth this year amid signs of overheating. The economy is expected to grow by 8½ percent this year, reflecting strong growth momentum but also expansionary macroeconomic policies. The projected increase in the fiscal deficit in the 2015/16 budget—amounting to almost 2 percent of GDP—will provide an expansionary stimulus and contribute to strong credit growth and a rising current account deficit. With increased financing need, CBM financing of the deficit is likely to remain significant at 1 percent of GDP while credit to private sector is expected to expand by about 45 percent. As a result, inflation is expected to rise to around 13 percent (end-year) in 2015/16 and the current account deficit to widen to about 9 percent of GDP, with the CBM’s foreign reserves falling to about 2½ months of imports. Sources: Authorities' data; and IMF staff estimates and projections. (Projections) WEO (Projections) MOGE 1/ Natural Gas Prices (Percent, y/y) Downside risks to growth and stability in the near term have increased (Table 7). The formula-based price smoothing mechanism under the contract has mitigated the impact of the fall in international commodity prices on Myanmar’s gas export earnings, and the overall terms of trade remains favorable given that Myanmar is a net importer of fuel. However, l ower natural gas prices would further reduce export earnings and government revenue, and could also lead The IMF’s new metric for low-income countries suggests an adequate level of reserves of about 4½ − 7 months of imports for Myanmar. Given Myanmar’s huge development needs, it would be appropriate for Myanmar to target around 5 − 6 months of prospective import cover. 1/ Myanma Oil and Gas Enterprise. Sources: Authorities' data; IMF's World Economic Outlook (April 2015); and IMF staff projections. Page 11 to lower-than-expected FDI inflows in the medium-long run. A sharper-than-expected slowdown in China’s growth would also have a negative impact on Myanmar. Moreover, a tightening of US monetary policy and uncertainty over Greece’s economic situation could strengthen the US dollar and put further downward pressure on the kyat. Increasing vulnerabilities resulting from rapid credit growth, a widening current account deficit, and an expansionary budget pose increasing risks to price and external stability. The ongoing liberalization of the financial sector—despite its overall benefits—also comes with risks as the CBM’s regulatory and supervisory capacity is still relatively weak. A combination of these potential shocks—if materialized amid political uncertainty related to the general elections—could severely strain the economy (see scenario analysis in the following section). On the other hand, a well-received election outcome and peace process may provide an upside surprise, resulting in higher-than-expected FDI inflows. Myanmar’s medium-long term growth prospects remain favorable on account of continued reform and FDI inflows (Table 5). Staff currently projects a long-term growth rate of around 7 percent. Given its low income level, Myanmar can sustain such rapid growth for a long time to come through catch up. With its strategic location and proximity to a dynamic East and Southeast Asia, Myanmar stands to benefit from an expected relocation of FDIs in manufacturing around the region in search of lower labor cost. To take advantage of this opportunity, Myanmar will need to continue to pursue market-oriented reform and improve its business environment. Authorities’ Views The authorities are in broad agreement with staff’s assessment of the current economic situation and outlook. However, they project growth at 9 ⅓ percent in 2015/16 on account of strong FDI inflows to support rapid growth in energy and manufacturing industries. booming tourism sector will also help boost transportation and construction industries. Infrastructure development under the next Five-Year National Development Plan will help sustain economic growth in the long run.