Namibia is a small, upper middle-income country with close economic linkages to South Africa. With Lesotho, Swaziland, and South Africa, Namibia is a member of the Common Monetary Area (CMA). Under the CMA, the Namibian dollar is pegged at par to the South African rand, which is also legal tender in the country. CMA members and Botswana constitute the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). Namibia has maintained robust growth since the global financial crisis, although in 2014 it was somewhat weaker (Figure 1). Despite strong growth in construction activities in mining and housing sectors, real GDP growth moderated to 4½ percent in 2014 (from 5 percent in 2013), largely owing to lower global demand for Namibia’s main export commodities (e.g., diamond, and uranium). Inflation remained contained, due to low international commodity prices (e.g. fuel). The government’s large scale fiscal program contributed to job creation (including many temporary jobs in construction), and unemployment declined somewhat (to 28.1 percent in 2014 from 29.6 percent in 2013). Growth buoyed by robust private sector credit. Domestic Credit (Contribution to annual credit growth) Growth performance has been underpinned by a rapid increase in credit (Box 1) . Average annual growth of private sector credit has exceeded 15 percent since 2012, with strong demand from both households and corporates (particularly construction, real estate, and trade and accommodation). Private credit expansion has been boosted by historically low interest rates, following South Africa’s monetary policy. Net credit to the government has also risen, reflecting the expansionary fiscal policy stance. Overall money supply grew by 14.3 percent (year-on-year) as of May 2015. Rapid credit growth over the last decade has been accompanied by improved access to financial services, with a larger share of the Namibian population having access to financial services. In view of high international commodity prices from 2000 through 2011, Namibia experienced a wave of exploration and investments. The three largest developments in the sector include: (i) the Otjikoto gold mine (from December 2014), (ii) the Tschudi copper mine (from February 2015), and (iii) the Husab uranium mine (from end 2016). Despite the recent decline in commodity prices, these investments are expected to continue, as they are at an advanced phase. These new mines will further contribute to growth over the next few years (mining is expected to account for 15 percent of GDP by 2018). To respond to the high unemployment in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the authorities implemented the Targeted Intervention Program for Employment and Economic Growth for 2011/12 ‒ 2013/14, with a three-year large-scale fiscal expansion (with a budget allocation of N$9.1 billion (10 percent of GDP)). y Credits to other sectors Net credit to the government Domestic credit (annual changes) Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates. v S t O Page 10 Act Act Est Budget Total revenue and grants Fiscal Balance (In percent of GDP) Namibia’s fiscal policy remains expansionary, to promote growth and employment. In 2014/15, supported by relatively high SACU revenues and further efforts in domestic revenue collection (e.g., enhanced collection of tax arrears and higher compliance), the government increased its expenditures (e.g., wages, goods and services, and capital spending), resulting in an overall fiscal deficit of 3¾ percent of GDP. For 2015/16, the budget envisages a larger deficit, with increases in subsidies and transfers, and capital expenditures and lower SACU revenues (declined by 1¾ percent of GDP from 2014/15). Based on recent economic data, the revenue forecast underlying the budget seems overestimated, and the deficit could reach 6¾ percent of GDP. The government is exploring the scope for tapping international capital markets. Staff estimate Capital expenditure* Net lending Overall balance Overall balance (excl. SACU revenue) * Including externally financed capital projects that are not channeled through the state account. Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates Personnel Goods and services Interest payment Subsidies and transfers Domestic revenue SACU revenue Grant Expenditures Current expenditure According to FinScope, the ratio of Namibian population excluded from financial services declined from 52 percent in 2007 to 31 percent in 2011, close to the target (26 percent) of the Namibia Financial Sector Strategy (NFSS). As part of the revenue collection efforts, a Large Taxpayer Office was established in June 2014, which contributed to improving tax compliance rates in Windhoek and satellite cities. A dedicated tax collection unit will be fully operational in 2015/16 which will help reduce tax evasion in remote areas. The increase in personnel cost was mainly due to a civil service salary increase (of 10 percent), coupled with the implementation of the "job evaluation and regrading" system which resulted in notch increase of 2 percent. Subsidies and transfers are expected to increase by 0.9 percentage points of GDP from 2014/15, owing to an increase in financial support to public enterprises for: (i) strengthening the medical care of public servants, (ii) enhancing the educational assistance (financial aid to students and universities to improve access to vocational training and tertiary education), and (ii) developing and rehabilitating of infrastructure (railway, airport, and road maintenance). The authorities acknowledged that their revenue estimates are overstated and plan to reassess revenue forecast in the upcoming mid-year budget review (in October). The Namibian government has issued foreign bonds in the recent past: (i) a US$500 million Eurobond in October 2011, (ii) a ZAR 850 million 10-year bond on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) in November 2012, and (iii) ZAR 800 million 5-year and 7-year bonds on the JSE in June 2015. As of July 2015, Namibia retains Baa3 rating from Moody’s and BBB rating from Fitch. Page 11 Box 1. Credit and GDP Growth and Financial Stability Time series analysis suggests the existence of a long-term relation between domestic credit to the private sector and economic growth in Namibia, despite the fact that a short-term direction of causality could not be identified. Rapid credit expansion, however, raises concerns in terms of financial stability. The direction of the short-term causal relationship between private domestic credit and GDP growth could not be identified using VAR-based estimates. The lack of Granger causality between private domestic credit (from banks) and output could be attributable to three factors: (i) domestic credit flows mainly to the construction and real estate sectors, whose share of GDP is relatively small (about 8 percent); (ii) economic activity in Namibia largely depends on government spending and mining activities (mostly financed with external flows); and (iii) private credit and GDP growth appear to be coincident indicators and this potential simultaneity makes the estimation of the direction of causality difficult (see Figure). Namibia: Nominal GDP and Domestic Credit Growth Gross Domestic Product Claims on Private Sector Sources. Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates However, a cointegration analysis reveals the existence of a long-term relationship between credit and output. The Johansen test reveals the existence of a cointegration equation between the quarterly series of credit and GDP (a long-term relationship). According to these estimates, based on a VECM specification with 4 lags, a 1 percent increase in real credit is associated with a 0.47 percent increase in real GDP in the long-run. In addition to the direct contribution to the construction and real estate sectors, financial intermediation is expected to support growth through the mobilization of savings, promotion of information sharing, enhancement of resource allocation, and risk management. In Namibia bank credit is also critical to provide trade finance and thus facilitates mining and construction activities. The large credit expansion might have been accompanied by systemic risk build-up. Despite the positive effects on growth, rapid credit growth and concentration in the loan book (Box 3) raise financial stability concerns, through contributing to pushing house prices above fundamentals. The analysis of the credit-to-GDP gap could not confirm excessive credit growth, as the credit-to-GDP ratio has been below its historical trend over the past few years (see Figure). The interpretation of this, however, warrants some caution, given that the very rapid credit growth following independence may have biased upward the long-term trend. Furthermore, overall credit may mask potential risks contained in specific sectors (e.g., growth in personal loans). Namibia: Credit-to-GDP Gap GAP (RHS) Credit-to-GDP Trend d T m T L m f i t i v Note: The estimates of the long-term trend are obtained by using a one-sided (backward-looking) HP filter on annual data starting in 1995. The smoothing parameter λ is set equal to 1600. Sources. Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates __________________________________ 1/ In the absence of information on credit from non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), the analysis is based on bank credit to the private sector. The contribution of NBFIs to private sector intermediation is, however, expected to be limited, as NBFIs invest mainly in government bonds, bank deposits, and dual listed companies (in South Africa and Namibia). Page 12 These developments resulted in increased pressure on external balances, while real estate prices have risen . With a significant increase in import demand (partly associated with construction requirements of the mining sector), the current account continued to deteriorate in 2014, and international reserves declined to 1½ months of imports by May 2015. House prices have risen significantly over the past years, driven by the growth in disposable income, relatively low interest rates, accommodative fiscal policies, purchases for short-term capital gains, and structural factors (urbanization, shortage in the supply of housing and serviced land, etc.). With increasing import demand, pressures on international reserves are mounting. House prices have increased by 87 percent over the last five years. International Reserves Millions of N$ (Left axis) Months of imports (Right axis) Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates. Namibia: House Prices (Average, 2009=100) Trend between 2011-2014 y = 0.0623x - 2415.5 Trend between 2007-2010 y = 0.0258x - 927.42 Sources: FNB House Price Index and IMF staff estimates. The government’s policy priority is to continue to address social and development challenges. In the recent presidential and parliamentary elections in November 2014, the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) party obtained a landslide victory. The new government indicated its intention to: (i) continue to address significant social and development challenges, (ii) ameliorate the persistently high unemployment, inequality, and poverty, (iii) safeguard macroeconomic policies, and (iv) promote economic diversification and transformation of the Namibian economy to be more inclusive and resilient to shocks. Namibia’s real effective exchange rate appears moderately overvalued (Annex 2). Namibia’s current account continued to deteriorate since its peak in 2006, owing to the large import needs associated with investments in the mining sector and the expansionary fiscal policy. The IMF staff’s estimates suggest the exchange rate could be about 8 percent overvalued. The current account, however, might not necessarily improve with the exchange rate depreciation by this degree, as far as the expansionary fiscal policy continues. The SWAPO party has ruled Namibia since independence in 1990. President Hage Geingob (former prime minister) and Prime Minister Kuugongelwa-Amadhila (former minister of finance) were sworn in on March 21, 2015, together with new cabinet members, including the Minister of Finance Calle Schlettwein (former minister of trade). Page 13 OUTLOOK AND RISKS Namibia’s growth outlook 5 percent on average during 2015–2020 is positive, but clouded with downside risks (Annex IV) Growth is expected to pick up slightly to 6 percent by 2017/18, supported by mining and construction sectors, then somewhat weaken over the medium term, once the production from new mines (copper, gold, uranium) reaches full capacity. The baseline scenario assumes a significant decline in SACU revenues in coming years. The main near- term risks are associated with (i) the highly volatile SACU revenues (about one-third of fiscal revenues) and the risk of a decline beyond what is captured in the baseline, (ii) rapid growth of house prices, and (iii) external environment. Emerging uncertainty for the prospects of SACU revenues poses risk to the economy. In coming years, reflecting the slowdown in the South African economy, SACU revenues are projected to decline as a share of GDP. Further increases in the current account deficit could erode already low international reserves. The SACU revenues are expected to decline in coming years. Namibia: SACU Revenue Projections A possible sharp reversal of the house price trend, coupled with the expected increases in interest rates, could affect financial intermediation, private sector consumption, and growth, including through (i) affecting borrowers’ repayment capacity and eventually banks’ asset quality and profitability, and (ii) lowering the consumption of highly indebted households and housing construction. Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Amount (N$ million, right axis) Percent of GDP (Left axis) Possible deterioration in external environments also pose risk to the economy. If international capital flows to South Africa will significantly decline, adverse spillovers to Namibia would rise, possibly channeled through lower trade, financial flows, and SACU revenues. In addition, further deterioration of the euro-area economies may generate significant negative spillovers to the Namibian economy through trade linkages as a large share of Namibia’s total exports—mainly uranium ore, diamonds, beef, unrefined copper and fish—are destined for the European market. Finally, given its export base, Namibia remains vulnerable to further decline in international prices of its main commodity exports. There is a downside risk for the projection, depending on the developments of the South African economy. Furthermore, SACU revenues may decline further with the expected revision to the revenue sharing formula. Page 14 The authorities share staff’s concerns and are addressing the policy options to deal with emerging risks. The authorities concur with staff’s concern on the prospects for SACU revenues and other risks. To respond to the possible SACU revenue fall, the authorities plan to adopt a tighter fiscal policy stance, so that it would avoid crowding out private sector credit, and would allow for the robust growth momentum to continue supported by mining, construction, and services sectors.