Outlook Output: Staff projects that real GDP will grow by 4.3 percent in 2013 with strong nonmineral GDP growth and an anemic mining sector (Table 3). Growth is expected to pick up slightly to 4.5 percent by 2016 supported by the strong construction sector owing to a planned public housing program and recovery in the mining sector through the full-capacity production of the Husab uranium mine. External position: The current account deficit is expected to widen in the next two years before narrowing in 2016. The widening is mainly due to the FDI funded construction imports related to the Husab uranium mining project. The deficit is expected to narrow starting from 2016, supported by the public sector savings generated by the planned fiscal consolidation, recovery in diamond demand, and the phasing down of the construction stage of the Husab uranium mine. Risks There are significant downside risks to the near-term outlook, both from global spillovers and domestic developments. The main near-term risks to output relate to the uncertain external environment, protracted economic and financial volatility especially for emerging markets, as well as lower than anticipated growth in emerging markets, which could constrain export demand (see staff’s risk assessment matrix (RAM). A global oil shock would also affect Namibia’s terms of trade, worsen the current account and ultimately economic activity as Namibia is a net oil importer. Policy uncertainty in South Africa can also affect Namibia through the monetary exchange rate peg link. In addition, a delay in finalizing negotiations of the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the European Union could pose additional risks to nonmineral exports, such as beef, grape, and fish products (Appendix III). Macroeconomic Balance 2.6External Sustainability 9.4Deviation from long-run real exchange rate level -12.9Equilibrium Real Effective Exchange Rate -11.9Purchasing Power Parity The misalignment estimates are larger for the 2013 point estimate because short-term factors have not played their way through, which is why the table presents the numbers for the 2016 forecasts. Calculated from an updated panel regression that follows the CGER methodology . Real exchange rate for 2013 is for June 2013. Misalignment computed for 2016 forecasts. Estimated Real Exchange Rate Misalignment (negative numbers suggest undervaluation) Calculated using CGER proposed coefficients for macro variables and trade elasticities. Misalignment computed for 2016 forecasts. For a net foreign asset position of 20 percent of GDP, the average of the last 10 years. The overvaluation would be 14.3 percent with the net foreign asset position of 2012. Misalignment Percent difference between observation in June 2013 and the monthly average between December 1996 and July 2013. Calculated from an updated panel regression in which the only significant variable is the terms of trade, with a 53 percent adjusted R squared. Real exchange rate for 2013 is for June 2013. Misalignment computed for 2016 forecasts. Page 9 Figure 1. Namibia: Recent Macroeconomic Performance and Outlook Economic growth has moderated... …owing to weaker mining sector performance especially diamond production. Inflation continued to moderate, largely on account of the slowdown in price of food, electricity, gas, and fuel. however, current spending remains elevated… Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates. The fiscal deficit has declined owing to lower execution of capital projects… and the public debt-to-GDP ratio has increased significantly. Inflation Real GDP Growth (Annual Percentage Change) Mining and Quarrying Sectors excl. mining and quarrying Contributions to Real GDP Growth (Annual Percentage Change) Revenue and Grants Expenditure and Net Lending Overall Fiscal Balance Fiscal Balance Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure (RHS) Capital and Current Expenditures Domestic Debt External Debt Public Debt Page 10 Figure 1. Namibia: Recent Macroeconomic Performance and Outlook (concluded) The current account continues to be in deficit… and international reserves are below the 2009 peak. and the BoN reduced its repo rate broadly in line with the SARB. …but a challenging business climate may be undermining investment opportunities. The REER largely tracks that of South Africa… Overall credit growth remains respectable… Sources: Namibian authorities, World Bank Doing Business Indicators 2011, and IMF staff estimates. 02468101214161820Jan-10Jun-10Nov-10Apr-11Sep-11Feb-12Jul-12Dec-12May-13 Total Private Credit Household Credit Namibia Credit Growth (Percent, year-on-year) Sources: Bank of Namibia Bank of Namibia repo rate South African Reserve Bank repo rate Interest Rates Real Effective Exchange Rate (Index, Jan 2005 = 100) Overall RankingStarting a BusinessRegistering Property Zambia Business Climate Indicators (Rankings out of 185 countries) Current account balance Trade balance Current Account and Trade Balance Proj. Months of Imports Reserves, billions $ Proj. Official Reserves Page 11 There are some medium-term fiscal and external risks both through a protracted low global growth and the uncertainties surrounding future SACU revenues. A protracted period of slower European growth could generate negative spillovers through trade linkages as a large share of Namibia’s total exports—mainly diamonds, uranium, beef, unrefined copper and fish—are destined for Europe. Namibia’s growth prospects are further clouded by the challenges posed by high levels of unemployment, poverty and inequality. These challenges require the need to create stronger engines of more inclusive growth.