Although the Namibian economy bounced back strongly from the 2008—09 global financial crisis, since then growth has continued to soften—reflecting a combination of weak net external demand and solid contribution from domestic demand (Figure 1). Output growth slowed from about 5¾ percent in 2011 to 5 percent in 2012. This moderation reflected a combination of decelerating net external demand partly offset by a solid contribution from domestic demand. From the expenditure side of GDP, domestic demand was relatively strong in 2012, with private consumption and investment growing by about 4.5 and 1.1 percent respectively in real terms, while net external demand declined by 0.6 percent. Preliminary official data suggest the moderation in growth continued in the first half of 2013, reflecting weak global demand for exports, which more than offset the solid growth in the nonmineral sector most notably in retail trade. The impact of severe drought to some extent weakened economic activity in the agriculture sector. Favorable credit conditions supported domestic demand growth (Figure 1). As elsewhere, interest rates and by extension costs of borrowing in Namibia are at historically low levels. Credit extension to households grew by 14 and 13 percent in 2012 and in the first half 2013, and household indebtedness remained elevated at 84.7 percent as of June 2013. Corporate debt levels These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, a limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. It is worth noting, however, that the quarterly production side GDP data for Namibia is not comprehensive, and is based on a sample of sectoral performance that is not usually a perfect predictor of the annual GDP outturn. Page 7 also grew about 18 percent as of June 2013, reflecting the increase in new foreign borrowing and a weaker exchange rate, albeit from a relatively low base compared to household debt. Notwithstanding the fiscal over performance in FY2012/13, the underlying FY2013/14 budget measures on the whole aimed to spur domestic demand. The fiscal outturn in FY2012/13 was significantly better than expected, the overall deficit was 0.3 percent compared to 3.9 percent projected in the original budget. This is mainly due to savings in capital spending driven by under execution of the government’s Targeted Intervention Program for Employment and Economic Growth (TIPEEG) , and stronger-than-expected revenue performance (including receipts from the Southern Africa Customs Union (SACU) ). However, the fiscal stance in FY2013/14 is expansionary (Table 2b) and the budget announced measures to boost private consumption in the form of reduction in individual income tax rates and changes in the thresholds. The gradual alignment of corporate tax rates also aims to spur domestic private investment. Reflecting the fiscal withdrawal in 2012/13, the current account deficit narrowed in 2012 (Figure 1 ). The current account deficit declined to 2.6 percent of GDP in 2012 from a deficit of 3.5 percent in 2011. This outcome was driven mainly by an increase in official transfers through higher-than-projected SACU revenues, and savings made in capital spending, driven by the under- execution of the government’s TIPEEG. Despite narrowing of the current account deficit, the official reserves coverage stood at just 3 months of import cover at end-2012 compared to 3.5 months in 2011 because of portfolio outflows. The rise in corporate foreign borrowing reflects the increased in short-term loans by resident banks and long term loans acquired by companies mainly in the mining and to a lesser extent the fishing sectors particularly in the first quarter of 2013. The Targeted Intervention Program for Employment and Economic Growth (TIPEEG), launched in FY2011/12 and extends to FY2013/14 with a target to create 104,000 direct and indirect jobs between 2011 and 2014. Namibia’s net portfolio investment has been traditionally negative (except in 2011 when Namibia issued a Eurobond), with most of the activity taking place on the balance sheets of resident non-banks who tend to add to their portfolio investments abroad and are allowed to invest 70 percent of their assets abroad. With this background, 2012 was arguably a good year because the net portfolio balance was less negative than in earlier years (except in 2011) in both dollar terms and percent of GDP. Services Trade Balance Income Official Transfers Private Transfers Source: Namibia authorities and IMF staff estimates Current Account Balance ($ Millions) Page 8 While the external competitiveness indicators for Namibia give mixed results, the overall assessment points to a mild overvaluation (Text Table and Appendix I). On the one hand, Namibia’s dollar has depreciated in real effective terms in line with the South Africa rand. On the other hand, Namibia’s current account balance is more negative than those that would be predicted by panel estimates from macroeconomic developments. This together with inadequate reserve coverage suggests that the exchange rate is arguably mildly overvalued but that the overall external position remains broadly sound.