Spillovers Near-term macroeconomic policy stance Fiscal policy: In staff’s view, given the exchange rate peg, the FY2013/14 budget did not sufficiently build on the gains made in improving the underlying fiscal position in FY 2012/13. Staff reiterated the need to unwind the TIPEEG in FY 2013/14 as originally planned, which will pave the way for returning to fiscal prudence. Staff welcomed the emphasis in the FY2013/14 budget to strengthen public financial management and rationalize loss-making state-owned enterprises (SOE) and reduce their perpectual dependency on the public finances. These efforts should pave the way for a smooth transition to a comprehensive medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy. The authorities broadly concurred with staff on the need to rein in current spending . They emphasized their efforts in improving the efficiency of public spending through the strengthening of public financial management and the other active reform agenda outlined in the FY 2013/14 budget. On TIPEEG, the authorities explained that it represents a repackaging of existing projects under the line ministries’ pipeline, instead of a newly-designed public Customs and excise revenue from SACU are collected into a common revenue pool and managed by the South African National Treasury. The revenues paid to SACU members in each year are based on forecasted revenues with under or over payment corrected with a 2-year lag. Page 12 employment program. These projects will likely proceed after the TIPEEG program ends. Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the SOE Governing Council are conducting a joint study, that they consider as high priority, to assess compliance of SOEs with the SOE Act’s requirements which should pave the way to reduce their dependency on the budget. Managing global spillovers Namibia is highly exposed to global risks mainly through trade channels (Appendix II). Trade linkages are important as they affect export receipts that determine sustainable levels of imports and fiscal spending. Discussion with various agencies suggest that while economic spillovers from South Africa warrant close monitoring, the direct spillovers would likely not be that large, in part because most of Namibia’s export go to other major trading partners including Europe and the United States. External vulnerabilities remain contained, but would benefit from additional reserve coverage to provide further support to the peg. If further adverse temporary global spillovers beyond the staff’s baseline scenario lead to a decline in export commodity prices and a significant loss of revenues, staff advised the authorities to allow the automatic stabilizers to work on the revenue side. This implies that the government should refrain from taking tax measures to compensate for the associated loss in mineral revenues or reducing expenditures to meet the government’s budget deficit target. Although this will delay the medium term consolidation path envisaged under the FY2013/14 budget, in staff’s view, it should not undermine medium-term fiscal or debt sustainability given the temporary nature of the shock (Table 1 and debt sustainability annex). The authorities noted the staff’s view about the potential global spillovers to Namibia, including developments in South Africa that warrant close monitoring. They reiterated that Namibia’s exports destinations are relatively diversified. Additionaly, the funding base of banks is largely domestic, and post 2015, mineral exports are expected to increase upon the completion of the new Swakop Uranium mine, which is expected to become the second largest uranium mine in the world. The authorities do not expect major effects on Namibia’s mining sector from large demonstration for wage increases in South Africa’s mines, as Namibia’s industrial relations tend to be less confrontational. However, there would be significant impact on business and economic activity if the recurring labor strikes were to disrupt the supply of goods from South Africa to Namibia. On vulnerabilities, they noted that Namibia has gained fiscal space given the achievement of a balanced budget in FY2012/13 and the relatively low debt level. The authorities expect that some of these projects would be financed by public private partnerships (PPP) going forward. Namibia does not have automatic stabilizers on the expenditure side. Namibia’s debt ratio has been historically low and is expected to remain within the authorities’ announced target of 35 percent of GDP over the medium term (see the DSA annex which uses the Fund’s new template for market access countries). Page 13 B. Policy Theme 2: Pursuing a “Growth-Friendly” Fiscal Consolidation and