Namibia has enjoyed steady financial sector developments. The banking system is well capitalized and profitable, with low levels of nonperforming loans (Table 6). Nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) are also well capitalized, with the average solvency level exceeding the statutory requirement. Both the banking sector and NBFIs expanded rapidly, underpinning Namibia’s robust growth performance. Vigorous private credit growth (to both household and corporate sectors) has buoyed economic activity mainly through its contributions to construction and real estate. These developments, however, have been accompanied by a potential buildup of macrofinancial risks . Namibia’s financial sector has a complex structure, interconnected internally and externally, with potential for system-wide and cross-border contagion (Box 2). The Namibian banking sector is well regulated, while there is a scope to further strengthen the NBFI supervision. In addition, house prices have been increasing since independence, raising concern about a potential real estate bubble, whose risks are heightened by the high concentration of banks’ loan book in mortgages and the elevated households’ indebtedness (Box 3). Page 18 Namibia has a complex and tiered financial system structure, which is closely interconnected, with tight links to South African markets and institutions. NBFIs— mainly consisting of long-term insurance, pension funds, investment managers, and unit trusts—dominate the financial system, in terms of asset size. The banking sector is comparatively small and highly concentrated, with the four biggest banks (of which three are South African subsidiaries) controlling more than 90 percent of the total assets in the sector. Commercial banks Nonbanks Long-term insurance Short-term insurance Medical aid funds Pension funds Unit trusts Investment managers Micro-lending n.a. n.a. n.a. Box 2. Structure of Financial Sector Namibia: Financial Sector Structure Number Asset (in percent of GDP) Namibia’s financial sector is supervised and regulated by the BoN and the Namibia Financial Institutions Supervisory Authority (NAMFISA). The BoN has the objective to promote and maintain a sound financial system, with the responsibility to supervise the banking institutions. The NAMFISA is responsible for supervising NBFIs. To ensure coordination among the relevant authorities on matters related to financial stability, in 2014 the Financial System Stability Committee (FSSC)—an inter-agency advisory and coordinating body (comprising the BoN, NAMFISA, and the Ministry of Finance)—was established. Total Sources: Bank of Namibia and NAMFISA. 1. Including cross-holding of assets. In view of the structure of the financial sector, the following sources of systemic risks can be identified: The NBFIs—given their large size and interconnectedness—could be source of systemic risk. Interlinkages have different forms, through cross-ownerships by a few large conglomerates and also through funding and debt exposures with unit trusts and asset managers playing a central role (Figure). The tight linkages of NBFIs with banking institutions increase the potential for system-wide contagion. Namibia’s financial system has many cross-border links, especially with South Africa. Three of the four largest banks in Namibia are subsidiaries of South African banks. These interlinkages expose Namibia to potential channels of contagion and systemic risks, while funding flows from South Africa to Namibia’s financial institutions are currently limited. Figure. Funding Links within Namibia’s Financial System Sources: Bank of Namibia, Financial Stability Report, June 2015; NAMFISA Quarterly Statistical Bulletin 2014 Q4. Notes: The numbers in brackets refer the total size of the relevant sector (total assets, in N$ billion). The arrows depict gross exposures from one sector to the other (thicker arrows for larger exposures). The numbers at the arrows depict the sizes of the relevant gross exposures (N$ billion). Cross- ownership relations are excluded. _____________________________________________________________ 1/ This Box is based on the findings of the TA mission on “Establishing an Effective Macroprudential Framework” (June 2015). Page 19 Box 3. Developments in the Real Estate Market and Financial Stability Namibia’s real estate prices ha ve recorded a sharp increase over the past several years, though the pace of increase softened somewhat in recent months. The house price index (estimated by the First National Bank (FNB)) indicates that between 2009 and 2014 the average price of properties in the residential segment increased by about 85 percent. In particular, the prices have grown faster in the central and coastal areas—which include the capital Windhoek and the coastal city of Walvis Bay—and in the low- and middle-value segments. House Price Index (2007Q1=100) Estimated Housing Demand and Supply in Windhoek National Central Coastal Northern Southern Housing Backlog Supply Demand Source: FNB House Price Index Sources: Bank of Namibia and NSA, and IMF staff estimates. Note: Housing demand and supply are estimated based on population growth projections and completed residential building plans, respectively. Housing backlog is assumed null in 2001. Multiple factors—fundamental, cyclical, and speculative factors—have contributed to soaring house prices. Specifically these factors include: ( i ) urbanization and migration of population from rural areas to major cities; ( ii ) increase in disposable income; ( iii ) acute shortage of supply due to the slow provision of serviced land by local authorities; ( iv ) low interest rates; ( v ) fiscal expansion and government incentive programs for home loans; ( vi ) home purchases for investment purposes, including some cash buying by foreigners. Staff’s assessment—based on (i) common housing ratios, and (ii) regression analysis—suggests that the recent house price surge at the current pace might not be sustainable. At a national level, house price over-valuation is estimated at around 20 percent. The over-valuation is expected to be higher in the low- and middle-value segments, where the housing backlog is the largest. In addition to social implications, these developments raise financial stability concerns as they signal that the market might face soon an affordability bottleneck that may trigger house prices reversal. Mortgage Loans in Banks' Portfolio A possible sharp reversal of the prevailing house price trend could impact financial stability in view of banks’ high exposure to the real estate sector (with the mortgage sector accounting for 52 percent of total loans at end- 2014) and high household debt of disposable income (estimated by the BoN at around 85 percent in 2014). _____________________________________________________________ 1/ This section is based on the Selected Issues Paper on “Macro-Financial Risks Associated with Housing Boom”. v Share of Residential Mortgage Loans (% of Total Loans) Share of Commercial Mortgage Loans (% of Total Loans) Total Mortgage Loans (Right Axis) (Billion of N$) Source: Bank of Namibia v v v v 2/ The FNB house price index—the only available house price index for Namibia—records residential price developments based on bonds registered for natural persons at the Deeds office. Page 20 A few sources of systemic risks, potentially affecting financial stability and the economy, are identified Possible house price correction (Box 3 and the Selected Issues Paper). The staff’s stress- testing exercise—based on a possible overvaluation of house prices by up to 20 percent suggests some resilience of the banking sector. Under severe but plausible risk scenarios (entailing a moderate house price correction, a mild increase in interest rates, and decline in commodity prices), all banks would be able to absorb the shocks with their large capital buffers and remain compliant. However, in the most adverse tail-risk scenarios (entailing large house price correction and significant increase in interest rates, followed by severe economic recession), some banks could face difficulty in complying with the capital requirement. Under the most extreme scenario, commercial bank credit could drop significantly three years after the shock, and growth could potentially decline by about 10 percent. Potential outflow of banks’ wholesale deposits. Commercial banks rely largely on wholesale funding, mainly in the form of short-term wholesale deposits (70 ‒ 80 percent of total bank funding). Short maturities of this funding, against long maturities of bank assets, expose banking institutions to liquidity and maturity risks. These risks are heightened by the low level of international reserves that, in the context of the fixed exchange rate regime, could challenge the BoN‘s capacity to act as a lender of the last resort. Large NBFIs and their close inter-linkages with banks (Box 2). NBFIs’ deposits are the most significant source of funding for banks. These funding linkages, together with tight ownership links, create the potential for system-wide contagion, which calls for close monitoring of their activities, although significant data and resource gaps make such oversight challenging. Cross border financial linkages (Box 2). Namibia’s financial system has many cross-border links, especially with South Africa, through cross-border investments and ownership, which expose the country to contagion and systemic risk shocks. In light of these risks, targeted macroprudential measures should be explored to enhance the resilience of the financial system, while carefully monitoring the developments in real estate markets and the financial sector. Those measures include: Introducing loan-to-value ratio (LTV) and debt service-to-income ratio (DSTI) limits. While underlying distortions in the real estate markets should be addressed, targeted Since independence, Namibia has never experienced a financial crisis, thus the stress testing exercise uses cross- country evidence of large reductions in housing prices, while exploring four scenarios: (i) a modest decline in house prices and a decline in oil prices that reduces cash purchases from foreign investors, (ii) a modest decline in house prices and a decline in international prices of Namibia’s export commodities, (iii) a large decline in house prices, a decline in international prices of Namibia’s export commodities, and significant increase in interest rates, and (iv) a severe economic recession accompanied by a significant decline in house prices and in private sector credit. Policy advice in this area is based on the recommendations from the IMF technical assistance on macroprudential policies (June 2015). Page 21 macroprudential policies could be considered to mitigate systemic risks. In particular, LTV limits on non-primary residences under consideration by the BoN could constrain house purchases financed with mortgage loans for investment purposes. The limits could be complemented by DSTI limits, because LTV limits become less binding as property prices increase. As these limits are subject to the risk of leakage, it is important to closely monitor nonbank activities and extend the limits to other financial institutions engaged in real estate business. In addition, as risks to the financial system may arise from primary residential mortgages, Staff suggested the BoN to also consider imposing, as needed, LTV limits on primary residences to limit households’ indebtedness and vulnerability to a house price shock. These measures should be designed, calibrated, and timed to mitigate financial stability risks without hampering affordability for lower income groups and causing excessive house price corrections, which may have financial stability implications. Furthermore, as these macroprudential policies cannot address the underlying drivers of rising real estate prices (including the acute supply constraints, delays in the delivery of serviced land, and the absence of a capital gains tax), they should go hand in hand with efforts to address these causes. Deeper financial markets can also offer alternative investment options and help reduce speculative housing demand. Further strengthening the supervision of NBFIs. While NAMFISA has made progress in strengthening its capacity to supervise and regulate nonbank financial institutions, the Financial Institutions and Markets (FIM) Bill which provides a modernized and flexible regulatory and supervisory framework needs to be enacted soon. To strengthen financial stability, NAMFISA could adopt additional criteria for its risk-based supervision, to capture institutions’ contribution to systemic risks, such as size, complexity, and interconnectedness. NAMFISA’s significant resource and capacity constraints need to be addressed to implement the new framework. Further enhancing cross-border coordination. While the authorities have been proactive in such coordination, there is scope to explore further measures. MOUs are in place with the SARB, South Africa’s Financial Services Board, and the Bank of Botswana. The BoN regularly participates in supervisory colleges for South African banking groups. Nevertheless, given the important cross-border links between the Namibian and South African financial systems, macroprudential measures adopted would need coordination, including through reciprocity agreements. In addition, the existing MOUs with SARB for cross-border banks should be expanded to cover resolution and crisis management (see IMF Country Report No. 14/340). Cross-border cooperation for the insurance sector (including on coordination on crisis management) should also be strengthened, given the systemic size of these institutions. The recent Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) suggests that South Africa's banking system is well capitalized and profitable, although banks need larger liquidity capacity to meet Basel regulatory requirements by 2018. The FSSA identifies slow growth and rising interest rates as major risks to the banking sector. Page 22 Establishing a body in charge of macroprudential policy. This entails: (i) giving this body an explicit macro-prudential mandate, and the necessary legal powers to exercise it; and (ii) providing this body with experienced staff, the availability of granular data and an enhanced IT framework. Addressing information and data gaps. Improving data availability is a prerequisite for risk identification and to conduct effective macroprudential policies. Improving granular data collection should be prioritized with a defined time schedule. Staff acknowledges the authorities’ efforts to address the data gaps, including BoN’s ongoing work to develop a new housing index (together with NSA and the Deeds office) and NAMFISA’s commitment to develop FSIs for the non-bank financial sector with IMF technical assistance. Leveraging on recent progress in AML/CFL legislation . Significant progress in enhancing the AML/CFT regime resulted in Namibia’s recent exit from the Financial Action Task Force monitoring process. In preparation for the next assessment in 2017, authorities are encouraged to effectively utilize AML/CFT tools in order to protect against national money laundering/terrorist financing risks and ensure financial stability. The authorities concurred with staff’s assessment of systemic risk and the need for macroprudential policies. Fully acknowledging the risks associated with rising house prices, the BON intends to introduce LTV limits for non-primary residences and explore further measures as needed, although imposing LTV limits for primary residences will be difficult, in light of Namibia’s housing shortage. NAMFISA concurred with the need to enhance its capacity and seek for technical assistance, while waiting for the enactment of the FIM Bill. The authorities recognized the importance of having a strong institutional framework to conduct macroprudential policy and explained the setup of the FSSC as a step to increase the involvement of and coordination across relevant institutions (BoN, NAMFISA, and MoF). To formalize the objectives and functions of the FSSC, the authorities are currently working on a MOU.