Namibia’s economic performance in the last decade has been strong. Real GDP growth outperformed the average for its small middle-income (SMIC) peers in sub-Saharan Africa. The rebound from the 2009 global financial crisis was also quick and strong and growth outpaced the global average for the last two to three years. At the same time, the economy continues to face enormous socio economic development and structural challenges, amidst high unemployment and income inequality. These socio-economic challenges are multidimensional, but three stand out: Dual economy. At independence in 1990, Namibia inherited a dual economy with the four interrelated challenges of low economic growth, a high rate of poverty, inequitable distribution of wealth and income, and high unemployment. On the one hand, a highly productive capital-intensive mining sector generates GDP growth but creates fewer jobs; on the other hand, most of the population particularly those in the north, depend on subsistence agriculture. Inadequate access to finance. The economic duality has also resulted in less financial inclusion with a significant proportion of the population unbanked compared to SMIC peers. Skill shortage. The development and retention of superior skills needed by both the private and public sectors are key challenges for Namibia. Namibia has Namibia’s official unemployment rate was at 27.4 percent at end-2012. In addition, GDP per capita and scores on UN Human Development Indicators are also weaker than its peers’ median (small middle income countries). Average Real Growth (2000-2012) Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Cape Verde Lesotho Chile Deposit Accounts with Commercial Banks (Per 1000 adults) Source: World Bank (Note: Mauritius data unavailable) 456NamibiaBotswanaChileMauritiusLesotho Global Competitiveness Index (1 worst, 7 best)Source: World Economic Forum Page 6 also lost ground on its rankings in the Global Competitiveness Index of 2012/13—Namibia ranked 92 out of 144, lower than the ranking of 83 rd , it achieved in 2011/12 in part due to its educational outcomes. Securing sustained higher growth, creating jobs and reducing inequality are the government’s key policy priorities. In this context, with the government pushing a “Growth at Home” strategy, the 4 National Development Plan (NDP 4) identified the following economic sectors as priorities: (i) logistics, (ii) tourism, (iii) manufacturing, and (iv) agriculture. The 10-year Namibia Financial Sector Strategy (NFSS) launched in 2012 serves as the blue print to enhance financial inclusion. Political economy context: Many analysts expect the 2014 presidential elections to be smooth. The candidate from the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), the party in power since independence, was selected in November 2012 through an internal democratic process.