VULNERABILITIES Since the financial crisis, Namibia has experienced robust growth and resilience to shocks, but vulnerabilities have been building up while unemployment remains high. Despite being a small commodity–dependent economy exposed to external shocks, since 2010, average annual real GDP growth exceeded 5 percent. The peg to the South African rand contributed to moderate inflation. However, four years of expansionary fiscal policy have led to a sharp increase in public debt. The current account deficit has widened, and the international reserve coverage has declined below safe levels (Table 1). At the same time, strong credit growth and supply constraints have contributed to fast-growing housing prices and high household indebtedness. Yet, unemployment remains high and little responsive to growth, contributing to maintain high income inequality, second only to South Africa (Figure 1). In 2015, growth remained strong, but external and fiscal vulnerabilities gained prominence (Table 1). Despite a severe drought, real GDP grew by 5.3 percent (6.5 percent in 2014) buoyed by construction in the mining and housing sectors, and expansionary fiscal policy. Strong public consumption and investment underpinned growth. Accommodative monetary conditions contributed to further boost bank credit and domestic demand (Figure 2). The economy, however, decelerated in the first half of 2016, with real GDP contracting in 2016Q2 as growth in construction and government services slowed down. Strong domestic demand and declining SACU transfers widened the current account deficit to 13.7 percent of GDP (7.6 percent in 2014). On the positive side, the 2015 Eurobond issuance improved reserve coverage to 2.8 months of projected imports (Annex I). However, other external buffers have thinned: external debt increased to about 51 percent of GDP (42¾ percent in 2014); external gross financing needs rose to 31 percent of GDP, well above the average of past years; and, the net international investment position, while still positive, declined to 4 percent of GDP from 15 percent in 2014 (Table 2; Figure 3). Moreover, since December 2015, reserve coverage has fallen, to 2.2 months of imports (August 2016). Reserves for the year are, however, expected to be boost by two currency swaps dd W tt Page 10 Expansionary fiscal policy caused the fiscal deficit to widen to an estimated 10.2 percent of GDP as subsidies and capital spending increased and SACU revenue declined (Table 3b). The large deficit, combined with the issuance of the 2015 Eurobond and currency depreciation (because of the peg to the South African rand), led public debt to jump to 39.8 percent of GDP (from 25.5 percent), above the authorities’ threshold of 35 percent of GDP and the median of similarly rated emerging market economies. The expansionary fiscal stance also increased government’s gross financing needs, covered in part by the Eurobond and in part by purchases of government securities by domestic financial institutions (Figure 4). These developments led to pressure on sovereign credit ratings, with Fitch revising Namibia’s ratings outlook from stable to negative in September Domestic demand has been partly fueled by strong credit growth that has contributed to fast-rising housing prices and high household indebtedness. Since 2010, credit growth to the private sector averaged 13¾ percent (13.8 in 2015), although slowed down in early 2016 (Figure 5). Corporate lending and mortgage loans, particularly to households, drove credit growth and supported rising housing prices that over the period increased on average by 14 percent. At the same time, household indebtedness reached about 90 percent of disposable income in 2015 (81 percent in 2013), higher than in South Africa and close to the level of advanced economies. Against this background, monetary and fiscal policy have recently turned on a tightening course. After averaging 3.4 percent in 2015, in 2016 headline inflation started rising and reached 6.9 percent in September, mostly due to higher food prices reflecting the drought, and increases in rental costs and administrative prices. In the context of the peg to the South African rand, the Bank of Namibia (BoN) raised the policy rate, both in 2015 and 2016, to reach 7 percent on par with the South Africa Reserve Bank (SARB)’s rate (Figure 2). In addition, with the FY16/17 budget (March 2016) and mid-year revised budget, the Deficit in FY2015/16 reflects below the line information. Preliminary above-the-line data suggest a deficit of about 8.7 percent of GDP. Namibia Median Same Rated EM Countries (Fitch) Public Debt on Higher Side of Emerging Market Peers (percent of GDP)Sources: MoF, WEO, and staff estimatesNote:Shaded area excludes top and bottow 20 percent of the distribution bps Namibia South Africa Repo Rates Increasing (percent) Nominal (LHS)Spread (RHS) Page 11 government started implementing spending reductions and announced medium-term fiscal consolidation plans to bring public debt on a declining path. Acknowledging long-term challenges, the government elected in 2015 has devised plans to boost growth and increase employment, while preserving macroeconomic stability. In the context of their 2030 vision, authorities are articulating a new national development plan (NDP), and implementing industrial policies to support labor-intensive sectors. However, the impact of some past initiatives, including tax incentives, has been limited, particularly on job creation and economic diversification, and a review is ongoing. At the same time, macroeconomic stability has been maintained, with the latest economic policies broadly reflecting recent Fund’s advice.