The economy will slow down in 2016 and vulnerabilities are rising. As the construction of large mines comes to an end and the government starts consolidating, real GDP growth is foreseen to slow temporarily to 1.6 percent in 2016. Inflation is expected to decline to 6 percent only by end-2017 as food prices normalize. Growth is projected to accelerate to above 5 percent in 2017-2018, as production from the new Husab uranium mine ramps up, before converging to a long-term rate of about 4 percent. However, because of low SACU revenue over the medium-term, future fiscal deficits are expected to remain large and public debt to increase to above 60 percent of GDP by 2021. Financing the government would require significant shifts in asset allocations of domestic financial institutions, possibly crowding out private sector credit. On the positive side, larger mining exports and tighter domestic policies would halve the trade deficit to about 12⅓ percent of GDP, with the current account deficit stabilizing at around 5 percent of GDP. In this context, SACU transfers and capital and financial flows will continue playing a key stabilizing role in the Namibian economy and in financing future trade deficits (Annex I). Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside. The main external risks to the Namibian economy arise from further commodity price declines as China rebalancing proceeds, accelerated fall in SACU revenue as the South African economy continues to slow, and lower demand for exports and domestic services as growth in the European trade partners and Angola remains sluggish. Domestic risks are equally prominent and weigh heavily on the outlook, especially from slower growth in the mining and construction sectors, sudden correction in overvalued housing prices and domestic credit, and possible funding risks from the government’s large financing needs and slower fiscal adjustment. The limited buffers could potentially force abrupt policy responses that would amplify the adverse impact of shocks. Should risks materialize, exports and growth would decrease, creating further pressure on fiscal and external accounts, and international reserves. Given the limited buffers, shocks could prompt an abrupt fiscal adjustment that would exacerbate the negative short-term impact on the economy, as the effects of appropriate fiscal and structural reforms would Over the medium term, SACU revenues are projected to remain below their recent peak, and to decline as a share of GDP, as Namibia’s nominal GDP growth is expected to exceed the growth rate of SACU revenues dominated by low growth in South Africa. Page 12 take time to materialize (Annex II). The impact would be particularly damaging if accompanied by downgrades of the sovereign credit rating, which could prompt further increases in interest rates for both the public and private sector. In addition, sharp reversals in housing prices, coupled with elevated household indebtedness, could negatively affect financial intermediation through a deterioration in banks’ asset quality and profitability, and in turn growth. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agree with the outlook and staff’s risk assessment, but have a more optimistic view on short-term growth prospects. They expect a milder slowdown in 2016 largely because of lower fiscal multiplier assumptions. However, they agree that near-term domestic risks weigh heavily on the outlook, particularly risks from government’s large financing needs. They concur that forced fiscal adjustment could amplify the negative effects of shocks on the economy. To mitigate risks, they have revised the FY16/17 budget and brought forward their fiscal adjustment plans.