The authorities’ 2016 budget and medium-term fiscal strategy marked a departure from past policies, outlining significant fiscal adjustment to bring public debt below their target of 35 percent of GDP. The budget envisaged nominal reductions in recurrent expenses— particularly goods and services and transfers to SOEs—and the postponement of non-productive capital outlays to yield a deficit 4.7 percent of GDP. The medium-term strategy foresaw negative growth in real primary expenses and contained capital spending dynamics to reduce the deficit to 2.1 percent of GDP and the public debt ratio to about 28 percent of GDP by FY18/19. However, the extent and quality of measures underpinning medium-term spending reductions remained to be identified. In the October mid-year budget review, the authorities introduced further spending reductions of about 2.8 percent of GDP for the remainder of FY16/17 to partially offset lower than excepted revenue, and revised the deficit to 6.3 percent of GDP, with a pro-cyclical stance. Reductions included a freeze on new hiring, and cuts to not yet executed capital and non-wage recurrent expenditure. The authorities also recognized that achieving their medium-term fiscal targets requires additional fiscal adjustment, and announced the intention to strengthen their adjustment plans going forward. Page 13 Under staff’s baseline scenario, which includes budget spending plans, fiscal deficits would remain large and public debt continue rising. The revised FY16/17 budget projects higher revenue than staff. As a result, staff foresees the fiscal deficit to be higher at about 7.1 percent of GDP in FY16/17, and reach 8-8½ percent of GDP by 2018/19. Debt would reach about 52 percent of GDP by FY18/19, and continue rising over the projection period to above 60 percent of GDP. Under this scenario, government’s gross financing needs would remain large, creating pressures on domestic financial markets and possible crowding out and funding risks. Moreover, the fiscal outlook is subject to significant risks. Recent additional reductions in the FY16/17 budget spending may be difficult to implement fully given the short time schedule, with the risk that the deficit for the year exceeds plans. In addition, if macro-economic shocks and contingent liabilities materialize, public debt could rise to about 80-90 percent of GDP by 2021 (Annex III). Additional fiscal adjustment is needed to bring public debt on a declining path and preserve macro-economic stability. Fiscal adjustment should be anchored in a credible medium-term framework and carefully calibrated to limit negative effects on growth. Crowing out of domestic credit could occur as domestic banks increase their holdings of government securities to finance the fiscal deficit. Under this assumption, satisfying the remainder of government’s gross financing needs in FY16/17-18/19 would still require non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) to increase their holdings of government securities from 14 percent of GDP in 2015 to about 23 percent in 2018. Risks include: weaker growth, lower commodity prices, slower fiscal adjustment, materialization of contingent liabilities, particularly for SOEs, and higher borrowing costs. nnu nnu ee ee cc Y dg Risk premium (bps, RHS) Total bids/offered (percent, LHS) Financing Pressures: Lower Coverage Ratios (91d Tbill Auctions, 3maverage) Sources: BoN and staff estimates Page 14 Under staff’s macroeconomic assumptions, a further 4½-5½ percent of GDP in measures (depending on multipliers) would likely be required over FY17/18-19/20 to bring the public debt ratio on a declining path by FY19/20 and eventually below 35 percent of GDP, as envisaged by the authorities. Spreading the additional adjustment over three years would limit the negative impact on growth and concentrate the adjustment at a time when growth is projected to be above its long-term trend. The adjustment would bring additional benefits. It would support further external adjustment and result in safer levels of reserve coverage (Annex I). It would also contain government’s gross financing needs, reducing crowding out and funding risks, although lower growth could temporarily reduce banks’ profitability and asset quality. In addition, fiscal adjustment would lift pressures on monetary policy. In this context, the BoN should maintain the policy rate at par, or with limited positive spread, with the SARB’s rate to support the peg. Bringing public debt below 35 percent of GDP by FY19/10, as planned by the authorities, would improve the fiscal outlook, but put significant downward pressure on short-term growth. Staff recommends the additional adjustment to be based on quality measures with low short- term multipliers to limit the negative impact on growth. A combination of increases in indirect revenue (e.g., ¼ of the adjustment) and expense reductions, while protecting capital and social spending, would minimize the impact of fiscal adjustment. While ambitious, the adjustment appears feasible if credibly designed. Staff proposed a menu of measures to be considered by Based on the Selected Issues Paper on “Calibrating Growth-Friendly Fiscal Consolidation in Namibia.” nnu nnu dd dd ee ee cc ee Y Page 15 the authorities, in some cases deepening existing policies. On the revenue side, staff suggested to focus on measures with low multipliers (e.g., excises, VAT base, property taxation, tax incentives). On the expenditure side, policy options include: (i) containing the dynamics of the bloated government wage bill by constraining inflation adjustment, limiting new hires to critical areas (e.g., education and health), and reducing allowances; (ii) curtailing subsidies and transfers to SOEs and other entities through reforming SOEs and reviewing intragovernmental arrangements; and (iii) consolidating and improving the targeting of key social programs. The FY16/17 budget already included reductions in travel and non-essential purchases. Sources: OECD, WEO, IMF Government Wage and Employment Database, and Staff Calculations Fiscal adjustment should be accompanied by structural reforms in public financial management and revenue administration. Improved spending efficiency and better revenue collection are critical to create space for adjustment, minimize the adverse growth impact of the consolidation, and ensure equitable burden sharing. Reforms should focus on: Public financial management (PFM). An early enactment of the 2015 Public Procurement Act (scheduled for FY2017/18), and stronger procurement processes could reduce waste and free resources for consolidation. Strengthening the macro-fiscal forecasting capacity at the ministry of finance, and accelerating plans to reform budget formulation and execution processes and the PFM legal framework could enhance the preparation and implementation of consolidation plans. Improving public investment management (e.g., project appraisal, implementation) would help support more efficient growth-enhancing spending. Finally, as the authorities plan to boost their efforts for public-private partnerships (PPP), a well-designed legal framework is needed to avoid excessive risk taking. Y Y ud oo cc du W V du V du nd nd du bud nd tt tt bud nd W ill W ill W ill Page 16 Revenue administration A recent international assessment has signaled significant room for improvement in the organization structure, business processes, and human resource management of the revenue administration. The authorities’ plans to create a semi-autonomous revenue authority possibly by 2017 are, therefore, timely and welcomed. Nonetheless, while gains from improving revenue administration in Namibia are potentially large, cross-country experience suggests that reaping the benefits of such changes may take time. To bring forward some of the benefits of better revenue administration, staff recommends to continue prioritizing the collection of tax arrears, and enhancing internal business process and IT systems. Concrete steps to reform the SOEs are needed to lower budgetary costs and improve confidence and growth. With a few exceptions, most SOEs operate at a loss and represent a significant burden for public finances and a source of fiscal risks. At the same time, they operate in key service and network industries and are critical to service delivery and infrastructure development (Box 1). The authorities are aware that SOEs face a number of financial and governance challenges and have recently created a Ministry of Public Enterprises as a step toward strengthening the monitoring of the sector and enhancing its performance. Reforms should focus on key areas, including: (i) stronger and timely oversight of the financial performance of key SOEs; (ii) full implementation of the legally mandated governance framework (e.g., business plans, performance agreements, and reporting obligations); and (iii) a clear demarcation between commercial, developmental and social activities to strengthen accountability, and foster greater private participation. Authorities’ views The authorities concur that changes in the macroeconomic outlook have significantly worsened the fiscal position. They noticed that in addition to a shortfall in revenues, which widened the deficit, the sharp increase in the public debt ratio in 2015 was due to the depreciation of the currency, a low GDP deflator, and the Eurobond issuance, which was partly saved. They are cognizant that current policies, if not recalibrated, would keep public debt on a rising path, threatening hard-won macro-economic stability. Therefore, they have introduced significant spending reductions in the revised FY16/17 budget, and plan to strengthen their fiscal consolidation strategy going forward. They affirmed their commitment to undertake additional fiscal adjustment to bring public debt on a declining path. They concur that significant adjustment is needed to bring the public debt ratio below 35 percent of GDP. They noticed that the adjustment could be phased over time, but have a preference for some frontloading to ease funding pressures and bring public debt below 35 percent over the next three years. They also noticed that fiscal adjustment should be based on quality measures with low multipliers to contain the negative impact of consolidation on growth, while protecting social spending. In this respect, they intend to focus on measures with the least adverse impact on economic activity, such as inefficient current spending and capital outlays that do not directly enter into productive processes. Page 17 Box 1. State Owned Enterprises in Namibia Namibia’s State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) play an important role in key sectors of the economy. There are about 30 SOEs and 3 stated owned financial institutions.1/ Most of the large SOEs operate in key service and network industries, and often in monopoly positions, such as telecommunications (Telecom Namibia), electricity (NamPower), water (NamWater), and transportation (Air Namibia). Because of their position, they play a key role in service delivery and in carrying out the government’s infrastructure development plans, funded through budget transfers often complemented by direct borrowing guaranteed by the government. In addition, SOEs engage in other quasi-fiscal activities, such as pricing services below cost or market price (e.g., water supply in rural areas). The financial performance of the largest SOEs is generally poor. With a few exceptions (e.g., NamPower, NamPort), they operate at a loss and have high leverage ratios (e.g., Air Namibia, TransNamib, Road Contractor Company) that make them particularly vulnerable to interest rate shocks. In several cases, SOEs stay solvent only because of government transfers and bailouts (e.g., Air Namibia). SOEs represent a significant burden on public finances. The main fiscal cost comes from annual budget transfers. Despite a policy to reduce spending, the FY16/17- 18/19 Medium-Term Fiscal Framework projects annual transfers to SOEs to be around 1.5 percent of GDP mainly to transportation companies (e.g., Air Namibia), with only one company (co- owned with the private sector) paying dividends. In addition, some SOEs have outstanding loan balances and interest arrears with the central government.2/ They are also a source of significant fiscal risks as their debt (about 4.3 percent of GDP in 2015) is largely guaranteed by the government The authorities expect the stock of guaranteed debt to increase further in the future as SOEs execute new development projects. The authorities are aware that SOEs face a number of financial and governance challenges that require overhauling reforms. In addition to their poor financial position, compliance with reporting requirements is weak, with most of the SOEs not publishing regular annual reports or financial statements. Furthermore, information on the aggregate performance of the sector is not available. Moreover, governance remains poor and compliance with national legislation (e.g., appointment of management, remuneration, and audits) is weak.3/ Recognizing the role of SOEs and their problems, the authorities have started spearheading various initiatives. In 2015, they created the Ministry of Public Enterprises with the mandate to oversee the functions and responsibilities of 98 parastatals, including SOEs, and reform the sector; and, in 2016, they set up a centralized reporting framework with key SOEs responding to the new ministry. ____________________ 1/ In absence of publicly available up-to-date data, the number of SOEs is estimated using various sources. 2/ See 2015 Summary Report of the Auditor General for FY12/13. 3/ Deloitte (2013), Namibia, 2013 Governance Survey. ili illi W ######## nnu Page 18 In authorities’ views, a combination of revenue and spending measures, and structural reforms, including for SOEs, would help to contain the negative effects of consolidation. They concur that some taxes could be raised (e.g., excises) and expenditure reduced, particularly the wage bill. They noticed that the degree of spending cuts could be mitigated by exploring the scope for public-private partnerships (PPP), particularly in the outer years, and by further improving revenue administration. To this end, they expect to finalize new PPP legislation by end-2016 and introduce a semi-autonomous revenue agency. They also pointed out that improving and fully implementing the existing Public Enterprises Governance Act and the new centralized reporting framework could improve public companies’ performance and help rationalize public transfers.