Namibia has a large and stable financial sector dominated by non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs). The banking system (assets about 68 percent of GDP) appears well capitalized and profitable. Credit quality is high with low NPLs, and liquidity above regulatory requirements (Table 5). Against a sound banking system, growth in bank loans has been in the double digits for longer than a decade, contributing to increased household indebtedness and buoyant housing prices. At the same time, Namibia has large NBFIs (gross assets of about 260 percent of GDP) with average solvency level in 2015 exceeding statutory requirements. However, financial and ownership interconnections between banks and NBFIs and foreign linkages make Namibia’s financial sector rather complex, complicating the assessment of capital and liquidity adequacy of individual institutions. In addition, the financial sector plays an important role in government financing, holding half of government debt (Figure 4). Financial inclusion indicators have lately improved and are close to some comparator countries (Figure 5). As the financial system expands and private indebtedness remains high, specific financial risks with potentially large effects on the economy have gained prominence (Figure 6). The main sources of possible systemic risks are: Overvalued residential real estate prices and banks’ mortgage exposure. Exuberant growth in housing prices combined with banks’ and households’ large exposures to mortgages (with total mortgages being more than half of banks’ loans) raise concerns about risks from possible housing price corrections (Country Report No. 15/276). Staff estimates that housing prices are on average overvalued by about 16 percent. Stress testing exercises suggest that all banks are resilient to moderate stress. In the case of very severe stress, some banks would need to significantly deleverage to preserve their capital buffers. Only under an extreme tail-risk scenario, some banks could face difficulties in complying with capital requirements. Under both severe and tail-risk stress scenarios, the drop In absence of detailed data, the NPL impact of various shocks are estimated using cross country regressions. A severe stress entails a correction in housing prices, interest rate increases, and lower but still positive growth. A tail- ce er va on ce ce ou ce ti Page 19 in commercial bank credit would potentially have strong negative effects on growth over the long term (Annex IV). Household indebtedness and balance sheet vulnerabilities. Elevated household indebtedness and debt service to income ratios raise concerns about household vulnerabilities to income and interest shocks and the resilience of banks. While information on individual borrowers’ income sources and indebtedness is not available, stress-tests on estimated households’ balance sheets suggest that middle and upper-middle income households are particularly vulnerable to both income and interest rate shocks (Box 2). Banks appear, however, resilient to the estimated increases in NPL under severe shock scenarios (entailing a one-year decline in real income and increase in interest rates). Linkages between NBFIs and banks. Money and asset management funds (investment funds) are tightly linked to banks. They provide about half of banks’ funding, and are often part of the same financial conglomerate, creating complex ownership structures. At the same time, investment funds are twice as large as banks and, as of end-2015, had about 60 percent of GDP in assets invested in foreign equity markets, possibly exposing them to external shocks (Figure 6). Balance sheet analysis suggests that a limited redemption shock to investment funds (of less than 3 percent of their assets caused, for example, by an external or confidence shock), that forces reallocations in funds’ assets away from bank deposits, could potentially lead to severe liquidity shortages for banks, affecting credit availability and potentially leading to a decline in growth. risk scenario entails overcorrection in housing prices, significant interest rate increases, and a severe recession. Stress tests assume no use of profits, which could be used to absorb part of the losses and reduce the need for deleveraging. For details, see Annex IV. Past analysis suggests that a 1 percent negative change in real credit is associated with 0.47 percent decline in real GDP in the long run (Country Report No. 15/276). The estimated household balance sheets are obtained by combining household survey information with a large sample of individual mortgage loans. However, given that more than 50 percent of banks’ total mortgage portfolio is concentrated with households in the top income quintile, an asymmetric shock affecting the specific sources of income of these households could have larger effects (Box 2). In addition, shocks to investment funds could reduce their ability to finance the government. However, in absence of well-developed secondary markets, the effect would mainly be on new issuances and possibly in terms of higher interest cost or financing shortages for the government. Based on Selected Issues Paper on “Macro-Financial Risks from Linkages Between Banks and Non-Bank Financial Institutions.” Page 20 Box 2. Household Vulnerability Several years of sustained growth in mortgage lending has led to indebted households. Household debt reached about 90 percent of disposable income in 2015, higher than in South Africa and close to the levels of advanced economies. The high indebtedness is largely explained by sizable mortgage loans, which in 2015 constituted about 85 percent of bank credit to households. Moreover, household survey data suggest that the average debt to income ratio is significantly higher for high-income households. Sustained income growth and low interest rates have supported households’ repayment capacity. Over 2010-13, growth in real disposable income in Namibia averaged about 8 percent, well above the level of OECD countries with available data. Strong income growth has contributed to maintain residential mortgage impairment figures broadly stable, notwithstanding a high debt service burden compared to BIS reporting countries, respectively 21 percent and 10 percent. A significant part of the debt burden is due to large interest payments that average about 11¾ percent of outstanding mortgage loans, despite historically low interest rates. Households are vulnerable to income and interest rate shocks, but banks appear resilient to such shocks . Due to the absence of borrowers’ information, staff assessed the vulnerability of individual household groups by estimating households’ balance sheets. The estimates combine data from the most recent household survey (2009/10) with a large sample of individual mortgage loans. The estimated balance sheets were then used to perform stress testing and assess the vulnerability of individual household groups. The tests simulate an increase in interest rates of 200bps or 300bps under different assumptions on real income growth rates. Shocks are assumed to be identical across income deciles. Results show that, under the 300bp interest rate shock, the share of vulnerable households could rise between 4¼ (in the case of no real growth in gross income) to 10⅓ percent (with a 3 percent decline in real gross income). Middle and upper-middle deciles of the income distribution appear to be the most vulnerable to shocks. The impact on lower income households is smaller as they have lower debt levels and are dependent on subsidies and transfers excluded from the income definition. Despite their higher indebtedness, the impact on higher income households is also limited because of their large buffers. Under these shocks, banks’ arrears on mortgages would increase by 4-5 times up to 9 percent of total loans, but could still be absorbed by banks’ capital buffers. Asymmetric shocks to the income sources of high income households could have larger effect on banks. Since almost 55 percent of total mortgages are accounted by the top two deciles of the household income distribution, a shock to their sources of income could have significant effects. For instance, lowering the nominal income of these households by 15 percent, combined with a 300bp increase in interest rates, could increase mortgage arrears up to 20-21 percent. Under this scenario, the system would on average be resilient, but some banks could face difficulties in complying with capital requirements. ____________________________ 1/ Analysis based on M. Leika and D. Marchettini, (2016), “A Generalized Framework for the Assessment of Household Vulnerability Using Microdata”, forthcoming. 2/ Households are classified as vulnerable if their financial margins (i.e. the gross income left after deducting mortgage payments and basic living costs) are lower than estimated vulnerability thresholds. Different thresholds for each combination of income decile and geographical region are computed using a signaling detection approach and calibrated to obtain the highest in-sample predictive performance. It is worth noting that debt to income ratios calculated using survey data do not match aggregate values reported in the authorities’ Financial Stability Report. V K V X Z Z NN K K Z W V Page 21 Box 2. Household Vulnerability (concluded) Share of Vulnerable Households Pre- and Post-Income and Interest Shocks 1/ Simulated Arrear Increase Under a 300bp Interest Rate Shock and Alternative Income Scenarios (in percent of Total Mortgage Loans) 1/ Inflation is assumed to average 6.5 percent. bp bp Z bp bp bp bp bp bp ee Page 22 A number of measures would strengthen the authorities’ ability to manage the different sources of systemic risk arising from the financial sector: Introducing further macroprudential measures to curb risks from the housing market, including debt-service-to income ratio (DSTI) limits. While structural distortions in the real estate market should be addressed directly, macroprudential policies can help mitigate the risks from overvalued housing prices. To tame these risks, the authorities have recently introduced loan-to-value (LTV) limits for non-primary home purchases to be effective in 2017. These could be complemented by DSTI limits, which would rely on recent reforms of credit information systems. DSTI limits would help address the tendency of LTV limits to become less binding as property prices increase and curb already high households’ debt service to income ratios. At the same time, it is important to extend the limits to non-bank financial institutions engaged in the real estate business to avoid regulatory leakages. In addition, as risks to the banking sector may arise from primary residential mortgages, authorities could, at a later stage, consider introducing LTV limits on such mortgages. These limits should be carefully designed and timed to avoid hampering affordability for lower income groups and sudden price corrections. Strengthening the supervision of NBFIs. Over the past years, NAMFISA has been strengthening its capacity to supervise and regulate NBFIs. However, the Financial and Institutions Market (FIM) Bill needs to be approved and enacted to create a modern and adequate regulatory and supervisory framework. In addition, NAMFISA could take further steps toward risk-based supervision of systemic NBFIs. Monitoring and assessing financial stability risks from banks and NBFIs linkages. Investment funds and their linkages with banks are macro critical and warrant closer scrutiny. The BoN is the best placed institution to take the lead in assessing financial stability risks arising from such linkages and conduct stress tests on banks considering possible shocks to and from investment funds. Better knowledge of inter-group linkages could also deepen the understanding of risks arising within financial conglomerates. In general, the authorities should accelerate their plans to improve the financial regulatory architecture and provide the BoN with the powers and instruments to assess macro-financial risks and exercise macro-prudential controls for the whole financial sector. In addition, they should step up efforts to introduce consolidated supervision to account for complex ownership and financial linkages across institutions in assessing risks, and to prevent regulatory arbitrage of capital and liquidity requirements. Addressing information and data gaps. The authorities have made significant efforts to improve data availability, although additional progress is needed. NAMFISA should continue to improve the collection of granular data, and eventually develop financial sector indictors (FSIs) for NBFIs and adequate databases to move towards risk-based supervision. The BoN could accelerate its efforts to improve the existing housing price indices. It should also develop wealth Policy advice reflects recommendations from the IMF technical assistance on macroprudential policies (June 2015). Since May 2014, credit providers are required to submit both negative and positive credit performance information to all registered credit bureaus. Page 23 and debt household surveys (and/or collect borrower data from banks and credit bureaus) to allow a better assessment of the risks stemming from the household sector, and fill data gaps to better understand the linkages inside the financial system. Authorities’ view The authorities concur with the assessment of financial risks and are taking steps to address key vulnerabilities. They noticed that the implementation of the new LTV limits and the recently enacted regulations on minimum down-payments for instalment credit (2016 Credit Amendment Act) would curb credit growth and risks from the housing market. Based on the experience in other countries, the BoN will explore options to introduce DSTI limits at a later stage. However, the authorities noticed that introducing macroprudential limits on primary residences is not desirable at this stage in light of structural housing shortages and potential social implications. They are cognizant of potential risks from banks and NBFIs linkages. The authorities noted that a shock to investment funds might not necessarily drain the liquidity in the system if, for example, deposits are re-directed from investment funds to banks, posing lower systemic risks than staff analysis suggests. However, they recognized the importance of having a strong institutional framework with a leading role for the BoN in assessing systemic risks arising from interconnections within the financial system and in conducting macroprudential policy. To this effect, they have finalized a Financial Stability Policy Framework. The framework will lead to the enactment of new legislation expected to improve coordination across the institutions in charge of regulating and supervising the financial system (BoN, NAMFISA and MoF). NAMFISA concurred with the need to enhance its regulatory capacity, including with technical assistance from the IMF, and move towards risk-based supervision. The authorities expect the approval of pending bills (particularly the NAMFISA and FIM bills) will significantly strengthen the regulatory environment for NBFIs.