Risks from low international reserves Namibia’s international reserves have markedly declined since 2009, making it vulnerable to exogenous shocks under the exchange rate peg. The reserves stood at US$1 billion (8¼ percent of GDP or 1½ months of imports) as of end-May 2015, declining by about 9 percent points of GDP since 2009, while Namibia’s external balances are heavily dependent on volatile inflows (exports of mineral products and SACU revenues). According to the IMF’s metric for market access countries, Namibia’s international reserves are significantly below their adequate level . The current level of reserves is only about 60 percent of the minimum adequate level (3 ‒ 5 months of imports or 16 ‒ 20 percent of GDP, Annex 1). Moreover, in the past fifteen years the level of reserves has been sub-optimal about seventy percent of the time. Given Namibia’s membership in the CMA (and, hence, the peg to the South African rand), sub-optimal reserves make the country more vulnerable to exogenous shocks. The authorities concurred with the need to build adequate international reserves and agreed with the proposed level of 3 ‒ 5 months of imports (as it coincides with the Bank of Namibia’s (BoN’s) own estimates). Staff’s baseline scenario envisages a moderate fiscal consolidation with enhanced external financing, though not enough to sufficiently raise international reserves. Under this scenario, growth would rise to 6 percent by 2017/18 supported by mining and construction. Fiscal balances would be broadly consistent with the government’s current medium-term indicative target (deficits of 5 percent of GDP on average over the medium term), with upfront consolidation efforts. However, due to the lack of detail of government’s consolidation plans over the medium term, the pace of adjustment is assumed to stall after a few years (consolidation fatigue). External financing of about N$12 billion (6 percent of GDP) would be required over the next five years to mitigate the impact of the SACU revenue shock. As a result, international reserves would remain at around Page 15 1½ ‒ 2 months of imports, and public debt would exceed the government’s target of 35 percent of GDP. Staff Medium-Term Projections (Baseline scenario) (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 GDP growth (annual change) Credits to private sector (annual change) Fiscal balance Total revenue of which SACU revenues Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Capital expenditure Current account balance (including grants) Gross international reserves (month of imports) Total public debt Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Prel. Prel. Est. Est. Policies to strengthen resilience With the envisaged fiscal consolidation under the reform scenario, expenditures would return to the ‒ 2007 levels. Fiscal Expenditures (Percent of GDP) With enhanced fiscal consolidation measures (reform scenario), adequate international reserves and modest debt levels (below the government’s debt ceiling) would be achievable over the medium term, while safeguarding critical social and development spending . A significant fiscal consolidation with spending cuts of 9 ‒ 10 percent of GDP over the next five years is required to achieve a balanced budget over the medium term, with a view to increasing the reserve coverage to three months of imports (consistent with the minimum adequate level). An external bond issuance (or other form of external financing) of about N$12 billion over the next five years would help to mitigate the SACU revenue shock, while public debt would remain below 35 percent of GDP. For this purpose, stepped-up efforts over the medium term are called for with the following policy measures: Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Contain expenditures, based on a growth-friendly fiscal consolidation strategy aiming to rein in current spending (wages and transfers and subsidies to public enterprises) while preserving productive infrastructure spending (as discussed for the 2013 Article IV consultation) could mitigate the negative impact on the economy. For this purpose, it is important to restrain non-priority spending (particularly in goods and services and subsidies, and transfers to public enterprises) and the wage bill. Policy measures for constraining the wage bill include: (i) freezing wages in real terms, (ii) limiting new Page 16 hiring to critical areas (e.g., education, health), and (iii) reducing various allowances, overtime, and bonus payments. As an initial step, the government plans to reduce travel expenses (by enforcing a limit on the number of official trips per year). Enhance revenue administration. Further efforts for domestic revenue collection—including through improving tax compliance, reducing tax expenditures, and prioritizing the collection of tax arrears—are essential to the consolidation (as they would limit the reliance on expenditure cuts). Increase external financing, within the government’s debt ceiling . In view of the relatively low level of Namibia’s public debt, external financing—through external bond (preferably rand denominated) or other options (e.g., borrowing from international partners, or credit lines)— should be sought, while carefully assessing the associated interest rate and rollover risks, in light of the envisaged normalization of monetary policy in advanced countries. It is also essential to (i) monitor the liabilities of all regional and local authorities and the fiscal risk from increasing explicit/implicit sovereign guarantees for public enterprises, and (ii) diversify the debt portfolio (to reduce rollover risks). Support fiscal consolidation with structural measures , including strengthening public financial management (e.g., introducing a single treasury account, conducting public expenditure reviews, enacting a new public financial management bill), improving data reporting and monitoring of state-owned enterprises, revising public procurement bill, and strengthening public investment management (e.g., improving project appraisals and implementation). These efforts, together with enhanced domestic revenue collection, would help to create a fiscal space for critical social and development spending and to mitigate the adverse impacts of consolidation on growth, while maintaining capital expenditures. Staff Medium-Term Projections (Reform Scenario) (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 GDP growth (annual change) Credits to private sector (annual change) Fiscal balance Total revenue of which SACU revenues Prel. Prel. Est. Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Capital expenditure Current account balance (including grants) Gross international reserves (month of imports) Total public debt Sources: Namibian authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Based on the budget outturn for 2014/15, overtime payments are estimated at 5.5 percent of total remuneration and bonus payments about 4 percent. To reduce allowances for public sector workers, the government plans to tighten the eligibility (e.g., housing allowance, daily remunerative allowances) and to reduce the number and size of allowances. Est. Page 17 The authorities affirmed their intention to tighten their fiscal policy stance, with stepped-up revenue efforts and expenditure control, along the lines envisaged under the reform scenario. They concurred with the need to rein in spending, improve its quality, and enhance external financing, while supporting the country’s development needs. They pointed that there would be scope for rationalizing government’s transfers to public enterprises (by 2¼ percentage points of GDP) by strengthening their monitoring, while acknowledging the importance of containing wages. They agreed with the need to strengthen international reserves (as envisaged under the reform scenario), while noting that the degree of spending cuts could be mitigated, by further improving domestic revenue administration and exploring the scope for public-private partnerships. Over the medium term, improvements in tax collection are expected from the establishment of an autonomous revenue agency. Furthermore, the authorities intend to improve spending efficiency, through strengthening their cash management and expenditure control (e.g., by introducing a real-time budget reporting system). For the first time, the government is planning to undertake a midyear budget review (in October) to update their medium-term fiscal framework with the SACU revenue shock and specify their intended fiscal consolidation measures.