The macroeconomic outlook is broadly stable. Output growth is expected to pick up to around 4¾ percent in 2013/14, driven by a recovery in agriculture, strong services, and higher public spending. Inflation is projected to moderate further (in line with declining Indian inflation) but remain high, at 8 percent (y/y). The current account surplus is forecast to rise to over 4 percent of GDP on account of remittances. Capital spending should accelerate in the last quarter, in line with previous patterns, contributing to net incurrence of financial liabilities projected at 1¼ percent of GDP. Private sector credit growth is expected to accelerate slightly. In 2014/15, growth is projected to increase somewhat as confidence improves, and inflation to moderate with India’s inflation. The current account surplus is expected to decline, as remittance growth slows. Medium-term prospects hinge on improving the environment for private investment. While remittances are expected to continue to support the external position, the outlook for growth will remain modest in the absence of a decisive boost in public capital spending to crowd in private investment, and structural reforms in the financial sector, and telecommunications, competition, labor market, and business regulation reforms. Growth is projected to remain at around 4½ percent in the medium term, with gradual improvements in execution of the capital expenditure budget supporting activity as remittance growth moderates. The external position is expected to remain strong, with international reserves high. Risks to the outlook are somewhat tilted to the downside (Annex 1). With limited links to global financial markets, external risks to the outlook stem mainly from a slower-than- projected recovery in India (Box 1), or a slowdown in countries that host Nepali workers. Domestic risks arise from the financial sector, especially from the large number of weak smaller banks and the largely unsupervised cooperatives sector, and from a potential failure to further improve the political climate. On the other hand, a decisive reform push and increase in public investment would likely boost private investment, raising growth beyond baseline projections. A debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that Nepal is at low risk of debt distress, due to reduced estimates of the cost of a potential banking sector crisis, and the increase in the discount rate used to assess LICs’ debt burden. This is a significant improvement compared to the previous DSA, which indicated a moderate risk of debt distress (Appendix 1). Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s assessment, but thought that growth could be higher, on account of stronger growth in services. They also pointed to their plans to accelerate capital spending, and spur credit to productive sectors (especially agriculture, hydroelectric power, industry, and tourism). With regard to risks, they emphasized Page 6 that further improvement of the political climate was a prerequisite for higher private sector investment. Box 1: Spillovers from India Nepal has a close economic relationship with India, with the open border facilitating movement of goods and labor. However, trade and remittance flows do not suggest large spillovers from India to Nepal. While India is Nepal’s largest trading partner, exports constitute a small share in Nepal’s GDP, limiting the potential impact of a slowdown in Indian demand. Remittances from India are estimated to account for only 10 percent of total remittances received by Nepal; 90 percent originate from other destinations, primarily Persian Gulf states and Malaysia. With the closed capital account, international financial linkages are also limited (the open border does not appear to have led to significant cross-border capital movement). While econometric evidence suggests that the impact on Nepal from a shock to India’s growth is the highest among South Asian peers, the overall effect is modest (Cashin and Raissi, IMF Country Report No. 14/58).