Background Domestic Bank Deposits (in percent of GDP, last available year ) Nepal’s financial sector is large relative to peer countries. Liberal licensing policies in the past have led to proliferation of financial institutions. As of April 2014, the NRB regulated 30 Class A commercial banks, 86 Class B development banks, 56 Class C finance companies, and 35 Class D microfinance banks. The NRB has also introduced regulations to link the opening of bank branches in the Kathmandu Valley to opening of branches in underbanked areas, and to increase transparency. These have been successful and should be retained. Sources: FinStats database Note: last available year is 2012 for Nepal ,2010 for Lao PDR, and 2011 for all other countries. q b m z G w P d m T h d B v d d b m C m V R D P V h B h G d U Page 11 The distinctions between Class A, B, and C banks have been eroded over time. In addition, a very large number (about 17,000) of credit cooperatives exist outside the NRB’s supervisory perimeter. Nonetheless, despite a large increase in bank branches over the last decade, access to finance remains limited, especially in remote areas and for small and medium enterprises. The number of financial institutions is declining, albeit slowly. The NRB is encouraging mergers, and developing banks and finance companies, in which public confidence is generally lower, are seeking to merge with commercial banks. The recently approved by-law on acquisitions should broaden options for further consolidation of the banking sector. The authorities have made progress in addressing financial sector vulnerabilities. The NRB has conducted a special review of risk management practices in 20 banks (which were found to be deficient), and is conducting another special review of 54 banks representing over 50 percent of financial sector assets. The NRB is also gradually developing its crisis management capability, and a Supervision Coordination Committee under its leadership has been established to help monitor the cooperatives sector. The legal framework is being strengthened. Draft amendments to the NRB Act to enhance the NRB’s crisis management and supervision powers are being prepared, and the process of amending the Banking and Financial Institutions Act (BAFIA) to harmonize it with the amended NRB Act has begun. A new Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Bill has been drafted. The newly-elected parliament has also enacted AML/CFT ordinances into law. This may facilitate Nepal’s removal from the enhanced scrutiny of the Financial Action Task Force, which will review progress this June. Staff Views Notwithstanding this progress, Nepal’s first-ever assessment under the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) identified significant financial sector vulnerabilities. Bank supervision remains largely compliance-based, fragmented, and underresourced. Nonperforming loans are likely underreported, evergreening is widespread, and stress tests suggest banking system strains if asset quality deteriorates moderately. Interconnections within the financial system and to other sectors are substantial, adding to concerns about lending practices. The largely unsupervised cooperatives sector is growing rapidly, partly fueled by directed lending policies, and poses a significant risk to the stability of the financial system. To reduce risks and strengthen the resilience of the financial system, and enhance access to finance, the assessment under the FSAP has laid out a number of key recommendations (Box 4). Limited financial infrastructure is an impediment to stability and development. The payments system lacks redundancy and is handicapped by limited use of electronic means. Several laws on debt enforcement and insolvency systems have been enacted, but implementation has been ineffective and inconsistencies among laws give rise to disputes. Credit information is weak and there is limited use of the insolvency regime. Page 12 Box 4: Key FSAP Recommendations Financial Stability Significant further consolidation of the financial sector is needed. To avoid creating large, weak banks out of small, weak banks, and strengthen the financial system overall, the NRB should: Undertake a thorough asset quality review to identify problem loans in banks’ balance sheets. Actively guide the bank consolidation process to ensure stronger banks emerge. Strengthen bank licensing regulations and policy to include adequate fit-and-proper criteria, a requirement for satisfactory risk management systems, and tighter standards for related parties and intra-group exposures. Be given special resolution powers to close insolvent banks, and those banks that do not meet tightened licensing standards after an adequate transition period. Be granted explicit consolidated supervision powers and amend the legal framework to incorporate a comprehensive definition of related parties and controlling interests. Financial Sector Oversight and Crisis Management Supervision, despite some recent improvements, requires significant further strengthening. Key actions are: Expedite implementation of a more risk-based approach to supervision and the integration of off- and on-site supervision (though capacity constraints will need to be taken into account). Supervisors should not hesitate to exercise judgment, and follow up more thoroughly on implementation of their recommendations. Exercise the NRB’s corrective and sanctioning powers proactively, and amend the prompt corrective action framework to trigger stronger corrective action at an earlier stage. Increase staffing and analytical capacity, limit staff rotation, develop IT and management systems, and streamline the NRB Board’s participation in operational decisions. Bring the Employment Provident Fund (EPF) and Citizens Investment Trust (CIT), two state-owned insurance providers, under joint supervision of the NRB and the Insurance Board, Significantly strengthen supervision of cooperatives by the Department of Cooperatives. Develop and coordinate agency-specific contingency plans, and carry out crisis simulations under the umbrella of the Interagency Coordination Committee, which should meet on a regular basis. Financial Development and Infrastructure Enhanced financial access and deepening could be promoted by the following steps: Clarify the mandate and reduce the number of state-owned banks. Accelerate the modernization of the payments system. Create a collateral registry, and eliminate the reporting threshold to the Credit Information Bureau. Improve and implement the debt enforcement and insolvency systems. Page 13 Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with staff recommendations. However, they pointed to resource constraints as well as the difficulty of closing financial institutions, though they indicated that the number of financial institutions has come down due to mergers of a number of development banks and finance companies. They also considered that re-licensing now would be disruptive and should be carried out gradually. With regard to joint supervision of the EPF and CIT, they noted that legal and institutional arrangements needed to be amended, and were being reviewed.