Sources: IMF, LIC DSF database, and IMF staff estimates. 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 45 Low-Income Countries (Median) Nepal Fiscal policy was tighter than planned in recent years due to budget implementation bottlenecks Spending under-implementation left the large infrastructure gap mostly unaddressed. In conjunction with relatively strong revenue collection, it kept the public debt to GDP ratio on a declining path, unlike in other low- income countries. Going forward, fiscal policy needs to support post-earthquake reconstruction and medium-term growth through higher public investment. This should be financed through a combination of higher tax revenues (see ¶14), external grants and loans, and domestic financing. The 2015/16 budget targets a large increase in spending. Compared to the estimated outturns for 2014/15, it aims for a 44 percent increase in current spending and a 168 percent increase in capital spending. In the IMF’s presentation of the fiscal data, the 2015/16 budget targets an overall fiscal deficit—measured by the net incurrence of liabilities—of 4.9 percent of GDP, compared to a surplus of 0.3 percent of GDP in 2014/15. If implemented, this fiscal impulse would have important implications for the conduct of monetary policy. It is unlikely that the budget can be implemented in full. The Budget Speech labeled 2015/16 as the “Year of Implementation”. While this is welcome, persistent implementation challenges and delays in operationalizing the NRA will make full budget implementation highly unlikely. For the next fiscal year, staff recommends that the budget targets a substantial but realistic spending increase. Reforms recommended to strengthen budget implementation are discussed in ¶16. Fiscal policy should be anchored by a ceiling on net domestic financing of the budget (NDF). Concessional external financing can finance the bulk of the projected increase in Page 14 infrastructure spending. On this basis, and taking into account the exchange rate peg and the need to protect international reserves as well as the need to ensure adequate space for continued growth in private sector credit, NDF should not exceed 1 percent of GDP per annum. High-quality capital spending financed by concessional donor inflows should be accommodated since it keeps debt in check while allowing for the needed infrastructure push. Given staff’s projections for concessional foreign financing, this will translate to an overall fiscal deficit of 3¾ percent of GDP per annum in the short term, and 2½ percent of GDP per annum in the medium term (reform scenario in the text table). In case of capital spending shortfalls, the deficit should be reduced one for one with shortfalls in donor-financed spending (with a corresponding reduction in NDF and a rise in NFA for any donor financing received but not spent). As discussed below, this fiscal performance would need to be underpinned by decisive structural fiscal reforms. Continued improvements in revenue performance will be important to maintain a strong fiscal position and meet the increasing need for capital expenditure. Revenue has been growing in recent years, albeit at a decreasing rate, on the back of rising consumption and imports. However, revenue fell short of the FY2014/15 budget and the ambitious target set for this year implies a strong possibility of another shortfall in the current fiscal year. To ensure that the tax revenue to GDP ratio remains on a rising trend, staff recommended the following: The Inland Revenue Department (IRD) needs to ensure that taxpayer compliance is not adversely affected by the earthquake and the current unrest in the country. Staff welcomed the recently completed review of the tax policy framework and the intent to commence with the implementation of various policy reforms from FY2015/16. Staff encouraged the authorities to work closely with FAD in the drafting of a unified tax code. The findings and recommendations of a VAT-GAP analysis, conducted by a recent FAD mission, should be used for an action plan to improve tax administration and compliance. Stronger public financial management (PFM) will be key to the swift and efficient implementation of post-earthquake reconstruction as well as the “regular” capital budget. Budget execution in Nepal suffers from persistent problems related to structural weaknesses such as poor project management and bureaucratic hindrances. The earthquake has added urgency to the need to improve capital budget execution and the authorities recently announced steps to expedite expenditure and simplify approval processes. Capital budget implementation remained slow in the first two months of the fiscal year . A coordinated effort by the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the National Planning Commission (NPC), and key line ministries to address bottlenecks is needed. Staff welcomed the MOF’s ongoing efforts to draft a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act (FRBM). This could provide important guidance to the budget implementation process and should be put in place in time for For spending items included in the approved budget, government bodies are no longer required to obtain authorization from the District Development Committee, the line ministry and the NPC, a process that could take up to six months. Similarly, multi-year projects included in the approved budget in one year no longer need to be re- authorized at the start of each fiscal year. Projects with minimal implementation will henceforth need to surrender budget resources. And a revised employee performance evaluation system will incentivize project completion. Page 15 the start of the next fiscal year. Staff welcomed the preparation of the PFM Reform Action Plan (following the publication of the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment in May) and encouraged the authorities to focus the Plan on key priorities for each agency and implement it as soon as possible. Finally, staff reiterated past FAD PFM technical assistance advice to enhance upstream project preparation, appraisal and selection, including: (i) establishing proper and transparent planning, selection and implementation for major capital projects; and (ii) developing better targeted selection and prioritization criteria based on cost-benefit analyses, project life cycle and future recurrent costs, project implementation readiness, as well as associated risks (see also Box 3 in the staff report for Nepal’s request for disbursement under the RCF). Debt management needs to be strengthened in view of the increasingly complex debt instruments and larger borrowing envisaged in the future, particularly related to the development of Nepal’s hydropower potential . The joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis conducted in the context of Nepal’s request for disbursement under the RCF concluded that Nepal’s risk of debt distress remains low. However, a Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) conducted by the World Bank in August 2014 called for improving the effectiveness of managerial oversight on the debt management functions. It also recommended to task one entity with the preparation of a comprehensive debt management strategy, analyze the costs and risks of the debt portfolio, and make debt service forecasts more robust. Protecting priority social spending and improving the effectiveness of safety nets are important . The growth of spending on health and education has stagnated in the last few years. Staff encouraged the authorities to reverse this trend and noted that the macro framework in the reform scenario can accommodate an increase in current spending by almost 2 percent of GDP per annum. Once earthquake-related spending is phased out, a rising share of this increase should be allocated to social spending. Large state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the energy sector need to be put on a sound financial footing. This is needed to reduce contingent liabilities and encourage private and foreign energy sector investment. In recent years, the combined losses of the Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) and Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) averaged about 1½ percent of GDP per year. To prevent future accumulation of losses, the automatic bi-weekly oil price adjustment mechanism introduced in 2014 should be adhered to and electricity tariffs should be reviewed more regularly. The NEA’s operations should be scrutinized more closely and remaining losses should be covered by transparent budget transfers. Authorities’ Views The authorities were confident that capital budget implementation would pick up from mid-November , after the festival season, and would end higher relative to the last fiscal year in part due to the simplification of administrative procedures. Nevertheless, they acknowledged scope to improve implementation capacity and that while there had been improvements in procurement, more needed to be done, including to strengthen capacity of the public and private Page 16 construction sectors. The authorities viewed the 1 percent of GDP ceiling on NDF as too restrictive in view also of the abundance of liquidity in the financial system. The authorities pointed out that social spending had been rising steadily in absolute terms and that much of the reconstruction spending would be on schools and health facilities. Moreover, local governments also carry out social spending but tracking this is difficult. On retail fuel prices, the authorities noted the importance of broadly maintaining parity with prices across the border to prevent distortions.