Political uncertainty has receded after successful elections for a new Constituent Assembly (CA) in November 2013. The Maoist party—the largest party in the previous CA— lost in a landslide, winning only 14 percent of seats. The two other main parties—Nepali Congress and United Marxist-Leninists (UML)—won 34 percent and 30 percent of the vote, respectively, and are the main partners in the governing coalition. The previous CA, elected in April 2008, had been dissolved in May 2012, following repeated changes of government and failure to draft a new constitution. Remittances have led to improvements in living standards, but may be weakening external competitiveness. Remittances from an estimated 2.2 million workers abroad (8 percent of the population) are projected to rise to almost 30 percent of GDP in 2013/14, considerably larger than the 9 percent of GDP in 2000. At the same time, the poverty headcount fell from 55 percent in 1995 to 25 percent in 2011. However, remittances may also erode competitiveness, as suggested by rising wages and declining shares of exports and industry in GDP, and weaken the impulse for policy reforms. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS, OUTLOOK, AND RISKS A. Recent Developments The macroeconomic situation remains solid, but growth is low. GDP growth slowed to below 4 percent in 2012/13, largely due to a weather-related weakening in agricultural output, but the delay in passing a full budget also resulted in low capital spending and a fiscal surplus. Inflation rose to over 10 percent y/y in December 2013 in the wake of the depreciation of the Indian rupee, but moderated to 8.9 percent y/y in March 2014. Growth of remittances rose to 17½ percent in the first eight months of 2013/14, partly on account of the depreciation. This fueled further build-up of international reserves, which stood at $5.8 billion (8.1 months of prospective imports) in March. High remittance inflows also drove reserve money growth of 30½ percent y/y in March, though private sector credit growth slowed to 15½ percent y/y. Despite efforts to accelerate spending, capital expenditure remained low. The authorities have made efforts to implement IMF policy advice, but have been hampered by political uncertainty. Progress has been made toward consolidating the financial sector, and the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) has begun to strengthen supervision, including with technical assistance (TA) from the IMF and donors. A full budget was passed on time for 2013/14, the treasury single account (TSA) has been rolled out to all 75 districts, and reforms in revenue administration are ongoing (with IMF TA). However, monetary policy has remained loose, and The fiscal year ends in mid-July. Page 5 non-transparent implicit subsidies to the Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) and Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) continue. B. Outlook The macroeconomic outlook is broadly stable. Output growth is expected to pick up to around 4¾ percent in 2013/14, driven by a recovery in agriculture, strong services, and higher public spending. Inflation is projected to moderate further (in line with declining Indian inflation) but remain high, at 8 percent (y/y). The current account surplus is forecast to rise to over 4 percent of GDP on account of remittances. Capital spending should accelerate in the last quarter, in line with previous patterns, contributing to net incurrence of financial liabilities projected at 1¼ percent of GDP. Private sector credit growth is expected to accelerate slightly. In 2014/15, growth is projected to increase somewhat as confidence improves, and inflation to moderate with India’s inflation. The current account surplus is expected to decline, as remittance growth slows. Medium-term prospects hinge on improving the environment for private investment. While remittances are expected to continue to support the external position, the outlook for growth will remain modest in the absence of a decisive boost in public capital spending to crowd in private investment, and structural reforms in the financial sector, and telecommunications, competition, labor market, and business regulation reforms. Growth is projected to remain at around 4½ percent in the medium term, with gradual improvements in execution of the capital expenditure budget supporting activity as remittance growth moderates. The external position is expected to remain strong, with international reserves high. Risks to the outlook are somewhat tilted to the downside (Annex 1). With limited links to global financial markets, external risks to the outlook stem mainly from a slower-than- projected recovery in India (Box 1), or a slowdown in countries that host Nepali workers. Domestic risks arise from the financial sector, especially from the large number of weak smaller banks and the largely unsupervised cooperatives sector, and from a potential failure to further improve the political climate. On the other hand, a decisive reform push and increase in public investment would likely boost private investment, raising growth beyond baseline projections. A debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that Nepal is at low risk of debt distress, due to reduced estimates of the cost of a potential banking sector crisis, and the increase in the discount rate used to assess LICs’ debt burden. This is a significant improvement compared to the previous DSA, which indicated a moderate risk of debt distress (Appendix 1). Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s assessment, but thought that growth could be higher, on account of stronger growth in services. They also pointed to their plans to accelerate capital spending, and spur credit to productive sectors (especially agriculture, hydroelectric power, industry, and tourism). With regard to risks, they emphasized Page 6 that further improvement of the political climate was a prerequisite for higher private sector investment. Box 1: Spillovers from India Nepal has a close economic relationship with India, with the open border facilitating movement of goods and labor. However, trade and remittance flows do not suggest large spillovers from India to Nepal. While India is Nepal’s largest trading partner, exports constitute a small share in Nepal’s GDP, limiting the potential impact of a slowdown in Indian demand. Remittances from India are estimated to account for only 10 percent of total remittances received by Nepal; 90 percent originate from other destinations, primarily Persian Gulf states and Malaysia. With the closed capital account, international financial linkages are also limited (the open border does not appear to have led to significant cross-border capital movement). While econometric evidence suggests that the impact on Nepal from a shock to India’s growth is the highest among South Asian peers, the overall effect is modest (Cashin and Raissi, IMF Country Report No. 14/58). POLICY DISCUSSIONS Responses of Output to a Negative GDP Shock in India H S E D G B P E T S I K P K I R S Note: Depicts annual percent change in output of a given country associated with 1% decline in GDP of India, together with the 16th and 84th percentile error bands. The key to Nepal’s development and growth is boosting the domestic economy in the presence of continued strong remittance inflows, which are among the highest in the world. This requires well- coordinated financial, fiscal, and structural policies. A. Exchange Rate Policy The level of the exchange rate appears broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 2). However, remittances skew domestic activity to non-tradables and contribute to reducing the competitiveness of agriculture and industry. International reserves are high, by a range of measures (Text Table). Reserve coverage, after peaking in 2015/16, is projected to stabilize at around 8½ months of prospective imports in the medium term, as remittance growth is expected to moderate and investment increase gradually. The peg to the Indian rupee serves as a transparent anchor. It continues to benefit Nepal in view of its close economic relationship with India. Moreover, the recent Indian rupee depreciation has boosted Nepal’s competitiveness vis-à-vis third countries. At the current juncture an “engineered depreciation” or devaluation against the Indian rupee would in the short run likely lead to additional remittance inflows, boosting international reserves and liquidity Page 7 Box 2: Exchange Rate Assessment Nepal: Exchange Rate Assessment 1/ CGER-type analyses that take into account remittances point to an exchange rate broadly in line with fundamentals , despite high current account surpluses and continued accumulation of international reserves. The estimate under the macroeconomic balance approach suggests some undervaluation, while the external sustainability approach indicates slight overvaluation. However, data limitations and rapid structural change in the economy make these estimates unreliable, as indicated by the wide range of the results in the macroeconomic balance approach. Alternative indicators also suggest that the level of the exchange rate is broadly appropriate. With the appreciation of the Indian rupee against third currencies in the past decade, and relatively high levels of inflation, Nepal’s real effective exchange rate (REER) has broadly appreciated. However, the bilateral real exchange rate with India, Nepal’s largest trading partner, has depreciated by 6 percent over the past decade. Moreover, the recent depreciation of the Indian rupee has helped to reduce the REER as well. Macroeconomic Balance External Sustainability 1/ + (-) is over(under)valuation. Upper Lower Mean Nepal: Real Effective and Real Exchange Rate (Index: 2005=100) Nepal: Trade with India (In percent) Real effective exchange rate Bilateral real exchange rate (vis-à-vis India) Imports from India (in percent of total imports, excl. oil) Exports to India (in percent of total exports) Sources: IMF, IFS and INS database Sources: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics beyond baseline projections. It would also trigger inflationary pressures, necessitating a sharp tightening of monetary policy to lock in any competitiveness gains. This could cause additional stress in a still-weak financial system. Table: Reserve Adequacy Jul-12 Jul-11 In millions of U.S. dollars In months of prospective GNFS imports In percent of foreign currency deposts In percent of broad money In percent of reserve money Gross international reserves Change in gross international reserves Sources: Data provided by the Nepali authorities, and IMF staff estimates In millions of U.S. dollars since mid-July of prev. year In percent of reserve money at mid-July of prev. year Jul-13 Mar-14 Page 8 Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that the peg had provided stability during recent years of political turmoil. However, they pointed out that the parity had not been changed for two decades, even as India’s growth had exceeded Nepal’s by a wide margin. In this context, they were concerned about the appreciation of the REER in recent years, and Nepal’s widening trade deficit. B. Monetary Policy Background Excess liquidity has again built up rapidly, and is undermining the conduct of monetary policy. After a tightening of banks’ liquidity in late 2012/13, excess liquidity rose again in 2013/14, fueled by remittance inflows and accumulation of government balances in the financial system. This has again pushed interbank and t-bill interest rates to very low levels, and begun to affect retail interest rates. The NRB has attempted to reduce excess liquidity, with limited means and modest success. Over the course of the year, the NRB conducted reverse repo operations, using a total of Nrs 19.5 billion worth of treasury bills, out of its total stock of around Nrs 22 billion. This has succeeded in reducing excess liquidity from a peak of Nrs 70 billion in November 2013 (7 percent of total deposit) to around Nrs 40 billion in March 2014. However, nominal interest rates remain close to zero, as the liquidity overhang persists. The NRB has instituted bank credit policies designed to stimulate lending and economic activity. Regulations mandating minimum shares of lending to deprived and productive sectors aim to encourage banks to explore new investment opportunities, and a cap on the spread between lending and deposit rates is intended to force banks to improve efficiency. Staff Views Harnessing the financial sector and remittances to support economic development is challenging. While the goal of channeling remittance inflows to productive investment is appropriate, care needs to be taken to avoid unintended consequences, and preserve financial sector soundness. Excess liquidity, and its high volatility, is undermining monetary management, could adversely affect asset quality, and acts to increase lending spreads. More broadly, monetary policy cannot compensate for the lack of infrastructure and other structural impediments to growth (see below). Monetary policy should focus on controlling the volatility and level of excess liquidity in the banking system. This requires stepping up sterilization and/or raising required reserves, with appropriate consideration of cost sharing between the financial system and the budget. The NRB should more actively smooth short-term fluctuations in excess liquidity—partly Page 9 caused by uneven capital spending over the course of the year—through open market operations (OMOs), and aim to reduce its level (this can also include injections of liquidity). Key steps are: Government debt securities. Additional issuance of treasury bills and bonds to the NRB is needed to provide room for OMOs. This would also provide the opportunity to build a yield curve. Alternatively, the NRB could issue its own securities, but this may fragment an already shallow market. Strengthening institutional settings. Enhanced cooperation between the NRB and the Ministry of Finance in forecasting revenue and expenditure flows could improve liquidity forecasts. Separating monetary from debt management considerations in monetary policy and operational decisions would increase the focus and credibility of the NRB’s monetary policy. This could be supported by establishing a monetary policy committee at the NRB. An interest rate corridor would further strengthen monetary management, a step under consideration by the authorities. It would limit interest rate volatility, facilitate liquidity management, and improve monetary policy transmission. It could also help reduce the interest rate differential with India and incentives for capital flight, though at present this problem appears small. Box 3: Inflation Determinants Dependent variable: ∆ ln(CPI) Coeff/(SE) 0.12** (0.05) (0.019) (0.04) ∆ ln(CPI) t-1 ∆ ln(NEER t-1 ) ∆ ln(CPI_India) 0.37*** (0.06) 0.45*** (0.08) ∆ ln(Broad Money t-1 ) Determinants of Nepalese Inflation Indian inflation is the key driver of Nepali inflation. The currency peg and close trade relations with India suggest that Nepal effectively imports India’s inflation. However, other factors also play a role in generating inflation, albeit a relatively small one. Econometric estimates suggest that Indian inflation has the most significant impact on Nepali inflation, with a 1 percent increase in India’s inflation leading to a 0.45 percent increase in Nepali inflation. Inflation expectations also play a significant role. Changes in broad money have a limited impact: a 1 percent increase in broad money growth corresponds to only a 0.1 percent increase in inflation. The effect of the lagged NEER is small and not statistically significant. Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Sample: March 2001-December 2013 Observations R-squared Constant These measures would help tighten very loose monetary conditions. While the impact on inflation would be modest (Box 3), there is some room for leaning against still-high inflation, thereby supporting competitiveness. Higher interest rates could also curb relatively cheap consumer credit, and with it, imports. Policies to direct lending and cap interest spreads are of limited effectiveness, and can have unintended effects. They may undermine asset quality by pushing lending to weakly supervised micro-finance institutions and largely unsupervised cooperatives, and Page 10 reduce quality standards for direct lending. In addition, a cap on spreads impedes longer-term lending and might discourage bank expansion into remote areas with higher operating costs and lower credit volumes than in urban areas. These effects run against the NRB’s goals to expand access to financial services, and promote lending to productive sectors. Against this background, these policies should be reviewed and modified, and eventually phased out. Promoting access to finance and investment lending could be achieved by other means (see below). Authorities’ Views The authorities saw a significant role for the NRB in promoting growth. In their view, excess reserves were a result of banks failing to seek out lending opportunities and actively contribute to economic development, and they did not want to reward such inactivity through remunerated reserves or debt issuance to mop up liquidity (the Ministry of Finance also had reservations about the interest cost of sterilization bonds). They also did not regard excess liquidity as a cause for concern, as it had not translated into excessive lending or higher inflation. Nonetheless, they indicated that they were considering introducing an interest rate corridor, as well as issuance of sterilization bonds. The authorities explained that demand for credit was high. Their directed lending and spread caps policies were meant to increase efficiency in financial intermediation by encouraging banks to lend to productive sectors that could contribute to development and job creation, while also encouraging savings. They were also of the view that the agricultural and hydroelectric power sectors had high growth potential but lacked financing, which necessitated NRB intervention. They also considered that enhancing supply by these sectors could reduce inflation. They pointed to prudential regulations on real estate lending and credit-to-deposit ratios that limited financial sector risk and would preclude an asset price bubble. However, they acknowledged that these policies could have unintended effects, such as hindering longer-term lending. C. Financial Sector Policies Background Domestic Bank Deposits (in percent of GDP, last available year ) Nepal’s financial sector is large relative to peer countries. Liberal licensing policies in the past have led to proliferation of financial institutions. As of April 2014, the NRB regulated 30 Class A commercial banks, 86 Class B development banks, 56 Class C finance companies, and 35 Class D microfinance banks. The NRB has also introduced regulations to link the opening of bank branches in the Kathmandu Valley to opening of branches in underbanked areas, and to increase transparency. These have been successful and should be retained. Sources: FinStats database Note: last available year is 2012 for Nepal ,2010 for Lao PDR, and 2011 for all other countries. q b m z G w P d m T h d B v d d b m C m V R D P V h B h G d U Page 11 The distinctions between Class A, B, and C banks have been eroded over time. In addition, a very large number (about 17,000) of credit cooperatives exist outside the NRB’s supervisory perimeter. Nonetheless, despite a large increase in bank branches over the last decade, access to finance remains limited, especially in remote areas and for small and medium enterprises. The number of financial institutions is declining, albeit slowly. The NRB is encouraging mergers, and developing banks and finance companies, in which public confidence is generally lower, are seeking to merge with commercial banks. The recently approved by-law on acquisitions should broaden options for further consolidation of the banking sector. The authorities have made progress in addressing financial sector vulnerabilities. The NRB has conducted a special review of risk management practices in 20 banks (which were found to be deficient), and is conducting another special review of 54 banks representing over 50 percent of financial sector assets. The NRB is also gradually developing its crisis management capability, and a Supervision Coordination Committee under its leadership has been established to help monitor the cooperatives sector. The legal framework is being strengthened. Draft amendments to the NRB Act to enhance the NRB’s crisis management and supervision powers are being prepared, and the process of amending the Banking and Financial Institutions Act (BAFIA) to harmonize it with the amended NRB Act has begun. A new Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Bill has been drafted. The newly-elected parliament has also enacted AML/CFT ordinances into law. This may facilitate Nepal’s removal from the enhanced scrutiny of the Financial Action Task Force, which will review progress this June. Staff Views Notwithstanding this progress, Nepal’s first-ever assessment under the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) identified significant financial sector vulnerabilities. Bank supervision remains largely compliance-based, fragmented, and underresourced. Nonperforming loans are likely underreported, evergreening is widespread, and stress tests suggest banking system strains if asset quality deteriorates moderately. Interconnections within the financial system and to other sectors are substantial, adding to concerns about lending practices. The largely unsupervised cooperatives sector is growing rapidly, partly fueled by directed lending policies, and poses a significant risk to the stability of the financial system. To reduce risks and strengthen the resilience of the financial system, and enhance access to finance, the assessment under the FSAP has laid out a number of key recommendations (Box 4). Limited financial infrastructure is an impediment to stability and development. The payments system lacks redundancy and is handicapped by limited use of electronic means. Several laws on debt enforcement and insolvency systems have been enacted, but implementation has been ineffective and inconsistencies among laws give rise to disputes. Credit information is weak and there is limited use of the insolvency regime. Page 12 Box 4: Key FSAP Recommendations Financial Stability Significant further consolidation of the financial sector is needed. To avoid creating large, weak banks out of small, weak banks, and strengthen the financial system overall, the NRB should: Undertake a thorough asset quality review to identify problem loans in banks’ balance sheets. Actively guide the bank consolidation process to ensure stronger banks emerge. Strengthen bank licensing regulations and policy to include adequate fit-and-proper criteria, a requirement for satisfactory risk management systems, and tighter standards for related parties and intra-group exposures. Be given special resolution powers to close insolvent banks, and those banks that do not meet tightened licensing standards after an adequate transition period. Be granted explicit consolidated supervision powers and amend the legal framework to incorporate a comprehensive definition of related parties and controlling interests. Financial Sector Oversight and Crisis Management Supervision, despite some recent improvements, requires significant further strengthening. Key actions are: Expedite implementation of a more risk-based approach to supervision and the integration of off- and on-site supervision (though capacity constraints will need to be taken into account). Supervisors should not hesitate to exercise judgment, and follow up more thoroughly on implementation of their recommendations. Exercise the NRB’s corrective and sanctioning powers proactively, and amend the prompt corrective action framework to trigger stronger corrective action at an earlier stage. Increase staffing and analytical capacity, limit staff rotation, develop IT and management systems, and streamline the NRB Board’s participation in operational decisions. Bring the Employment Provident Fund (EPF) and Citizens Investment Trust (CIT), two state-owned insurance providers, under joint supervision of the NRB and the Insurance Board, Significantly strengthen supervision of cooperatives by the Department of Cooperatives. Develop and coordinate agency-specific contingency plans, and carry out crisis simulations under the umbrella of the Interagency Coordination Committee, which should meet on a regular basis. Financial Development and Infrastructure Enhanced financial access and deepening could be promoted by the following steps: Clarify the mandate and reduce the number of state-owned banks. Accelerate the modernization of the payments system. Create a collateral registry, and eliminate the reporting threshold to the Credit Information Bureau. Improve and implement the debt enforcement and insolvency systems. Page 13 Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with staff recommendations. However, they pointed to resource constraints as well as the difficulty of closing financial institutions, though they indicated that the number of financial institutions has come down due to mergers of a number of development banks and finance companies. They also considered that re-licensing now would be disruptive and should be carried out gradually. With regard to joint supervision of the EPF and CIT, they noted that legal and institutional arrangements needed to be amended, and were being reviewed. D. Fiscal Policy Background The fiscal position is solid, with public debt projected to decline to 30½ percent of GDP in 2013/14, but execution of the capital budget is sluggish. Revenue growth remained strong due to high import growth and ongoing administrative reforms in the Inland Revenue and Customs Departments. Grant inflows strengthened, mainly related to election spending. High revenue growth has financed large increases in current spending, including on salaries, wages and pensions. The authorities significantly raised the capital budget in 2013/14, even though execution remains difficult and the overall level remains low. However, capital spending is underrecorded as some transfers to local governments, accounted as expense, are used for capital formation. Staff Views Fiscal policy needs to support growth through higher public investment. Key areas with a large impact on potential growth are power generation and distribution, and transport. Investments in these areas would also likely crowd in private sector investment, as they would provide essential infrastructure for agriculture and industry. Spending on health and education has increased significantly in recent years, including with donor support. This should be continued. Care needs to be taken to monitor expenditures executed through local bodies. There is ample fiscal space to finance additional investment and social spending. There is room for further growth in revenues, even if at decreasing rates. At the same time, with public debt low, a modest expansion of fiscal deficits is affordable without endangering debt sustainability. Further space should be created by reducing or eliminating implicit subsidies to the NOC. At the same time, the sustainability of current spending will need to be ensured. This applies in particular to civil service remuneration and pensions, which, though still low, could rise substantially over the longer run. Page 14 NOC losses need to be addressed to avoid the build-up of further liabilities. Prices should be adjusted as needed to avoid recurrent losses and interruptions in supply, ideally through an automatic pricing mechanism, while protecting the poor. If some subsidies are required to this end, these should be transparently recorded. Raising public investment requires reforms, including to the budget planning and execution processes. The planned introduction of a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act (FRBM) should be used to remove obstacles to an efficient execution of the capital budget (e.g., the requirement for spending authorization from the Planning Commission even after budget approval, and no multi-year spending authorizations). Consideration should also be given to better prioritize spending within sectors, concentrating financial and personnel resources to ensure completion of key projects. Following the rollout of the TSA, further public financial management reforms to enhance cash management, and improve revenue and expenditure forecasts could also help manage capital spending. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the need to boost capital spending. They intend to pass the 2014/15 budget one month ahead of the beginning of the fiscal year, which should facilitate execution of the capital budget, but are also examining other obstacles to public investment, including provisions in the Procurement Act. With regard to fuel pricing, they pointed to political constraints. E. Boosting Sustainable and Inclusive Growth While poverty has been reduced significantly in recent years, Nepal’s human development indicators remain low. Further expenditures on health and education could help reduce the human effects of poverty and improve the productivity of the workforce. The expansion of telecommunications offers an opportunity to extend financial services through mobile telephony, which could transform access to finance and promote inclusion, as demonstrated in many peer countries. To generate sustained economic growth and employment opportunities, which alone can deliver lasting development, key domestic policy reforms are needed. While financial sector policies and higher public investment can contribute to support private sector investment, more comprehensive reforms are also required. Labor market reforms and improvements in the efficiency of markets through competition, e.g. in fuel distribution and goods and passenger transport, would support broader economic development. To this end, creation of a dedicated competition authority should be considered. Lastly, a one-stop shop should not only be offered for large investments, but to any investor. The NOC currently has Nrs 34 billion in debt (1¾ percent of GDP). Page 15 The exploitation of Nepal’s large hydroelectric power potential should be accelerated, especially given long lead times for projects. The expansion of power supply through projects currently underway should alleviate power shortages, but demand is expected to increase as well. In addition, power could also be exported to India, diversifying sources of foreign exchange. To this end, large-scale projects involving foreign investment to generate power and build infrastructure for power trade with India should be developed expeditiously. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the need to enhance infrastructure and remove hurdles toward more inclusive growth. They pointed out that cellular phone subscriptions now amount to 85 percent of the population, and are estimated to cover 65-70 percent of individuals. They also indicated that a few hydroelectric power projects, particularly those financed with domestic resources, have shown good execution and may offer lessons for other projects. While large projects have a higher long-term impact on output, shorter gestation projects may be more useful for kick-starting growth. OTHER ISSUES Some progress in implementing recommendations from the safeguards assessment has been made. New accounting software has been installed, and all government transactions are monitored through the TSA, and controls over reserve management is being strengthened. Efforts to strengthen macroeconomics statistics should continue, including in the context of the National Strategy for Development of Statistics. TA is being provided by the IMF to improve statistics in national accounts, fiscal accounts, balance of payments, and monetary accounts. There is scope to further improve the quality of those statistics, supporting more effective economic monitoring and policy formulation. STAFF APPRAISAL The macroeconomic situation is broadly stable, and the external position strong. Continued robust remittance inflows are supporting high international reserves; however, they also fuel excess liquidity in the financial system, and skew activity to non-tradables and contribute to reducing the competitiveness of agriculture and industry. The fiscal position is solid, and while public debt and the risk of debt distress are low, public investment remains modest. Poverty reduction has progressed, but economic growth is weak. High remittance inflows are increasing welfare, as does public spending on health and primary education. While the improvement in the political environment following the elections to the CA should help raise confidence, low public investment, a weak business climate, and eroding external competitiveness are holding back growth. Page 16 Monetary policy should focus on controlling liquidity. While the NRB has stepped up sterilization operations, it should use OMOs more actively to control both the level and volatility of liquidity in the financial system. This would help tighten very loose monetary conditions, reduce financial sector risks and improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism. To this end, the NRB should be equipped with adequate amounts of sterilization bonds, cooperation between the NRB and the Ministry of Finance needs to be stepped up, and the institutional set- up for monetary policy strengthened. Financial sector policies should aim to strengthen supervision, reduce vulnerabilities and make the financial system more efficient. While the NRB has made progress, the financial system remains vulnerable, as the recent assessment under the FSAP underlines. The number of banks should be further substantially reduced, alongside a strengthening of the licensing framework. In this context, the authorities should not hesitate to close insolvent banks. The move to risk-based supervision should be expedited, and the legal framework enhanced. Staffing and IT also need strengthening. Developing financial infrastructure would also help reduce risks and increase access to credit. At the same time, supervision of cooperatives needs to be expanded and significantly strengthened. Fiscal policy has ample room to support growth and poverty reduction. Revenues are projected to rise further, though at decreasing rates, and low public debt would allow for a modest expansion of fiscal deficits without endangering debt sustainability. There is also room to create further fiscal space by reducing or eliminating implicit NOC subsidies. The authorities’ intention to pass the 2014/15 budget earlier than usual to help accelerate capital spending is welcome, but comprehensive measures are needed, including passage of the FRBM Act, and other changes to the legal and institutional framework. Reforms to boost inclusive growth need to be tackled with urgency. There is significant room to boost competitiveness to develop industry and agriculture, which would provide domestic employment opportunities. While better public infrastructure would provide a significant impetus to inclusive growth, reforms to improve labor relations, boost competition, and reducing the regulatory burden are a necessary complement. Accelerating large privately financed infrastructure projects would also provide a boost to investor confidence. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12- month cycle. Page 17 Economic growth slowed in 2012/13, largely due to weak agricultural output … … and anemic public investment due to delay of the 2012/13 budget. Figure 1. Nepal: Recent Developments Fiscal Performance (In percent of GDP) Revenue Current expenditure Capital expenditure Overall balance Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates The Nepalese rupee has weakened reflecting the peg to the Indian rupee, and the REER has depreciated. Exchange Rate (Index) REER NEER USD per 100 NRs (RHS) (+) Appreciation (-) Depreciation Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. … fueling continued accumulation of international reserves. Gross Official Reserves Reserves (in billions of USD, LHS) Gross official reserves (in months of imports, RHS) Real GDP Growth (Percent change) Real GDP, Other Real GDP, Agriculture Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates Inflation, after spiking in December, is gradually decelerating but remains high. Consumer Price Inflation (y/y percent change) Nepal: Headline CPI (y/y) Nepal: Food CPI (y/y) India: Headline CPI (y/y) Sources: Nepali authorities, Haver analytics; and IMF staff estimates. Worker’s remittances are still growing, albeit at a reduced pace Remittances (12-month moving average) Growth (y/y) Flow (million US$, RHS) Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates Page 18 Figure 2. Nepal: Monetary and Financial Developments Deposit growth has been supported by workers’ remittances … Leading to increases in banks’ excess reserves. Nepal: Deposit and Workers' Remittances (In percentage) Total deposits (y/y) Workers' remittances (3mma, y/y) Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Note: total deposits inlude class A B, and C banks after July 2011, but only cover class A banks prior to then. Nepal: Excess Reserves and Open Market Operations (In billions of NPR (LHS), in percentage (RHS)) (+) Liquidity injection (-) Liquidity withdrawal Excess Reserve (in bil NPR, LHS) Outright purchase (+)/ sales(-) (in bil NPR, LHS) Repo (+)/ Reverse repo (-) (in bil NPR, LHS) Cash Reserve Ratio (%, RHS) Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Interbank rates spiked on temporary tighter liquidity, but fell back as remittances continued to rise. Broad money is relatively stable while reserve money is volatile due to seasonality of the public sector balance. Nepal: Interest Rate (Percentage points) Treasury bills (91 days) Bank rate (for NRB's standing liquidity facility) Nepal interbank rate Deposit rate (commercial banks) Lending rate (commercial banks) Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Nepal: Monetary aggregates (y/y percent change) Broad money (y/y) Reserve money (y/y) Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Credit to private sector is decelerating but remains robust … … and some is flowing to the real estate sector. Nepal: Components of Domestic Credit Growth (In percentage, depository corporations including class A, B and C) Private sector Public sector Domestic Credit (y/y) Private credit (y/y) S v y Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. y v S S v Nepal: Credit Growth (Commercial Banks) (y/y percent change) Finance, Insurance & Real Estate (in bil NRs, RHS) Others (in bil NRs, RHS) Finance, Insurance & Real Estate Total credit Sources: Nepali authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 19 Nepal’s overall ranking improved …. … but deteriorated along several dimensions. Figure 3. Nepal: Business Environment and Governance Ease of Doing Business Ranking: South Asia B D B Sources: World Bank, Doing Business Report (2014 and 2008) In particular, infrastructure and higher education are key impediments. 2013-14 Nepal Scores in Global Competitiveness Index Max Min Nepal Score v m Sources: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2013-14) Labor markets seem less efficient than regional peers… Labor Market Efficiency Ranking and Young Population Ratio: South Asia Ease of Doing Business Ranking: Nepal B D B Sources: World Bank, Doing Business Report (2014 and 2008) Voice and accountability have risen but there remains ample room for further improvements. Voice and Accountability: South Asia (Percentile rank) v G B Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators 2013 Note: Voice and Accountability reflects perceptions of the extent to which a country's citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression, freedom. … and regulatory quality also indicates room for further improvement. Regulatory Quality and GDP Per Capita: South Asia 2012 (Percentile rank; in US Dollars) Y Nepal Bangladesh Pakistan India Bhutan Sri Lanka Less efficient labor market Sources: World Development Indicators (2012) and World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2013) Note: Young population ratio: people younger than 15 as percentage of population aged 15-64. Maldives Bhutan Bangladesh Afghanistan India Pakistan Nepal Sri Lanka Better governance Sources: Worldwide Governance Indicators 2013; IMF Note: Regulatory quality eflects perceptions of the ability of the government to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote private sector. Note: These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of respondents, a limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumptions on business constraints and information availability. Page 20 Figure 4. Nepal: Inclusive Growth Economic growth has been stable but low, … Volatility of GDP Growth, 2000–12 1/ (In percent) Cambodia Bangladesh Lao P.D.R. Vietnam Mongolia Nepal Papua New Sri Lanka Guinea Source: IMF's World Economic Outlook 1/ Each candlestick shows maximum, 3 rd quartile, median, 1 st quartile, and minimum growth rates, respectively, during the sample period. The MDG poverty reduction target has already been met … Nepal: Trends in poverty headcount ratios (In percent) Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP) (% of population) Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP) (% of population) Target Sources: Nepali auhtorities; and WDI database However, output per capita remains among the lowest in the region Per Capita GDP (PPP) (In U.S. dollars) d I m V R D P G P Source: World Bank, WDI Database d b m C h d B m y … while income poverty has declined dramatically, largely due to remittances.. Change in poverty headcount ratios (In percent points) Sri Lanka (1996-2010) India (1994-2010) Bangladesh (1996-2010) Lao P.D.R. (1992-2008) Cambodia (1994-2009) Pakistan (1997-2008) Nepal (1996-2011) Vietnam (1993-2008) At $2 per day (PPP) At $1.25 per day (PPP) Source: World Bank, WDI Database … and income distribution has also improved. Change in Gini Index (In Gini points) improvement Nepal (1996-2010) Cambodia (1994-2009) Bangladesh (1996-2010) Vietnam (1993-2008) Sri Lanka (1996-2010) Pakistan (1997-2008) Lao P.D.R. (1997-2008) India (1994-2010) Mongolia (1995-2008) Source: World Bank, WDI database … and further efforts are needed to improve human welfare. Human Development Index (HDI) (In index, 2012) k S d I R D P HDI, 2012 Average HDI (1980-2012) d b m C k P h d B m y (Source) Human Development Report 2013 (UNDP) Page 21 Table 1. Nepal: Selected Economic Indicators, 2010/11–2014/15 1/ Proj. Output and prices (annual percent change) Real GDP CPI (period average) CPI (end of period) Nonfood CPI (end of period) Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Expenditure Expenses Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Net lending/borrowing Net acquisition of financial assets Net incurrence of liabilities Foreign Domestic Money and credit (annual percent change) Broad money Domestic credit Private sector credit Velocity Saving and Investment (in percent of nominal GDP) Gross investment Private Central government Gross national saving Private Central government Balance of Payments Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Trade balance (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Exports value growth (y/y percent change) Imports value growth (y/y percent change) Workers' remittances (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) In months of prospective GNFS imports Memorandum items Public debt (in percent of GDP) GDP at market prices (in billions of Nepalese rupees) GDP at market prices (in billions of U.S. dollars) Exchange rate (NRs/US$; period average) Real effective exchange rate (eop, y/y percent change) Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Fiscal year ends in mid-July. Page 22 Table 2. Nepal: Summary of Government Operations, 2010/11–2014/15 1/ Budget Proj. MTEF Proj. Total revenue and grants Total revenue Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Grants Expenditure Expenses Of which : Interest payments Salaries and allowances Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Operating balance Net lending/borrowing Net financial transactions Net acquisition of financial assets Net incurrence of liabilities Foreign Domestic Total revenue and grants Total revenue Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Grants Expenditure Expenses Of which : Interest payments Salaries and allowances Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Operating balance Net lending/borrowing Net financial transactions Net acquisition of financial assets Net incurrence of liabilities Foreign Domestic Memorandum items Change in net credit to central government (in billions of NRs) Change in net credit to central government Primary balance Public debt Domestic External GDP (in billion of Nepalese rupees) (In billions of Nepalese rupees) (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Sources: Data provided by the Nepalese authorities, and Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Fiscal year ends in mid-July. Table refers to central government operations as contained in the budget. 2/ Based on the authorities' data and Fund staff assumptions. Page 23 Table 3. Nepal: Monetary Indicators, 2010/11–2014/15 1/ Nepal Rastra Bank Reserve money Net domestic assets Claims on public sector Claims on private sector Claims on banks & financial institutions Other items (net) Net foreign assets Monetary Survey Broad money Narrow money Quasi-money Net domestic assets Domestic credit Credit to public sector of which : Credit to central government Credit to private sector Other items(net) Net foreign assets Reserve money Broad money Net domestic assets Domestic credit Credit to public sector Credit to private sector Net foreign assets Memorandum items Velocity Multiplier Private credit (in percent of GDP) GDP at market prices (in billions of Nepalese rupees) Mar 2014 Proj. (In billions of Nepalese rupees, end-period) (Twelve-month percent change) Source: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Prior to July 2010, broad money survey consists of central bank and commercial banks only. After July 2010, broad money survey includes development banks and finance companies as well. Page 24 Table 4. Nepal: Balance of Payments, 2010/11–2018/19 Proj. Current account Current account (excluding official transfers) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Services (net) Receipts Of which : tourism Payments Income Credit Debit Current transfers Credit, of which: General government Workers' remittances Debit Capital account Financial account Direct investment Portfolio investment Other investment (net) MT debt (net) Other (net) Errors and omissions Overall balance Financing Change in reserve assets (- =increase) Use of IMF resources (net) IMF Disbursements IMF Repayment Memorandum items Current account (in percent of GDP) Current account, excl. grants (in percent of GDP) Trade balance (in percent of GDP) Exports (in percent of GDP) Imports (in percent of GDP) Exports (y/y percent change) Imports (y/y percent change) Remittances (in percent of GDP) Remittances (y/y percent change) In months of prospective GNFS imports As a share of broad money (in percent) Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Total external debt (in percent of GDP) Debt service (in percent of current account receipts) Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) (in million US dollars) Page 25 Table 5. Nepal: Macroeconomic Framework, 2010/11–2018/19 1/ 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 Proj. Output and prices (annual percent change) Real GDP CPI (period average) CPI (end of period) Nonfood CPI (end of period) Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Expenditure Expenses Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Net lending/borrowing Net acquisition of financial assets Net incurrence of liabilities Foreign Domestic Money and credit (annual percent change) Broad money Domestic credit Private sector credit Velocity Saving and Investment (in percent of nominal GDP) Gross investment Private Central government Gross national saving Private Central government Balance of Payments Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Trade balance (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Exports value growth (y/y percent change) Imports value growth (y/y percent change) Workers' remittances (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) In months of prospective GNFS imports Memorandum items Public debt (in percent of GDP) GDP at market prices (in billions of Nepalese rupees) GDP at market prices (in billions of U.S. dollars) Exchange rate (NRs/US$; period average) Real effective exchange rate (eop, y/y percent change) Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Fiscal year ends in mid-July. Page 26 Table 6. Nepal: Commercial Banks’ FSIs, 2006–2013 Capital adequacy Capital fund to risk weighted assets Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets Asset quality NPLs to total loans Loan loss provision to total loans Earnings and profitability Return on equity (ROE) 1/ Return on assets (ROA) 1/ Interest income to gross income Non-interest expenditures to gross income Employees expenses to non-interest expenditures Liquidity Liquid assets to total assets Liquid assets to demand and savings deposits Liquid assets to total deposits Exposure to real estate (in percent) Share of real estate and housing loans Share of loans collateralized by land and buildings 1/ Excluding state-owned banks. Page 27 Table 7. Nepal: Millennium Development Goals Targets Indicators Earliest Most recent Target Status of Progress Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Target: Halve between 1990 and 2015, Proportion of population below the national poverty line (percent) 1/ 55(95) 25.2(11) Achieved E P the proportion of people living below the poverty line Target: Halve by 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education Target: Ensuring that by 2015, children everywhere will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women Target: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005, and to all levels of education by 2015 Goal 4: Reduce child morality Target: Reduce by two-thirds between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate Goal 5: Improve maternal health Target: Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases Target: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS Proportion of population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (percent) 49(90) 22.5(10) Achieved Net primary enrollment ratio (percent) Reaching last grade Literacy rate of 14-24 age Ratio of girls to boys in primary education (percent) Ratio of girls to boys in secondary education (percent) Ratio of females to males in tertiary institutes (percent) Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 births) Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months) Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births) Births attended by skilled health personnel (percent) 64(90) 38(90) 49.6(90) 93.7(10) 77.9(10) 86.5(10) 56(90) 43(90) 32(90) 162(90) 108(90) 108(90) 850(90) 7(90) 99(11) 99(10) 63(10) 54(11) 46(11) 46(11) 229(08) 36(11) Likely Possible Possible Achieved Achieved Unlikely Unlikely Unlikely Likely Likely Unlikely HIV prevalence among population aged 15-24 years (percent) 0.29(90) 0.3(11) Achieved Target: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of malaria and other major diseases Annual parasite incidence of malaria per 100,000 people Prevalence rate of tuberculosis cases per 100,000 people Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability Target: Halve between 1990 and 2015, sustainable access to safe drinking water and sanitation Proportion of population with access to an improved drinking water source (percent) Proportion of population with access to improved sanitation (percent) Source: World Bank, Nepal Development Update (April, 2013) 119(90) 460(90) 16(10) 238(11) Halt and reverse Achieved Likely 46(90) 6(90) 80(08) 43(08) Achieved Unlikely I T E R T I E T R Y F U D Page 28 Annex I. Risk Assessment Matrix Source DOMESTC RISKS Financial sector distress A credit and asset price bubble could re-emerge if excess liquidity is translated into higher credit growth. Alternatively, conditions in the real estate market could deteriorate. Political instability Political stalemate and infighting, even in the aftermath of the Constituent Assembly election, could undermine confidence and delay economic reforms. Likelihood Impact Policy Response to Minimize Impact Medium Medium/High Move to pro-active and risk-based supervision and exercise corrective and sanctioning powers more forcefully, and earlier. Increase resources for supervision. Medium Low/Medium Preserve fiscal and external policy space. Decisive reform push and increase in public investment (upside) Economic reforms and a boost in public investment in critical infrastructure bolster confidence and accelerate private investment and growth. Low High EXTERNAL RISKS Slower-than-projected recovery in India Prolonged slow growth in India could reduce FDI and, to some extent, exports and remittances. Protracted period of slower growth in emerging economies. An economic slowdown in countries (Persian Gulf countries, Malaysia) hosting Nepali overseas workers could weaken remittance inflows. This would reduce demand and growth; tighten liquidity and expose weaknesses in the financial system; and reduce government revenues due to slower import growth. Medium Low Accelerate structural reforms to improve the investment climate and boost public investment. High Medium/High Preserve fiscal and external policy space to cope with adverse shock in the short term. In the longer term, boost public investment, and pursue structural reforms to improve the investment climate to reduce dependency on remittances. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 29 STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2014 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—INFORMATIONAL ANNEX Asia and Pacific Department Prepared By CONTENTS FUND RELATIONS ________________________________________________________________________ 2 RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP __________________________________________ 5 RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ________________________________ 11 STATISTICAL ISSUES ____________________________________________________________________ 13 June 17, 2014 Page 30 FUND RELATIONS (As of April 30, 2014) I. Membership Status: Joined 9/06/61; Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on May 30, 1994. II. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund III. SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million SDR Million RCF Loans ECF arrangements V. Financial Arrangements: (In SDR Million) SDR Million Percent Quota Percent Allocation Percent Allocation Expiration Date Amount Approved Amount Drawn VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: (in millions of SDRs; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Charges/interest Total Forthcoming Exchange Rate Arrangement In February 1993, Nepal unified its exchange rate and eliminated the multiple currency practice associated with the previous dual exchange rate arrangement. In October 1997, the exchange INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Type Approval Date ECF ECF SAF Page 31 arrangement of Nepal was reclassified as that pegged to a single currency unit from pegged to a currency composite. The Nepalese rupee is pegged to the Indian rupee at a rate of 1.6. Currently, all merchandise imports (except for a few goods restricted for security or related reasons) are freely available through an open general license system, with foreign exchange provided through the banking system at the market exchange rate. As of March, 2014, the exchange rate for the Nepalese rupee (Nr) was US$1=Nrs. 97.88. The restriction on quantitative limits on foreign exchange for leisure travel was removed in early 2011. The Industrial Enterprises Act places a 75 percent limit on the conversion and transfer to foreign currency of salaries of non-residents from countries where convertible currency is in circulation. Since the limit applies to amounts that may be less than net salaries, it gives rise to an exchange restriction under Article VIII. Safeguards Assessments A safeguards assessment of the NRB was concluded in May 2011. The assessment noted that the external audit mechanism needed improvement, since the audit procedures did not meet international standards. Also, the NRB's financial reporting would be strengthened by resolving the many qualifications raised by the external auditors each year. 2012 Article IV Consultation The Executive Board discussed the staff report for the 2012 Article IV consultation (IMF Country Report No. 12/ 326) on November 16, 2012. Consultations with Nepal are held on the standard 12 month Article IV consultation cycle. Technical Assistance Since 2010 Purpose MCM Monetary Policy/Operations FAD Monetary Policy Operations and Enhancing Banking Supervision Bank Supervision and Crisis Management Conduct Bank Diagnostics Banking Supervision and Regulation Migration to GFSM 2001 Exchange Rate and Capital Account Liberalization Tax and Customs Administration Reforms/Modernization Follow up on the LTO and Customs Administration Reform PFM Stocktake Capacity Building Workshop Revenue Administration Extension of LT Treasury Advisor Long Term Revenue Administration Side trip of LT Advisor to Kailali, Kanchanpur Year Continuous 2006–12 2009–10 2011–13 Page 32 LEG STA Side trips to Bhairwah and Palpa: implementation of TSA Side trip to Gorkha, Tanahu and Kaski Treasury Roadmap Visiting district Lomjun-discussions with the DTCO's and staffs relating to TSA progress Visiting districts Pokhara, Kasi, Tanahu, and Sindhupal Chowk Implementation of a Large Tax Payer Unit Review of Tax Policy and VAT Administration Public Financial Management Pension reform AML/CFT National Strategy Work-at-Home Assignment Bank Resolution AML/CFT Legal Drafting Mission AML/CFT Structures and Tools Balance of Payments Statistics Monetary Statistics National Accounts 2010, 2011, 2014 2012, 2013, 2014 2012, 2013, 2014 2010, 2012, 2014 2011, 2014 2012, 2014 Resident Representative Mr. Thomas Richardson has been the Senior Resident Representative since August 6, 2012. He is based in New Delhi. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 33 RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP (As of April 10, 2014) A. Partnership in Nepal's Development Strategy Nepal has achieved remarkable progress over the last years. The country managed to halve the percentage of people living on less than $1.25 a day in only seven years, from 53 percent in 2003/2004 to 25 percent in 2010/2011. Several social indicators in education, health and gender have also improved. In addition, since the end of the civil war in 2006, Nepal has successfully transitioned away from being a post-conflict country and former combatants have been integrated into the country’s armed forces. While the country’s political transition – notably the drafting of a new constitution – is taking longer than expected, the November 2013 elections, which resulted in a peaceful transfer in power, were an important step toward the formation of an inclusive and democratic state. To build on this progress, Nepal needs to take advantage of its economic potential and put in place the prerequisites that will provide faster, sustained and inclusive growth. While the political process remains intricate (understandably so given Nepal’s relatively short experience with democratic governance), the country urgently needs to pay greater attention to the economy. Remarkably, Nepal’s economy grew steadily even during the height of conflict and economic management remained prudent, resulting in a budget surplus in 2013. Yet growth levels are too low to allow Nepal to continue its past progress and relegate poverty to history. Current growth relies heavily on remittances supporting consumption and growth in basic services with low growth potential. To move to a higher growth trajectory, Nepal will have to remove bottlenecks to private and public investment in key growth sectors. The most vivid example of Nepal’s economic potential is hydropower. While the estimated potential for hydroelectricity generation in Nepal is 84,000 MW, of which at least half is economically viable, only 746 MW (less than 2 percent of the viable potential) is currently developed. Hydropower development could be a game changer for Nepal. Development of the sector would reduce load-shedding and provide major revenues through exporting electricity to India or even China. The World Bank Group (WBG) stands ready to support Nepal’s aspirations for increasing economic growth through increased investments in key sectors while providing support to make growth more inclusive and to help equalize opportunities across groups and communities. This constitutes a major shift in World Bank Group (WBG) support away from short-term post-conflict assistance towards establishing the foundations for increased and inclusive growth. After three consecutive interim strategies in Fiscal Years (FY) 2007, 2009 and 2011, the WBG will provide more long-term support. A new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) is being finalized and will cover four years from FY2014-2018. B. IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas Areas in which the Bank leads and there is no direct IMF involvement The areas in which the Bank leads the policy dialogue and there is no direct IMF involvement are the social sectors, infrastructure, environment, and agriculture. In education, the Bank has encouraged Nepal’s decentralization efforts to achieve more effective delivery of public services and has played a pivotal role in supporting the transfer of public schools Page 34 to community management. Along with other donors, the Bank is actively supporting Nepal’s well-formulated, ten-year primary education reform program through the ongoing School Sector Reform Project (SSRP). This Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) brings together GON and 12 development partners – of which 9 partners pool their resources with those of the GON, and 3 development partners who support the program directly. The Second Higher Education Project supports (a) enhanced quality, efficiency and relevance of higher education through a set of systemic reforms, and incentives to selected institutions; and (b) improved access for academically qualified students from disadvantaged groups in (i) higher education and (ii) higher secondary education. The objective of the Enhanced Vocational Education and Training Project is to expand the supply of skilled and employable labor by increasing access to quality training programs, and by strengthening the technical and vocational education and training system in Nepal. Under its new CPS, the WBG will shift its ongoing engagement in the education sector toward a stronger focus on equalizing access, improving quality and providing skills for jobs. In health sector, the Bank has been working closely with the government and development partners in supporting the government’s sector program since 2004 through a SWAP, similarly to its engagement in the health sector. The Second HNP and HIV/AIDS Project is assisting the Government in improving the equitable delivery of health care services, specifically by increasing access to essential health care services and their utilization by the underserved and the poor. The Community Action for Nutrition Project (Sunaula Hazar Din) aims to improve attitudes and practices known to improve nutritional outcomes of women of reproductive age and children under the age of 2. Changes in attitudes and practices would address the key risk factors for child malnutrition and create demand for nutrition related services and products. The supply of these services and products will be provided through existing public sector and donor-funded programs, the private sector and, to a limited extent, financed through the Project. To support broad-based growth, the Bank supports investments in several key infrastructure sectors. The Road Sector Development Project provides all-season road access in select hill districts. The Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program provides innovative financing by utilizing a new financing instrument (Program-for-Results), which links disbursements of funds directly to the delivery of verifiable results. It is the first Program-for-Results to be approved by the World Bank’s Board under IDA and supports the vision behind Nepal’s Bridge Policy and Strategy of 2004 to provide “safe, reliable and cost effective” bridges. The Bank is also strongly engaged in the energy sector where, however, progress continues to be slow. The Kabeli Transmission Project aims (i) to support the addition of transmission capacity to the Integrated Nepal Power System; and (ii) to provide access to electricity and cooking fuel to communities in the area of the Kabeli 132 kV transmission line. The upcoming joint IDA-IFC Kabeli- A Hydroelectric Project will add on grid generation capacity through public private investment in a peaking run-of-river hydropower project with an installed capacity of 37.6 MW. It will also assist the Investment Board of Nepal (IBN) in improving its ability to carry out its responsibilities of facilitating the development of large hydropower projects across the country in line with applicable international performance, technical, environmental and social standards. To address issues arising from rapid urbanization in Nepal, IDA also provides support to improve municipal governance, including municipal services, through the Urban Government and Development Program: Emerging Towns Project. To support rural development, the Nepal Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project aims to improve irrigated agriculture productivity and management of selected irrigation schemes, and enhance institutional capacity for integrated water resources management. At the same time, the project supports decentralization to improve service delivery by promoting grassroot-driven, INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 35 bottom-up planning and community-based management. The Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme aims to improve irrigation water delivery to, and management in, the command area. The Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Project (RAIDP) helps to improve governance and service delivery for rural infrastructure, while at the same time promoting agricultural and rural economic growth, and generating employment through direct project investments in rural transport infrastructure. After a long gap, the Bank re-engaged in the agriculture sector through the Agriculture Commercialization and Trade Project. It aims to improve the competitiveness of smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains and 25 districts supported by the project. To address the food insecurity issues, a Social Safety Net Project is under implementation. It addresses the short and medium term implications of the global food crisis for the country by strengthening the agricultural production and safety net mechanisms on a broad scale. The objective is to ensure access to food and basic needs for vulnerable households in the short term in food insecure districts. Recognizing that Nepal’s development agenda is closely intertwined with peace building, a Peace Support Project is under implementation. The project aims to contribute to the peace process by providing interim cash transfers and services to conflict-affected groups. While many of the Bank’s investment/sector operations mentioned above also support social inclusion, a more direct initiative in this area that received Bank support is the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF). PAF channels resources to the poorest groups in rural communities by creating infrastructure, employment and income-generating opportunities. Areas in which the Bank leads and its analysis serves as input into the IMF program The Bank takes the lead in assisting Nepal with public expenditure analysis. In addition, the Bank’s intensive dialogue and technical assistance have been supporting the reforms, including the development of a credible Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). This framework has applied since FY04 to the prioritization of the development budget to ensure efficient budget allocations for priority projects. Areas of shared responsibility The Bank and the IMF continues to provide assistance in the overall management of the country's macroeconomic aggregates. The Bank and the IMF have assisted in debt management through technical assistance, joint Debt Sustainability Analysis and policy dialogue to ensure that the overall debt stock and fiscal deficits are within reasonable limits. To sustain the impressive revenue growth, in addition, the Bank and the IMF continue to provide policy advise and technical assistance. The Bank and the IMF also work closely together on providing support to financial sector strengthening, most recently through carrying out a joint Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). WBG support to the financial sector aims to address economic risks stemming from the sector’s rapid expansion and associated distress in the banking sector. To address financial-sector vulnerabilities, the Bank has been providing technical assistance in the areas of crisis management, bank resolution and deposit insurance. A FY13 Development Policy Operation (DPO), developed closely with DFID and the IMF, helped to address some of the root causes of the sector’s difficulties. A follow-up DPO – building on the FSAP as well as a DFID-supported banking sector diagnostic – will aim to consolidate banking sector stability and pave the way for developing a more robust and inclusive financial sector. Page 36 C. World Bank Group Strategy and Lending Operations World Bank Group support to Nepal is aligned to its twin global goals—eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. A poverty “lens”, developed for the news CPS, concludes that while Nepal’s progress on poverty reduction was commendable, a significant share of the population remains clustered around the poverty line. It confirms the need for WBG support to focus on removing Nepal’s binding growth constraints to allow for higher income levels. In this context the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multi-lateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will continue to foster its ongoing collaboration to make maximum use of its joint comparative advantage. WBG efforts will be organized within two pillars. Under pillar 1, it will support increasing economic growth and competitiveness, and will focus on hydroelectric power generation, enhancing transport connectivity, and improving the business environment. Under pillar 2, the WBG will provide support to increasing inclusive growth and opportunities for shared prosperity, by enhancing the productivity of agriculture, equalizing access to health care, skills development and social protection. Cutting across these pillars, WBG activities will contribute to improving the effectiveness, efficiency and accountability of public expenditure. WBG support will be guided by the principles of balancing risks and rewards, selectivity and flexibility. In a shift from more cautious approaches taken in past strategies, the WBG will engage in larger programs that strive for nation-wide impact. Regarding selectivity, this strategy consolidates the WBG’s engagement into fewer sectors, where the Group has a comparative advantage and can leverage its financing and analytical resources for greater development impact. In addition, the WBG will maintain programming flexibility, given the politically-fragile country environment. Within each of the CPS pillars, the strategy identifies specific areas where the Bank Group can make a difference. For IDA, these include transport, energy, education/skills, health, and public expenditure management. For IFC, these include supporting hydropower, improving access to finance, facilitate new private investments and reduce the barriers of investment in priority sectors, promote tourism and support agribusiness. IDA and IFC expect to work together on hydropower development, agriculture, and improving access to finance. FY14 Lending Program: In FY14, IDA is committing US$222 million in new commitments, including the Strengthening National Rural Transport Project (U$100 million), Irrigation and Water Management Additional Financing (US$50 million) and the Third Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (US$72 million). Bank Assistance Program in Nepal : The current portfolio consists of 17 projects with net commitments of $1.5 billion, and three regional projects with net commitments of about $240 million. The average project size is $86 million, near the Bank-wide IDA average of about $87 million. Cumulative disbursements as of January 31, 2014, were $633 million (about 46 percent of net commitments) for the national and about $15million (about 6 percent of net commitments) for the regional projects. Economic and Sector Work : The World Bank Group is also engaged in analytical and knowledge dissemination exercises. It provides regular economic updates and advises the Nepalese authorities on key economic policies. It also works with partners and the government on analyzing poverty trends in Nepal. For example, with support from the U.K.’s Department for International Development and Denmark, the Bank worked closely with the Central Bureau of Statistics to complete the latest Living Standards Survey (NLSS 3), to provide core data on poverty trends and access to services. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 37 Activities of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in Nepal IFC’s committed investment portfolio in Nepal stood at $40 million as of March 4, 2014, consisting of power, transport, banking, microfinance, tourism, and trade finance lines. IFC invested in 14 projects (for $57 million in total) over the last ISN period (FY12 and FY13) and 6 projects (for around $4 million in total) in FY14 as of March 4, 2014. Most recently, IFC’s investments include hydropower investments, an airline expansion, and credit for trade financing. On the advisory services side, IFC is engaged in a range of areas including investment climate, access to finance and sustainable business advisory. Besides, there is also a pipeline of advisory projects in the PPP transaction space. IFC’s advisory services has strengthened multifold, from an active portfolio of $1.3 million in FY09 (three projects) to $12.8 million as of February 2014 (10 percent of South Asia Portfolio), across 12 projects in Nepal. Some high impact ongoing programs in the country include: Investment Climate Reform Project; enhancing access to finance through strengthening the payments system and credit bureau, and improving sustainable energy finance practices; and promoting climate resilient agriculture. A strong pipeline of projects has been developed to continue the transformative work. Some of the upcoming projects include work in the Nepal hydro sector which is a IFC/World Bank joint initiative and includes support for impact investments and sector wide adoption of E&S standards; scaling up renewable energy and SME banking programs; and development of PPP transactions in critical sectors. Going forward, IFC will seek to continue the programs aligned with the three strategic pillars of IFC’s South Asia Strategy which includes: (a) inclusive growth; (b) climate change; and (c) regional and global integration. IFC will continue to prioritize on the hydropower sector, financial sector and agribusiness. IFC’s additionality in Nepal comes through providing longer tenor financing than is available in the market, patient equity capital, crisis response products such as liquidity facilities, global and regional expertise and experience, and technical assistance to enhance areas such as corporate governance and management of environmental and social risks. IFC aims to continue to respond to client needs through facilities such as SME Venture Fund, Infraventures, transaction advice for PPPs, and risk-sharing facilities. As local currency financing is essential for companies and sectors that generate local currency revenues, including large scale infrastructure hydropower-projects, IFC plans to continue its effort in partnership with IDA, with the GON to create such instruments. IFC is supporting the Nepal Business Forum (NBF), a public private dialogue platform established by the GoN in 2010, which brings together over 40 government and private sector agencies to dialogue and review government policy and regulation towards the private sector, with the aim of improving the effectiveness, and accountability of private sector policy making, and regulatory enforcement. Given the political uncertainty and civil unrest, the NBF has been an important tool in helping the country refocus on economic growth by facilitating constructive dialogue on constraints to investment, trade and export, and finance and credit. In addition, IFC’s advisory service continues to facilitate new private investments and reduce the barriers of investment in key priority sectors including tourism, agriculture, finance, and infrastructure (especially hydropower). IFC is supporting the GoN with PPP transaction advisory to assist in evaluating its priority projects through a Memorandum of Understanding with the Investment Board of Nepal. Under this MoU, IFC will provide support to the development of feasibility studies, strategic options for particular projects, development of contract documents, as well as support and capacity building to take these projects to market. Other ongoing IDA/IFC work is laying the foundation to help Nepal transform to a climate resilient development path—consistent with poverty reduction and sustainable development goals—with financial support from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience and other climate investment funds. IFC is working with leading agribusiness firms to improve agricultural and water management practices, introduce new technologies among smallholder farmers producing rice, maize and sugarcane to help them adapt to climate change. The objective is to expand the agriculture sector in Nepal using sustainable and replicable climate smart models in order to improve farmer resilience. Page 38 Table II.1. IDA Projects (Amounts in US$million) IBRD/IDA * Total Disbursed (Active) of w hich has been repaid Total Disbursed (Closed) of w hich has been repaid Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) of w hich has been repaid Total Undisbursed (Active) Total Undisbursed (Closed) Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) Active Projects Project ID P132289 P125495 P120265 P104015 P099296 P112893 P105860 P110762 P118179 P095977 P113441 P090967 P117417 P113002 P087140 P125359 P132750 Overall Result Project Name Kali Gandaki Rehab NP: Bridges Program Support NP: Emerging Towns Project NP: Enhanced Vocational Educ & Trng NP: Irrig & Water Res Mgmt Proj NP: Kabeli Transmission Project NP: PAF II NP: Peace Support Project NP: Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Proj NP: Road Sector Development Project NP: School Sector Reform Program NP: Second Higher Education Project NP: Second HNP and HIV/AIDS Project NP: Social Safety Nets Project NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade NP:Community Actionfor Nutrition Project SNRTP IDA Cancel. Undisb. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 39 RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK Country Program The Asian Development Bank (ADB) began lending to Nepal in 1969. As of 31 December 2013, Nepal has received 167 loans/grants—128 sovereign ADF loans ($3,103.38 million), 5 non-sovereign loans ($58.64 million), and 34 ADF grants ($823.75 million) totaling $3,985.77 million. Nepal Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2013–2017, approved in October 2013 is more selective, with a bulk of the CPS resource envelope allocated to operations in energy, transport, and urban infrastructure and services, followed by agriculture and education. Five thematic priorities—gender equality and social inclusion, environmental sustainability, good governance, regional cooperation and integration, and private sector development will be mainstreamed in ADB operations. The portfolio of active sovereign ADF loans and grants as of 31 December 2013 consists of 47 loans and grants with an overall net amount of $1,553.75 million. The assistance program for 2013 comprised seven projects with a total of $330.5 million in ADF loans and $45.5 million in ADF grants. The projects include the Tanahu Hydropower Project (loan $150.0 million); Skills Development Project (grant $20.0 million); Kathmandu Valley Waste Water Management Project (loan $80.0 million); SASEC Road Connectivity Project (loan $75.0 million); Project Preparatory Facility for Energy (grant $21.0 million); and Bagmati River Basin Improvement Project (loan $25.5 million and grant $4.5 million). Technical Assistance As of 31 December 2013, ADB has approved technical assistance (TA) projects totaling $180.30 million. There are currently 24 ongoing TAs amounting to $32.8 million. 19 projects (22 loans and grants) and 6 TAs which are about 51% and 25%, respectively, of the Nepal portfolio, are currently being administered by the Nepal Resident Mission. Private Sector Operations ADB’s private sector operations in Nepal began in 1989. As of 31 December 2013, cumulative approvals in four projects amounted to $58.6 million. One of the major private sector projects is the 60-MW Khimti Hydropower project, which was approved in 1996. ADB's private sector operations will focus mainly on hydropower development, both for domestic sale and for export to India although many constraints to investment remain and further policy dialogue is required. Moving forward in the energy sector, ADB’s private sector arm will look into private sector-led investments on a case-by-case basis. ADB's Trade Finance Program (TFP) fills market gaps by providing guarantees and loans through partner banks in support of trade. TFP has done over 8,000 transactions supporting over $16 billion in trade and over 4,000 small and medium-sized enterprises since 2004. In 2013, TFP supported $4 billion in trade through over 2,000 transactions. In Nepal, the TFP works with three banks and has supported over $69 million in trade. Page 40 Sovereign Loans and Grants by the Asian Development Bank, 1968 - 2013 (as of 31 December 2013) Loans Agriculture and Natural Resources Education Energy Finance Industry and trade Public Sector Management Transport and Communication Water supply, sanitation and other municipal infrastructure and services Multisector Regional Cooperation Total Loans Grants Agriculture and Natural Resources Education Energy Finance Industry and trade Public Sector Management Transport and Communication Water supply, sanitation and other municipal infrastructure and services Multisector Regional Cooperation Total Grants Total Approved (Loan and Grant) Gross disbursements (Loans and Grants) Technical Assistance Total approved Gross disbursement INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 41 STATISTICAL ISSUES Economic and financial data are broadly adequate for surveillance, with scope for improvement especially in fiscal (external financing) data, more detailed price statistics, and the timeliness and quality of balance of payments data. Nepal provides core data to the Fund and releases data in government and central bank publications. It has been a participant in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) since May 2001. Metadata were initially posted on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board in May 2001 and last updated in January 2009. Real Sector Statistics The Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) compiles national accounts using the methodology of the SNA . Key estimates include GDP by industry (in current and constant prices) and by expenditure categories (current prices), and gross national income and savings. A 2011 STA mission revealed that on the expenditure side, no separate estimate of change in inventories is made, and inventories plus statistical discrepancy is treated as a residual, which has risen over time to more than 13 percent of GDP. This raises serious doubts over the reliability of other categories of final expenditure, particularly household final consumption and capital formation. On the activity side, while benchmark estimates are assessed to be robust, weaknesses arise due to low quality of extrapolators and lack of benchmark surveys in key areas such as construction and trade. Previous STA missions in 2005 and 2006 (with AsDB assistance) provided support to the development of quarterly national accounts (QNA) and the rebasing of the annual national accounts to 2000/01 from 1994/95. CBS is now considering rebasing national accounts to 2004/05 or 2010/11, for the reference year 2013/14 or 2014/15. Significant progress has been made compiling quarterly national accounts estimates for the period 2004/05 to 2012/13; however, these data still require extensive review and editing before publishing. It had been planned that the quarterly data would be published in March or April 2014. The lack of data which can be used to assess estimates for annual household consumption expenditure remains a major shortcoming. The CBS has launched an annual household survey that will collect data on household expenditure that could be used to improve the household expenditure estimates. High frequency indicators are generally lacking; a quarterly manufacturing production index exists but updates are not available since Q1 of 2010/11. The Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) compiles the consumer price index (CPI), with 2005/06 as base year. Survey work to revise the CPI basket is underway, expected to be completed in 2013/14, in order to produce a new CPI series by 2015/16. The new survey will include more commodities and is expected to yield a more representative basket, as the previous survey was carried out during the armed conflict, which may have affected survey responses. A core inflation series is not published, although underlying data necessary to calculate such a series appear to be available. NRB also publishes a wholesale price index (WPI), with weights based on 1999/2000 data. Broadly, the index covers agricultural commodities (49.6 percent), domestic manufactured goods (20.4 percent), and imported goods (30 percent). The CBS has received TA to update and expand the producer price Page 42 index (PPI) to include other economic sectors. Current PPI coverage is restricted to manufacturing. As well, an index of wages and salaries is compiled and published, with base year 2004/05. Government Finance Statistics Authorities began to compile fiscal data in accordance with IMF’s Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001) in 2011, an important step forward. Still the budget classification needs further improvement to exclude financing transactions from the functional classification of expenditure, make a more clear distinction between revenue and transactions in nonfinancial assets, subsidies and capital payments to enterprises, and other improvements to ensure full consistency with the GFSM 2001. Meanwhile, treasury single account (TSA) has been rolled out to all 75 districts including Kathmandu, which allows for more timely and accurate fiscal data reporting and monitoring. However, a number of fees collected outside the budget, foreign aid directly paid by donors, the operations of extrabudgetary entities and local governments are not reported in the annual budget, and there is no compilation of the government’s balance sheet in accordance with the GFSM 2001. Government finance statistics are regularly reported for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook , but not in the International Finance Statistics. Monetary and Financial Statistics Following up on the recommendations of a 2009 STA mission that NRB broaden the coverage of monthly monetary statistics to include development banks and finance companies, the NRB now compiles and publishes an expanded broad money survey, which is a significant step forward. There is room for improvement in the reporting of data on the interest rates. At present, key policy rates including t-bill, interbank, and NRB policy rates are available, but deposit and lending rates of commercial banks are not well reported, while those of development banks and finance companies are not reported at all. It may be useful to report the prime lending rate of top 5 commercial banks, as well as average deposit rates of the same, to provide a sense of the movement over time. At present, maximum and minimum rates are reported, which remain relatively fixed over time and are not very informative. Data on the NRB’s claims on other depository corporations (ODCs) are not consistent with the data on the ODCs’ liabilities to the NRB because ODCs’ liabilities include only refinance and repo credit from the NRB; separate data on the NRB’s deposits at the ODCs are currently not available and therefore are excluded from the ODCs’ liabilities to the NRB. External Sector Statistics The NRB compiles and disseminates balance of payments (BOP) statistics in conformity with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Statistics Manual ( BPM5 ). Balance of Payments statistics present several shortcomings in terms of coverage, classification, and data sources. Key shortcomings in BOP statistics are: (i) underestimation of imports, and to a lesser extent exports; (ii) significant problems in measurement of remittances; (iii) incompleteness of data on foreign grants, making it difficult to INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 43 classify current vs. capital, and official vs. private grants; (iv) absence of direct investment data; and (v) unrecorded financial flows. Nepal is a participant of the Japan Administered Account for Selected IMF Activities (JSA) project on the Improvement of External Sector Statistics-ESS (BOP, IIP, and External Debt Statistics) in the Asia and Pacific Region. Since 2012, NRB has been receiving technical assistance in the area of ESS. The 2013 STA mission has observed important progress in the implementation of recommendations of previous TA missions. Thus, for first time, the NRB has compiled a preliminary draft of the International Investment Position (IIP), resumed the compilation of external sector debt statistics, and improved the compilation of direct investment. The drafts of the IIP, EDS, and DI have been submitted to the NRB management for approval before national dissemination and submission to IMF STA. In the area of data source, the mission has continued redesigning the International Reporting System (ITRS), the main collection source for compiling BOP and IIP, and assisted the authorities in improving the surveys for collecting direct investment and trade credit data. Overall the quality of BOP data has improved with the support of IMF STA technical assistance (TA) and training of the NRB staff through ESS IMF HQ and regional courses. Page 44 Nepal—Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance (As of April 30, 2014) Date of Latest Date Observation Received Frequency Frequency Frequency of Data of of Reporting Publication Exchange rates D and M W and M W and M International reserve assets and reserve liabilities of the Monetary Authorities Reserve/base money Broad money Central bank balance sheet Consolidated balance sheet of the banking system Interest rates D and M W and M W and M Consumer price index Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of financing – general government Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of financing – central government Stocks of central government and central government-guaranteed debt A/M A/M A/M External current account balance Exports and imports of goods and services GDP/GNP Gross external debt Sep. 2013 Jul. 2013 Sep.2013 Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions. Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds. Interest rates of commercial banks are reported in the monthly monetary update, whereas official interest rates are reported weekly as well as monthly. Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing. The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments. Including currency and maturity composition. Domestic debt is reported monthly and external debt is reported on annual basis. Daily (D), weekly (W), monthly (M), quarterly (Q), annually (A), irregular (I); and not available (NA). INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 45 STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2014 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION—DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS June 17, 2014 Approved By Paul Cashin and Ranil Salgado (IMF) and Jeffrey Lewis and Ernesto May (IDA) Prepared by the staffs of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Nepal is assessed to be at low risk of debt distress compared to the previous assessment of moderate risk, mainly due to reduced estimates of the cost of a potential financial sector shock and the increase in the discount rate used. Generally prudent fiscal policy and low execution of capital spending budgets have underpinned declining levels of public debt. The baseline external public debt indicators show that external debt dynamics are broadly sound and remain resilient to standard stress tests. Efforts to raise capital investment would enhance long term growth; in this context, raising net incurrence of liabilities to around 2½ percent of GDP over the medium term would help boost domestic capacity while maintaining a stable debt profile. BACKGROUND 36 percent in 2012, and from around 60 percent a decade ago, largely reflecting prudent fiscal policy. External debt stood at 20 percent of GDP by end-2013 ($3½ billion), of which 85 percent is concessional borrowing from World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB). Japan is the largest bilateral creditor, followed by Korea, India and China. Domestic debt declined from 13½ percent of GDP in 2012 to 11½ percent by end-2013, on account of low budget execution resulting in a budget surplus in 2012/13. The total stock of public debt in Nepal declined in 2013 to 31¼ percent of GDP from The risk rating is determined using the Low Income Country Debt Sustainability Analysis (LIC-DSA) framework. Nepal’s fiscal year starts in mid-July. The thresholds are determined based on Nepal’s policy performance rating, which is “medium” according to the CPIA score. Page 46 Macroeconomic assumptions remain broadly in line with the previous DSA (Box 1). MACROECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS Key differences, reflecting developments since the previous DSA, include (i) moderately improved growth prospects, (ii) higher revenue gains over the long term, based on better-than-anticipated performance to date and in line with continued emphasis on revenue administration reforms, and (iii) a slightly stronger current account in the near and medium term, driven by higher-than-anticipated remittance growth, which is only partially offset by stronger imports. In the long term, however, the current account is expected to be slightly weaker. Real GDP growth is expected to recover from 3½ percent in 2012/13 to 4¾ percent in 2013/14, mainly driven by a recovery in agricultural output, a buoyant services sector supported by remittances, and higher public spending. The election of a new Constituent Assembly and government has reduced the degree of political uncertainty. The baseline assumes improved budget execution of capital spending compared to the previous DSA in line with authorities’ efforts in this area, as growth of remittance inflows moderates. Overall, growth in the medium and long run is projected at 4½ percent, slightly higher than 4 percent assumed previously. The external current account is projected to move from a sizeable surplus in 2013/14 to moderate deficits over the medium to long term. The exchange rate peg with the Indian rupee is assumed to remain at the current level over the projection period. Import growth is expected to moderate in line with remittances. Export growth is projected to increase only Box 1. Macroeconomic Assumptions Table Previous DSA Current DSA Current versus previous Real growth (%) Inflation (GDP deflator, %) Revenues and grants (% GDP) Grants (% GDP) Primary expenditure (% GDP) Net acquisition of non-financial assets (% GDP) Primary deficit (% GDP) Net incurrence of liabilities Net domestic financing (% GDP) Exports of G&S (y/y growth) Imports of G&S (y/y growth) Remittances (y/y growth) Current account balance (% GDP) 2012 2014 MT LT 2014 MT LT 21.1 21.7 22.5 21.4 22.9 24.0 10.9 10.2 0.9 -0.8 MT LT Note: MT stands for medium term and reflects average over the next 5 years, and LT refers to long term and generally reflcts indicators at the end of the projection period. Page 47 moderately, reflecting weak competitiveness due to significant infrastructure bottlenecks. As a consequence, the ratio of exports to GDP is expected to gradually decline over the medium term. Fiscal policy is expected to remain prudent. Enhanced revenue generation backed by tax administration reforms, augmented external grants (which, though, decline over time as a share of GDP), and moderately higher fiscal deficits would allow for higher public investment, which would increase from 3.7 percent of GDP in 2014 to 5.2 percent in 2034. Net incurrence of liabilities is projected to rise from 1¼ percent of GDP in 2013/14 to 2¼ percent over the next five years, rising gradually to 2½ percent towards the end of the DSA horizon. This path is consistent with a stable debt profile. Financing of the deficit is expected to tilt increasingly towards domestic sources (rising to 1½ percent of GDP in the long term), as public financial management improves and external loans decline relative to GDP. The grant element of foreign borrowing has increased relative to the previous DSA, mainly on account of the upward revision of the discount rate to 5 percent. The change in the discount rate, unified at 5 percent for all LIC DSAs, was made to prevent a narrowing of borrowing space for LICs due to historically low advanced economy interest rates and inflated debt burden estimates. As a result of the higher discount rate, the grant element remains in the range of 53–55 percent throughout the DSA horizon compared to 32–36 percent in the previous DSA, and one breach observed in the previous DSA (PV of external debt to exports + remittances in response to the most extreme shock) is no longer observed. Future debt disbursements are assumed to be mostly concessional IDA and ADB loans, with enhancement of total IDA assistance by at least 10 percent, triggered by the low- risk assessment. Under the baseline scenario, Nepal’s external debt indicators remain well below EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY A. Baseline indicative sustainability thresholds (Figure 1 and, Table 3b). As in the previous DSA, remittances are formally included in the analysis as inflows remain robust, and are poised to touch nearly 30 percent of GDP in 2013/14. However, debt dynamics may be susceptible to volatility in remittance flows, as captured under standard shocks, discussed below. Over the medium term, the present value (PV) of external debt stabilizes at 8 percent of GDP + remittances, 25 percent of exports + remittances, The change in risk rating from “moderate” to “low” would lead to a switch from a 45–55 percent mix of grants and loans, respectively, from IDA to 100 percent financing on standard IDA credit terms, with a roughly 10 percent increase in the level of total assistance. This has been incorporated into the projections. The ADB already provides 100 percent loan assistance. Page 48 and 50 percent of revenues. Debt service-to-exports + remittances stabilizes at 1½ percent, while the ratio of debt service to revenues stabilizes at 3¼ percent. Debt dynamics remain resilient to standard shocks. These stress tests include shocks to B. Stress Tests and Alternative Scenarios GDP growth, exports, non-debt creating flows, and a combination of these shocks, as well as a one- time 30 percent nominal depreciation shock. Under the most severe shock (to non-debt creating flows, capturing a remittance shock), the PV of debt to exports + remittances rises rapidly over the next 2 years but stays below the threshold, and thereafter declines again, while all other indicators remain well below the thresholds. Under the baseline, the ratio of public debt to GDP rises modestly by the end of the PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY projection period. The public debt-to-GDP ratio increases slightly from 31¼ percent in 2013 to 32½ percent in 2034. In PV terms, public debt to GDP declines somewhat from 25½ percent in 2013 to 23¾ percent by 2034. As a ratio of revenues and grants, the PV of public debt declines from 132 percent in 2013 to 103 percent. The composition of public debt is projected to tilt somewhat towards higher domestic debt, from 36 percent in 2013 to 40 percent of total public debt in 2034. Debt dynamics remain resilient under standard stress tests. In the context of the PV of public debt-to-GDP ratio, the most extreme shock is a 30 percent one-time depreciation in 2015, which does not lead to a breach of the threshold. Among the other stress tests, the 10 percent of GDP increase in debt creating flows shock mimics a financial sector shock leading to domestic debt- financed bank recapitalization needs. Under this shock, the PV of public debt-to-GDP ratio rises to a peak of 29 percent in 2015, again staying well below the 56 percent threshold. The financial sector shock assumed in the previous DSA, which led to sustained breaches on multiple debt indicators, is considered unlikely in view of the stress test findings in the recent assessment under the Financial Sector Assessment Program, and some progress on financial sector reforms. Contingent liabilities arise mainly from the operations of state owned enterprises (SOEs), and rising pension costs need to be addressed to head off future risks. Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) and Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) are the two biggest loss-making SOEs, on average making combined losses of 1½ percent of GDP a year, and needing frequent government bail-outs despite periodic (though not automatic) price adjustments to recover costs. In addition, A stress test conducted during the recent FSAP suggests that the recapitalization needs for the entire banking sector (public and private) from a financial sector shock in which nonperforming assets increase by 2 percentage points (implying a 50 percent increase) could amount to 4¾ percent of GDP. This test, based on updated calibration, supersedes the one conducted in the previous DSA. Key assumptions included (i) 50 percent loss of central bank foreign exchange reserves; (ii) a one-time 33 percent depreciation of the currency; (iii) an output loss of 30 percent over 4 years; and (iv) fiscal costs of bank resolution and deposit coverage of 23 percent of GDP financed through domestic and foreign debt. Page 49 NOC’s outstanding loans (arising from accumulated past losses) alone stand at nearly NR 34 billion, or 1¾ percent of GDP. NEA’s outstanding loans from the Government stood at nearly NR 69 billion (3½ percent of GDP). Other contingent liabilities of the SOE sector, including debt arrears, accumulated losses, government guaranteed debt, and unfunded liabilities to employees, amount to another 2 percent of GDP. Government guaranteed debt, mainly loans from the pension fund to NOC, is estimated at ¾ percent of GDP, and does not appear to pose a risk to debt sustainability. Civil service pension liabilities, are currently modest at 1¼ percent of GDP, rising to 1½ percent by 2025, and can be addressed through adequate parametric reforms in the medium term according to a recent IMF TA mission on pension reforms. The authorities broadly concurred with the findings and policy messages of the DSA. AUTHORITIES’ VIEWS They expressed some concern over the change in IDA assistance from a mix of loans and grants to loans only triggered by the assessment of a low risk of debt distress, and pointed out that they were being penalized for their success. With respect to improving execution of capital spending, they highlighted various measures that they intend to implement to improve the situation. These include introducing the budget a month earlier in FY2015 to speed up the release of budget appropriations for investment projects, as well as amendments to the Procurement Act, and the drafting of a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Law to enhance the budgeting and expenditure process. The DSA suggests Nepal’s risk of debt distress is low. This changes the assessment of CONCLUSION moderate risk of debt distress in the previous DSA. The moderately improved medium term growth path and the higher discount factor underlying the current DSA imply a lower PV of public debt path than the previous assessment, even with a moderate increase in the size of fiscal deficits to enable higher capital spending in the medium term. The change implies that the mix of IDA assistance to Nepal will change to 100 percent IDA loans, but the level of IDA assistance will also increase by about 10 percent since the 20 percent discount applied to grants will not apply to a fully loan-based allocation. In order to maximize the growth benefits of somewhat enhanced allocation and the space afforded by the low debt trajectory, Nepal should make efforts to improve public financial management to boost public investment, by enhancing project appraisal, streamlining the budget release process, and strengthening monitoring of capital budget execution. Page 50 Figure 1. Nepal: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2014–2034 1/ b.PV of debt-to-GDP+remittances ratio d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio a. Debt Accumulation Rate of Debt Accumulation Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP) Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale) c.PV of debt-to-exports+remittances ratio e.Debt service-to-exports+remittances ratio f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio Baseline Historical scenario Most extreme shock 1/ Threshold Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio on or before 2024. In figure b. it corresponds to a Non-debt flows shock; in c. to a Non-debt flows shock; in d. to a Non-debt flows shock; in e. to a Non-debt flows shock and in figure f. to a Non-debt flows shock Page 51 Figure 2. Nepal: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2014–2034 1/ Baseline Historical scenario Fix Primary Balance Public debt benchmark Most extreme shock 1/ PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/ Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/ Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio on or before 2024. 2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants. Page 52 I T E R T I E T R Y F U D Table 1a. Nepal: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2011–2034 Actual Estimate Projections Average Standard Deviation Average Average E P Public sector debt 1/ of which: foreign-currency denominated Change in public sector debt Identified debt-creating flows Primary deficit Revenue and grants of which: grants Primary (noninterest) expenditure Automatic debt dynamics Contribution from interest rate/growth differential of which: contribution from average real interest rate of which: contribution from real GDP growth Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation Other identified debt-creating flows Privatization receipts (negative) Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities Debt relief (HIPC and other) Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization) Residual, including asset changes Other Sustainability Indicators PV of public sector debt of which: foreign-currency denominated of which: external PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt) Gross financing need 2/ PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) of which: external 3/ Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/ Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/ Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions Real GDP growth (in percent) Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent) Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent) Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation) Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent) Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent) Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent) Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.] 2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period. 3/ Revenues excluding grants. 4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt. 5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability. Page 53 Table 1b. Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2014–2034 PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio Projections Baseline A. Alternative scenarios A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2014 A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/ B. Bound tests B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2015-2016 B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2015-2016 B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2015 B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2015 PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/ Baseline A. Alternative scenarios A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2014 A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/ B. Bound tests B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2015-2016 B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2015-2016 B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2015 B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2015 Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/ Baseline A. Alternative scenarios A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2014 A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/ B. Bound tests B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2015-2016 B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2015-2016 B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2015 B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2015 Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period. 2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants. Page 54 I T E R T I E T R Y F U D E P Table 2a. Nepal: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2011–2034 1/ Actual Historical Standard Average Deviation Projections External debt (nominal) 1/ of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) Change in external debt Identified net debt-creating flows Non-interest current account deficit Deficit in balance of goods and services Exports Imports Net current transfers (negative = inflow) of which: official Other current account flows (negative = net inflow) Net FDI (negative = inflow) Endogenous debt dynamics 2/ Contribution from nominal interest rate Contribution from real GDP growth Contribution from price and exchange rate changes Residual (3-4) 3/ of which: exceptional financing PV of external debt 4/ In percent of exports PV of PPG external debt In percent of exports In percent of government revenues Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent) PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent) PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars) Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio Key macroeconomic assumptions Real GDP growth (in percent) GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent) Effective interest rate (percent) 5/ Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent) Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent) Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent) Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP) Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/ of which: Grants of which: Concessional loans Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/ Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/ Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars) Nominal dollar GDP growth PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars) (PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent) Gross workers' remittances (Billions of US dollars) PV of PPG external debt (in percent of GDP + remittances) PV of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances) Debt service of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances) ... 131.4 Average Average Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt. 2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ (1+g)]/(1+g+ ρ +g ρ ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms. 3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes. 4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value. 5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock. 6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability. 7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief. 8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt). Page 55 Table 2b. Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2014–2034 Projections PV of debt-to-GDP+remittances ratio Baseline A. Alternative Scenarios A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2014-2034 1/ A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2014-2034 2/ B. Bound Tests B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 3/ B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 4/ B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2015 5/ PV of debt-to-exports+remittances ratio Baseline A. Alternative Scenarios A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2014-2034 1/ A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2014-2034 2/ B. Bound Tests B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 3/ B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 4/ B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2015 5/ PV of debt-to-revenue ratio Baseline A. Alternative Scenarios A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2014-2034 1/ A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2014-2034 2/ B. Bound Tests B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 3/ B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 4/ B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2015 5/ Page 56 Table 2b. Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2014–2034 (Continued) (In percent) Debt service-to-exports+remittances ratio Baseline A. Alternative Scenarios A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2014-2034 1/ A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2014-2034 2/ B. Bound Tests B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 3/ B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 4/ B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2015 5/ Debt service-to-revenue ratio Baseline A. Alternative Scenarios A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2014-2034 1 A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2014-2034 2/ B. Bound Tests B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 3/ B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2015-2016 4/ B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2015 5/ Memorandum item: Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/ Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows. 2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline. 3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels). 4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI. 5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent. 6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2. Page 57 Press Release No. 14/346 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July16, 2014 International Monetary Fund 700 19th Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Executive Board Concludes 2014 Article IV Consultation with Nepal On July 3, 2014, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Nepal. Nepal’s economy has stabilized, though growth remains low, following elections for a new Constituent Assembly which has reduced political uncertainty. Growth is projected to recover to 4¾ percent in 2013/14, from below 4 percent the year before, supported by agriculture, increased fiscal spending, and continued strong remittance inflows. Inflation moderated to 8.9 percent year on year in March 2014 after increasing by double-digits following the depreciation of the Indian rupee (to which the Nepali rupee is pegged). Remittances grew by 17.5 percent in the first eight months of 2013/14 and are set to reach nearly 30 percent of GDP in 2013/14. This has led to a sizeable current account surplus and further build-up of international reserves, which stood at $5.8 billion in March. With limited sterilization of remittance inflows, nominal interbank and treasury bill rates remain close to zero and excess reserves in the financial system persist. A debt sustainability analysis indicates that Nepal is now at a low risk of debt distress. Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. Page 58 Medium-term prospects hinge on improving the investment environment. Growth is projected to remain at around 4.5 percent, with gradual improvements in implementation of the capital expenditure and budget supporting activity as remittance growth moderates. Inflation is expected to decline in line with developments in India. Downside risks to the outlook stem from a possible weaker than expected recovery in India, and/or a slowdown in countries hosting Nepali migrant workers. Progress has been made in addressing financial sector weaknesses, with efforts to enhance supervision, consolidate the sector, and strengthen the legal framework for crisis management and bank resolution. Nonetheless, Nepal’s first-ever assessment under the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) identified significant financial sector vulnerabilities. Bank supervision remains largely compliance-based, fragmented, and under-resourced. Concerns about the reliability of financial soundness indicators remain, and stress tests suggest banking system strains if asset quality deteriorates moderately. Interconnections within the financial system and to other sectors are substantial, adding to concerns about lending practices. A largely unsupervised cooperatives sector is growing rapidly, partly fueled by directed lending policies, and poses a significant risk to the stability of the financial system. Executive Board Assessment Executive Directors welcomed Nepal’s strong fiscal and external positions and progress in raising living standards, supported by large remittance inflows. Directors noted nevertheless that economic growth remains subdued, with downside risks from a weaker-than-expected recovery in India or a slowdown in countries hosting Nepali migrant workers. In this context, Directors emphasized the need for continued sound macroeconomic management and deeper structural reforms to boost competitiveness and longer-term prospects. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summing up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm. Page 59 Directors agreed that, given a low risk of debt distress, Nepal has fiscal room to support growth, particularly by improving the execution of capital expenditure budgets and social programs. Building on the gains made in revenue administration, they recommended that additional fiscal space be created by reducing implicit subsidies to the state oil and electricity companies. More broadly, Directors encouraged further improvements to the legal and institutional framework, including the passage of a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act. Directors noted that the elevated level and volatility of liquidity in the financial system, generated by remittance inflows, call for active management by the central bank, with a view to reducing financial sector risks and improving monetary policy transmission. In this regard, Directors considered it important that the central bank be adequately equipped with government securities to mop up excess liquidity, and that cooperation with the Ministry of Finance be strengthened. They also supported the planned introduction of an interest rate corridor to improve monetary management. Directors encouraged the authorities to phase out directed lending and caps on interest spreads. Directors welcomed progress in strengthening the financial sector and stressed the need to address remaining vulnerabilities by fully implementing the recommendations from the Financial Sector Assessment Program. Key policy priorities include: further consolidating the banking sector through closure of insolvent banks and tightened licensing standards; expediting the adoption of risk-based supervision; enhancing the oversight of credit cooperatives; and improving the legal framework, particularly for bank resolution. Directors noted that further development of Nepal’s financial infrastructure would help harness the sector’s potential to support growth and reduce risks. Directors underscored that structural reforms to boost competitiveness and inclusive growth would help increase employment and reduce dependence on workers’ remittances. They encouraged the authorities to step up efforts to address infrastructure bottlenecks, improve labor relations, increase competition, and reduce the regulatory burden. Page 60 Nepal: Selected Economic Indicators, 2010/11–2014/15 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 Proj. Output and prices (annual percent change) Real GDP CPI (period average) CPI (end of period) Nonfood CPI (end of period) Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Expenditure Expenses Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Net lending/borrowing Net acquisition of financial assets Net incurrence of liabilities Foreign Domestic Money and credit (annual percent change) Broad money Domestic credit Private sector credit Velocity Saving and Investment (in percent of nominal GDP) Gross investment Private Central government Gross national saving Private Central government Balance of Payments Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Trade balance (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Exports value growth (y/y percent change) Imports value growth (y/y percent change) Workers' remittances (in millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) In months of prospective GNFS imports Memorandum items Public debt (in percent of GDP) GDP at market prices (in billions of Nepalese rupees) GDP at market prices (in billions of U.S. dollars) Exchange rate (NRs/US$; period average) Real effective exchange rate (eop, y/y percent change) Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Fiscal year ends in mid-July. Page 61 Statement by the IMF Staff Representative on Nepal July 3, 2014 This statement summarizes the main developments since the staff report was issued on June 18, 2014. This information does not alter the staff’s assessment of policy issues and the thrust of recommendations contained in the staff report. The latest available data suggest that CPI inflation in Nepal rose to 9.7 percent (year on year) in May, in large part due to weather-related food price hikes. This development broadly resonates with CPI inflation in India, consistent with the findings of staff analysis that inflation in Nepal is closely related to Indian inflation (see Box 3 in the Nepal staff report). The latest CPI inflation rate in India was 8.3 percent (year on year) in May. External sector developments are broadly in line with projections in the staff report. Growth of remittances has slowed to 14.5 percent in May (year on year, year to date). International reserves reached $6.1 billion at end-May, with reserve cover at 8.2 months of prospective imports. Reserve money growth remained broadly stable, reaching 28.4 percent in May (year on year). Excess reserves in the banking system, after declining earlier in the year, rose again to NRs 54 billion, despite efforts by Nepal Rastra Bank to mop up liquidity (mainly through reverse repo operations). Fiscal revenue continues to be buoyant, while expenditure, especially capital spending, has been slow. Revenue grew by 19.4 percent in May (year on year, year to date). Regarding expenditure, as of June 26, with less than one month left until the end of the fiscal year, capital budget execution reached 51 percent of planned spending, while recurrent spending reached 75 percent of budgeted amounts. Page 62 Statement by Abdul Ghaffour, Alternate Executive Director for Nepal and Ram Sharan Kharel, Advisor to Executive Director July 3, 2014 Context Setting 1. The 2014 Article IV Consultation and the first Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) for Nepal were undertaken at a time when political uncertainty has started to normalize with successful election for a new Constitutional Assembly (CA) in November 2013 and the formation of a new coalition government thereafter. The government and the CA are committed to promulgate constitution, complete the ongoing peace process and undertake local election within a year while making political consensus. These developments have created positive enabling environment for the authorities to advance its reform agenda and boost investment towards fostering a high, broad-based and inclusive growth while, at the same time, maintaining socio-economic stability. 2. On behalf of our Nepali authorities, we would like to thank the International Monetary Fund and World Bank team for the focused and constructive discussions on macroeconomic developments and policy issues in Nepal. The authorities acknowledge Staff’s comprehensive reports, which shed light on economic challenges and risks facing Nepal’s economy and financial sector and the appropriate policy measures to be considered. For the most part, there is broad agreement on major policy thrusts, albeit some reservations on some areas of the FSAP assessment. This statement will provide an update on recent economic development in Nepal and elaborate on selected issues mainly for emphasis and clarifications.