Consumer Prices in Nepal and India (Percent change, year on year) India: Headline CPI (y/y) Nepal: Headline CPI (y/y) Sources: Nepali authorities, Haver analytics; and IMF staff estimates. The peg to the Indian rupee serves as a transparent anchor. It continues to benefit Nepal in view of its close economic relationship with India. The level of the exchange rate remains broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 1). However, remittances skew domestic activity to non-tradables and contribute to reducing the competitiveness of agriculture and industry. Accordingly, in the staff’s view, the authorities’ focus should be on competitiveness-enhancing structural reforms to support the peg. Stepped-up efforts to install enough hydropower capacity to eliminate load shedding could give a big boost to the investment climate. Money growth should be contained to a level consistent with supporting the peg. By mid-2014, Nepal’s inflation began to decouple from that in India, reflecting the Reserve Bank of India’s increased emphasis on bringing consumer price inflation down in the context of their planned transition to flexible inflation targeting. The earthquake has exacerbated the decoupling of inflation in the two countries. Given the economic disruption caused by the earthquake and the recent unrest, some temporary increase in inflation in Nepal is inevitable and should be accommodated. However, as the economy recovers, the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) should aim to keep Nepalese inflation close to that in India to maintain competitiveness. Accordingly, efforts should be made to contain the growth of broad money in 2015/16 (Table 5). The monetary operations framework needs to be strengthened to put the NRB in a position to better control the growth of broad money . A positive first step in this respect is the creation, since the FSAP, of separate open market committees for public debt management and Dec-13 Mar-14 India: call money market: wght. avg. rate India: mSF rate India: Reverse repo India: Repo rate Nepal: interbank rate Broad Money in Nepal and India (growth, in percent) India (M3) Nepal (M2) Dec-14 Mar-15 Jun-14 Sep-14 Jun-15 Nepal and India: Policy and Call Market Interest Rates (In percent) Sources: Reserve Bank of India; Nepal Rastra Bank; and IMF staff calculations. Page 17 monetary management. Staff also welcomed the introduction of deposit auctions in August 2014. Over the past year, deposit auctions have at times contributed to the mopping up of excess liquidity. The next step would be to hold regular pre-announced deposit auctions with a view to effectively mop up excess liquidity and systematically raising short-term interest rates from current low levels, closing the gap with interbank interest rates in India. This should be supported by the NRB refining its liquidity forecasting framework building on suggestions made in the context of the FSAP and earlier MCM technical assistance missions. A key recommendation has been for the NRB to adopt an interest rate corridor to provide more systematic guidance to short-term interest rates with a view to strengthening the monetary transmission mechanism. In addition, treasury sterilization bonds could be introduced for the purpose of addressing structural excess liquidity with NRB instruments (repo/reverse repo) used for fine-tuning. The introduction of treasury sterilization bonds would also foster capital market development and make the cost of monetary tightening transparent in the budget. Consideration should also be given to phase out the NRB’s directed lending facilities as they complicate the conduct of monetary policy and are not core central bank functions; they should be gradually transferred to the budget. Authorities’ Views The authorities favored a looser monetary policy stance to promote growth. They broadly concurred with the staff’s exchange rate assessment. By virtue of the peg to the Indian rupee, India’s gains in disinflation were expected to spill over to lower inflation in Nepal. Broad money should expand by at least 15 percent to support growth. In view of market imperfections, the NRB’s directed lending facilities are needed to achieve the government’s inclusive growth objectives. They expected interest rates to rise once government spending would pick up. To regulate liquidity, the authorities were also looking at monetary operations frameworks other than the interest rate corridor. They questioned the relevance of treasury sterilization bonds in the context of a separation of public debt management and monetary management.