Background The fiscal position is solid, with public debt projected to decline to 30½ percent of GDP in 2013/14, but execution of the capital budget is sluggish. Revenue growth remained strong due to high import growth and ongoing administrative reforms in the Inland Revenue and Customs Departments. Grant inflows strengthened, mainly related to election spending. High revenue growth has financed large increases in current spending, including on salaries, wages and pensions. The authorities significantly raised the capital budget in 2013/14, even though execution remains difficult and the overall level remains low. However, capital spending is underrecorded as some transfers to local governments, accounted as expense, are used for capital formation. Staff Views Fiscal policy needs to support growth through higher public investment. Key areas with a large impact on potential growth are power generation and distribution, and transport. Investments in these areas would also likely crowd in private sector investment, as they would provide essential infrastructure for agriculture and industry. Spending on health and education has increased significantly in recent years, including with donor support. This should be continued. Care needs to be taken to monitor expenditures executed through local bodies. There is ample fiscal space to finance additional investment and social spending. There is room for further growth in revenues, even if at decreasing rates. At the same time, with public debt low, a modest expansion of fiscal deficits is affordable without endangering debt sustainability. Further space should be created by reducing or eliminating implicit subsidies to the NOC. At the same time, the sustainability of current spending will need to be ensured. This applies in particular to civil service remuneration and pensions, which, though still low, could rise substantially over the longer run. Page 14 NOC losses need to be addressed to avoid the build-up of further liabilities. Prices should be adjusted as needed to avoid recurrent losses and interruptions in supply, ideally through an automatic pricing mechanism, while protecting the poor. If some subsidies are required to this end, these should be transparently recorded. Raising public investment requires reforms, including to the budget planning and execution processes. The planned introduction of a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act (FRBM) should be used to remove obstacles to an efficient execution of the capital budget (e.g., the requirement for spending authorization from the Planning Commission even after budget approval, and no multi-year spending authorizations). Consideration should also be given to better prioritize spending within sectors, concentrating financial and personnel resources to ensure completion of key projects. Following the rollout of the TSA, further public financial management reforms to enhance cash management, and improve revenue and expenditure forecasts could also help manage capital spending. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed on the need to boost capital spending. They intend to pass the 2014/15 budget one month ahead of the beginning of the fiscal year, which should facilitate execution of the capital budget, but are also examining other obstacles to public investment, including provisions in the Procurement Act. With regard to fuel pricing, they pointed to political constraints.