The level of the exchange rate appears broadly in line with fundamentals (Box 2). However, remittances skew domestic activity to non-tradables and contribute to reducing the competitiveness of agriculture and industry. International reserves are high, by a range of measures (Text Table). Reserve coverage, after peaking in 2015/16, is projected to stabilize at around 8½ months of prospective imports in the medium term, as remittance growth is expected to moderate and investment increase gradually. The peg to the Indian rupee serves as a transparent anchor. It continues to benefit Nepal in view of its close economic relationship with India. Moreover, the recent Indian rupee depreciation has boosted Nepal’s competitiveness vis-à-vis third countries. At the current juncture an “engineered depreciation” or devaluation against the Indian rupee would in the short run likely lead to additional remittance inflows, boosting international reserves and liquidity Page 7 Box 2: Exchange Rate Assessment Nepal: Exchange Rate Assessment 1/ CGER-type analyses that take into account remittances point to an exchange rate broadly in line with fundamentals , despite high current account surpluses and continued accumulation of international reserves. The estimate under the macroeconomic balance approach suggests some undervaluation, while the external sustainability approach indicates slight overvaluation. However, data limitations and rapid structural change in the economy make these estimates unreliable, as indicated by the wide range of the results in the macroeconomic balance approach. Alternative indicators also suggest that the level of the exchange rate is broadly appropriate. With the appreciation of the Indian rupee against third currencies in the past decade, and relatively high levels of inflation, Nepal’s real effective exchange rate (REER) has broadly appreciated. However, the bilateral real exchange rate with India, Nepal’s largest trading partner, has depreciated by 6 percent over the past decade. Moreover, the recent depreciation of the Indian rupee has helped to reduce the REER as well. Macroeconomic Balance External Sustainability 1/ + (-) is over(under)valuation. Upper Lower Mean Nepal: Real Effective and Real Exchange Rate (Index: 2005=100) Nepal: Trade with India (In percent) Real effective exchange rate Bilateral real exchange rate (vis-à-vis India) Imports from India (in percent of total imports, excl. oil) Exports to India (in percent of total exports) Sources: IMF, IFS and INS database Sources: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics beyond baseline projections. It would also trigger inflationary pressures, necessitating a sharp tightening of monetary policy to lock in any competitiveness gains. This could cause additional stress in a still-weak financial system. Table: Reserve Adequacy Jul-12 Jul-11 In millions of U.S. dollars In months of prospective GNFS imports In percent of foreign currency deposts In percent of broad money In percent of reserve money Gross international reserves Change in gross international reserves Sources: Data provided by the Nepali authorities, and IMF staff estimates In millions of U.S. dollars since mid-July of prev. year In percent of reserve money at mid-July of prev. year Jul-13 Mar-14 Page 8 Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that the peg had provided stability during recent years of political turmoil. However, they pointed out that the parity had not been changed for two decades, even as India’s growth had exceeded Nepal’s by a wide margin. In this context, they were concerned about the appreciation of the REER in recent years, and Nepal’s widening trade deficit.