While poverty has been reduced significantly in recent years, Nepal’s human development indicators remain low. Further expenditures on health and education could help reduce the human effects of poverty and improve the productivity of the workforce. The expansion of telecommunications offers an opportunity to extend financial services through mobile telephony, which could transform access to finance and promote inclusion, as demonstrated in many peer countries. To generate sustained economic growth and employment opportunities, which alone can deliver lasting development, key domestic policy reforms are needed. While financial sector policies and higher public investment can contribute to support private sector investment, more comprehensive reforms are also required. Labor market reforms and improvements in the efficiency of markets through competition, e.g. in fuel distribution and goods and passenger transport, would support broader economic development. To this end, creation of a dedicated competition authority should be considered. Lastly, a one-stop shop should not only be offered for large investments, but to any investor. The NOC currently has Nrs 34 billion in debt (1¾ percent of GDP). Page 15 The exploitation of Nepal’s large hydroelectric power potential should be accelerated, especially given long lead times for projects. The expansion of power supply through projects currently underway should alleviate power shortages, but demand is expected to increase as well. In addition, power could also be exported to India, diversifying sources of foreign exchange. To this end, large-scale projects involving foreign investment to generate power and build infrastructure for power trade with India should be developed expeditiously. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the need to enhance infrastructure and remove hurdles toward more inclusive growth. They pointed out that cellular phone subscriptions now amount to 85 percent of the population, and are estimated to cover 65-70 percent of individuals. They also indicated that a few hydroelectric power projects, particularly those financed with domestic resources, have shown good execution and may offer lessons for other projects. While large projects have a higher long-term impact on output, shorter gestation projects may be more useful for kick-starting growth.