Steps have been taken to begin to address weaknesses in the legal and supervisory framework governing financial institutions highlighted by the 2014 FSAP. The 2014 FSAP stress tests suggest banking system strains if asset quality deteriorates moderately. The attached matrix (Appendix I) summarizes the limited progress made so far in implementing high-priority FSAP recommendations. Staff recommended follow through on existing policy initiatives along with additional reforms to support the stability and resilience of the financial sector: Strengthen the taskforces set up to follow up on the FSAP recommendations. Staff welcomed the various taskforces in the NRB and the GON established to follow up on FSAP recommendations. Given the large number of recommendations as well as the need for collaboration across institutions, an apex committee may be useful. That committee should be provided a mandate, technical support, suitable resources and a firm timetable. Continue to strengthen the bank supervision function. The NRB is working to complete the first cycle of risk-based supervision (RBS) on-site inspections. Off-site supervision needs Page 18 significant strengthening to complement the on-site component. As the supervisory information system (SIS) is put in place, plans to integrate the off-site and on-site functions should be developed. A program to hire, train and retain supervisory staff should be developed to provide for continuity in supervisory activities. In this regard, staff urges the NRB to revisit the staff rotation policy, which has undermined its ability to effectively supervise the financial system. Limit further forbearance. Staff welcomed the NRB’s statement that post-earthquake forbearance on asset classification and loan loss provisioning would remain limited in scope and time-bound. Extend legal upgrades to secondary legislation. While the primary legislation (BAFIA, NRB Act Amendments, Deposit and Credit Guarantee Fund Act) has benefitted from considerable TA and is pending enactment, the secondary legislation and regulations require attention. The NRB is encouraged to identify the priorities in the prudential regulations that need upgrading and begin the upgrade process. The NRB Risk Management guideline should be converted to a directive, officially introducing risk management requirements to the banking industry . The directive’s issuance will help level the playing field by officially informing the industry of the shift to risk-based supervision. Additionally, guidance should be provided as the industry transitions to IFRS. Use the results of the Special Inspections Program to prepare a diagnostic of the impact of the earthquakes on the banks. This diagnostic could be based on the results of the ongoing special inspection of 54 BFIs (representing 64 percent of the banking system) by DFID, in coordination with the World Bank and the Fund, and by performing additional diagnostics of financial institutions to determine their resilience. On this basis, a strategy should be developed to resolve unviable BFIs and address possible capital shortfalls in others. Develop an operational framework for bank resolution. Building on the relevant laws that have been submitted to Parliament, the next step in the development of an operational framework for bank resolution is to draw up implementing regulations. Formalize a system to monitor banks’ capital-raising plans. The two-year phase in period to increase the paid up capital demands diligent NRB oversight. A formal review process should be established to ensure that each BFI has internalized the obligation to increase the capital and adheres to the capital plan. Also included in this process should be a robust review of the accounting techniques used by BFIs, to minimize the potential for overstated earnings. And the NRB should establish a contingency plan that would include corrective action and administrative sanctions in the event of failure to meet required capital levels. Efforts to strengthen the Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework should continue. Staff welcomed the enactment of the Page 19 AML/CFT ordinances and Nepal’s exit from FATF’s enhanced scrutiny in June 2014. The implementation of the AML/CFT regime should be further strengthened, including through the issuance of implementing rules and the application of risk-based supervisory tools, supported by ongoing IMF TA. The ongoing safeguards assessment of the NRB will call for a strengthening of the quality of the NRB’s external audit and legal framework. A safeguards assessment mission in September 2015 found that limited progress has been made in following up on recommendations made in the context of a similar evaluation in 2011. Notable positive developments include the successful implementation of a new accounting system and improved financial reporting practices. However, several key functions lag behind and strong commitment from the NRB Board and senior management will be needed to modernize them; in particular internal audit and currency and vault operations. Priority should be given to the following: The quality of the external audit should be brought in compliance with international standards. The NRB should engage an auditor with requisite global experience and expertise in the audit of large financial institutions. The NRB's legal framework should be enhanced to further support central bank autonomy and governance. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agreed with the recommendations and requested technical assistance and training to support implementation. The Special Inspections Program would be completed by October and the NRB had asked DFID to go ahead with the preparation of the “fast diagnostic” of the impact of the earthquake on banks and insurance companies. The NRB would consider the modalities for monitoring banks’ implementation of their capital plans. It would aim to issue the Risk Management directive by February 2016.