The earthquakes exacerbated the macroeconomic policy challenge of boosting growth by raising public capital spending and private investment, while containing inflation Real GDP growth is estimated to have decelerated to 3.4 percent in 2014/15, compared to a pre-earthquake baseline forecast of 5 percent. Growth had accelerated to 5.5 percent in 2013/14 owing largely to a favorable monsoon. Average growth of 4 percent in the three previous years lagged neighboring countries. Inflation had been moderating from a high base, in line with developments in India. However, the recent acceleration, to 6.9 percent in August (y/y), widens the wedge over Indian CPI, thereby undermining Nepal’s competitiveness. Preliminary data on government spending suggests a 28 percent increase in capital spending in 2014/15. However, the financing data indicates that the budget was in surplus for the third year in a row, even as revenues fell short of the budget for the first time in several years. As a result, public debt remained on a declining path, falling to 26 percent of GDP in 2014/15, from 32 percent of GDP in 2012/13. The external position has remained strong. The current account surplus reached 5.0 percent of GDP in 2014/15, aided by a surge in remittances following the earthquake and lower oil import prices. Reserves rose to US$7.2 billion, or 33 percent of GDP, covering almost eight months of prospective imports. The effect of the earthquakes on the financial system has yet to become clear. As of July 2015, commercial and development banks had capital adequacy ratios comfortably in excess of the required minima (6 percent) and reported low non-performing loans (Table 8). Growth is expected to gradually rebound to around 5½ percent by 2016/17, as economic activity recovers from the earthquake and reconstruction gains momentum . Inflation is projected to rise to about 8½ percent over the next 12 months. Losses in agricultural production and damage to transport systems represent a large shock to the supply of agricultural products, which account for some 40 percent of the CPI basket. However, over time, as agricultural production recovers and transportation infrastructure improves, inflation pressure should ease. Stepped-up foreign aid and higher inflows of remittances will further boost liquidity pressures in the financial system, necessitating active liquidity management to avoid excess inflation relative to India. The medium-term outlook depends importantly on the authorities’ reform efforts Experience in other fragile countries shows that natural disasters can have permanent effects on potential growth. For instance, the June 2015 IMF policy paper on IMF Engagement with Countries in Post-Conflict and Fragile Situations—Stocktaking notes that fragile states tend to experience larger growth downturns in the face of shocks. This highlights the need for ambitious macroeconomic and structural policies. To illustrate this and the importance of ramping up public infrastructure spending and attracting FDI-financed mega-projects to boost medium-term growth, staff prepared two scenarios (see Table 1): The baseline scenario is an updated version of the medium-term scenario presented in the context of Nepal’s request for a disbursement under the RCF. In this scenario, following the Page 11 I T E R T I O L O E T R Y U Output and prices (annual percent change) Real GDP CPI (period average) CPI (end of period) Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants of which: tax revenue Expenditure Expenses Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Statistical discrepancy Net lending/borrowing Net financial transactions Net acquisition of financial assets Net incurrence of liabilities Foreign Domestic Balance of Payments Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars) Trade balance (in millions of U.S. dollars) Exports value growth (y/y percent change) Imports value growth (y/y percent change) Workers' remittances (in millions of U.S. dollars) Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) In months of prospective GNFS imports Excl. reconstruction- and FDI-related imports 2012/13 2013/14 Est. 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 Baseline scenario projections Reform scenario projections Memorandum items Public debt (in percent of GDP) GDP at market prices (in billions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Fiscal year ends in mid-July. E P L T w k — R f – Page 12 initial reconstruction-related, partially donor-funded rebound in activity, growth decelerates to around 4 percent over the medium term (Tables 3–7). Continued under-implementation of the budget and under-investment hold back imports thereby supporting reserves. A debt sustainability analysis conducted on the basis of this scenario in the RCF staff report (IMF Country Report 15/224) concluded that Nepal’s risk of debt distress would remain low. The reform scenario illustrates the implications of adopting staff’s policy advice. These reforms would aim to sustain the growth momentum, with an acceleration to about 6 percent by 2019/20, on sustained efforts to strengthen the government’s capital budget implementation capacity, while bringing inflation down to the neighborhood of that in India. A persistent push to develop large FDI-financed hydropower projects would lay the basis for stronger, sustained, private-sector led growth in the next decade. Construction on the large hydropower projects is projected to start in 2017/18. Insofar as these projects are highly import intensive, and FDI and donor financing do not completely cover higher import spending, the current account balance would turn to modest deficits in the medium term due to higher imports and reserves would be lower than in the baseline. External debt would remain manageable and continue to be contracted largely on highly concessional terms. Recent developments have heightened the downside risks to the baseline scenario (Table 2). Continued political instability and a continuation of the recent disruptions to economic activity and transportation and trade routes to and from the country’s southern border and the related fuel crisis could severely affect growth and inflation in this fiscal year. Another important downside risk relates to the government’s capacity to boost capital spending The baseline scenario assumes a considerable degree of under-execution of the ambitious 2015/16 budget. Nevertheless, owing also to delays in setting up the National Reconstruction Authority (NRA) which remain to be resolved, the 40 percent increase in expenditure relative to the 2014/15 budget outturn that is projected in the baseline scenario, and expected to persist through 2015/16, may not be achieved. Other downside risks pertain to remittances, and the financial sector. Authorities’ Views The authorities were more optimistic on the outlook for growth. The unrest and disturbances to trade routes were deemed to be temporary phenomena. Once stability would return, there would be confidence effects from the new constitution. The authorities were also hopeful that the measures taken to streamline procedures for government spending would pay off. Together with progress in operationalizing the NRA this was expected to underlie an important pick up in government capital and reconstruction spending following the October/November festival season. In conjunction with base effects from low growth in 2014/15, this was expected to raise growth above 5 percent in 2015/16. Page 13