The economy appears set on a gradual path of recovery. The central scenario has moderate growth and a slow decline in unemployment over the remainder of the decade. A gradual reduction in the current account surplus is also projected as domestic investment and consumption take over from net exports as the main drivers of growth. Corporate savings are high, reflected in the high current account surplus. There is scope for firms to use these savings for new investment or increased wages and hiring, which would further boost domestic demand and reduce the current account surplus. The risks to the macroeconomic outlook are mixed, but skewed to the downside. Weaker-than-expected growth in the euro area or emerging markets could slow the Dutch economy given its high dependence on exports. While the housing market seems to have turned the corner, a reversal of the recent recovery in house prices could weaken household balance sheets and dampen domestic demand. With house prices still well below their peak levels even in nominal terms, there seems little risk of overheating thus far. Fiscal risks are mixed; while a slowdown in overall growth would negatively affect revenues, a continued rebalancing of growth from external to domestic components would, other things being equal, improve the tax composition of growth, leading to stronger structural consolidation and debt reduction. The Netherlands is also receiving many refugees and economic migrants. The number of asylum applications, more than half from Syria, has been rising rapidly. Over 20,000 new asylum applications were placed in September and October alone, nearly equal to the total in the preceding 8 months of 2015. The most recent forecast is for 58,000 arrivals in each of 2015 and 2016. Even if the numbers of applicants remain at September–October levels for the final two months of the year instead of increasing further, the numbers in 2015 would be more than twice those of 2014 and nearly five times the 2013 level. Costs associated with refugees and other migrants are not known given the rapidly changing numbers of new arrivals, but they are expected to be substantial and the authorities have publicly stated that they could reach €1 billion next year As the authorities have agreed to binding spending ceilings through the end of the current government’s term, the authorities plan to increase spending as needed to accommodate the refugees and will offset this by reducing other expenditures. In the longer term, there will be demographic and growth dividends if immigrants can be effectively integrated. t o b t NLD, NFC NLD, HH DEU, NFC DEU, HH Corporate and Household Savings Sources: EC andIMF staff calculations. Page 11 The large current account surplus narrowed slightly in 2014, but surpluses will remain high over the medium term. The current account surplus is projected to narrow over the medium term, but it will remain above 8 percent of GDP the rest of this decade. In the longer term, it is expected to decline somewhat as pension fund investments (predominately placed abroad) peak and then turn negative as baby boomers retire. Also, natural gas exports will decline and the Netherlands will shift to being a net natural gas importer. The External Sector Report (ESR) assessment indicates that the external position is stronger than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings by 1–5 percent of GDP. But the assessment is particularly uncertain in the Netherlands—the current account surplus may also reflect the high corporate savings and liquidity of Netherlands-based multinationals and favorable tax treatment for corporate income in the Netherlands. The high corporate savings are likely to be used for new investment as the Dutch and global economies recover which will also tend to reduce the current account surplus (see ESR Table). The authorities broadly agree with the central scenario of a gradually closing output gap over the remainder of the decade and a slight turnaround in the current account surplus. They also agreed that the risks are mostly to the downside and are largely due to external factors. However, they see some upside potential from a strengthened recovery in the housing market.