The Dutch pension system has many virtues. The first pillar ensures a basic retirement income for all citizens and a very low rate of old-age poverty. The fully-funded, mostly defined- benefit, second pillar plans ensure a high replacement rate while pooling longevity risk. Finally, the Financial Assessment Framework ensures the soundness of these plans by requiring adjustments in contributions and benefits whenever the solvency ratio threatens to fall below full funding. However, the second pillar plans are coming under stress. They are increasingly combining the disadvantages of both defined benefit and defined contribution schemes while failing to capture many of the virtues of either. While in principle defined benefit plans, they are increasingly behaving as de facto collective defined contribution plans Preserving their solvency has necessitated frequent ad hoc adjustments in contribution rates, benefit accrual rates, indexation mechanisms, and even nominal benefit reductions. The system also entails opaque redistribution mechanisms from younger to older cohorts. As a result, the predictability that should be associated with defined benefit plans for both contributors and beneficiaries has been undermined. Furthermore, the adjustments to contributions and benefits tend to be procyclical in that they reduce disposable income at times when the economy is already weak. Finally, the absence of individual accounts, and opaque redistribution mechanisms between age cohorts make them non- transparent. This topic is discussed in greater detail in the Selected Issues paper: Reforming Occupational Pension Schemes in the Netherlands. Page 17 The government’s reform proposals to provide for more transparency, individual choice, and improve actuarial fairness across age cohorts are welcome in this context. In particular, individual accounts could improve transparency and provide greater choice. One possibility is to shift to a full defined-contribution system. This option would not preclude collective asset management by the social partners. It would also allow greater individual choice in contributions and investment options, and ensure sustainability by definition. The investment options could be constrained to protect future retirees from poor investment choices and insure them against longevity risk; the social partners could continue to negotiate terms for annuities, pension-related insurance, and investment management services collectively. The problems of procyclicality, portability, actuarial fairness in intergenerational transfers, and non-transparency would go away. Box 2. The Second Pillar of the Dutch Pension System—Recent Developments and Reform Options The second pillar of the Dutch pension system consists of about 365 pre-funded occupational funds, the total assets of which represent 160 percent of GDP. Complementing the flat rate first pillar pay-as-you-go public scheme, the funds levy tax-deductible contributions as a constant proportion of the pensionable salary and provide for most of the retirement income, in principle in the form of defined benefits accrued at a constant rate. Over the crisis, solvency ratios have deteriorated under the joint effects of an initial drop in investment returns and a protracted increase in liabilities triggered by low discount rates—prompting some funds to reduce benefits or levy catch up contributions, thus negatively affecting disposable income in pro-cyclical way. At the same time, opaque and actuarially unfair redistribution mechanisms within the schemes, notably from the young to the old, or from the poor to the rich, have remained unscathed, hence delaying debt deleveraging and the economic recovery. In this context, the government has recently submitted to Parliament a proposal for “personal pensions with risk sharing”, consisting of mandatory, individual defined contributions schemes complemented by insurance provisions aimed at pooling part of the longevity and/or financial risks, in a proportion still to be determined. There are no obvious answers to the challenges facing the Dutch pension system. However, the authorities may consider the experiences of the Australian system (mandatory individual DC schemes, instrumental in the built up of large pension savings but currently suffering from underdeveloped payout options), Swiss system (decentralized DC schemes complemented with DB features such as nationwide guarantees on investment returns and retirement incomes) discussed in the SIP, or perhaps even closer to the Dutch model, Danish pension system (mandatory DC schemes with collective management of asset portfolios) for both positive and negative lessons learned. If reforms are more limited and retain defined-benefit system elements such as predefined accrual rates, the question of actuarial fairness between age cohorts would still arise. The government proposal has a constant, proportional, but a decreasing accrual rate as retirement age approaches. We have argued for addressing intergenerational fairness issues by keeping a Funding ratio 30-year LT nominal interest rates (RHS)Source: DNB. The Netherlands: Pension Fund Funding Developments Page 18 constant accrual rate with escalating contribution rates with age. Each has its problems. The former approach would place a high premium on the youngest workers to have regular and stable employment at a stage in life when they are least likely to be in that situation. The latter has the advantage of giving younger households more disposable income to save up for down payments or build up home equity, but it might discourage the hiring of older workers. Modifications would also need to take into account the need for greater transparency, although individual accounts would facilitate this. Under any approach, transition issues will be complicated. They are technically easier to solve the closer to a defined contribution system the authorities go, but real and perceived issues of fairness will arise with any transition scheme. Administration and trading costs for pension funds seem high at roughly 50 basis points per year, particularly taking into account the very large size of the funds. The authorities and pension funds should consider the merits of the current active management strategies relative to more of a buy-and-hold approach and other strategies to reduce costs. The current pillar II system is fragmented among sectoral and corporate pension schemes, penalizing occupation mobility. Any redesign should increase rather than reduce labor market flexibility through pension portability. There are no obvious answers to the challenges facing the Dutch pension system. However, the authorities should consider the experience of the Australian system (with mandatory defined- contributions but challenges in the payout options) and Swiss system (with decentralized defined- contribution plans) for lessons learned in both positive and negative experiences. The Danish pension system may also merit consideration; it has many similarities to the Dutch model, but it also differs from it in some of the dimensions currently under consideration in the Netherlands. The authorities welcomed the staff endorsement of their principles for pension reform. In particular, they agreed that more transparency would be welcome and possibilities for tailor-made solutions or individual choice need to be explored. However, they express some reservations about allowing too much individual choice in terms of both contribution levels and investment decisions. In their view, the government and social partners needed to protect contributors from the consequences of poor investment decisions and the “myopia” revealed in the behavioral economics literature. In reforming the system to make it actuarially fair across age cohorts, they see having a flat contribution rate but a rate at which pension entitlements accrue that declines with increasing age as preferable to the staff recommendation of contributions that increase with age. Page 19