The recovery continues but remains sluggish. After contracting in Q1 2014, GDP expanded in Q2 by 0.7 percent (q/q), led by growing exports. High frequency indicators, such as PMI and industrial production, point to expansion continuing through, but at a slower pace. Exports are rising on expanding global trade, but consumption is still contracting on an annual basis as indebted households continue to save. Deleveraging pressures are expected to keep growth low at 0.8 percent this year before rising gradually to 1.2 percent in 2015, supported by rising exports and a modest recovery in housing prices. Investment is projected to remain sluggish due to weak domestic demand and reduced euro area growth. Over the medium term, headwinds from the large household debt overhang are expected to hold down growth to an average of 1.5 percent, compared to 2.3 percent during 2000-07. Progress in household deleveraging has been slow. Following a decline of 27 percent in real terms, housing prices have held steady over the last year, halting the decline in household wealth. Household leverage, however, remains high, with debt to income ratios still around 300 percent, almost double the levels in the early 2000s. The loss of housing wealth has been significant at about 60 percent of GDP, concentrated mainly among younger cohorts where nearly two-thirds of mortgages are underwater. Rising unemployment and declining inflation reflect the sizeable output gap. While the unemployment rate barely rose during the early phase of the crisis, the rate has risen to 7.2 percent In March 2014, Statistics Netherlands started reporting national accounts data in according to the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010. Under the newly adopted standard, GDP in current prices is nearly 8 percent larger than under ESA 95, mostly due to the inclusion of R&D costs in investments and new data sources. PMI (Manufacturing, SA, 3-month moving average) IIP (m-o-m, in percent) The Netherlands:HighFrequency Indicators Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund Staff calculations Denmark Ireland Netherlands Spain The Evolution of Household Debt (Percent of disposable income) Sources: OECD and Fund Staff calculations Page 6 in 2014, some 2 percentage points above its long term average. Labor slack and the large output gap (4½ percent of GDP) have pushed down core inflation close to zero, raising real interest rates and the burden of household debt. The external current account surplus now exceeds 10 percent of GDP, supported by a rising trade balance. Based on the ESR assessment, the external position is stronger than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings by 0-4 percent of GDP. Relative to the euro area, the real effective exchange rate has declined since 2005. Other country specific factors include a fully funded pension system and high savings from household deleveraging (see Box). The large surplus reflects strong external demand, especially for intermediate goods for re-exports, significant fiscal tightening, high corporate savings and depressed domestic demand. The net international investment position (NIIP) has strengthened since 2008 to nearly 40 percent of GDP, mostly due to a higher FDI, and contraction in banking sector liabilities, primarily related to unwinding correspondent banking positions. Over the medium term, the current account balance is projected to remain above its pre-crisis levels, mainly due to weak domestic demand. Structural reforms to raise productivity and progress in repairing household balance sheets and the banking system will support domestic demand and contribute to reducing external imbalances. A slower pace of fiscal consolidation and shift towards more productive investment will also help in the rebalancing. The risks to the outlook are mainly on the downside and if realized, are likely to interact, causing regional and global spillovers (see RAM). a. Geopolitical tensions and euro area weakness. An escalation of the Russia-Ukraine crisis that leads to more sanctions or higher fuel prices would hurt the Dutch economy, mainly through indirect spillovers and financial linkages with the rest of Europe. Russia is the fifth largest exporter to the Netherlands, supplying mostly crude oil and minerals. Dutch FDI in Russia is also sizeable (10 percent of GDP), mainly in the energy sector. The Netherlands is also exposed to weakness in the euro area which accounts for 60 percent of Dutch exports. Outward spillovers could occur through Dutch banks’ exposures in Germany and the United States and their links to global trade finance. The Netherlands Germany Euro area RealEffective Exchange Rate, ULC Based (2005=100) Page 7 Box 1. The Puzzle of the Netherlands’ Current Account Surplus The current account has been in surplus since 1981, reaching 10 percent of GDP in 2013 and reflects in part the Netherlands’ growing role as a global trade hub for multinationals. Over the past decade, the current account surplus has been driven by the net lending of Dutch non-financial corporations (NFCs). Corporate surpluses driven by strong profits and stagnant investment have pushed up the current account to above 10 percent of GDP, from around 4 percent of GDP in the late 1990s. This is mainly reflected in the trade balance, which reached 7½ percent of GDP over 2010-13, highlighting the Netherland’s growing importance as a global trade hub. A favorable tax environment has supported the Netherland’s role as a center for trade and FDI. The Netherlands benefits from a lower tax rate among OECD countries, with a number of tax provisions aimed at supporting trade and FDI. These include a large network of tax treaties, taxation mechanisms protecting exporters’ cash flow, advance tax rulings, and reduced taxes on intangibles. In addition, group financing has a favorable regime for intra-company dividends, interest and royalties, and protective rules on netting of profits and losses between affiliates. The accounting treatment of trade may also have contributed to the rising current account surplus. The introduction of Intra- stat reporting in 2003 removed mandatory reporting between EU countries, imposing a statistical correction for coverage and classification. Based on a sample of corporations reporting on goods, services, and current transfers, the statistical correction (reaching nearly 1 percent of GDP in 2013) may reflect the growing presence of multinationals whose recording of profits and transfers may have also helped push up the surplus. Net Lending by Sector and Current Account,percent GDP NFC FC GG HH CA 61996-20072007-2012Decomposition of NFC Savings Increases, percent GDP Value Added Compensation Net Property Income Transfers and Taxes Trade, customs Statistical discrepancy 1/ Other components BOP 2/ CAB, based on BOP Errors and omissions Notes: 1/ The statistical discrepancy reflectsthe treatment of methodology adjustment from custom-based trade to balance-of payments goods. 2/ Include trade in services, income, and current transfers. Source: DNB and IMF staff calculations. CurrentAccount Surplus and its Statistical Components (Percent of GDP) Page 8 b. A decline of house prices and low inflation. With house prices as a key driver of private consumption, an unexpected decline in house prices would further weaken household balance sheets and spending. Over the medium term, low inflation would exacerbate real household debt burden and increase the risk of disorderly deleveraging. c. Financial stress. Further weakness in housing prices or in SME loans where NPLs have reached 6 percent of total loans could spill over to banks and accelerate deleveraging. Given Dutch banks’ large wholesale funding needs, such domestic shocks could also prompt banks to reduce further cross-border exposures. d. Recovery in net wealth. On the upside, a faster pick up in house prices or lower energy prices could increase household net wealth and incomes. Authorities’ views on the economic outlook and risks The authorities saw domestic demand playing a stronger role in supporting the recovery. The recovery arrived earlier than expected, led by stabilizing housing prices and a strong pickup in transactions which are up nearly 40 percent (y/y). The authorities saw policy measures to stabilize the housing market and reforms to the tax, labor and pension systems as helping to lift confidence and activity. In particular, the reduction in pension premiums and temporary gift tax exemptions boosted disposable income which increased for the first time since 2007. On lower inflation, the authorities highlighted falling global commodity prices as driving headline prices and saw the risks of deflation as low given the continued rise in real wages. Recent ECB liquidity support measures should also support prices mainly through its impact on the exchange rate. Views differed on the drag of household debt on consumption . The authorities were generally more sanguine on the growth headwinds from household deleveraging. They highlighted studies that found that younger households had increased their savings in response to the fall in net wealth, but their overall impact on consumption was small. Others, however, noted the impact of household deleveraging extended beyond the immediate borrower and generated negative externalities by reducing labor mobility and constraining credit through lower collateral values. See for example van Es, Bonenkamp, Lanser and Ciocyte: Consumers in distress: Consumption, income and wealth, Chapter 6 in the book Road to Recovery, CPB (2014) and van Beers, Bijlsma, and Mocking, House prices and consumer savings: results based on Dutch administrative data (forthcoming, 2014). Mar-05Oct-06May-08Dec-09Jul-11Feb-13Sep-14 NLDDNK ESPIRL Dynamics of House Prices by Country (SA, 2010=100)Source: Haver Analytics.050 Z PP W K Household Debt (2013) (Percent of GDI) Source: OECD. 730Mar-00Sep-03Mar-07Sep-10Mar-14 Private Consumption House Price Index House Price Index and Consumption (Index, 2010Q1=100)Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Home mortgage debtNet wealth Net Wealth and Mortgage Debt (Percent of GDP) Sources: CPB and DNB. 70+ <30 Households with Negative Home Equity, 2011 (Percent)Sources: Statistics Netherlands (2013), Web Magazine, 22 March and Statistics Netherlands (2014), "Income and Spending", Statline, January. ...in a highly leveraged economy.The housing bubble burst...While the averagehousehold net worth is sizeable... Private consumptionis only weakly affected by movements in disposable income......but is more closely related to movements in house prices....most young households are under water. 105110115Mar-05Mar-07Mar-09Mar-11Mar-13 RealHH Consumption (2005=100) Real Net Disposable income (2005=100) Consumption and Disposable income (Index, 2005=100) Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Page 9 gg V dd dh dg pp cc cc nn oo ’ j rr “ ” “ ” “ ” j ill ill W nu nu und lli du ill du lli ill hu up upp du up rr und Page 10 Instead, the authorities saw the main risks as a slowdown in the euro area . In particular, an unanchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area would affect the Netherlands through lower external demand and its impact on domestic prices. The authorities also noted potential downside risks from geopolitical tensions, but saw these so far as moderate. If the Russia-Ukraine conflict were to escalate, spillover channels would be mainly indirect through weaker demand from the rest of the euro area and greater uncertainty. On the external current account, the authorities saw the surplus as being driven primarily by growth in multinational profits and re-exports, as well as household deleveraging and did not expect these factors to subside in the near term. They saw few signs of a significantly undervalued exchange rate as inflation pressures remain weak and real wages are rising. Nevertheless, they agreed that policies to address the household debt overhang and increase investment, especially by SMEs, would over the longer term bring down the surplus. Page 11 Figure 1. Sluggish and Uneven Recovery Figure 1. Sluggish and UnevenRecovery Germany The Netherlands France United Kingdom GDP (y-o-y percent change)Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Consumption Investment Exports Components of GDP (2008=100)Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Jan-13May-13Sep-13Jan-14May-14Sep-14 Core Non-coreSources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Consumer Price Inflation (Y-o-y percent change) Headline Structural Fiscal Balance (Percent of GDP) Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook Headline NAIRU Unemployment Rate Sources: Haver Analytics. Output Gap (Percent of potential GDP) Sources: Fund staff calculations. Afterthe great recession, Dutch economy has underperformed relative to its peers......mostly due to weak investment and private consumption. The negativeoutput gap will not close completely over the medium term. The end of labor hoarding has led to an upsurge in unemployment.Deleveraging andlarge output gap have pushed down core inflation. The significant consolidation has weighed on growth. Page 12