High household debt is at the center of the weak economy. The legacy of the housing crisis has left behind a large household debt overhang, a distorted housing market, and leveraged banks that have all contributed to depressing aggregate demand. Indebted homeowners have reduced consumption to repay debt, which in turn has held back investment demand. With their large mortgage portfolios, banks are overleveraged and vulnerable to a growth shock or a cutoff in wholesale funding. Public recapitalization Page 13 of the banks and various support of home ownership create risks for the fiscal sector. These in turn have contributed to excess savings and growing external imbalances. The burden of the large debt overhang is also unevenly distributed across generations. Aggregate household net wealth is high at 400 percent of GDP but is concentrated mainly among the older generations who benefit from high pension savings and low mortgage debt, while younger households who purchased their homes at the peak of the market, remain heavily in debt. Deleveraging pressures on these younger households, with their higher marginal propensity to consume, are a drag on personal consumption and a constraint on the economy’s ability to adjust and reallocate resources. Faster progress in repairing household balance sheets would support a more robust and sustained recovery and reduce intergenerational imbalances. Staff simulations suggest that under current house prices and deleveraging trends, it would take about 10 years before household leverage ratios return to their pre-crisis levels (even longer for a new lower “equilibrium” debt ratio). During this period, growth would remain subdued as reduced spending (higher savings) by low net wealth households more than offsets higher spending by older households (see Box 3). To facilitate an orderly adjustment, a comprehensive strategy to raise household surpluses to pay down debt (flow problem) and to alleviate debt burden among the young (stock problem), including through intergenerational transfers and more efficient workouts is needed. See for example Bijlsma (2013): Changes in Household Behavior after a Housing Wealth Shock. Baseline (inflation=1.5, GDP growth=1.5) Optimistic (inflation=2, GDP growth=2) Adverse (π=1, growth=1) Pre-recession (inflation=2.5, GDP growth=2.5) Duration of Deleveraging (Illustrative Scenarios) (mortgage debt to GDP in percent /1) Source: Haver Analytics and FundStaff calculations/1 Mortgage debt in MFIs and special purpose vehicles YoungerOlder Net wealth Home mortgage debt Housing assets Pension & financial ssets Balance Sheet of Dutch Households by Age,2011 (Percent of average gross household income by main earner's age) Source: Dutch Central Bureauof Statistics and DNB Page 14 Addressing the household debt problem among the young would lift overall spending. Policies to assist younger cohorts with a higher propensity to consume would lift overall spending and could include:  Increasing transfers between generations A temporary tax exemption for monetary gifts of up to €100,000 was introduced last year to reduce mortgage debt and was used by more than 50,000 households. Staff estimates suggest that around 0.4 percent of GDP has been transferred and likely contributed to the nascent housing recovery. Absent any extension of the measure beyond its expiration at end-December, the authorities could consider increasing the €50,000 limit for tax-free transfers, allowing gifts to all family members to be used to repay mortgage debt. To help lower income groups, individuals could be allowed to spread payments over several years up to the limit.  More reprofiling of underwater mortgages Banks have taken steps to renegotiate mortgages with distressed borrowers, but progress on reprofiling debt has been slow. Supervisors should encourage banks to remove restrictions and limits on prepayment and sequestered savings accounts to facilitate reprofiling into longer-term, amortizing mortgages. Regulatory measures, such as higher risk weights on interest-only loans, could lead to greater price differentiation in favor of traditional annuity mortgages.  Reducing the stigma of personal bankruptcy Mortgages in Dutch law are full- recourse and easily enforceable, even in personal bankruptcies. This has kept mortgage defaults very low, but limited the use of the system for insolvent borrowers. Easing restrictions on certain professions or constraints on financial services resulting from bankruptcy would encourage greater use of the system for the heavily indebted and ultimately reduce the stigma associated with bankruptcy and encourage greater use of the system for the heavily indebted. Targeting a nominal debt repayment amount rather than a percent of income could encourage work and debt repayment under probation. Greater use of out-of-court alternative dispute resolution mechanisms such as arbitration or mediation could also help avoid foreclosure and personal bankruptcy. The authorities saw the temporary tax break on monetary gifts as having contributed to a revival in the housing sector . The program was designed to be temporary to bring forward spending and was allowed to expire as part of a broader effort to scale back exceptional support to the housing market. Nevertheless, the authorities saw merit in expanding the general €50,000 exemption for tax-free transfers in order to give lower income groups more time to build up savings and benefit from the transfers. 15%20%25%IRLGRCESPPRTITAGBRFRADEUNLDBEL Expected Mortgage Default Rate by Country Source: Fitch Residential Mortgage Briefing, 2013. Page 15 Box 2. Deleveraging and Household Debt Overhang The deflation of the Dutch housing bubble has reduced the aggregate housing wealth by approximately 60 percent of GDP and impeded consumption growth While house prices generally influence consumption through changes in the net wealth of house owners, the strength of the effect depends on country specific characteristics. International comparison of the relationship between household consumption and house prices shows that the influence of house prices is particularly strong in the Netherlands. Consequently, the recent contractions of private consumption in the Netherlands can be at least in part attributed to the loss in housing wealth and the debt overhang (for details see Mrkaic (2014), House Prices, Consumption, and Household Debt Overhang in the Netherlands .) The losses in home equity have been greater among highly leveraged younger house owners than among the old. Younger households have suffered particularly large losses in home equity. They purchased houses near the peak of the market and had to absorb large price declines. In addition, due to their high leverage, their home equity declined more than that of the older house owners. The loss in house equity is equal to the percentage change in house prices times the leverage multiplier. The leverage multiplier is equal to (1-LTV) ; it grows rapidly with leverage. In 2011, the leverage multiplier for highly levered house owners below 45 years of age was approximately 12 and only 1.8 for older ones. Currently, approximately two thirds of younger households have negative housing equity. Duration of deleveraging depends on the magnitude of debt overhang and macroeconomic environment. The negative shock to the housing wealth of young house buyers, together with their low levels of financial wealth, incentivizes them to increase savings in order to rebuild their net wealth. The speed of debt overhang reduction depends on the rate of saving, income growth, inflation, and growth of house prices. A flow of funds analysis shows that deleveraging is a slow process; under the assumption of no new policies it would be a drag on consumption over the medium term. Intergenerational rebalancing could accelerate deleveraging of the young households and reduce the negative effect on their consumption. Reducing pension contributions (as described in the main text of the Staff report) could help accelerate deleveraging by giving younger generations additional resources to reduce their debt. Simulations show that, for younger cohorts, over a ten year horizon the reduction of the outstanding debt to income ratio could be accelerated by approximately fifty percentage points, should such transfers be implemented. Outstanding Mortgage Debt (in percent of annual income) With transfers No transfers 25 year old house buyer, 400 percent loan to income ratio.Source: Fund staff calculations Page 16 Despite the high share of underwater mortgages, default rates have remained low and are unlikely to rise . For these reasons, the authorities saw little need to reprofile underwater mortgages on a large scale. Banks were already encouraging heavily indebted borrowers to switch from interest-only to longer-maturity amortizing mortgages, but faced challenges given the strong tax incentives for borrowers to retain their current loan. To avoid moral hazard, they stressed that any reprofiling should be agreed with lenders on a voluntary basis. The authorities believed that the price impact of increasing risk weights to discourage interest only mortgages would likely be small and dominated by the favorable fiscal incentives under the MID. The authorities highlighted that the Dutch personal bankruptcy code now allows for a “fresh start.” The new arrangement under the Dutch Bankruptcy Act allows a bankrupt borrower the opportunity for discharge after meeting payment requirements for three years, and education and training programs are in place to support work during probation. Mortgage debt relief is also possible under the discharge. However, the track record of successful repayment is mixed, and the stigma associated with bankruptcy remains severe. Reducing pension contributions for the young could also free resources to reduce debt. Under the Dutch system where occupational pension accrual rates are equal for all participants, most younger employees contribute in excess of the present value of their pension benefits, i.e. pension benefits are back loaded. This implicitly transfers savings from the relatively poorer, young to the wealthier older cohorts. Staff simulations suggest that rebalancing pension contributions to an actuarially fair level while keeping the career- average accrual rate unchanged could shorten the duration of deleveraging for younger generations by one to three years by helping to lower debt faster and support demand. Similar to corporate equity financing, providing tax allowances for the buildup of home equity could also encourage using pension savings to pay down mortgages (see fiscal Section). The authorities noted that the recent pension reform would further lighten the burden on younger cohorts starting next year . To increase disposable income and link occupational pensions to increased life expectancy, the authorities reduced the cc Age Actuarially Fair and Current Accrual Rates (percent per year) Actuarially fair accrual rate Current accrual rate Sources:Fund Staff calculations. Calculated under the assumption of real wage growth of 2 percent per year and 4 percent annual real return on invested pension fund contributions. Page 17 Figure 2. Housing Cycle in the Netherlands Mar-05Oct-06May-08Dec-09Jul-11Feb-13Sep-14 NLD DNK ESP IRL Dynamics of House Prices by Country (SA, 2010=100)Source: Haver Analytics. Z PP W K Household Debt (2013) (Percent of GDI) Source: OECD. 730Mar-00Sep-03Mar-07Sep-10Mar-14 Private Consumption House Price Index House Price Index and Consumption (Index, 2010Q1=100)Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Home mortgage debt Net wealth Net Wealth and Mortgage Debt (Percent of GDP) Sources: CPB and DNB. 70+ <30 Households with Negative Home Equity, 2011 (Percent)Sources: Statistics Netherlands (2013), Web Magazine, 22 March and Statistics Netherlands (2014), "Income and Spending", Statline, January. ...in a highly leveraged economy.The housing bubble burst...While the averagehousehold net worth is sizeable... Private consumptionis only weakly affected by movements in disposable income......but is more closely related to movements in house prices....most young households are under water. 105110115Mar-05Mar-07Mar-09Mar-11Mar-13 RealHH Consumption (2005=100) Real Net Disposable income (2005=100) Consumption and Disposable income (Index, 2005=100) Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Page 18 annual pension accrual rate from 2.15 to 1.875 percent, starting in 2015. However, any more drastic measures such as using pension savings to pay down mortgages would need to be considered in the context of broader reforms so as to safeguard the fully funded system which has served pensioners well. Options to reduce intergenerational imbalances include adjusting accrual or contribution rates or possibly moving closer to a defined contribution system with individual accounts. Discussions on broader pension reforms are expected to start next year. B. Strengthening the Financial Sector to Support the Recovery and Reduce