The Dutch banking system is gradually emerging from its restructuring. Dutch banks are well prepared for Basel III, and continue to adjust to tightening capital and liquidity requirements (Panel 3), Retail deposits increased, as depositors moved assets from insurance savings accounts to banks’ and helped reduce banks’ reliance on wholesale funding. Banks have made steady progress towards meeting the new capital and liquidity requirements under Basel III and securing loss-absorbing capital. In early 2015 the banking sector needed to raise about €2.6 billion in core capital to comply with the Basel III rules, and €12 billion in hybrid debt instruments to comply with national supervisory requirements—mainly for higher risk-weighted requirements and the Dutch-specific leverage ratio at 4 percent. Banks were successful in issuing qualifying instruments in 2015. The three systemic banks are also gradually preparing for specific risk buffers and the minimum capital necessary to absorb losses through bail- in rules. Housing policies and housing finance are being addressed in tandem with tax reform. The authorities are reducing the maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio for mortgage loans by one percentage point per year until it reaches 100 percent in 2018, with no further plans beyond that date. The 2014 Article IV consultation urged a further and faster reduction beyond 2018. In May 2015, the Financial Stability Committee’s (FSC) recommended reducing the LTV by one percentage point a year through 2028 when it would reach 90 percent. The current policies of gradually reducing the LTVs ratios on new mortgages to 100 percent by 2018 and allowing MID only for new fully amortizing loans are steps in the right direction to mitigate housing risks. The prospective reinstatement of the higher gift tax exemption is also welcome for reducing mortgage debt. However, more could be done in housing-related policies. The Netherlands’ LTV limit is high even at 100 percent, and the recent recommendation of the FSC to continue the annual reduction in LTV limits between 2019 and 2028 to reach 90 percent should be adopted. The Netherlands is among the countries for which Financial Stability Assessments (FSA) are mandatory. The next FSA will be conducted in conjunction with the next Article IV consultation, and planning for it is well underway. Accordingly, the next Article IV consultation will have a deeper focus on financial sector issues. The FSC is composed of the DNB, and the Authority for Financial Markets (AFM). The Ministry of Finance participates in its deliberations, but it does not vote. It also receives research support by the Central Planning Bureau (CPB). Figures are not available on the likely impact of such a change on average LTV ratios; however, a substantial minority of mortgage loans are made at the maximum allowable LTV (103 percent in 2015). Page 20 A faster pace would be welcome for both LTV and MID reduction. This would ensure that households have greater financial buffers and would limit macroeconomic volatility in the event of a housing shock. This process should be complemented by an accelerated reform of social housing to make it more market oriented and other polices to promote a larger and more robust private rental market (e.g., deregulation of rents on small apartments). These policies would give younger households an alternative to premature home ownership and promote geographic labor mobility, both directly and by helping to avoid underwater mortgages. Clarifying the LTV path after 2018 sooner rather than later would also provide buyers more time to build savings and for all participants in the housing market to plan appropriately. The authorities pointed to the low level of defaults on mortgages throughout the crisis. Furthermore, they pointed to the broad set of reforms undertaken by the current government. In this context, they emphasized that the FSC advice on further reducing the LTV limit was addressed to future governments and the decision on this and any further measures should indeed be left to future governments.