The Dutch housing market suffers from numerous distortions that have contributed to the debt overhang. Compared to the rest of Europe, the Dutch private rental market is small, squeezed between an oversized social housing sector which owns nearly one in every three dwellings and strong ownership demand fueled by generous mortgage interest deductibility (MID) and other fiscal support. Full MID combined with high LTVs has also led to a buildup of long-term interest only mortgages. The authorities have undertaken a number of measures to shrink the social housing sector (SHC) and expand the rental market . They have increased rents for higher income individuals and shifted SHC rents closer to market levels. To shrink the SHC sector, improve its efficiency and governance, the authorities have also imposed a levy, and encourage the sale of dwellings into the non-regulated housing sector. The size of the SHC sector should be scaled back to focus on its social mandate and allow the development of the private rental market . Accordingly, the authorities should continue to raise taxes on SHCs, apply more rigorous and frequent means testing to determine tenants’ eligibility to social housing, and complete the shift to market- based rents. To reduce fiscal contingent risks, public support of SHCs through guarantees should be scaled back to core social tasks, and replaced with a more targeted system of direct subsidies to lower income groups. Price controls on rents should be lifted to attract private investors and help expand the private rental market. Zoning regulations should be eased to expand housing supply.... The supply of new housing has been held back by tight zoning regulations and a fragmented jurisdictional system. The authorities should relax gradually constraints on new construction by incentivizing municipalities to open land for new developments through increased shares of property tax revenues and by elevating more zoning decisions to the level of provinces and the central government. …while scaling back public support would reduce housing risks to the government. The National Mortgage Guarantee (NHG) scheme insures lenders against default and sets flat, below market premiums, independent of borrower risk, with payments almost fully backed by the government. NHG-related contingent liabilities amount to around 27 percent of GDP. Shifting to risk-based pricing and lowering the maximum guarantee threshold would reduce distortions in mortgage financing and contingent liabilities for the government. The government is also considering packaging NHG-backed mortgage bonds through the National Mortgage Institute (NHI) to attract pension funds and other nonbank investors. To avoid further contingent liabilities, the NHI should not expand fiscal risks beyond its packaging of NHG-backed bonds. Page 23 Box 3. Reforming Social Housing Corporations in the Netherlands Social housing corporations (SHCs) overlook the housing market, managing 2.4 million dwellings or 34 percent of the total stock and offering cheap housing to low and middle-income households. Social housing also accounts for nearly 80 percent of the rental sector and in big cities, such as Amsterdam and Rotterdam, more than half of all dwellings are social. About 420 SHCs dominate the rental market. Most housing corporations were established before 1930, with the oldest ones founded in the second half of the 19 th century by corporations, charitable institutions, churches, and municipalities. Housing corporations constructed 60 percent of all new dwellings in 2011, and operate their dwellings within government rent-price regulation and tenure protection in various forms. Housing corporations manage tenures through a complex scoring system for dwellings and waiting lists for tenants. On average, the waiting time for social housing in Amsterdam and The Hague is 8 and 6 years, respectively. SHCs have to be self sustaining and could be given more flexibility to sell their real estate holdings. The 1995 reform (“Brutering” or Balancing-out agreement) ended subsidies and public support to housing corporations and gave full ownership of the social housing stock to the SHCs. Ever since, SHCs fund themselves through rents and other real-estate activities. Selling dwellings also allows SHCs to realize the latent value added on their books. Additionally, SHCs rely on cross-subsidies and financial transfers among housing corporations, mainly from stronger to weaker SHCs. SHC funding also benefits from public guarantees. SHCs are incorporated as non-profit corporations under a Board of Directors, with a majority established as foundations. They are eligible for government guarantees when raising funding from the Guarantee Fund for Social Housing (WSW), and reduced prices for purchasing land from local governments. At end-2013, housing corporations had borrowed about 14 percent of GDP (€86.2 billion) from the WSW. Some SHCs were found lacking proper governance and transparency. SHC Board of Directors are self-appointed with limited supervision by public authorities. They often engage in activities beyond their core business, including risky non-real estate related investments. For example, the large losses on derivative deals by the top housing corporation in 2012 prompted the authorities to strengthen oversight and enforce more stringent reporting. NLDPOLUKFINDNMFRAIRLITASPADEU Percent of rental stock Percent of total housing Source:CECODHAS Housing Europe, Housing Europe Review, 2012 The Netherlands has the largest share of social housing among EU countries. Page 24 New risk-sharing instruments could be introduced to protect homeowners. Reliance on debt financing concentrates the risk of declining house prices on borrowers. Introducing new financing instruments, such as debt-equity swaps for underwater mortgages, equity loans for home buyers, or futures contracts to insure against idiosyncratic drops in house prices, could diversify housing risks across the economy and facilitate an orderly adjustment of household balance sheets. The authorities could explore the possibility of supporting these new risk-sharing instruments, such as by setting market standards, pricing benchmarks or offering GFI preferential treatment of such contracts. The authorities agreed on the need to gradually ease restrictions on the private rental market . This has been done mainly through increasing rents in social housing sector for higher income dwellers and by making the rent-setting mechanism less administrative and more market based. In addition, the authorities have encouraged the sale of social dwellings, including through a tax on social housing corporations. They, however, noted the difficulties in introducing changes to SHC governance through legislative measures because they are private entities. To encourage further housing developments, the authorities have also increased the share of property taxes received by municipalities from 2016 onwards. They noted that the lack of land for residential construction was not a binding constraint in the housing market given the unused land available for construction and low demand. The government’s exposure to housing risk through the NHG is set to decline . The authorities have already taken steps to reduce the maximum value of insured properties and increase the insurance premium. Since January 2014 the NHG exposure has been reduced to 90 percent of the claims. In addition, from January 2015, 15 bps of the mortgage insurance premium will be set aside to safeguard against the risk of excessive defaults. The authorities, however, cautioned against reducing further the NGH’s guarantee limit and raising its premium which could undermine the NHG’s social mandate to promote affordable housing. On new financial risk-sharing instruments, the authorities saw benefits for households to hedge risk to their most important asset but noted that this went against the push for greater simplicity in financial instruments . Over time with a firm housing recovery and stronger balance sheets, banks could consider developing such instruments to help borrowers hedge their risks. Page 25