Monetary policy stance. Growth is set to exceed trend and other indicators point to a strengthening of the labor market. With inflationary pressures starting to emerge the RBNZ has moved toward a policy of withdrawing monetary stimulus, with the clear signal that it expects to increase rates steadily by nearly 200 basis points by end-2015. This could also help to cool house price inflation. Going forward an effective monetary policy transmission would allow for a nimble Page 9 Private reporting Share of New Residential Mortgages at LVRs Greater than 80 Percent (percent) policy response should growth circumstances change. More broadly, the integrity and credibility of the RBNZ’s monetary policy framework and the free floating exchange rate will continue to play a key role in delivering macroeconomic stability and enhancing the resilience of the New Zealand economy. Macro-prudential measures. In response to house price inflation and to boost financial sector resilience the RBNZ last year took a number of prudential measures including requirements for banks to hold higher levels of capital against their high loan-to-value (LVR) housing exposure and tight limits on lending above 80 percent LVR threshold (Box 2). The result has been a sharp reduction in high LVR lending (text figure). The RBNZ has made it clear that the LVR restrictions are not intended to be permanent and could be eased or removed once housing market pressures have moderated. More generally, the available tools under the new macro-prudential policy framework should be viewed as a complement to macroeconomic and micro-prudential tools, used sparingly and with caution, and primarily with the objective of limiting the buildup of system-wide financial risk. Fiscal policy. New Zealand’s fiscal position compares well to its advanced economy peers, but the government considers it a priority to return to budget surplus to preserve its favorable standing with external creditors against the background of relatively high net foreign liabilities, and to build buffers and create fiscal space to cope with future economic shocks and deal with aging and health care cost pressures that are expected to increase over the long term. The government’s deficit reduction plan includes better targeting of social spending where it has identified sizeable inefficiencies and potential for cost savings. The cuts in spending are broad based with a ¾ percent of GDP reduction in health, ¾ percent in social security, ½ percent in education, and nearly ¾ percent in other functions from 2012 to 2016. With solid economic growth, revenue is forecast to increase by ¾ percent of GDP in the same period. Deficit reduction would also play a role in supporting monetary policy through the current cycle by making room for increases in private sector and earthquake-related reconstruction spending and thereby allowing for lower interest rates than would otherwise be the case and reducing pressure on the exchange rate. To this end, any revenue over-performance while demand pressure remains strong should be used to pay down government debt rather than being used for higher spending. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed with staff on the policy actions required—a tightening of monetary conditions, continued deficit reduction to support this, and maintaining The RBNZ, acknowledging the uncertainties, has said that the measures have reduced inflation pressures by an amount similar to a 25-50 basis point increase in the policy interest rate, and that without the measures house price inflation would be in the range of 2½ percent higher than at present. The actual functional distribution of cuts will depend on the future allocation of the budget’s operating allowances. Oct-11 Feb-12 LVR survey Oct-13 Jun-12 Oct-12 Feb-13 Jun-13 Page 10 Box 2. New Zealand’s Experience with Macro-Prudential Policies Minimum CFR Banking System Core Funding (percent of loans and advances) The banking system performed relatively well during the global financial crisis despite its strong links with volatile international capital markets. It remains sound and well positioned for the on-going recovery with overall credit picking up. Despite this positive outcome, the authorities have moved to tackle existing vulnerabilities that remain from both domestic and external sources. The micro- prudential framework has been incrementally strengthened in line with Basel III standards and a new resolution framework has been added but the RBNZ has also added more innovative macro-prudential policies to its toolkit to strengthen the resilience of the overall financial system to possible shocks. The macro-prudential policies are aimed at tackling a number of vulnerabilities. On the external side, to reduce the risk from banks’ long standing reliance on potentially volatile foreign funding, the core funding ratio has been progressively raised and specific liquidity ratios have been introduced (text figure). These have had a noticeable impact as shown by the only limited effects of recent volatility in global financial markets on the local banks. A major domestic risk to financial stability has been bank lending to the housing market. The risks are two-fold; (i) that such lending could lead to a price overshooting which if abruptly reversed could damage banks’ balance sheets; and (ii) that in such a situation, banks would need to shore up capital by cutting lending to the real economy and the ensuing credit crunch would have macroeconomic effects that raise non- performing loans. The RBNZ has recently introduced requirements for banks to hold a higher level of capital against high loan-to-value ratio (LVR) mortgage lending and tight limits on lending above the 80 percent LVR threshold. There are emerging signs that these policies may be starting to cool the housing market. High LVR lending has fallen from around 25 percent of all mortgage lending in September 2013 to 5.6 percent at the end of March 2014. National house sales dropped 11 percent between October 2013 and March 2014, with the drop in sales volumes evenly spread across regions. The RBNZ also estimates that, in the absence of LVR restrictions, annual house price inflation could have been around 2.5 percentage points higher in the year to March 2014. New Zealand’s macro-prudential policy framework has several important features:  The introduction of macro-prudential policy measures has been on a gradual and incremental basis with full industry consultation. They have also been well targeted and aimed at avoiding distortions. Unlike their use in many Asian economies, they have not been fine tuned in terms of geography or the profile of the purchaser.  The measures have been announced as being temporary to be eased when the housing market Core Funding Ratio (CFR) cools down. This has reduced the incentive for evasion and there are no signs of regulatory arbitrage or increased activity by the non-bank financial sector that could reduce the effectiveness of these measures.  These measures reinforce rather than substitute for the existing monetary and exchange rate Source: RBNZ framework. Monetary policy continues to be the primary tool in managing aggregate demand, while the macro-prudential measures focus on protecting financial stability. The measures do not aim to influence capital inflows or the level of the exchange rate. Page 11 macro-prudential measures to cool the housing market. They noted that as spare capacity has largely been exhausted it is important that inflation expectations remain anchored, and the RBNZ’s monetary policy tightening is aimed at keeping future average inflation near the 2 percent target mid-point and ensuring that the economic expansion can be sustained. They agreed that positive budget revenue surprises associated with strong economic growth should be used to pay down debt. They emphasized that while monetary policy and macro-prudential policies are complements, it is essential that each be focused on its primary objective—price stability and financial stability respectively.