A strong public sector balance sheet ultimately underpins confidence in New Zealand’s economy. In this regard, while public debt is already low (Annex III), the authorities’ planned medium-term fiscal consolidation path is broadly appropriate, envisaging an improvement of the cyclically adjusted balance by about 1/3 percent of GDP annually from 2016/17 onward over the next few years. However, in the short run, with the economy below potential and ample fiscal policy space, the authorities’ planned fiscal stimulus through automatic stabilizers and increased public investment is timely. In particular, investments to support a boost in housing supply in Auckland, and infrastructure improvements to address bottlenecks would also help ease house price inflation, and improve the productivity of the economy. This should be facilitated by the recently completed national 30-year infrastructure investment plan, which provides a strategic framework for infrastructure investment decisions. Monetary policy should focus on price stability while paying due regard to economic growth. With the below-potential growth, measures of core inflation around the lower end of the target band, and a still strong exchange rate, the RBNZ’s recent easing and its continued readiness to ease further are appropriate. Using monetary policy to ‘lean against the wind’ could be considered as part of a broader strategy to rein in financial stability risks only if financial stability risks become broad based and prudential policy is insufficient to contain them. Even in this case, the benefits would need to be weighed against the output costs and the risk of policy reversals, though further prudential and tax measures to reduce incentives to invest in housing could ease these trade-offs. Page 18 For monetary policy to be able to focus on the real economic cycle, the risks arising from further house price inflation in Auckland need to be managed through other policy measures. The underlying issue is a supply/demand mismatch. Intensifying efforts already underway to boost higher-density housing, and increase the supply of land and infrastructure in the city would be welcome, including through better local/central government coordination and measures to discourage land hoarding (which could include higher land taxes), but even then the supply response will be slow. Therefore, in the interim, to buy time, other measures can usefully be employed: Prudential measures: Housing market risks are serious, and need to be proactively addressed. While the impact of the newly introduced macroprudential and tax measures will need to be evaluated, the authorities should prepare further steps in advance, should they be needed. This could include targeted higher risk weights on housing loans, higher down payments, and a formal debt serviceability test, as deployed in other advanced economies in the Asia-Pacific region that have experienced rapid house price growth. Tax measures: The newly introduced measures to deter speculative investment are welcome, and further steps in this direction (e.g., by widening the scope within which a resale of real estate is deemed for a business purpose and the proceeds taxable) could be envisaged. In addition, the incentives for buying real estate increase when real estate investors can write off interest payments against their other taxable income. This ‘negative gearing’ encourages investment that would otherwise be loss making, and thereby acts as an amplifier of price movements in the real estate market. Ring-fencing housing losses to within real estate earnings would therefore weaken an important price driver. The financial system has markedly improved its capital and liquidity buffers since the GFC, but challenges remain. The major banks have a large proportion of their assets in residential mortgages and rely on broadly similar business models. Banks have continued to reduce their reliance on short-term offshore funding markets, resulting in a rise in the core funding ratio from 78 percent in 2010 to 86 percent in 2015, mainly through increased deposit funding. With regard to capitalization, all banks currently exceed Basel III capital requirements, with strong profitability. Stress tests indicate that even under very adverse scenarios, banks’ CET1 capital remains above the minimum requirement. Nonetheless, a reduction in collateral values and loss absorbing capital could prompt banks to rebuild buffers, leading to reduced credit provision to the economy. To improve the resilience of the sector and reduce vulnerabilities stemming from the reliance on offshore funding, it is important to continue strengthening capital buffers and moving toward more stable sources of funding. Staff welcomes the planned review of financial sector capital levels in 2016. Moreover, the planned FSAP in 2016 will also assess financial sector resilience. Even after the recent growth in size and depth, New Zealand’s capital markets remains small by international standards and the banking system continues to dominate funding for firms. Further development of both equity and bond markets, including retirement products, should remain a policy priority. Should any of the risks outlined above materialize, macroeconomic policy responses would need to be adjusted. A sharp slowdown in the economy driven by key export markets could Page 19 warrant a monetary and, if severe enough, a coordinated fiscal policy response. A severe downturn in the housing market may also call for supportive demand policies. Similarly, a period of extremely low liquidity in financial markets or an excessive risk premium required by international investors could call for both monetary and fiscal support. Authorities’ Views The authorities emphasized their commitment to reducing net debt. While low compared to other advanced economies, they felt that a small open economy like New Zealand needed particularly strong buffers and that the government has an important role to play given the economy’s net external liabilities. While keeping its fiscal strategy unchanged, the government has updated some of its short-term intentions and long-term objectives to provide scope for the fiscal position to fluctuate in response to changing economic circumstances. The intention is to reduce net debt in national definition to around 20 percent of GDP by 2020, and to within a range of 0 to 20 percent of GDP over a longer time horizon. The authorities also emphasized their efforts to enhance the efficiency of both capital and current spending, the latter through a ‘social investment’ approach which takes into account costs and benefits of social policy interventions over a 20-year horizon. The authorities were ready to let automatic stabilizers—which largely work on the revenue side—operate fully, and have announced an additional NZ$1 billion of capital spending given the pipeline of high-quality investment priorities. This could help alleviate housing market and infrastructure pressures in Auckland. The RBNZ reaffirmed its accommodative stance. While they expect interest rates to now be on hold for some time, they stand ready to ease further should circumstances warrant. They confirmed that monetary policy was focused on price stability, with due regard to output growth, but at the same time, they pointed to the limits of monetary policy in fine-tuning the economy. With regard to house price inflation, they indicated that they were strengthening their collection of data to enhance analysis of mortgage lending, and suggested that they would need to assess the impact of the most recent macroprudential and tax measures on the housing market and mortgage lending before deciding on possible additional measures. While pointing to stress tests indicating that banks can withstand a sizeable shock to house prices, the terms of trade, and economic activity, the authorities agreed on the importance of maintaining strong capital and stable sources of funding buffers.