The short-term outlook is challenging. The decline in dairy prices is still feeding through the economy, as investment and input decisions in the dairy sector continue to influence related sectors through the rest of the milk production season (until May 2016). While New Zealand’s milk Page 12 production comprises less than 5 percent of GDP, its downstream and upstream footprint is estimated to be much larger. On the investment side, the plateauing of reconstruction in Canterbury and a relatively slow pick-up in infrastructure and housing construction in Auckland imply that the contribution of investment demand to growth will be significantly reduced (Figure 1, panel 3). More broadly, New Zealand’s main trading partners, China and Australia, have slowed, putting downward pressure on demand for and prices of New Zealand’s exports. House price inflation has not given rise to a general credit boom . Credit to the private sector has accelerated recently but remains moderate at 7.1 percent in the year to November, with both housing loans and business credit growing at similar rates (Figure 2, panel 6). Going forward, house price growth is projected to moderate, as the impact of tighter macroprudential and tax measures sets in. This should lead to a slowdown in housing loans and an eventual decline of the household debt-to-disposable income ratio (Box 2). At the same time, business credit is expected to pick up further as investment accelerates in the medium term, supported by accommodative monetary policy and a recovery in domestic-currency export prices. Fiscal policy is supportive of the economy in the short term, while consolidation is projected to resume in the medium term. In 2015/16 and 2016/17, weaker revenue growth and higher public investment are expected to return the budget to deficit (of about ½ percent of GDP each year), providing significant stimulus to the economy. In the medium term, the authorities’ fiscal plans envisage significant expenditure control through improvements in the efficiency of recurrent as well as capital spending, while maintaining revenue broadly constant as a share of GDP. In 2017/18, the budget is projected to be broadly in balance, and from 2018/19 in surplus which gradually increase to about 1 percent of GDP. Net debt is forecast to decline to about 5½ percent of GDP by 2019/20. New Zealand’s economy is resilient and its financial sector sound. Business and consumer confidence indicators have recently picked up again, and consumption remains solid and net immigration strong. The flexible exchange rate provides an important buffer. The depreciation of the NZ dollar is cushioning some of the impact of dairy price declines, and supports exports of education and tourism services, which constitute around one-fifth of total exports and continue to grow rapidly, as well as manufacturing. In the agricultural sector, farmers are well-experienced and can employ a range of measures (e.g., delaying capital expenditure, using cheaper feed, reducing labor costs, culling cows) to adapt to lower prices, and banks continue to support the sector, taking a medium-term approach to borrower’s viability. 17 percent of GDP according to a BusinessNZ estimate. Page 13 Box 2. Macro-Financial Outlook and Risks The housing sector is central in assessing New Zealand’s outlook and risks, considering risks stemming from high price inflation in Auckland, high concentration of mortgage loans in banks’ asset books, and high levels of household debt. Staff’s analysis, using a model of house prices based on economic fundamentals, suggests that house prices and household debt are to moderate over the medium term, containing financial sector risks in the baseline scenario. Banking sector assets are around 180 percent of GDP,household debt is high, and much of household wealth is in housing. However, based on medium-term fundamentals, house price growth is likely to moderate, along with mortgage credit growth and the level of household debt (see also Tables 1 and 4). House Prices and Policy Rate House prices (avg. pct change) RBNZ policy rate (%; RHS) House prices. The baseline projection is for a soft landing supported by effective macroprudential measures and tax policies, with house price inflation slowing to a sustainable 3-4 percent, based on medium- term fundamentals (interest rates, working-age population, and per capita income). Household debt. Projected increases in house prices would further raise nominal household debt, but income growth should gather pace, resulting in the debt-to-disposable income ratio—which stood at 154 percent in 2014— initially rising further before falling gradually. Household interest payments. The interest payments-to-income ratio is currently at historic lows. With RBNZ policy interest rates rising in the medium term, the household interest payment burden as a share of income is projected to rise, gradually approaching historical averages. Credit to the private sector is assumed to grow as a weighted average of house price increases and business investment (broadly in line with recent historical patterns). This results in slightly slowing growth, and overall credit should remain broadly stable as a ratio of GDP. However, combined with deposits staying broadly constant as a share of GDP, this results in no significant reduction in banks’ use of wholesale funding. Sources: RBNZ and Fund Staff calculations. Household Debt (%) Household debt-to-income Interest payments-to-income (RHS) 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Nominal GDP and Private Sector Credit ‐ ) e g n h c y y ( P G i l n m o Private sector credit (y/y % change) Page 14 Banks remain well capitalized and stress tests indicate hat the sector can withstand a sizeable shock to house prices, the terms of trade, and economic activity (Box 3). They have also reduced their reliance on foreign sources of funding. Potential Growth and Output Gap Output gap (% potential output; RHS) Potential growth (y/y % change) Actual growth (y/y % change) Forecast 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Medium-term prospects remain positive. Under the baseline scenario, dairy prices are expected to stabilize going forward at the current level. While the Chinese economy as a whole is expected to slow down, New Zealand’s main exports—agricultural consumer products and tourism—should benefit from the ongoing shift to a more consumption-oriented growth model in China. Consumer demand in other Asian countries is also expected to grow along with their income levels, and net exports to benefit from the weaker exchange rate. Overall, while output growth is estimated to have slowed to 2¼ percent in 2015, slightly below potential, it is projected to recover to its estimated potential rate of 2½ percent, based on total factor productivity (TFP) and capital input growth in line with long run historical averages, and moderately declining growth of labor input consistent with the projected slowing of working age population growth (with migration fluctuating in line with historical experience). With inflation expectations consistent with the midpoint of the RBNZ’s target range of 1-3 percent, inflation is forecast to rise to within the band in 2016, as the impact of the decline in oil prices drops out, the depreciation of the NZ dollar passes through, and fiscal stimulus is adding to demand, and then gradually converge to the center of the band.