Current account. New Zealand’s persistent current account deficits and relatively high net external liabilities reflect longstanding structural saving-investment imbalances, with low household savings playing a key role (text figure). The reasons for low household savings cannot be fully explained by New Zealand’s observed fundamentals, but might be partly related to less quantifiable factors such as New Zealand’s tax, social security, and welfare systems. The deficit narrowed last year as a result of the strong terms of trade, but is expected to widen as growth in private consumption and investment remains strong. Investment related to ongoing earthquake reconstruction will also continue to add to the deficit through the forecast horizon. Reducing pressure on the exchange rate and limiting the current account deficit in a lasting way will require structural measures to address the savings-investment gap, rather than being the task of short-term macroeconomic management. Over the longer term, as reconstruction tapers off and if the Net International Investment Position (In percent of GDP) CAN US AUS NZL Long-term Projections for Net Foreign Liabilities and Current Account Deficits (As percent of GDP) Net Foreign Liabilities Long-term Projection Current Account Deficits (rhs) 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 Source: Haver Analytics. Source: SNZ; staff estimates. exchange rate overvaluation recedes, current account deficit could decline to below 4 percent of GDP, stabilizing the net foreign liability position at below 90 percent of GDP (text figure). See Annex 3 of the Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation, “Household Savings and the Current Account in New Zealand.” Household savings are structurally low. In this Annex we use a quantitative approach to why this might be the case, but much of the low savings rate is left unexplained by observable factors. The recorded decline in net foreign liabilities in recent years reflects one-off post-earthquake reinsurance payments from offshore to New Zealand. This effect is expected to unwind as these are payments are used for reconstruction spending over the forecast horizon. Page 12 Exchange rate assessment. At 86 cents to the U.S. dollar, our estimates suggest that the exchange rate is 5-15 percent stronger than would be consistent with stabilizing net foreign liabilities over the longer term (Box 3). There are several factors contributing to the current level of the exchange rate including the high terms of trade, the gap between domestic and foreign interest rates, New Zealand’s favorable growth outlook, and an appetite for relatively safe New Zealand assets. If any of these factors were to ease, in part through a faster-than-expected tightening of monetary conditions in other advanced economies, the exchange rate would likely depreciate. The government’s ongoing deficit reduction plan should also ease pressure on the exchange rate by boosting national saving. However, global liquidity could remain ample for some time, and New Zealand’s non-agricultural tradable sector will need to continue to adapt by further increasing efficiency to remain competitive. Coping with terms of trade shocks. The historically high terms of trade has been one of the key drivers of economic growth recently. Some moderation of the terms of trade is built into the baseline scenarios. Although the share of primary exports to China of New Zealand’s total exports has increased markedly since 2008 (text figure), partly related to New Zealand’s reputation for high quality dairy products relative to Chinese producers, New Zealand is still well integrated into global markets for these products which would buffer shocks that arises from weaker demand in China. The floating exchange rate will also help by depreciating when the terms of trade fall, making other tradable goods and services more competitive. The impact of a faster- than-anticipated decline in the terms of trade on nominal output would affect budget revenue more broadly. Share of Primary Exports to China (Annual total, %) Jan-00 Forestry Jan-06 Jan-08 Jan-10 Jan-12 Jan-02 Jan-04 Dairy Wool Source: RBNZ Jan-14 Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed that the persistent strength of the New Zealand dollar reflects a combination of structural savings-investment imbalances and the strength of the terms of trade, reinforced at present by the more advanced process of monetary policy normalisation in New Zealand compared to other countries. They recognize the long-standing vulnerability associated with the country’s relatively large net external debt position, and view the planned increase in public savings as the most effective policy action to manage this risk. They emphasized the key role the integrity and credibility of the monetary and fiscal policy framework and the floating exchange rate have played in delivering macroeconomic stability and enhancing the resilience of the New Zealand economy. They agreed that the New Zealand dollar appears overvalued, viewing the current level of the exchange rate as unsustainable in the long run. They expect that the currency’s current strength should dissipate if New Zealand’s export commodity prices moderate and external monetary conditions begin tightening. Page 13 Box 3. Exchange Rate Assessment REER Commodity Price Index (rescaled) Sources: RBNZ, IMF staff estimates. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Exchange Rate and Commodity Price Index (Monthly, 2000M1-2014M3) New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate remained elevated in 2013 driven by historically high prices for commodity exports. The relatively strong dollar continues to weigh on the competitiveness of export and import-competing industries. The current account deficits are projected to widen in the medium term, partly related to the post- earthquake reconstruction investment. Aside from the structural savings-investment imbalance that contributes to the persistently strong exchange rate, there are a number of short- term factors associated with its current level, including the recovery in global risk appetite and increased portfolio and official flows into New Zealand. Model-based approaches suggest that New Zealand’s real exchange rate is 5-15 percent above the level that would be consistent with medium term fundamentals. The IMF’s amended real effective exchange rate (REER) regression approach attempts to identify the policy-related (both domestic and international) drivers of the deviation of each country’s real exchange rate from its fundamentals- based fitted value. Applied to New Zealand, this yields an estimate of 13 percent overvaluation for 2013. About 9 percent of the overvaluation is due to unexplained residuals, i.e., the exchange rate gap not explained by medium term fundamentals and policy drivers. A similar approach, the current account regression, suggests that New Zealand’s current account deficits are larger than the level consistent with the medium term fundamentals by 1 percent of GDP. Given estimated trade elasticities, this would suggest an overvaluation of about 5 percent. These estimates are, however, subject to considerable uncertainty. The IMF’s external stability approach suggests that stabilizing net external liabilities in the medium term would require the current account deficit falling to about 3¾ percent of GDP. Given estimated trade elasticities, this would require the New Zealand dollar to be about 11 percent weaker than its current level. 1/ This box is based in part on preliminary results from the IMF’s External Balance Assessment (See http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/eba/data.htm). Equity and Bond Funds Net Inflows ($, million) Source: EPFR. Equity flows Bond flows Page 14