Near-term outlook. Growth is forecast to increase to about 3½ percent this year and moderate to a trend rate of 2½ percent over the medium term. Strong construction activity is expected to remain an important driver for near-term growth (text figure), although the speed of the Canterbury post-earthquake rebuild and its interaction with the wider economy are less certain. The terms of trade are projected to ease somewhat due to an assumed moderation in global dairy prices, but remain high relative to historical levels and continue to boost growth in national income. The current monetary policy stance remains well below neutral, and with leading indicators pointing to an economy that is set to grow above trend in the near-term, pressure on core inflation should follow, particularly from the construction sector (text figure). External risks. New Zealand’s growth prospects remain exposed to external developments (Box 1). In particular: Earthquake-related Investment and Reconstruction (As share of GDP) Infrastructure Non-residential Residential Source: RBNZ estimates Surveyed Capacity Measures (standardized, seasonally adjusted) Difficulty finding skilled labour Capacity utilization Source: NZIER, RBNZ.  A sharp growth slowdown in China. About two thirds of New Zealand’s exports of goods—mainly agricultural products—go to China, Australia, and other parts of Asia. A sharp slowdown in China could weaken growth prospects in the region and reduce New Zealand’s terms of trade, which would also have an adverse impact on New Zealand’s national income and overall economic activity. Past declines in commodity prices have usually been accompanied by a weakening of the exchange rate, partially buffering the impact on the economy.  Surges in global financial market volatility. An orderly exit by other advanced economies from unconventional monetary policy could have the welcome effect of weakening New Zealand’s exchange rate. However, a bumpy exit and bouts of financial market volatility could lead to widespread contagion and raise the cost of New Zealand banks’ offshore borrowing which, for a given monetary policy stance, could raise household debt servicing costs and impact overall economic activity. Page 7 Box 1. New Zealand: Risk Assessment Matrix Main Sources of Risks Potential external risks Likelihood / Direction Overall Level of Concern Expected Impact on Economy Low/Medium Medium  A sharp growth slowdown in China  Surges in global financial market volatilities  Sustained decline in commodity prices Potential domestic risks  A sharp fall in house prices High Medium Medium China and Australia are the top two destinations for New Zealand exports, leaving growth prospects vulnerable to their economic outlook. A sharp slowdown in China would affect New Zealand directly through the terms of trade and indirectly through its impact on Australia as China accounts for a large share of demand of Australia’s exports. The flexible exchange rate serves as an important buffer against the terms of trade shocks. Medium Orderly tapering would likely be beneficial for the economy and may help bring about an exchange rate depreciation. However, a bumpy exit from unconventional monetary policies and bouts of market volatility would likely raise the cost of New Zealand banks’ offshore wholesale borrowing. High As commodity exports form a substantial part of New Zealand’s total exports, a sustained decline in global commodity prices would have an adverse effect on national income and overall economic activity. The floating exchange rate would help buffer the impact. Medium to High There are underlying supply and demand factors that contributed to the high and rising house prices in New Zealand, but the risk of house price overshooting remains. A deterioration in households’ ability to service mortgage debt, possibly due to a sharp rise in unemployment, falling incomes, or very high domestic interest rates, could cause a sudden price correction, reducing consumer confidence as a large share of wealth is in housing, worsening banks’ balance sheets, and impacting overall economic activity. It is too early to gauge the full effect of the macro-prudential policies introduced last October. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Housing sector risks. By historical and international comparisons and some measures of affordability New Zealand’s house prices appear elevated (text figure). This in part reflects a limited housing stock from low housing investment in recent years and geographical constraints preventing a rapid housing supply response. With house price inflation running high, there remains the risk that expectations-driven, self-reinforcing demand dynamics and price overshooting could take hold. The government’s steps to help alleviate supply bottlenecks, measures to tighten standards for mortgage lending (paragraph 11), and an increase in mortgage rates should help ease price pressures. But a sudden price correction—possibly triggered by a shock to household incomes or See Annex 2 of the Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation, “The Housing Market in New Zealand.” Page 8 borrowing costs—could reduce consumer confidence, impact overall economic activity, and hurt banks’ balance sheets. House Price Inflation (Annual, 3-month moving average, 2000M1-2014M3 ) Auckland New Zealand Tail risks and downside scenarios. Many of the above risks are closely linked—for example a sharp slowdown in China could weaken growth prospects in Australia, triggering a broad-based fall in demand for New Zealand’s exports, and lead to a sudden decline in house, farm and commercial real estate prices. This in turn could weaken consumer demand and negatively affect banks’ balance sheets and their willingness to lend. The downside macroeconomic impact in a scenario where shocks compound each other, while difficult to model, could be large. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Sources: REINZ, RBNZ estimates. Christchurch Policy space to manage risks. The authorities have monetary and fiscal policy space to respond to shocks. The RBNZ has scope to adapt monetary conditions to help buffer against a downside scenario, and the free-floating New Zealand dollar provides an additional cushion against terms of trade and other external shocks. New Zealand’s modest public debt gives the authorities scope to delay their planned deficit reduction path in the event of a sharp deterioration in the economic outlook. The new macro -prudential policy framework improves the RBNZ’s ability to safeguard financial stability, and the bank stands ready to take additional measures if needed to guard against the risks that would arise from an unsustainable acceleration in house price inflation. As a longer term measure, policies to address housing supply constraints will continue to play an important role in containing price pressures and increasing affordability. Authorities’ views. The authorities shared staff’s assessment of the economic outlook and risks. They noted some early signs that recent policy measures to help slow house price inflation are gaining traction, and emphasized that addressing housing supply constraints is key to containing house price pressures and increasing affordability over the longer run. Nevertheless they remain keenly aware of the risks the housing market cycle poses to the financial sector and the economy in the near term. They continue to regard a sharp growth slowdown in China and a related decline in commodity prices as the main external risk to the New Zealand economy, and emphasized the role of the floating exchange rate in providing a cushion against such shocks.