While overall prospects are positive, risks are significant and tilted to the downside (Annex II). Dairy prices. A renewed decline in dairy prices could threaten some higher-cost dairy producers. While New Zealand’s dairy sector as a whole has coped with significant price swings in the past, debt in the sector is concentrated among a relatively small group of farms. At the end of the 2013–14 season, 10 percent of farms accounted for around one-third of the total sectoral debt and these may constitute a pocket of vulnerability. The impact of this on financial stability, however, would likely be limited. China spillovers. A sharper-than-expected slowdown in China that significantly affects consumer spending could reduce New Zealand’s exports and may lead to the exit of some farmers and attendant repercussions on the financial sector. In addition, it would also likely adversely affect Australia, New Zealand’s second-largest destination for exports. Page 15 El Niño. The El Niño weather pattern is well entrenched. While irrigation is spreading, some agricultural areas are reliant on rainfall. Should a drought occur there, agricultural output could be significantly affected. House prices. If the authorities’ measures fail to cool house price inflation in Auckland, the housing market could be increasingly driven by self-reinforcing demand dynamics which could eventually lead to a sudden sharp correction in house prices, with adverse effects on the financial sector (residential mortgages represent about 50-60 percent of banks’ assets) and the wider economy. High levels of household debt—with a large share of mortgages carrying adjustable rates—also imply that a rise in interest rates could strain their ability to service debts, squeeze disposable income and consumption, and trigger declines in house prices. Financial market volatility. U.S. monetary policy normalization may lead to unexpected bouts of higher global financial market volatility. This could lead to an abrupt depreciation, higher financing costs and/or a period of very poor liquidity in international financial markets. There are also upside risks. A stronger-than-anticipated supply response to housing demand could pave the way for a smoother deceleration of house price inflation while supporting growth, and a recovery in dairy prices would boost incomes and investment. Continued high net immigration could pose challenges for short-term economic management, but in the longer run would boost growth. There is ample policy space to respond. Should downside risks materialize, the RBNZ has scope to ease interest rates further. The low level of public debt would allow even more supportive fiscal policy if warranted. The flexible exchange rate provides an important buffer, and the financial system is less vulnerable than before the GFC. Broadly, financial system stress tests suggest it is able to withstand—at least in the short term—adverse developments related to China spillovers, dairy prices, and the housing market (Box 3), even though public support may be needed in an extreme scenario. More broadly, with chronically low national saving, New Zealand’s economy is dependent on borrowing from abroad. Its persistently negative saving-investment balance has led to the accumulation of a large net negative international investment (IIP) position (65 percent of GDP in 2014), and requires to a significant extent financing by bank borrowing from abroad. While the net IIP position has improved from a negative 85 percent of GDP in 2009—supported by the payouts from international reinsurers after the Canterbury earthquake as well as strong deposit growth—this still renders the economy susceptible to swings in international financial markets (even though foreign exchange exposures are mostly hedged or in domestic currency), and is estimated to lead to higher capital costs. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s assessment of the outlook and risks, though they viewed risks as more balanced. They emphasized that at the current juncture the Page 16 degree of uncertainty, including with regard to dairy prices, immigration, and the impact of El Niño was unusually high. Dairy prices: the authorities noted that dairy markets had a history of volatility. They stressed, however, that the dairy industry has gone through rounds of structural changes coping with the volatility, and has become more competitive and resilient, with increasingly professional management and new investment. Immigration: they noted that the current situation, in which net emigration to Australia was at an all-time low, was unusual, and that they expected it to pick up as growth in Australia rebounds. However, should high net immigration continue, this would support growth in the longer run even if it posed challenges—notably by increasing pressure in the housing market—in the short run. El Niño: the authorities indicated that the El Niño weather pattern was well established, but its impact as yet uncertain. The spread of irrigation had reduced the risk associated with drought. Box 3. Stress Testing the New Zealand Financial Sector Over the past years, the RBNZ has conducted regular stress tests of the New Zealand banking system, focused on housing price busts, interest rate spikes and a protracted decline in dairy prices. The Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority collaborated on the subsidiaries of Australian banks, which play dominant roles in New Zealand. House price bust and interest rate spike . In the house price decline scenario, a sharp slowdown in economic growth in China triggers a severe double-dip recession. Real GDP declines by around 4 percent, and unemployment peaks at just over 13 percent. House prices decline by 40 percent nationally, with a more marked fall in Auckland. The agricultural sector is also hit by a combination of a 40 percent fall in land prices and a 33 percent fall in commodity prices. The RBNZ also considered a scenario where the interest rate is sharply higher, resulting in increased unemployment and higher borrowing costs. In these scenarios banks face higher funding costs and credit losses, with a significant adverse impact on profitability and capital ratios. Losses on residential mortgages account for around one-third of total credit losses. The aggregate Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio falls by around 3 percentage points though all banks remain above the minimum CET1 capital requirement of 4.5 percent. Losses are greater than the capital held for housing for the internal ratings based risk weight banks and almost all banks would use capital conservation buffers and face constraints on dividend and bonus payouts. Even though CET1 requirements are not breached, it is unlikely that New Zealand would have a fully-functioning banking system as banks with substantially reduced capital ratios would be severely constrained in their ability to raise funding (both in availability and pricing), and hence in their ability to advance credit. In such a scenario, the lower credit extended by banks would also have an adverse impact on real GDP growth and would likely lead to higher fiscal deficits. Low dairy prices. In the stress scenarios, milk prices are substantially below recent averages and farm gate prices are assumed to fall by around 40 percent by 2018-19. This will result in higher loss rates, estimated around 2-14 percent of all dairy lending. The banks would incur losses amounting to 2-18 percent of pre-tax profits, highlighting the need for increased provisioning, but the impact would be manageable from a financial stability perspective. Page 17 House prices: they pointed to stress tests that suggested banks would be able to withstand a severe shock to house prices, output, and dairy prices, but noted that in a severe scenario credit supply could become constrained. Financial market volatility: while acknowledging the risks, the authorities noted that New Zealand’s banking system had weathered the GFC relatively well, and stressed that capital ratios have improved and the use of wholesale funding was significantly reduced since then. The authorities broadly shared the staff’s assessment of longer-term vulnerabilities and higher capital costs arising from low saving. While they pointed out that this is a long- standing feature of the economy and that net external liabilities had been reduced substantially after the GFC, they shared the staff’s concerns and indicated that they would consider measures to raise savings.