A commitment to macroeconomic stability has characterized government policies . Following the conclusion of the ECF-supported program in 2011, policies have continued to support macroeconomic stability and growth, which in turn have served to reduce poverty. Over the last three years, real GDP growth has averaged 4.8 percent, one of the highest in the region, while inflation has remained anchored by the crawling peg exchange rate regime. The fiscal stance has become modestly more expansionary and, as a result, public debt ratios are expected to stabilize at around 41 percent of GDP—in contrast with the reduction envisaged in previous consultations. The external current account deficit has declined, reflecting both lower oil prices and increased reliance on renewal energy sources . General elections are scheduled for November 2016 President Ortega’s approval ratings remain high and with his party’s majority in the National Assembly (61 out of 91 deputies), he has been able to advance a political agenda that includes a constitutional reform in early 2014 that increased presidential powers and eliminated term limits on presidency. His high approval ratings reflect, among others, a sound macroeconomic policy stance and the elimination of widespread electricity blackouts. There are changes in the administration of the oil collaboration scheme with Venezuela First, at the request of the government of Venezuela, all assets and liabilities associated with the oil cooperation scheme are in the process of being transferred from a private financial cooperative (CARUNA) to a limited liability Nicaraguan company ALBAN ISA, co-owned by the Nicaraguan state petroleum distribution company (49 percent) and the national petroleum company of Venezuela (PDVSA, 51 percent). The government’s current policy is not to extend public guarantees on any of the associated liabilities. Second, the number of barrels per day that can be imported under the oil collaboration was increased in 2013 from 27,000 to 30,000, and will represent external financing of about 2.7 percent of GDP in 2015 (5.2 percent in 2014). Progress in the implementation of Fund recommendations has been mixed . During the last Article IV consultation, Directors stressed that fiscal discipline should remain the cornerstone of Nicaragua’s macroeconomic policy framework. Specific recommendations included broadening the The oil cooperation agreement involves the purchase of oil by Nicaragua at market prices w ith 50 percent of the oil bill paid upfront and the remainder over 25 years (including a tw o -year grace period) at an interest rate of 2 percent. The operation of the oil collaboration scheme prior to current changes w as described in the 2013 Article IV Staff Report for Nicaragua (Country Report 13/377). Moody’s upgraded Nicaragua’s issuer rating to B2 from B3 in mid -2015 noting that the impact from a sudden stop of Venezuela cooperation has become more manageable. Central America Range Nicaragua Real GDP Growth (In percent, yoy) Source: Haver Analytics, Inc.1/ Includes: CostaRica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras. Page 10 revenue base by implementing the 2012 tax reform, rationalizing public expenditures while reinforcing the social safety net, and reforming the pension system to ensure its financial viability. In line with this advice, the authorities enacted a tax reform in 2013 aimed at strengthening revenue administration and introduced a parametric reform of social security aimed at extending the solvency of the regime until the end of next decade. However, in late 2014, a new tax reform was passed that repeals the reductions in tax exonerations and exemptions and corporate income tax rates that were planned for 2015–17. At the same time, social security spending has increased more than anticipated, raising doubts about how long the scheme can remain solvent. Progress in the areas of domestic bond market development, central bank recapitalization, and statistics (in part due to capacity weaknesses) has been limited.