The interbank market remains shallow and the interbank rates volatile Banks hold reserves at the central bank that are, on average, far in excess of regulatory requirements as they internalize their liquidity risks. These large positions could lead to rapid credit growth that eventually result in higher inflation or international reserves losses. The central bank is moving forward to strengthen the monetary framework within the confines of the crawling peg. In line with Fund’s TA advice, the central bank has introduced 7 and 14 day notes to improve short-term liquidity management. The authorities are encouraged to proceed with the recapitalization of the central bank as a condition for strengthening its financial autonomy. In this context, the external audit report for the 2014 audited financial statements of the BCN is qualified due to the uncertainty and valuation surrounding government debt, and its impact on the BCN’s financial position. Further, the implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), a key recommendation of the Fund’s 2009 safeguards assessment, remains outstanding (see 2015 Informational Annex). The supranational structure and cross-border activities of financial conglomerates warrant strengthening regional cooperation in prudential supervision . The Central American Council of Bank Supervisors is playing a more active role in facilitating exchange of financial data across countries. This is particularly relevant for Nicaragua, as its financial system is dominated by the presence of regional conglomerates. The largest three banks belonging to these conglomerates represent about 80 percent of assets, loans, and deposits in the Nicaraguan banking sector. In this context, authorities are encouraged to: (i) monitor the potential risks at the group level given Nicaragua. Conglomerates' Presence (Share of Assets, as of September 2015) Regional conglomerates -Domestic Regional conglomerates -Non-domestic Global banks Other banks Sources: SIBOIF and Fund staff calculations. 1/ Domestic conglomeratesare controlled by holding corporations located in Panamá, but are owned by Nicaraguan economic groups. These holding companies have subsidiariesin Central America and other countries such as Ecuador, Dominican Republic and some Caribbean countries. Page 19 their regional interconnectedness; (ii) improve the harmonization of financial data; and (iii) make further efforts to ensure quick response and collaboration from the principal supervisor. The rapid credit growth of recent years combined with high dollarization warrant closer watch . Nicaragua has a highly dollarized economy as more than 70 percent of total banking assets are denominated in dollars, and another 20 percent are dollar-indexed. Similarly, about 90 percent of the deposits are in U.S. dollars or dollar- indexed deposits. The expansion of credit to the private sector, in the context of high dollarization, persistent dollar strength, and potential hikes in U.S. interest rates, could pose risks. In particular, U.S. dollar lending to corporations (and households) that do not generate dollar revenue (or income) must be monitored given the persistent dollar strength and the likely increase in U.S. interest rates—70 percent of the loan portfolio is with agents that do not generate dollars. However, the limited exposure by local banks to foreign financing helps contain risks . A review of the macro-prudential tools could strengthen the mitigation of the risks associated with high dollarization. In February 2015, Nicaragua exited the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) gray list of jurisdictions with strategic deficiencies in their Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) regime . This was the result of Nicaragua establishment of a legal and regulatory AML/CFT framework, but the country has been encouraged to continue addressing other deficiencies. Nicaragua’s AML/CFT regime is scheduled to undergo another full assessment in 2017, under the revised FATF standards, which emphasize the identificatio n, assessment and understanding of ML/TF risks . Efforts to strengthen the AML/CFT regime should continue in order to combat organized crime and corruption (e.g., enhancing measures for politically exposed persons and the suspicious transaction reporting system).