There is room for improvement in Nicaragua's competitiveness (Box 1). The country’s economy remains exposed to increases in oil prices and declines in non-oil commodity prices, which could endanger external sustainability. Nicaragua's export quality is below the CAPDR average in all categories except crude materials. In particular, while the quality of Nicaragua's food and live animal exports is generally superior, the country is underperforming in the quality of manufactured goods and behind those countries that export similar products (e.g., Vietnam). Consistent with the cross - IMF (2015), Financial Integration in Central America, Panama, the Dominican Republ ic, and Colombia—Cluster Report. 6080100120140CRSLVGTMHNDNICDRPAN Credit in foreign currency Credit to the productive sector Mortgage, consumption and other loans Loan Dollarization and Sector Allocation (Inpercent of totalbanking sector credit) Source: Central American Monetary Council and IMF staff calculations. El Salvador and Panama are fully dollarized. Page 20 country analysis conducted by IMF staff, improving infrastructure and trade networks, investing in human capital (from educational outcomes in primary education to training programs that address labor skills bottlenecks), and reducing barriers to entry are needed to promote diversification and structural transformation in low-income countries. Progress in structural reforms in these areas could help to reduce informality and strengthen Nicaragua’s poverty-reducing efforts. The rapid increase in private external debt needs to be closely monitored . Gross financing needs are projected to increase to 15.9 percent of GDP in 2015, owing to the large debt service obligations of the private sector that are reflected in a large negative net investment position (-116 percent of GDP in 2014). In particular, the private sector was a net creditor in 2006 with a positive net financial position of 3 percent of GDP and has now become a net debtor of about 32 percent of GDP, of which two-thirds correspond to Venezuela oil-financing collaboration being administered by ALBANISA and CARUNA.