Building additional fiscal buffers will help insure against downside risks and put public finances on a more solid footing . The continued uncertainty around the Venezuela oil collaboration poses important downside risks to public finances. In addition, the financial position of the INSS has not improved as much as envisaged in the 2014 reform, while the deficits of the state- owned enterprises have weakened the consolidated public sector balance. The 2016 fiscal stance is moderately expansionary, but broadly consistent with the stabilization of the debt ratio by 2020. Nicaragua is still assessed as being at moderate risk of external debt distress, with a heightened risk of overall debt distress. In this context, Fund staff recommends building additional buffers through a fiscal effort of 1 percent of GDP in 2017, following the elections, which is projected to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to 38 percent of GDP by 2020. Alternatively, this effort would allow the authorities to confront downside risks if these were to materialize, such as increased pressures to absorb some of the oil-collaboration-funded projects into the budget, while maintaining the debt ratio stable in the medium term. Nicaragua. Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios See Nicaragua—Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation —Debt Sustainability Analysis Update, December 14, 2015. Consolidated Public Sector Primary Balance (Percent of GDP) Baseline scenario Adjustment scenario Consolidated Public Sector Debt (Percent of GDP) Baseline scenario Adjustment scenario Page 17 Such fiscal consolidation could be achieved by re-introducing key elements of the 2012 tax reform that were rolled-back in 2014 and by developing a plan to eliminate electricity subsidies over the medium term Tax exonerations and exemptions (Appendix II—A Framework for Future Tax Reform). Reducing or eliminating tax exonerations and exemptions, particularly in the VAT, would increase revenue while improving tax efficiency and equity and allow space for reducing the headline corporate tax rate. Electricity subsidies . The current system is complex, costly (about 1¼ percent of GDP), and tends to disproportionately benefit non-vulnerable groups. While a complete elimination is politically difficult in the near term, there is ample room to reduce its costs and ensure that the benefits reach a larger share of poor households. As a first step, the authorities could focus on the elimination of subsidies that generate the biggest distortions and the largest fiscal costs (e.g., consumption-based subsidies that are excessively generous and that in effect represent the highest cost of the existing subsidy system). Over time, consideration should be given to building institutions that can target better the poor (e.g., conditional cash transfer programs or other means testing mechanisms); once these are in place, the remaining distortions of the existing system of electricity subsidies should be eliminated. The finances of the INSS have not improved as expected following the parametric reform introduced in 2014 . The reform included a phased-in increase in employer contributions and linking pension increases to increases in the average wage, and was calibrated to extend the sustainability of INSS to 2031. While revenue has improved, this has been outweighed by increased expenditure due to the introduction of the “reduced pension” in 2013 and a legislated increase in these pensions in 2015, as well as higher than budgeted expenditures on health services, capital goods, and administration. At the same time, the investment returns of the reserve fund have been low. On current trends, the INSS is projected to start running persistent deficits by 2017, and the reserve fund is expected to be depleted by 2024. Staff recommends reining in expenditure on health and other goods and services to extend the life of the INSS reserve fund. Over the medium term, the authorities need to consider additional parametric reforms to strengthen the system’s finances. The SOEs are expected to remain major contributors to the consolidated public sector deficit over the medium term . The three largest SOEs (ENEL, ENATREL (electricity transmission) Tax expenditures in Nicaragua w ere estimated at 7.6 percent of GDP (90 percent of w hich correspond to VAT exonerations and exemptions) in 2010, one of the hi ghest in the Central American region. Consumption-based electricity subsidies, w hich amount to about ⅔ of the total cost of electricity subsidies , benefit households in three consumption categories (0–50 kWh, 50–100 kWh, and 100–150 kWh) for a total cost of 0.8 percent of GDP; how ever, only 10 percent of these costs benefit the low est consumption category where there is a higher concentration of poor households. A reduced pension was granted to INSS members who have betw een 250 -749 weeks of contributions. Previously, INSS me mbers had to have at least 750 weeks of contributions to be eligible for an old age pension. The current cost of the reduced pension is estimated at betw een ⅓ and ½ percent of GDP annually. Page 18 and ENACAL) have large public investment programs and are expected to run deficits through 2020. In particular, ENACAL requires transfers from the central government to cover its current expenditure. Efforts are therefore needed to address ENACAL’s structural problems such as large technical and non-technical losses, and consideration should be given to increasing water tariffs as these are heavily subsidized. Improving public sector accounting and monitoring and fiscal transparency should remain as policy priorities . The authorities need to increase institutional coverage of public sector information in line with international standards; increase the quality of information through a consistent application of cash and accrual principles; and improve transparency by publishing the central government’s and other institutions’ financial statements. Over the longer term, reducing budget rigidities (i.e. earmarking) is key to enhancing the transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness of public spending and strengthening the budget design process.