The critical role of natural resource wealth in realizing Niger’s broader development agenda places a focus on ensuring a strong institutional framework . A new mining code—which for example raised mining royalties from 5.5 percent to 12 percent, depending on profitability—was introduced in 2006. In addition to its regulatory role, the government has also sought strategic investment opportunities in the natural resource sector. Following the agreement in May 2014 with the French group Areva, all mining companies now operate under the 2006 mining code . Under this agreement, the production contract (for the uranium mines SOMAIR and COMINAK) which has been in operation during the last ten years has been renewed for five more years and is subject to the 2006 mining code. It was agreed that while this may not have a significant impact on revenues in the near term due to the decline in uranium prices, bringing all producers into compliance with the 2006 mining code represents an important step forward in the management of the natural resource sector, such as preserving an ownership stake in the major uranium mines. Unfavorable market conditions have resulted in a delay of the start of production from the new uranium mine Imouraren . The Imouraren mine, which would more than double Niger’s output of uranium to around 9,000 tons a year, was scheduled to start production at the end of 2015. Niger’s government and Areva, however, have recognized that the mine would not be profitable at current uranium prices and agreed to create a strategic committee to decide on a timetable for the mine start up, should market conditions improve. Following the financial crisis and the incident in Fukushima, the price of uranium has declined dramatically, passing from CFAF 175,000 in 2007 to CFAF 35,000 in 2014. Page 16 In the petroleum sector, additional measures are needed to put the SORAZ refinery on a solid financial footing (SIP—Energy Sector Challenges in Niger). Improved commercialization of refined products in neighboring countries and the elimination of unjustified costs helped the refinery record a surplus at end-2013; the level of these positive results has not however been sufficient to compensate the deficit recorded in 2012. The commercial viability of the refinery could be strengthened through actions that have an impact on both the revenue and cost sides, including a revision of the pricing of domestic-refined petroleum product sales. In restructuring, the authorities intend to focus mainly on cost reduction and have identified several options, including the possibility to replace Chinese workers with Nigerien workers. The authorities are also trying to reduce debt service costs through the refinancing of the loan to build the refinery (US$880 million) on concessional terms. Niger may become an exporter of crude oil . As oil reserves of the Agadem block are estimated to exceed the production capacity of the refinery, the authorities have embarked on a project for the export of crude oil. For this purpose a new transportation company (Niger Oil Transportation Company—NOTCO) will be created in the coming months, with the government participating in the capital of the company with a 10-15 percent share. Work on the construction of a pipeline that will connect the fields of the Agadem block to the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline that was expected to start in 2014 is delayed for technical reasons and environmental disputes. The project, with an estimated cost of about US$850 million, will be financed mostly through foreign direct investments (FDIs).