Macroeconomic performance has been broadly positive, but signs of weakness are emerging Real GDP grew by 6.8 percent in Q3 2013 (y-o-y), mainly owing to a continuing strong performance (7.9 percent (y-o-y) growth) in the non-oil sector (primarily agriculture, services, and trade Table 2), in which Nigeria over performs its peers (Figure 1). Oil production improved slightly in Q3, but remains below capacity owing to continued oil theft/production losses Staff projects the economy to grow 6.4 percent in 2013. Inflation continued to decline, ending December a t 7.9 percent, in part owing to lower food and utility prices (which comprise 68.5 percent of the consumption basket), and supported by fiscal consolidation and a tight monetary policy stance by the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN). Core inflation has been rising however since May, reflecting higher prices of imports. Page 6 The current account surplus is expected to decline to 3.1 percent of GDP (Table 3) from 7.8 percent at end-2012. The fall in oil exports is a consequence of production losses associated with oil theft and is projected at 4 percent annually. At the same time, imports have continued to rise at a rapid pace as demand remained strong through the year (Figure 2). The non-oil primary deficit (NOPD) of the consolidated government is projected to narrow to 23½ percent of non-oil GDP from 27 percent at end-2012, driven by expenditure restraint, including lower-than-budgeted capital expenditure because of low execution capacity (Tables 2 and 4a). Meanwhile, fiscal buffers have been depleted the balance in the Excess Crude Account (ECA) and Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) declined from US$11 billion at end-2012 to US$3 billion at end-2013 because oil revenue has been below budget, largely on account of oil theft and production losses. Credit to the private sector remains sluggish (Table 5b), with banks showing more appetite for low-risk government securities. Prudential indicators (Table 6) suggest a well-capitalized banking system with a low level of nonperforming loans (NPLs), though most deposits have a short-term maturity, and lending by banks is still not sufficiently diversified. Capital inflows have become more volatile as concerns have increased about the possible unwinding of the U.S. unconventional monetary policy (UMP) . In the last three years, Nigeria has received a significant amount of foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows (largely into the oil and gas, banking, manufacturing, and telecommunications subsectors ) as well as portfolio investment (equity and debt securities), contributing to a slight exchange rate appreciation, a strong increase in the All Share Index, and accumulation of gross international reserves (text figure). Foreign direct investment (FDI) and portfolio inflows increased to 7.9 percent of GDP in 2012 compared to 3.4 percent in 2010. However, softened investor sentiment toward emerging/developing markets, after Chairman Bernanke’s May 22 statem ent on the possible unwinding of UMP, led to some outflows (projected at 5.5 percent of GDP in 2013) and pressures on the naira, which weakened against the U.S. dollar. The CBN intervened to help stabilize the exchange rate, with gross international reserves falling to US$43.6 billion at end-2013 from US$49 billion in mid-March. As a result of changing market sentiment, there was also an increase in government bond yields (text figure). The pressure on the naira was, however, contained and capital inflows have stabilized. Data for 2011 show that the United Kingdom and the United States comprise 46 percent and 19 percent of capital importation respectively. Page 7 Bond Market Indicators, 2010 (Millions of U.S. dollars and percent) Equity Market Indicators, 2010 (Millions of U.S. dollars and units) U f Bonds Flows 10Y Bond Yield (RHS) J y p J y p J y p J y p J Sources: EPFR; and Thomson Reuters. c P D U Equity Flows Stock MSCI Index (RHS) J y p J y p J y p J y p J Sources: EPFR; and Thomson Reuters. U Sovereign Bond Yield-to-Maturity Spreads Relative to the United States, 2013 (Basis points) May 22nd Nigeria Ghana EMBIG(spread) Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations.