The monetary policy stance is appropriate to safeguard macro-financial stability. The monetary policy committee (MPC) has set the inflation target for 2014 at 6-9 percent, above the 5-percent target of the Convergence Council of the ECOWAS (Figure 1). During 2013, the CBN has maintained its policy interest rate corridor (12 percent +/- 200 basis points), but in July raised the banks’ cash reserve requirement (CRR) on public deposits from 12 percent to 50 percent. At the Page 17 same time, the CBN has been sterilizing capital inflows by increasing issuance of CBN bills, smoothing temporary fluctuations in the exchange rate to limit exchange rate pass-through on inflation. Moreover, given the risk of fiscal slippage and potential capital outflows associated with changing investor sentiment, maintaining high interest rates with a stable exchange rate would reduce the risk of highly destabilizing capital outflows, and consequent pressure on the exchange rate. Managing liquidity remains challenging. Staff acknowledged Nigeria-specific circumstances that motivated an increase in the CRR on public sector deposits; in particular, the still limited coverage of the TSA with about a half of public sector deposits held in commercial banks. Staff however noted that the increase in the CRR poses costs on banks, and recommended more reliance, going forward, on open market operations to guide short-term interest rates to conduct monetary policy. Staff also noted that the current policy stance poses a concern about longer-term inclusive growth: while inflation has come down from 12½ percent at the beginning for 2012 to 8 percent at end-2013, lending rates remained unchanged reflecting no changes in the monetary policy rate established by the CBN, so that the maximum real cost of borrowing has increased from 10 percent to 17 percent, amplifying barriers to the growth of SMEs that have no access to the equity market. Authorities’ views . The authorities were in broad agreement with staff’s assessment on the appropriateness of the tight monetary policy stance. They also agreed on the blunt nature of the CRR, but argued that because financial markets do not always work in a rational manner, sending a strong signal of CBN’s commitment to keep inflation low was critical to the monetary policy stance because of the risks for capital flow reversals and fiscal slippages. In particular, they stressed that CRR effectiveness should be assessed based on its broader economic impact, in particular its benefit to managing liquidity in the banking system and its capacity to contribute to broadening the coverage of the TSA. The stable naira policy has provided confidence to markets. Pursuing exchange rate stability has worked well so far, contributing to bringing inflation down to single digits, providing a conducive environment for investing in domestic government securities and the equity market, and accumulating international reserves. Reserve buffers are deemed adequate the current level of reserves (5.7 months of prospective imports) is close to the optimal level implied by standard metrics (Appendix 5), but staff pointed out risks from medium-term oil price developments, potential capital outflows associated with expected UMP tapering, political uncertainty through the election cycle, and low fiscal buffers. The external sector assessment finds a moderate overvaluation of the naira in 2013, though caution is warranted given the quality of balance of payments data, in particular the size of errors and omissions (outflow of 3 percent of GDP in 2012). If the underlying supply-demand imbalance continues and persistent pressures emerge, staff underscored that the exchange rate should be allowed to adjust. At the same time, staff also encouraged a continuation of improvements in productivity-enhancing measures to improve non-price competitiveness to bolster non-oil exports, while enforcing security to curtail oil theft/production losses to strengthen external positions. Increased demand for dollars, coupled with administrative limits in the last Page 18 quarter of 2013 on sales to the Bureau de Change (BDC) segment (about 16 percent of the market as of September 2013), resulted in a widening of the spread in the official-BDC rate, from an average of 1.5 percent in the first half of 2013 to 9 percent at end-December. The CBN has since lifted these limits, authorized dealers are now free to sell to BDCs subject to compliance with AML/FT laws and other foreign exchange regulations, and the spread in the official-BDC rate has narrowed. Nigeria: Assessment of Real Exchange Rate Equilibrium Macroeconomic External RER Approach Balance Approach Sustainability Approach Current account norm Underlying current account balance Current account gap Estimated elasticity of current account balance (In percent of GDP) (In percent) Real exchange rate gap Source: IMF staff estimates. Based on estimates for net oil exporters of IMF Working Paper 09/281. Current account balance projected for 2018 (output gap is assumed to close by 2018). Positive numbers indicate overvaluation. Authorities’ views . The authorities were in broad agreement with a number of factors that could potentially put the naira under pressure over the medium term. They pointed to the asymmetric adjustment of fiscal policy: when oil revenues decline, the ECA is drawn down and borrowing and debt service increase because the size of the wage bill limits the government’s ability to reduce spending. In particular, they pointed out that the weakening of the fiscal position, affecting the exchange rate, mainly owed to oil theft, which is a criminal issue, and has to be addressed through security measures and introducing stringent rules to track oil revenue. The banking sector is well capitalized and with low NPLs, but implementation of the key recommendations in the 2012 FSAP Update would further enhance financial stability (Table 6). While financial soundness indicators generally point to strong commercial bank performance, staff noted that net foreign liabilities had increased in the past 2 to 3 years from 26.2 percent of core capital (share capital and reserve fund) at end 2011 (at the time of the FSAP Update) to 69.5 percent at end-December 2013. While part of these open positions may be hedged, staff recommends that the CBN closely monitor foreign exchange exposures and the adequacy of bank equity. Given the volume of interbank transactions, including with discount houses, and of In September 2013, the CBN replaced the Wholesale Dutch Auction System (WDAS) with the Retail Dutch Auction System (RDAS), tightened reporting requirements, and imposed weekly limits on the sale of foreign exchange to the BDC. It also took disciplinary action against some of the traders in the BDC segment. Page 19 foreign currency operations, the CBN should more closely monitor the level and nature of such transactions and the open foreign exchange positions of banks. Staff welcomes the authorities’ reactions to FSAP recommendations (Box 4 ). In particular, staff welcomes the authorities’ directive for the Asset Management Company of Nigeria (AMCON) to redeem by end-2013 all its debt held by deposit money banks (DMBs) and not to purchase additional assets from banks which could encourage moral hazard and imprudent risk taking in the sector. Staff commends the CBN’s collaboration on the use of cross-border supervisory arrangements, notably memoranda of understanding (MOUs) and participation in a regional College of Supervisors. Further, the mission encourages enhanced participation in on-site inspections of all Nigerian banks operating abroad, particularly in countries where the supervisory framework is not as developed as in Nigeria. Authorities’ views . The authorities noted that the AMCON is closing for all practical purposes: it is no longer purchasing NPLs, and it has a financing plan for ten years. They expressed a preference, however, for a longer period for winding down AMCON than the proposed sunset of end-2017 as recommended in the FSAP, and maintaining an inactive ― shell .‖ In principle, this would allow them to reduce future ―cost‖ in the event of need for a similar institution. The authorities agreed with the need to continue to strengthen the prudential framework and expressed interest in additional TA on Financial Soundness Indicators.