The 2017 fiscal program envisages a modest expansion in the expenditure envelope, compared to 2016, to provide space for priority spending . This would entail an increased deficit of the basic balance to 4.9 percent of GDP, compared to a projected 4.4 percent of GDP in 2016 (MEFP, ¶ 30 to 35), (Text Table 2). Total revenues would increase by 0.8 percent of GDP, driven by a rise of 0.6 percent of GDP in tax revenue from a higher VAT taxes (0.5 percent of GDP) which have significant scope for efficiency gains both at the tax and customs administration, where personnel changes were recently made. Spending will reflect social priorities in the EDD in the health, education, and public infrastructure sectors. Domestically financed expenditures will increase by 1.5 percent of GDP, relative to the projected 2016 outcome, driven by interest payments and priority sector investments. The expenditure envelope already reached a high level under the 2015 budget execution with spending slippages as most investment planned were executed in advance and heightened security spending as the military personnel was strengthened. Large domestically funded capital spending in the draft 2017 budget priorities: infrastructure (54 percent); security (22 percent); and rural development and reconstruction of major cities, including school and health facilities (18 percent). The priorities established in the new development strategy contained in the EDD are: (i) security of properties and persons; (ii) urban, village, and farming water supply; (iii) continuation of the 3N Initiative and food security; (iv) infrastructure and energy; and (v) education and health. Page 26 Financing would be sourced from donors and additional regional borrowing. Budget support is projected at CFAF 92.4 billion comprising both grants and highly concessional loans (MEFP, ¶ 36). Text Table 2. Niger: Main Fiscal Indicators, 2015-21 (In percent of GDP) Over the medium term, the authorities are committed to fiscal consolidation to achieve the WAEMU convergence criterion of a deficit on the overall balance of no more than 3 percent of GDP Revenues. Significant receipts from natural resource projects are expected to materialize once the projects come on stream from 2020 and these will enable large-scale investments to address Niger’s massive social and development needs. In the interim, and given the regular adverse shocks, the authorities agreed that greater emphasis needed to be placed on non-resource sector revenues. Fiscal space and program targets. Assuming only a modest pickup in revenues during the program period, and with security spending likely to remain elevated for the foreseeable future, the program will accommodate continuing high fiscal deficits in 2017-18. Subsequently, as ap cc illi PPP cc dg pp Page 27 revenues expand, it was agreed that fiscal consolidation be stepped up as to converge toward the 3 percent of GDP overall deficit anchor for WAEMU member countries that would be consistent with placing debt on a declining path. Staff encouraged the authorities to reach understandings with the WAEMU Commission on a slight deferment of the budgetary convergence criterion. Streamlining tax exemptions will be important to limit medium-term revenues losses (MEFP, ¶ 37 to 40). Over the last five years, tax exemptions have become sizeable, reaching about CFAF 80 billion in 2015 (1.7 percent of GDP) and CFAF 150 billion in 2015 (4.5 percent of GDP) for tax and customs revenues respectively. Thus going forward, the authorities are committed to bring tax exemptions currently under the Investment Code in line with best practices by reducing their number and streamlining their scope. To that end, a comprehensive review of the different allowances will lay out the necessary steps to combine overlapping fiscal advantages in sector- specific codes into the customs and tax codes. Under the program, part of the fiscal space would be used to advance the inclusive growth agenda . In line with the broader strategy defined in the EDD, the authorities are committed to using part of the increased fiscal space under the new program to strengthen resilience to disasters and address issues in the areas of gender and demographics. Indeed, disasters affect longer term development through the damage of physical and human capital. On gender, while there has been strides in empowering women through education during the implementation of the PDES, gender inequality continues to lag. Accordingly, pro-poor spending is planned to increase by 36 percent in 2017 (Table 7).