Niger’s overall economic outlook remains positive . Growth is projected to rise to 5.2 percent in 2017, and to average 5.4 percent during 2017-19, driven by the expansion of irrigated agriculture under the national food security program (3N Initiative). The main natural resource projects—an oil pipeline through Chad and the Imouraren uranium mine—are now expected to be completed in 2020 and 2021, respectively, providing for a boost to growth beginning in 2020. The current account deficit is projected to rise to about an average of 18.6 percent of GDP in 2017-19 driven by capital and intermediate goods imports associated with FDI and the government’s investment program. Exports are expected to improve from higher gold production and agricultural products boosted by investments under the recently signed compact between Niger and the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC). Inflation is expected to remain subdued at about 2 percent. Gross official reserves are projected to remain stable at 4 months of import of goods and services. The exchange rate remains broadly in line with model-based estimates of fundamentals, but broader competitiveness indicators point to major challenges (Text Table 1) . Consistent with the regional 2016 WAEMU external stability assessment, the EBA-lite methodology suggests that the real effective exchange rate (REER) during 2015 was broadly in line with macroeconomic fundamentals. But the recent Naira’s depreciation could lead to a weakening of Niger’s competitiveness. In addition, broader competitiveness indicators, such as the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators, highlight significant structural gaps in dealing with construction permits, getting credit, and paying taxes (Background note on External Stability Assessment). Text Table 1. Niger: Exchange Rate Assessment, 2016 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The current account elasticity used (-0.63) is based on the median trade elasticity for small countries reported in Tokarick (2010). In the initial estimates, the underlying-CA is the CA in 2015 for the CA-model and the underlying-CA is the CA in 2020 for the ES- model with the objective of stabilizing the NIIP at -79.6 percent of GDP consistent with the CA-norm of -9.4 percent of GDP obtained in the CA-model. The alternative scenario uses a lower current account that discounts for FDI driven investments and the large public investments. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside (Table 13). Lingering security concerns could discourage foreign investment, disrupt domestic production, and force a further reprioritization of expenditures towards security. Persistent weak commodity prices could lead to Real exchange rate gapReal exchange rate gapNorm UnderlyingNorm UnderlyingCA model -9.4-18.115.0CA model -9.4-10.22.4External sustainability -11.4-15.46.4External sustainability -11.3-10.2-1.9IREER-12.0IREER-12.0Current account/GDPCurrent account/GDPAlternative scenario with an underlying CA level of -10.2 percent of GDPInitial Estimates Page 18 further delays in implementing the resource projects underpinning growth prospects. On the upside, a rebound in uranium and oil prices or a pickup in the Nigerian economy would boost Niger’s fiscal space and growth. To illustrate some of these risks, staff developed two alternative scenarios . The scenarios simulate security and terms of trade shocks (Figure 5). In both scenarios, staff assume that exports from the new resource projects will be delayed by one year as a result of the shock. The simulation results show, in 2017, a decline in GDP growth of 0.3 to 0.8 percentage points, and a deterioration of the current account of 0.8 to 1.7 percent of GDP, and a fall in reserves. The fiscal stance would also deteriorate as revenue would fall and security spending expand. From a DSA perspective, while under the security shock the debt ratios would remain under their respective thresholds, the large impact of the terms of trade shock on exports would cause the debt-to-export ratio to exceed the 150 percent threshold by 15.4 percent in 2017. In addition, based on earlier work, staff found that climatic shocks have a large and persistent impact on Niger’s economic activity, but with limited impact on consumer prices, inter alia due to the government’s mitigating policies in place (IMF, 2012). Also, staff estimates that a natural disaster causing losses of 0.5 percent of GDP would have a weak fiscal impact but could be magnified in terms of economic growth and the current account deficit. Niger has been adversely impacted by spillovers from its main trading partner, Nigeria (Box 1) . The spread of terrorist attacks into Niger remains a key risk. The economic downturn in Nigeria, together with the sharp exchange rate depreciation and restrictions on access to foreign exchange since late 2014, have contributed to Niger’s conventional exports to Nigeria falling by 16 percent in 2015, and re-exports by 17 percent resulting in significant customs revenue losses. Also, at end-June 2016 exports to Nigeria had fallen by 45.4 percent compared to end-June 2015. Niger’s growth prospects are also vulnerable to spillovers from neighboring Chad, as the construction of the crude oil pipeline connection depends on security conditions there. In the security shock scenario, staff consider an increase of security-related spending equivalent to 1 percent of GDP that affects trade and other economic activities. In the terms of trade shock scenario, staff envisage a 25 percent decrease of the baseline oil and uranium prices in 2017 and going forward. See Niger Country Report No. 12/109 and the October 16 SSA-REO on Enhancing Resilience to Natural Disasters in SSA). Data are provided by the customs office. BOP data may be different because of retreatment and reclassification. Page 19 Box 1. Niger: Spillovers from the Economic Slowdown in Nigeria Niger and Nigeria share a 1,500-kilometer-long Niger: Exports and Customs Revenue with Nigeria, 2014-16 (Billions of CFAF) border, on both sides of which commerce has flourished for centuries and opportunities for arbitrage abound. Nigeria’s highly-subsidized fuel products find their way into Niger, which also serves as a transit route for imports debarked in Benin and destined for Nigeria, which Niger taxes at low rates (5-10 percent range), but yield non-negligible customs revenues (1 percent of GDP in 2014). Niger’s trade with Nigeria was estimated at 3 percent of GDP in 2015, but excluding re-exports and transit merchandises, and informal trade in agriculture products, livestock, and fuel products. The economic slowdown in Nigeria following the collapse in international oil prices in late 2014 has resulted in a sharp reduction in incomes and a large exchange rate depreciation (coupled with a shortage of foreign exchange) that have greatly reduced Nigeria’s demand for Niger’s products. In value terms, Niger’s conventional exports to Nigeria fell by 16 percent in 2015, while the much larger volume of transit merchandises and re-exports fell by 17 percent. This trend continued during 2016 with re-exports falling by a further 15 percent, and export falling by 45.4 percent on an annual basis, at end-June, leading to a large loss in customs revenue. In the case of livestock, trade flows have reversed with Niger periodically importing from Nigeria. Total imports from Nigeria have increased by 36.6 percent in 2016, mostly primary and locally manufactured goods that generate little tax due to regional agreements.