The outlook is for growth to moderate as the economy adjusts to permanently lower oil prices . In 2015, oil exports are projected to be $52 billion (down from $88 billion in 2014), a reduction of 6 percentage points of GDP, which is projected to reduce the external current account balance and international reserves. Fiscal oil revenues are projected at 3.4 percent of GDP (down from 5.8 percent in 2014), limiting fiscal spending. Staff projects that these aggregate demand shocks could lower growth by about 1½ percentage point from 2014 to 4¾ percent in 2015—the overall impact on non-oil sector GDP will come from cuts in public investment and a reduction in real purchasing power of oil receipts (see Selected Issues Paper (SIP) for a more complete discussion). The depreciation of the exchange rate will add to inflation, reflecting the pass-through of higher domestic prices for imports, but the effect is likely to be contained, in part due to lower food prices from increased local production of staple food crops. The outlook is compromised by low fiscal and external buffers, which have reduced the capacity to absorb shocks relative to the experience of the 2008-09 financial crisis. Authorities’ views: The authorities reiterated their determination to implement appropriate measures to manage risks. They agreed that the oil price shock is significant and, at least in part, permanent, but saw a smaller effect on economic activity than staff, owing to measures targeted at sectors critical for growth (agriculture, power, small enterprises) and the impact of remittances. They noted that rising food self-sufficiency would limit the pass-through to inflation and activity in housing construction would continue. Risks are on the downside (Risk Assessment Matrix, Box 1). External . Investor sentiment could deteriorate rapidly depending on a further decline in oil prices, and developments in the region and the rest of the world (e.g., outlook for AEs and EMs). Any of these could trigger capital outflows, putting pressure on the exchange rate and GIRs. Domestic . Security risks could increase owing to election-related violence, as well as an intensification of the insurgency. Election results if disputed could lead to a prolonged period of uncertainty, disrupting reform efforts, and in turn adversely affect the investor sentiment. Nigeria currently maintains a multiple currency practice (MCP) related to the CBN rDAS. Drawing on input-output tables, staff estimates the fiscal multiplier to be about 0.4. Page 12 Box 1. Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) Source of Risks Relative Likelihood Expected impact I - Financial sector and capital market risks Source of impact Policy response • Side-effects from global financial conditions 。 A surge in financial volatility 。 Financial imbalances from High protracted period of low interest rates continue to build 。 Persistent dollar strength • Bond market stress from a reassessment in sovereign risk 。 Japan 。 Euro area/USA Low High • Nigeria's exposure to global financial • The monetary and exchange rate policy market volatility is high. Given the framework needs to be revisited, including allowing relatively open capital account, central greater flexibility in the DAS rate. government and the private sector • Nigeria needs to (i) develop a contingency plan (especially banks) have issued (ii) monitor key indicators and hence preparedness to international markets in recent years