The authorities are keen to address priority needs in education, health, and infrastructure . This needs to be balanced with implementation capacity and resource availability. A Niger has committed troops to participate in the Sahel regional army formed by Niger, Mali, Benin, Chad, and Mauritania, to address the rising presence of terrorists, Niger will be deploying an additional 700 soldiers, with attendant salaries and other expenditures. Page 13 series of priority sector projects has been identified encompassing both externally financed ones (though requiring some domestic financing), as well as solely government financed projects to boost agriculture production. Execution of these projects would result in larger domestically financed investment by about 0.9 percent of GDP in 2015, compared to the second and the third reviews’ program targets. Some risks may still arise from budget execution as the amount provisioned for food insecurity appears low given preliminary estimates for the food deficit. The strategy aims at containing the basic fiscal deficit to 3.7 percent of GDP in 2015 In line with the government’s aim to diversify the economy, Niger’s fiscal strategy is predicated on three main pillars: (i) macroeconomic stability; (ii) structural and public financial management reforms; and (iii) investment in priority sectors (MEFP, ¶ 29). To that end, the government will sustain its fiscal efforts to increase revenues while exercising restraint in current spending in order to move gradually to a zero basic deficit, consistent with the WAEMU convergence criteria. In 2015, however, to ensure room for continued high level of public investment to meet priority spending, the basic fiscal deficit is projected to rise slightly to about 3.7 percent, consistent with debt sustainability. • • • Revenues : The agreed framework reflects enhanced tax collection efforts which result in an increase of tax revenues from 16.9 percent in 2014 to 17.7 percent in 2015, while it sets a more prudent nontax revenue baseline at 0.9 percent of GDP. Exceptional revenues are expected from the sale of another 3G license and other bonuses from oil exploration permits, and capital investments have been identified that would be undertaken once those revenues materialize. Expenditures : The authorities are seeking to further accelerate public investments in priority sectors. Expenditures will gear more toward capital spending (health, education, and infrastructure), while current spending would decrease slightly. The agreed fiscal framework envisages a 0.4 percent of GDP increase in capital spending relative to 2014, thereby sequestering a portion of discretionary spending. The framework targets more realistic externally financed capital expenditure than the draft budget given the low execution rate of capital spending. Financing : External financing needs are projected at CFAF 512 billion (excluding amortization and debt relief), which is anticipated to be met by CFAF 222 billion in loans and CFAF 290 billion in grants, including CFAF 109.4 billion in budget support (MEFP, ¶ 30). Domestic financing would largely come from bonds issuance on the regional market of CFAF 121 billion (2.9 percent of GDP), consistent with the issuance schedule agreed with the BCEAO. Projects are linked to the 3N initiative implementation, and the large infrastructure projects such as a regional railroad, the Kandadji dam, and a power project at Salkadamna. Preliminary estimates by the authorities of food deficit are around CFAF 45 billion (1.1 percent of GDP), while the budget provision seems to cover around 50 percent of this amount. Excluding external grants and net lending. Page 14 Realization of the 2015 fiscal objectives requires effective implementation of revenue administration measures . The authorities noted that key tax administration measures are already well advanced: the General Tax Administration (DGI) will reinforce tax audits and the tax registration system, and step up efforts to resolve disputed tax payments; customs revenues will increase due to ongoing reforms (including the establishment of a single interconnection server linking up regional offices) and reinforced administrative measures in controlling exemptions under a new performance contract; loopholes of tax exoneration will be limited; and to enhance accountability, performance contracts are also being set between the Ministry of Finance and the Direction Générale du Budget (DGB), the Direction Générale du Trésor et de la Comptabilité Publique (DGTCP), the Direction Générale des Douanes (DGD), and the Direction Générale des Impôts (DGI) (MEFP, ¶ 33,34). Important reforms in customs administration are also underway . Steps have been taken to accelerate the migration to ASYCUDA WORLD and thus allow for improved revenue collection and oversight of exemptions. The authorities have obtained a no-objection from the World Bank, which will enable the start of work with UNCTAD to implement the project before the end of 2016. They intend to implement by the middle of 2015, an intermediate, locally developed application for the control of exemptions; and enhance the electronic transit system and cooperation with transit countries. Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to increase spending for priority sectors (SIP—Fiscal Policy and Development: Spending priority in Niger). Over the last three years (2011-14), the authorities have increased allocations to priority spending—specific targets were established in March 2011 for health (10 percent of total mobilized resources), education (25 percent), water (10 percent), food security (15 percent), and infrastructure (10 percent). However, actual allocations have fallen short of expectations, with only so far 17 percent of the budget allocated to education, while that of food security was around 12 percent, health (7.74 percent), water (4 percent), and infrastructure (7 percent). Staff urged an increased focus on the efficiency of spending . While acknowledging the existence of significant infrastructure gaps, staff noted that the envisaged level of capital spending was very high—relative to capital spending levels either in Niger or elsewhere in the region. Therefore staff emphasized the need to place more focus on efficiency of such spending. Particular concerns are uncertainties in budget allocation and execution for priority sectors. The authorities agreed that the quality of spending (especially in the social sectors) is critical for promoting growth and improving social performance. To this end, they expressed the need Figure 1a. Niger: Public Investment, 2014 (Percent of GDP) Niger Burkina Mali Togo Faso Public Investment Source: AFR database. Cote d'Ivoire Benin Guinea Bissau Domestically Financed Page 15 for further technical assistance in implementing a program budget and in applying new fiscal strategies to better manage natural resource revenues, while noting their commitment to strengthen project management capacity (MEFP, ¶ 41). Medium-Term Policies Niger’s main challenge is how to use expected resource revenues for development Addressing development needs should be done while moving gradually to zero basic balance over the medium term, consistent with the WAEMU criterion (SIP—Fiscal Policy and Development: Priority Spending in Niger). The development strategy should respond to longstanding food insecurity, high population growth which has resulted in an increasing share of school-age population, and geographical proximity to conflict-affected fragile countries. Key priorities include strengthening fiscal institutions to maximize the returns from Niger’s natural resource wealth, promoting inclusive growth and mitigating vulnerabilities. These priorities are in line with those defined in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and PDES.