Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies Recent developments have highlighted the challenges facing the monetary authorities, and risks to the current monetary and exchange rate policy framework . Monetary policy is driven by the CBN’s commitment to maintain a stable official exchange rate. Thus, international reserves have to adjust to balance supply and demand in the foreign exchange market, and the CBN has less room to manage its inflation target via monetary expansion or contraction. Moreover, the increased use of administrative measures in the money market, liquidity injections through intervention schemes that have contributed to increases in private sector credit, and the maintenance of a tight monetary policy stance can send mixed signals to market participants. Further, structural liquidity cycles have added to volatility in financial markets, resulting in sharp spikes in overnight rates. Staff sees clear tensions in the current operation of the monetary and exchange rate policy framework that attempts to maintain a peg against a strongly appreciating U.S. dollar while the economy attempts to adjust to a large adverse terms-of-trade shock. Staff sees the appropriate focus as allowing greater flexibility in the exchange rate to facilitate the adjustment to external shocks. In this context, a further tightening may be needed to avoid a disorderly adjustment of the exchange rate. The authorities view exchange rate stability as a key plank in maintaining macroeconomic stability, and consider that a stable naira is not incompatible with managing inflation through open market operations and other monetary instruments. The 2014 period average exchange rate was moderately overvalued (Annex 4, Text Table 1). The official exchange rate did depreciate in November, but the widening gap with the interbank market rate along with a further fall in the oil price suggest a continued misalignment. Reserves are six months of prospective imports, but slightly below the lower-end of the The CBN faces “structural” liquidity cycles, which can amplify shocks and increase risks, including the monthly disbursements by the Federation Account Allocation Committee (FAAC) to State and Local Governments (SLGs), which hold bank accounts in deposit money banks (DMBs). The introduction of the Treasury Single Account (TSA) attempts to address the issue, but TSA coverage is still incomplete and has not extended to the SLGs. Page 16 100-150 percent of the emerging market reserve adequacy metric, in large part owing to the fall in reserves in 2014 and the buildup of liabilities to non-residents in recent years. Further liberalization of the foreign exchange market would facilitate macroeconomic adjustment. Staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to gradually move toward greater flexibility in the exchange rate, while noting that the stable naira policy has helped underpin market confidence. Staff encourages measures to minimize the wedge across or unify the segments of the foreign exchange market, rather than through administrative measures taken in recent months, and to develop market-based hedging instruments. Nigeria continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, although it no longer maintains any restrictions under Article XIV. Staff encourages the authorities to accept the obligations under Article VIII, noting the enhanced integration with international markets. The authorities consider the current level of the official exchange rate to be close to its equilibrium value. Further, strong growth prospects suggest that Nigeria would remain an attractive prospect for foreign investors, implying continued capital inflows. The authorities monitor closely the various segments of the forex market and indicated their commitment to pursue intervention and prudential measures to preserve the smooth functioning of the market. Text Table 1. Nigeria: Assessment of Real Exchange Rate Current account reference Current account norm Current account gap Current Account Regression External Sustainability Approach Equilibrium RER Regression Real exchange rate gap Source: IMF staff estimates. Based on External Balance Assessment Methodology (IMF Working Paper 13/272). Current account norm is adjusted upward for errors and omissions. Positive numbers indicate overvaluation. Elasticity of current account to real exchange rate gap is 0.12. Financial stability has been maintained, but challenges to asset quality are emerging (Annex 3). Loan portfolios are vulnerable to the decline in oil prices given their concentration in the oil sector (24 percent of total loans as of 2014 Q2) and a significant proportion of total loans are denominated in foreign currency (21 percent as of 2013 Q4), only some of which will be mitigated by natural hedges. Consequently, movements in the exchange rate can impact credit quality. Large banks have strengthened their capital, providing greater capacity to absorb losses, but medium and smaller banks may be more vulnerable to an increase in NPLs. Staff welcomes the new prudential guidelines to limit foreign currency exposure, increased capital weighting on concentrated exposures, Page 17 and efforts to enforce compliance with the existing provisions controlling SLG access to credit. Staff recommends continued vigilance, including through stress testing of individual banks’ balance sheets, and enhanced supervisory oversight of those banks that are relatively weaker. Also, to mitigate potential foreign currency liquidity risks staff sees merit in considering a reserve requirement on foreign currency deposits, which now represent about 20 percent of total deposits The authorities agreed that continued vigilance is needed, noting that they remain fully committed to sustaining financial stability and that their recent prudential actions highlight their readiness to introduce “speed bumps” where systemic vulnerabilities are emerging. Fiscal Policies Given limited buffers, the draft budget appropriately tightens the fiscal stance . Relative to 2014, staff projects that oil revenue will drop by 2.4 percentage points of GDP. The MTEF envisages a gradual increase in non-oil revenues (0.1 percent of GDP in 2015), with a reduction in expenditure of 1.7 percent of GDP (1 percent from lower fuel subsidies, 0.2 from lower capital spending, and 0.5 from adjustment by SLGs). The projected overall impact is an increase of 0.3 percentage points of GDP in the consolidated government deficit. However, fiscal buffers remain weak and, absent additional fiscal adjustments, staff projects that the ECA could be depleted by end-2015 (SIP: Oil Sector Developments). In addition, with FG capital spending envisaged at 0.4 percent of GDP, the ability to delay capital spending as an informal buffer, as has happened in previous years, is limited. Staff welcomes the announced steps to increase revenue through enhanced revenue administration and excise taxes and fees on luxury goods and services. Nevertheless, staff sees the need to identify additional contingency measures to contain recurrent expenditures and boost non-oil revenues in 2015—such as accelerating potential reforms to VAT and CIT (¶20)—to prevent the ECA from being fully depleted. . Authorities’ views: The authorities noted they would take measures to preserve the ECA at least at $1billion in 2015, highlighting that they contained ECA withdrawals in 2014, a pre-election year. Also, they indicated they have identified measures for curtailing recurrent expenditure. State and local governments face a challenging adjustment. Staff estimates that the existing revenue sharing formulas imply that SLG revenues fall by about a quarter billion dollars for each $1 drop in oil prices. In addition, given the low levels of the ECA, SLGs may not have recourse to augmentation or special distributions (equivalent to an average of 9 percent of their revenue over 2011-2013) to fund their expenditures. With limited room for financing and, absent increases in independently generated revenue, the revised MTEF implies an adjustment in SLG expenditure of about 15 percent in real terms relative to 2014. Achieving such a rationalization without impeding delivery of critical public services or the accumulation of arrears will require careful prioritization, especially in capital projects (45 percent of SLG expenditures), and better monitoring of the evolution of SLG accounts payable. Staff encourages the authorities to further improve public financial management across all levels of government, including through improved coordination and capacity-enhancement activities. In the long-term, it could be important to review the fiscal federalism arrangements—minimizing the duplication of programs (and taxes) and enhancing accountability—to Page 18 help address more efficiently the socio-economic disparities across states (SIP: Promoting Economic Transformation). The authorities have started to engage subnational governments on the need for budget adjustment. Following the budget price adjustments, the Federal authorities have informed the states of the much lower oil revenue expected for 2015 and the need to prioritize spending. The authorities acknowledge the benefits of a state-by-state approach, recognizing that the states with lower capacity are likely the ones with little internally generated revenue. The authorities aim to build capacity at the SLG level, including through collaboration with the State Commissioners of Finance and workshops with international experts. There are near-term refinancing uncertainties . The government faces significant refinancing needs in the first four months of 2015, including a benchmark bond (about N500 billion) falling due in April, but financing costs have risen significantly—the spread between the Nigeria 2023 Eurobond and the reference U.S. Treasury was 442 basis points at end-December, over 220 basis points wider than the low for 2014 (Annex 5). Staff noted that active engagement with investors and preserving cash buffers can help mitigate refinancing risk. The authorities are monitoring market developments closely and noted that they are projecting financing costs to increase in 2015. However, they remain confident that demand from domestic investors, especially pension funds, would ensure sufficient demand for new bonds and facilitate a smooth refinancing.