A strong reform agenda would support the achievement of program objectives . A set of priority reform measures has been identified, drawing on recent FAD technical assistance. These measures would address past slippages in revenue and spending, and the broader issues with implementation of PFM and revenue administration reforms during the previous program. Tax and Customs Administration The program steps up efforts to strengthen revenue collection agencies (MEFP, ¶ 41 to 52). It targets an increase in revenues to 17.5 percent of GDP by 2019, after which the anticipated increases in natural resource revenues would materialize. A comprehensive reform program is already underway, drawing on technical assistance from the IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) and AFTRIAC-West to address capacity constraints (Box 2). Page 28 Box 2. Niger: Revenue Mobilization and Liquidity Management A strategy is in place to modernize customs administration while strengthening transparency and governance, with a view to enhancing performance (MEFP, ¶ 42-45). Some operations are being contracted out to enhance efficiency. The finalization of the electronic inter-connection of all the customs offices will be key to combat fraud. The deployment of ASYCUDA World Software supported by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to all main offices not covered so far will pave the way for electronic customs transit, helping to broaden the tax base. With the introduction of tax identification numbers for all importers, the customs office will be able to perform risk based tax audits. Also the customs office is deepening its collaboration with the customs of Benin and Togo. Tax administration reforms aim at broadening the tax base and strengthening staff capacity through training . Reforms are supported by FAD technical assistance as well AFRITAC-West and focus mainly on continuing modernizing the management of tax administration’s operations through the improvement of tax collection, and the decentralization of the tax audit and control functions (MEFP, ¶ 46-51). To that end, the tax office will expand the competency of the large enterprises Directorate (DGE) to all the companies that meet the threshold (CFAF 500 million annual cash flow) regardless of their location. Thus, 120 companies that were previously under the jurisdiction of regional tax offices will be transferred to the DGE before end-2016. In addition, to further improve the coverage of the rapidly expending city of Niamey, the tax office will establish two tax assessment centers and two tax payment centers by June 2017 in Niamey. The tax office will also: (i) strengthen the tax audit function by joint customs and tax administration staff and decentralize the tax control unit to the regions; (ii) continue the ongoing project to provide a full information system that will improve transparency and reduce the risk of fraud; and (iii) finalize the measures to strengthen the reimbursement of VAT credit initiated in 2016, to strengthen VAT effectiveness. Enhanced management of tax exemptions will broaden the tax base. Improved monitoring and control of tax exemptions will be undertaken by revisiting existing exemption legislation and reinforcing the management of public enterprises (MEFP, ¶ 37-40). In that regard, the PPP framework will be reviewed and the government will consider transferring the tax provisions in the sector codes to the general tax and custom codes. Also, to limit the fiscal risks from public enterprises, an audit will be undertaken to clarify financial relations between the state and the main public enterprises. The Treasury office will strengthen accounting procedures, and improve non-tax revenue collection and liquidity management (MEFP, ¶ 52). Further modernization of accounting procedures will facilitate TSA implementation, with expected financing support from the European Union and technical support from FAD, this process will be supported by a long term IMF resident expert funded by the European Union. By end-March 2017, the government will sign the account management agreements with the BCEAO and the selected commercial banks and close all inactive accounts ( compte dormants ) (MEFP, ¶ 52 and 56). Public Financial Management and Liquidity Management Public expenditure management and budget execution are being enhanced . The Inter- Ministerial Budgetary Committee that was created in Mid-2016 provides an effective mechanism for aligning expenditure commitments with resource availability, thereby preventing the incurrence of arrears. To strengthen planning and spending control, the preparation of annual budgets, starting from the 2018 budget, will be in line with the budget program framework under the 2012 budget law (MEFP, ¶ 56). On the basis of this framework, budget execution will be subject to commitment authorizations and payments credits, further enhancing investment efficiency. Full implementation of the TSA is expected during the program period (MEFP, ¶ 52). Page 29 State-owned enterprises reform A comprehensive evaluation of state-owned enterprises will be launched to limit fiscal risks and generate cost savings (MEFP, ¶ 40). On the basis of that evaluation, an action plan will be established to audit the financial relations between the government and the main companies, to quantify implicit government subsidies, and inform policies for reducing exemptions.