Gender inequality in Niger is among the highest in the world and policies to improve women’s conditions are lagging (Background Paper on Gender Inequality in Niger). Some progress in women’s welfare indicators has been achieved during the implementation of the Programme de Développement Economique et Social (PDES), that sought to attain the Millennium Development Goals V Q Page 20 (Text Figure 2). However, Niger has the seventh lowest score in the world on the United Nation’s Gender Inequality Index (GII) and also ranks at the bottom of the OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). Poverty and social norms contribute to establish patterns of early marriage and a high fertility rate that take many women away from school and limits their participation in the workforce. Creating equal opportunities for women could contribute to boost development and growth outcomes, as gender inequality in Niger entails substantial economic costs (Text Figure 3). Text Figure 3. Niger: Indicators of Gender Equality and Regional Comparators, Latest Available Data The authorities consider gender inequality a major policy issue, and noted several affirmative action policies in recent years and plans going forward . The adoption of a National Gender Policy in 2008 laid out a four-pronged strategy: (i) supporting teenagers’ school enrolment to discourage early marriages; (ii) providing guidance and maternal support to teenagers; (iii) expanding opportunities for revenue generating activities and improved access to finance; and (iv) promoting public awareness by strengthening partnership with non-governmental organizations and opinion leaders. The authorities also highlighted Niger’s gender promoting institutions: the Ministry of Women Promotion, dedicated to providing vocational education and finance to women, and the National Gender Observatory. Also, through regional collaboration with neighboring countries (Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Chad, Mali, and Mauritania), the authorities are implementing programs aimed at empowering women and adolescent girls and at providing better access to quality reproductive health services. Staff agreed on the relevance of these policies and urged the authorities to continue to address gender-based legal restrictions . Staff acknowledged Niger’s socio-cultural context, while stressing the economic opportunity costs of not enabling women to fully participate in the Cuberes, David, and Marc Teignier, 2015, “Aggregate Costs of Gender Gaps in the Labor Market: A Quantitative Estimate”: Journal of Human Capital, forthcoming. nd nd Page 21 labor force because of legal gender-based restrictions. Staff noted that removing restrictions on ownership and inheritance of assets would provide women with access to collateral, as well as removing restrictions on women opening bank accounts would promote women’s inclusion in the financial system and support small business entrepreneurship. Thus, drawing on other country experiences, staff urged the authorities to pursue proven economic, legal, and institutional reforms such as improved access to finance and revenue generating activities that improve income opportunities for women. Also staff called for increased opportunities for women to enter the formal sector through enhanced training programs.