Despite the increased debt stock, the DSA suggests a moderate risk of debt distress (Niger: 2014 Debt Sustainability Analysis). Niger’s debt exposure has increased significantly since 2009, principally a result of government involvement in the financing of projects in the natural resources sectors. The refinancing loan for the construction of the SORAZ refinery (in the amount of CFAF 437.4 billion) included in the revised budget, if approved by the Chinese authorities in 2014, would replace the existing private non-concessional funding of the refinery (which was 40 percent guaranteed by the State), thereby leading to a steep increase in the stock of public external debt (including guarantees) from 22.8 percent of GDP at end-2013 to a projected 32.7 percent of GDP at end-2014. The master facility agreement contracted with China EximBank is earmarked for infrastructure projects with higher economic rates of return, increased debt exposure and the overall amount of the facility is expected to be disbursed within 8 years. Total external debt (including private debt) will increase from 49.5 percent of GDP at end-2013 to 53.7 percent of GDP at end-2014. Despite the increased exposure, the updated DSA suggests that the risk of debt distress remains moderate. The authorities’ own DSA covering the period 2014-34, prepared in August 2014 shows similar results: external debt ratios remain below thresholds in the baseline scenario, but there are some breaches under alternative shock scenarios. Page 17 Staff and the authorities agreed on the next steps to further strengthen debt management . The process of strengthening debt management was initiated earlier this year, with the creation of the Inter-Ministerial Committee by the order of the Prime Minister in December 2013 to prevent the recurrence of non-concessional borrowing, covering both loans with non-traditional borrowers and other non-concessional loans. The Committee has met twice this year due to lower loan activities. The authorities expressed strong commitment to improve the functioning of this Committee and to produce the periodical quarterly report on debt management. The authorities committed to continue strengthening the database of public and private debt to improve their debt management strategy.