Nigeria has achieved a decade of strong growth from a large and diverse economy. Economic growth averaged 6.8 percent a year over the past decade, with the economy accounting for 35 percent of the GDP for Sub-Saharan Africa. While the economy is diverse, with services accounting for over 50 percent and oil only 13 percent of GDP in 2013, the oil sector remains a critical source for fiscal revenues and foreign exchange (Figures 1 and 2). Growth has been driven by the non-oil-sector and private consumption, but Nigeria still lags peers in critical infrastructure (Figures 3 and 4), has high rates of poverty (33 percent in 2012/13) and income inequality, and faces development challenges (Annex 1). The sharp decline in oil prices in the second half of 2014 underscores the challenging but compelling need to address remaining development challenges . Sharply lower oil revenues to each tier of government will strain efforts to address social and economic disparities. In addition, the international environment is less accommodating, with uncertainty about the future of oil prices and the implications of the election (in March 2015) outcome increasing investors’ risk aversion. Figure 1. GDP by Sector, 2013 Figure 2. Consumption-led Growth, 2011-13 (Percent of GDP) Pre-rebasing Services mining Post-rebasing manufacturing agriculture Source: National Bureau of Statistics. (Percent) Consumption-private Investment Real GDP Source: National Bureau of Statistics. Consuption-public Net exports The authorities continue to advance their policy agenda, drawing on past discussions with staff (Annex 2). Public financial management systems have been strengthened by expanding the coverage of the Treasury Single Account (TSA) and information management systems to most Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). Financial sector supervision has advanced through the implementation of Basel II/III, adoption of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), implementation of the framework for consolidated supervision, strengthening of cross-border supervision (e.g., the use of memoranda of understanding (MOUs), joint inspections, and Page 6 participation in various Colleges of Supervisors), and enhancements in macroprudential oversight. The legacy debt overhang in the power sector was solved, paving the way for investment to increase gas production; the seed and fertilizer program helped improve food security to rural farm households (including women farmers); and institutions and instruments have been established to boost affordable housing, promote skills acquisition and entrepreneurship training, and improve access to finance for small- and medium-sized enterprises. Figure 3. Investment to GDP Ratio, 2013 (Percent) Figure 4. Public Investment Effectiveness Index (Units. Higher values reflect better performance) Overall Evaluation SSA Source: IMF. Implementation Brazil South Africa Indonesia Turkey Source: Dabla-Norris et al . (2011). Appraisal Selection