The political and security situation remains fragile, with high domestic vulnerabilities Spillovers from conflicts in neighboring countries and the increasing presence of terrorist groups along the 1,500 km border with Nigeria and across the country continue to place substantial strains on socio-political stability and required a reallocation of fiscal spending toward security. Security risks are compounded by continued widespread food insecurity exacerbated by a fast growing population—the economy still largely depends on subsistence agriculture where frequent drought, flooding, inadequate irrigation, and limited modern inputs hold back productivity growth. Development indicators are improving somewhat, including a significant reduction in child mortality rates in the last several years, but poverty remains pervasive. Niger is ranked last in the UN Human Development Index for 2013. Presidential elections are expected in 2016. The authorities have advanced their reform agenda, drawing on staff’s advice during the 2011 Article IV consultation . In line with staff’s advice to improve the business climate, efforts have been stepped up. These led to the drafting of a decree establishing a one-stop-shop dealing with the advantages in the investment code and the recommendation of an Administrative Arbitral Committee for Fiscal Litigations in the 2015 budget law, a bureau to advice small- and medium-size enterprises on access to business financing was established, a public-private partnership law was adopted and supported by a related technical coordination unit and that on the tax and accounting system governing public-private partnerships. Some progress has also been made in strengthening debt management: Quarterly reporting on debt flows and stocks is underway; the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Debt Management met twice and is working on internal working rules and charting a debt management strategy. However, progress has been slow in formulating a medium-term fiscal framework.