Nigeria’s oil production declined sharply in early 2013, from increased oil theft that was amplified by pipeline closures after the sabotage . With the oil sector accounting for 75 percent of government revenue and 95 percent of exports, the reduction in oil exports adversely affected the fiscal and external positions in 2013. The impact on revenues was particularly strong: for example, between January 2012 and June 2013, revenues collected from Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) fell by 47 percent and transfers to the ECA were reduced by 73 percent. Historically, oil theft has varied (text figure). Nigeria: Crude Oil Theft and Deferred Production, 2003 (1,000 barrels of oil per day) Deferred production Theft Sources: Nigerian authorities; and IMF Staff estimates. A number of key measures have been taken to address oil theft/production losses, but more can be done . Mitigating measures have included special naval exercises, collaboration with local leaders in oil-producing communities, and international initiatives to discourage the purchase of illegal oil by foreign refineries. While these measures, along with the reopening of some major pipelines, helped improve production in the second half of 2013, staff noted that more can be done to tackle the governance issues in the oil sector and to address the international dimension (Appendix 3). Staff highlighted the need to further strengthen the regulatory framework of the prospective PIB with enhanced oversight and transparency provisions and stringent enforcement clauses. While efforts are underway to improve the reconciliation of oil revenue Page 12 collections—Nigeria is Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) compliant —processes from pre-Federal Account Allocation Committee (FAAC) to postmortem FAAC are being strengthened, and collaboration among agencies has improved (Box 2). Staff urged the authorities to regularly audit and monitor exports and collection processes for oil revenues, and to apply the Anti-Money-Laundering (AML)/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) framework to help combat oil-theft-related money laundering. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed on the need to strengthen governance and oversight in the oil sector. They also concurred on capacity enhancements to address critical infrastructure constraints, ensure open access rules, and mandate strong integrated regulatory bodies aligned with international best practices. They indicated that the decision to privatize the four main state refineries, along with a sector project to build a US$9 billion refinery, would make an important contribution to modernizing the petroleum industry and could help accelerate ongoing efforts to enhance transparency in fuel subsidy management processes and further streamline the fuel subsidy regime. The authorities pointed also to the need to strengthen provisions in the PIB to ensure more transparency and accountability in the oil industry. Addressing oil theft has strong AML/CFT implications . The Nigerian AML/CFT framework contains important building blocks that can support a national strategy to combat oil theft and related money laundering. The Presidential Committee on Financial Action Task Force (FATF) could lead in the national coordination of AML measures to combat oil theft and related money laundering. The ongoing National Money Laundering/Terrorism Financing Risk Assessment (NRA) also provides a well-timed opportunity to include oil theft and related money-laundering risk as part of its mandate. The IMF’s technical assistance (TA) has also helped enhance capacity to conduct strategic analysis and typologies that could be applied to the study of oil theft and money laundering, and staff recommended that such an exercise be conducted and its results disseminated to all AML/CFT stakeholders. Financial and non-financial sector supervisors also have the capacity to require and enforce explicit oil theft money-laundering controls using their risk-based approach to supervision, including reporting of suspicious activities to the relevant authorities. Authorities’ views . The authorities concur that oil theft is a profit-motivated crime with money-laundering elements and that the existing AML/CFT framework could be mobilized to support broader national efforts to mitigate oil theft and associated production and revenue losses. There was broad agreement that the main AML/CFT stakeholders (i.e., the Presidential Committee on FATF matters, the Nigerian Financial Intelligence Unit (NFIU) and its umbrella agency the EITI compliance means the EITI Board considers that all of the EITI requirements have been met, but does not imply full transparency in the oil sector (http://eiti.org/faqs#EITICompliant). The EITI audit reports have helped improve the awareness of the governance issues in the extractive industries in general, but these reconciliations are retrospective and need to be strengthened with reconciliations on an on-going basis. In this section, authorities refer to the regulatory authorities (Ministry of Petroleum; government state oil company; and Direction of Petroleum Resources). Page 13 Economic and Financial Crimes Commission, and the AML/CFT supervisors) could play a critical supporting role in this endeavor, including by harnessing the role and cooperation of financial and non-financial entities subject to Nigeria’s AML/CFT regime. The authorities expressed interest in TA on strategic analysis and typologies exercises.