Niger faces major development and security challenges, but the political situation is stable . Despite significant improvements in social indicators over the last two decades, more than half of the population lives below the poverty line of less than US$1.90 (PPP-adjusted) a day (Text Figure 1a). The economy is still dominated by subsistence agriculture, which is hampered by frequent floods and droughts, and the prevalence of rudimentary techniques that hold back productivity. Since 2012, heightened armed hostilities across Niger’s borders have caused major humanitarian and economic crises. Such hostilities periodically claim lives, destroy property and infrastructure, disrupt domestic production and trade flows, and have resulted in an estimated 350,000 refugees and internally displaced persons (Text Figure 1b). As a result, security-related spending rose from 1.5 to 5.2 percent of GDP between 2011 and 2015, leading to higher budget deficits and diversion of spending from social priorities. Text Figure 1a. Niger: Social Indicators, Text Figure 1b. Niger: Refugees from 2005-latest Neighboring Countries’ Conflicts, 2012-16 (In percent or per thousand as indicated) (Number of people) The authorities have advanced their reform agenda, drawing on recommendations from the 2014 Article IV Consultation and in the context of the ECF Arrangement that expires at end-December 2016 . In line with staff’s advice to adhere to a prudent debt management policy, the authorities launched the process of strengthening the debt management framework including by establishing an Inter-Ministerial Committee on Debt Management. This Committee is headed by a permanent secretariat which coordinates debt policy across all ministries and ensures that every debt contracted is consistent with debt sustainability. Progress has also been made on improving the business climate, as Niger moved up from a rank of 176 th out of 189 countries in the 2014 World Bank Doing Business Report to 150 th out of 190 countries on the 2017 Report. However, headway H pp H tt z tt H mm ee H PPP SS bb SS Page 15 has been slow in customs and tax administration reforms, controlling spending and improving budget management.