Niger has the world’s fastest growing population, offering a prospective demographic dividend that can be captured with well-designed policies (Background Note on Harnessing the Demographic Dividend in Niger: Opportunities and Challenges). The significant decline in the mortality rate indicates that Niger has started its demographic transition. However, with the highest fertility rate in the world of 7.6 children per woman, Niger’s population growth rate has accelerated to 4.1 percent a year. The resulting young and growing labor force bodes well for economic growth, but adequate policies are needed to provide education and jobs for the youth to capture potential demographic dividend expected from 2020. Current projections suggest that the dividend could be low in terms of income per capita gains, but would last beyond 2100. Until then, the share of the working age population will be lower and the dependency ratio higher than the average levels reached by other regions that have already enjoyed large demographic dividends (Text Figure 5). The authorities showed strong commitment to seizing the demographic transition opportunities, but foresee pressing and long-term challenges . To that end, they have been implementing policies to reduce the fertility rate, promote vocational education, and create more job opportunities. To reduce fertility, they have adopted a bottom-up approach (focusing on local communities) which, they noted, has proven effective in overcoming to some extent the resistance of religious leaders. Specific actions include: (i) launching in 2012 of informal education venues (“ école des maris ”), intended to promote and facilitate family planning through increased involvement of husbands; and (ii) initiating in November 2015 the Sahel Women's Empowerment and Demographic Dividend project (SWEDD), supported by the World Bank and the United Nations The authorities informed that Niger subscribed to Africa Risk Capacity (ARC), a sovereign drought insurance for African Union member countries. In addition to the DNPGCCA and 3N Initiative, ad hoc structures were set up for specific missions; a Ministry in charge of Humanitarian Action and Disaster Management was created in May 2016. The authorities indicated that coordination issues will be addressed under the 2014-18 National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy (SNRRC) currently being revised with the assistance of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). Page 23 Population Fund. The priorities of enhancing vocational education and expanding job creation are identified in the EDD through the implementation of the Sectoral Program for Education and Training Development project (PSEF 2014-24). Another key challenge is ensuring quality universal education for all Nigeriens as education indicators remain low. To speed up job creation for graduates of vocational schools, the business environment is being improved to stimulate private sector initiative (see ¶ 39). Text Figure 5. Niger: Share of the Working Age Population, 1950-2100 Staff welcomed the measures taken so far to harness the expected demographic dividend, but called for better coordination and greater priority to vocational education and economic diversification . Staff noted that the existence of multiple institutions mandated to address demographic challenges, could lead to an inefficient allocation of resources and stressed the need for better coordination. Staff also urged for enhanced prioritization of investment in human capital, with the goal of improving women education and enhancing vocational education to ensure the development of a more gender balanced and skilled workforce. Also, based on other countries’ experience, staff showed that strong policies to curb population growth could shorten the duration of the demographic dividend window, and increase its size. With the goal of creating the needed jobs for the more than 250,000 young expected to join the labor force each year, staff called for the improvement of the business environment, sustained modernization of agriculture through the 3N Initiative, and leveraging resource revenues to promote economic diversification. bb bb Page 24 THE NEW ECF ARRANGEMENT: PRESERVING SUSTAINABILITY WHILE ENHANCING INCLUSIVE GROWTH The ECF-supported program is anchored on the government’s development strategy as set out in its Economic Development Document (EDD). With fiscal space likely to remain constrained over the medium term and security- and refugee-related spending likely to remain elevated, a successor ECF-supported policy framework is considered critical for sound policy implementation by both the government and its international partners who provide 60 percent of total budget financing. The new ECF program seeks to build on lessons from previous arrangements (Annex 1 on Niger: Ex-Post Peer-Reviewed Assessment). Previous programs have, despite substantial adverse exogenous shocks, preserved macroeconomic stability while enabling progress with social and development indicators. There were, however, frequent slippages in performance resulting in delayed reviews. This was in part due to the government’s inability to respond promptly to the shocks that often resulted in revenue shortfalls and, given weak public financial management, the incurrence of domestic arrears. There were also delays in implementing structural reforms. The new program would support progress towards the broad objectives of the EDD, while building on progress and challenges in reducing poverty under the PDES: Achievements and challenges . Niger’s development strategy under the ECF 2012-16—as laid out in the government’s PDES —helped to preserve macro-economic stability and to sustain an