Fiscal consolidation is progressing well, but fiscal buffers have been drawn down sharply . General government expenditure declined by about 1 percentage point of GDP in 2012-2013, largely from policies to control personnel expenses in the federal government, including by limiting compensation increases, consolidating pay bonuses, and enhancing payroll administration processes. Actual capital expenditure has been below budget but relatively stable share in GDP largely reflecting capacity constraints. Non-oil revenue as a share of GDP has increased slightly, reflecting the rapid growth in non-oil GDP. In addition, SLGs have contained the growth of expenditure, reflecting a relatively tight shared revenue envelope and their limited ability to borrow. This has narrowed the NOPD from about 27 percent to 23½ percent of non-oil GDP over the past year. However, ECA withdrawals were needed to offset lower oil revenue to all levels of government, reducing the ECA buffer to about US$3 billion by end-2013 (equivalent to about one month of federally collected revenue). Improvements have been made to the fiscal framework, but more needs to be done to enhance fiscal control. The introduction of the Nigeria SWF in mid-July 2012 represented an important strengthening in the management of oil revenues. The Nigeria SWF made its first investment in September 2013, providing more than US$200 million to international banks to manage a fixed-income portfolio. However, additional measures are needed to enable the framework to serve as an effective fiscal anchor, ensure adequate fiscal buffers, and avoid procyclical spending. For example: (i) the budget oil price is not formally instituted; (ii) the full transition from the ECA to the Nigeria SWF has not occurred excess crude revenues are still being deposited in the ECA, which is managed by political agreement among federal, state, and local governments and is subject to discretionary withdrawals; and (iii) the Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL) does not cover the SLGs, which receive more than half of total oil revenue as prescribed in the constitution. These factors imply that the federal government has only limited control over macrofiscal management (Box 3). The authorities’ fiscal framework is based on a budget oil reference price (set below the oil market price) and a production volume that determines the expenditure envelope for all levels of government as well as the scope for accumulating fiscal buffers. The framework is bounded by a 3 percent of GDP limit on the federal government deficit provided by the 2007 Fiscal Responsibility Act and accompanied by limits for borrowing from the state and local governments. For details on the fiscal framework see IMF Country Report No. 13/116, p. 8. Page 14 The upcoming elections could test the resilience of the fiscal framework and the consolidation plan . In the past, expenditure has been sensitive to elections, with the share of primary balance in non-oil GDP increasing one year before and during the election year (text figure). For example, a general raise for public sector wages was granted in 2010, less than a year before the general election of 2011. Non-oil primary balance (percent of Non-oil GDP) WEO oil price (RHS) Nonoil Primary Deficit and Oil Price, 1995 (Percent and U.S. dollars per barrel) The 2014 budget is consistent with the medium-term consolidation plan, but its implementation is subject to risks heightened in the context of the 2015 election. The 2014 budget has been crafted using a US$77.5 barrel reference price (below the reference price of US$79 used in 2013) and oil production of 2.388 million barrels per day (bpd) (about 5 percent lower than in the 2013 budget). The budget assumes a continued fiscal effort in 2014, including a reduction of expenditure of about 1 percentage point of GDP by further containing the growth of personnel expenditure, while maintaining capital expenditure by the federal government at about 2 percent of GDP. Furthermore, the MTEF implies continued consolidation in the medium term, with NOPD estimated to decline from 23½ percent to a sustainable NOPD of 18 percent of non-oil GDP by 2016 (Appendix 4). If implemented as planned, buffers will be gradually rebuilt with the ECA increasing from US$3 billion to US$15 billion in the next three years. Key risks to its implementation include the following: Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Vertical lines represent years of presidential elections b p c P U The assumed oil production is 3¾ percent above its 2013 level, implying that the problem of oil theft/production losses will be at least partially contained. Therefore, given the low level of fiscal buffers, potential disruptions in oil production are likely to require additional debt issuance to finance the projected expenditure levels. The assumed savings in payroll expenditure will require determined implementation. Initial efforts to clean up payrolls through the implementation of the Integrated Personnel and The government originally proposed a budget oil price of US$74 a barrel for 2014. However, the National Assembly agreed on a price of US$77.5 a barrel for the price of oil; the detailed budget is still under discussion. Staff expenditure projections are based on a slightly higher oil price of US$79 a barrel The NOPD is based on the permanent income hypothesis, which provides a long-term benchmark for fiscal sustainability in an oil-rich country. Page 15 Payroll Information System (IPPIS) have been very successful about 20 percent of the federal workforce (about 200,000 civil servants) had been targeted and more than 45,000 erroneous payroll records have been corrected. However, expanding the IPPIS to the rest of the federal workforce, including the armed and security forces, health care professionals, and educators may be difficult. In addition, with relatively rapid growth in the non-oil sector, it could be challenging to keep public sector wages frozen without affecting service delivery. The medium-term consolidation plan implies a stable federal government capital budget of about 2 percent of GDP a year. However, in the past there has been an uptick in the use of the capital budget in election years for example, in 2011 capital releases were about 71 percent of the budget levels compared to an average of 52 percent in 2010, 2012, and suggestive of potential pressures to increase this expenditure during the political cycle. Moreover, consolidation efforts should aim to create space for, and enhance the quality of public investment, with positive benefits for key sectors including agriculture. The projected long-term decline in oil revenue will necessitate additional fiscal effort, particularly for SLGs whose revenues are projected to decline by nearly ½ a percentage point of GDP over 2016-2018. Given their limited ability to borrow, the key will be to raise revenues independently or reduce expenditure but without affecting service provision, particularly in key areas such as health care and education. The consolidation momentum needs to be preserved through the 2015 election cycle and beyond. Rebuilding the ECA fiscal buffer to an adequate level to offset oil-revenue shocks (potentially of about US$15 billion to US$20 billion) and supporting macroeconomic stability requires a resolute implementation of the MTEF and a strong fiscal framework. This should be based on four pillars: (i) strengthening oil-revenue management; (ii) containing expenditure and increasing the quality of spending, ensuring service delivery in key areas such as education and health care; (iii) boosting non-oil revenue through ongoing initiatives to enhance tax administration, curtail exemptions, and reduce evasion. Non-oil revenue mobilization could be further underpinned by broadening the value-added tax (VAT) base, continuing extension of automated tax collections, simplifying tax laws, and reducing transfer-pricing risks; and (iv) establishing FRLs for states, to further enhance the MTEF guidance of the fiscal policy of the general government. This could include states adopting a balanced-budget rule that could help limit the potential state and local budget slippages and reduce the incentives for ad hoc ECA withdrawals. Early successes in the Subsidy Reinvestment and Empowerment Program (SURE-P) could be leveraged to build broader support for the eventual full deregulation of fuel prices to strengthen the safety net, including the Conditional Grant Scheme (CGS) (addressing weaknesses in education, health care, water, and sanitation) and the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) (which has reached more than 60,000 households in extreme poverty). Further expansion of these programs should be underpinned by a strong framework for monitoring and evaluation to improve service delivery in an affordable way. Page 16 Authorities’ views . The authorities agreed on the need to further strengthen the fiscal framework and reiterated that the government would keep its fiscal consolidation on track. Oil revenue management initiatives are also underway. Expenditure restraint is central to the authorities’ 2014 budget. The authorities pointed to their ability to contain salaries and clean up payroll in the past two years as evidence of their commitment to control the wage bill. The expansion of the IPPIS started in December 2013, by including the police force (about 200,000 individuals) and should be expanded to most of the remaining federal government workers by end-2014. On capital spending, the authorities argued that the 2014 budgeted level reflects the current capacity and prioritizes the completion of existing capital projects. They also see potential quick gains from improved non-oil revenue administration, which could deliver up to US$500 million (a 6 percent increase in non-oil revenue) in 2014. The authorities agreed with the need to strengthen the safety net, but noted the low political appetite for further subsidy removal. The authorities acknowledged that the states have limited capacity to borrow any debt issuance request is carefully evaluated by the Debt Management Office (DMO) taking into account the state revenue capacity and indicated that FRLs have already been approved by 12 states. Nigeria ’s public financial management (PFM) capacity is improving, but needs to be strengthened . Thus far, the Government Integrated Financial Management Information System (GIFMIS) has continued to support the rollout of the Treasury Single Account (TSA), which has been implemented in 217 entities (about 60 percent of the ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) of the federal government). In addition, the GIFMIS has deployed several other functionalities including the budget preparation component (which has helped the 2014 budget process). Looking forward, the resolute implementation of PFM reforms is crucial to the ongoing consolidation efforts. This should include the expansion of the TSA to the remaining entities of the federal government, ideally prioritized by size to include first large entities such as the armed and security forces. In addition, it would be important to establish protocols for public entities outside the federal government which are responsible for a substantial portion of public expenditure to be gradually added to the TSA, including SLGs. Authorities’ views. The authorities are committed to continue the rollout of the TSA in 2014 to the remaining MDAs. However, they indicated potential challenges to expand the system to MDAs outside of Abuja. In addition, their current focus is initially limited to the federal government, given issues of fiscal federalism that limit the ability of the central government to control the cash management practices of the SLGs.