The strategy of supporting a de facto exchange rate peg through exchange restrictions is significantly distorting the economy and weighing on economic activity . The restrictions have served to protect certain sectors of the economy, but many other sectors are cutting production and shedding labor, resulting in cuts to investment and consumption. The BOP impact of reducing imports has been offset to a large extent by lower investment and reduced non- oil exports, as firms have experienced difficulties in obtaining inputs for their production, and some domestic production that was previously exported has been diverted to the local market. Foreign exchange shortages and the associated increase in the spread between the interbank rate and the rates on the BDC and parallel markets have also contributed to higher prices, undermining the desired anti-inflationary impact of the restrictions. Staff views a comprehensive policy response, including tighter monetary policy and adjustment of the exchange rate, as urgently needed to facilitate the much-needed external adjustment . While imports have been contained to some extent through prioritization by the CBN, adjustment has been hampered by the monetary easing and a de facto fixed overvalued exchange rate (see Annex IV), contributing to the combination of above-target inflation, capital outflows, and loss of international reserves. Meanwhile, monetary easing has failed to spur economic activity due to increased banking system credit to the public sector, deterioration in borrower creditworthiness, and uncertainty over the economic outlook. Adjustment in the exchange rate, accompanied by a tighter monetary and fiscal stance and measures to facilitate removal of the exchange restrictions, would defend reserves, facilitate an orderly adjustment, and permit the return to a normal functioning of the foreign exchange market. Authorities’ views : The authorities consider that the foreign exchange controls have provided necessary breathing space amidst declining oil prices by slowing the loss of reserves, and, in their assessment, stimulating production and employment in some sectors. The authorities note inflation slightly above their target range, but view the recent monetary easing as necessary to buffer the economic slowdown. Exchange system. Nigeria has recently introduced measures in the foreign exchange market that give rise to exchange restrictions and a multiple currency practice (MCP) under Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3, of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement: (i) an exchange restriction arising from the prohibition to access foreign exchange at the Nigerian foreign exchange markets for the payment of imports of 40 categories of items; (ii) an exchange restriction arising from the rationing of foreign exchange and its allocation based on the CBN’s determination of priority categories of The estimated exchange rate gap for 2015 as a whole, including the contributions of related policies, was a 15 percent to 20 percent overvaluation. With fundamentals changing over the course of 2015 and into early 2016, especially the continuing low price of oil (the average price for Nigerian oil expected for 2016 based on futures market prices is about 30 percent lower than the average price for 2015), the estimated current account and exchange rate gaps, and the associated balance of payments risks, likely have increased. Page 22 transactions; and (iii) an MCP arising from the large spread between the rate set by the CBN for commercial banks, and the rates in the BDC and parallel market. In addition, existing limits on the amounts of FX available when traveling abroad, which cannot be exceeded even upon verification of the bona fide nature of the transaction, also give rise to an exchange restriction under Article VIII. Authorities’ views : The authorities are not requesting Fund approval of the exchange restrictions and MCP. While not committing to a timetable for their removal, the authorities see the exchange measures as temporary and plan to adjust or remove them upon reserves being restored to more adequate levels, supported by strengthened monetary and fiscal policies and planned structural reforms. They also noted that these measures were implemented for balance of payments needs, and are non-discriminatory in implementation. Greater flexibility in the exchange rate is needed to allow the economy to adjust to external shocks. Greater flexibility has pros and cons for commodity-dependent exporters like Nigeria (see Box 5). In staff’s view, a more flexible regime would facilitate attempts to diversify the export base and permit the economy to adjust more smoothly to changes in fundamentals, lowering the potential for episodes of exchange rate misalignment and reducing reliance on reserves to buffer external shocks. Increased flexibility would also free up the CBN to focus more on price stability as its primary objective and increase the scope for countercyclical monetary policy. Increasing flexibility could start with implementing a central parity rate within a band, then increasing the width of the band and allowing the central parity to respond to the supply and demand of FX. Such a regime transition should be aided by supporting macroeconomic policies, establishing an alternative nominal anchor, strengthening technical implementation capacity and communications, and adopting measures (for example, to deepen hedging markets) to help the financial, corporate, and household sectors deal with exchange rate volatility. Authorities’ views : The authorities emphasized the role the exchange rate peg had played as a nominal anchor and considered current account and exchange rate gaps to be smaller than estimated by staff. The authorities acknowledged that the price of foreign exchange should reflect changes in economic fundamentals, but expressed concern about the impact of exchange rate volatility on financial and corporate balance sheets.