The short- and medium-term outlooks are strong. Growth is expected to increase from 6.4 percent in 2013 to 7.3 percent in 2014, driven partly by a rebound in oil production and supported by positive effects of reforms in power and higher agriculture production. Inflation should continue to decline, in line with a tight monetary policy and helped by expected policies preserving fiscal consolidation through the ongoing political cycle. The authorities’ 2014– Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) proposal is consistent with a declining NOPD in 2014 compared with end-2013. However, the early start to the 2015 general elections and fiscal performance in previous election cycles suggest uncertainty about the continued implementation of the MTEF and structural reform agenda. Over the medium term, continued progress on fiscal consolidation and the implementation of key structural reforms should lead to a gradual increase in Page 8 the growth rate and a generally more resilient economy, characterized by a low risk of debt distress. Risks to the outlook are significant (Risk Assessment Matrix, RAM Table 7) . To illustrate these risks, staff analyzed the direct impact of domestic and external shocks on key macroeconomic variables. The first scenario (Figure 6) replicates a persistently lower oil price. The drop in oil prices puts substantial pressure on the fiscal and external accounts, resulting in severely depleted buffers. The second scenario (Figure 7) looks at the implication of less prudent fiscal policy, with increased spending that does not target human capital and infrastructure development. In this scenario, depleted buffers show that policies assumed in the baseline cannot be sustained. The third scenario (Figure 8) examines the impact of high levels of production losses related to oil theft, compounded by less favorable oil market dynamics from the shale oil/gas revolution (Appendix 1) and a possible emerging market slowdown. In this scenario oil revenue reduces significantly, leaving little space for boosting growth-enhancing spending. In addition to these scenarios , security problems in the North could also affect economic activity through agriculture and trade, as occurred in 2012. Also, a reversal of investor sentiment or less confidence in the policy stance could put pressure on the exchange rate and adversely affect macroeconomic and financial stability. This could occur from the prospective exit from UMP.