New spending pressures have required adjustments to the 2014 budget and fiscal program design . Specifically, a revised budget approved by the National Assembly in August 2014, provided conservative revenue estimates, and accordingly expenditures were adjusted. However the basic balance has been relaxed by 1.3 percent (compared to the last review) to accommodate higher spending financed by regional securities issued on the regional markets; this implies a modification of the ceiling of domestic financing (Table 7). Specifically: • Revenues : Overall revenues were reduced by 5.5 percent of GDP largely due to delays in implementing new telecom taxes and shortfalls in customs revenue that were adversely impacted by regional security. Potential telecom revenues of CFAF 216 billion (5.5 percent of GDP) included in the initial budget did not materialize. Customs revenues have underperformed due to deteriorated security conditions at the borders which disrupted trade flows. The revised framework includes additional nontax revenues and financing of CFAF 16 billion (0.4 percent of GDP) of royalties and signature bonus related to the sale of oil exploration rights in the Agadem block and CFAF 34 billion from the sale of a 3G telecom license to a telecom operator. In view of However, the net reduction is around 4.1 percent as nontax revenue from a sale of a telecom license came late in the year to temper a potential decrease. Page 12 the increase of exceptional revenues and to address future exogenous shocks, staff and the authorities agreed to increase the buffers at the BCEAO to CFAF 38.7 billion, from CFAF 13.6 billion in the second and third reviews. • Spending : Current budgetary spending was increased slightly to accommodate additional security expenditures, with a significant increase in investment. Additional spending of 0.4 percent of GDP, is envisaged on goods and supplies related to Niger’s new regional military commitments: 1.2 percent of GDP to meet needed infrastructure investments to mitigate food insecurity and flooding risks; and an allocation of 0.4 percent of GDP to cover mandatory National Retirement Fund costs. Increased investment will be financed by domestic sources—with the support of BCEAO, the authorities have issued CFAF 93.3 billion (2.3 percent of GDP) in 2014 on the regional security market—and increased budget assistance from the World Bank and the European Union. However, given limited capacity reflected in significant under-execution of capital expenditure in the first half of the year, the revised fiscal framework is built on a more conservative target on capital expenditure than the authority’s revised budget proposal. Reflecting the higher performance observed in the reduction of domestic arrears (in the amount of CFAF 9.5 billion) in the first half than the program target, the authorities have increased their annual target of domestic arrears reduction to CFAF 10 billion. The authorities also recently replaced a 36-year old presidential plane . Documents provided to staff suggest an allocation of CFAF 21 billion (0.5 percent of GDP) for the purchase of the plane in the 2013 budget. However, given slower procurement procedures than expected, cash payments started in 2013, and the remainder was paid in 2014 (albeit recorded in the 2013 budget), financed by residual balances of the 2013 budgetary allocation that had been transferred to a special deposit account at the BCEAO (MEFP, ¶ 9). However, as payments have been inappropriately expanded beyond the complementary period in 2014, the authorities have been taking corrective measures with regard to the respect of the complementary period and on stopping commitments on time (MEFP, ¶ 42). For 2014, the Minister of Finance issued an order stopping all budgetary commitment by the end of November. In addition, over the medium term, the authorities committed to improve the investment management system by speeding up implementation of the action plan of the 2012 organic law on public finance laws (MEFP ¶ 42). The adoption of this organic law is also part of Niger’s commitment to implement provisions aimed at strengthening regional integration by harmonizing budget reporting.