The urgently needed near-term fiscal adjustment should be used to jump start medium-term fiscal policy goals—delivery of key public services. The new reality of low oil prices and low oil revenues means that the nature of government—all tiers of government—needs to fundamentally change. The fiscal challenge is no longer about how to divide the proceeds of Nigeria’s oil wealth, but what needs to be done to effectively deliver public services, be it in IMF (2015), Pan-African Banking: Opportunities and Challenges for Cross-Border Oversight Page 17 education, health, or infrastructure. In this context, immediate fiscal adjustment is unavoidable. With the lowest non-oil revenues among major commodity producers (Figure 4) and consolidated government spending already relatively low (11½ percent of GDP in 2015), the fiscal adjustment should be tilted to raising revenues. A fiscal adjustment of about 3 percent of GDP is needed to ensure medium-term debt sustainability While public debt is low at 14.4 percent of GDP, the FGN interest payments-to- revenue ratio has increased significantly to about 32 percent. With the sharp decline in the growth rate and despite the recent reduction in domestic real interest rates, the overall primary balance required to keep debt on a sustainable path is now at about -1 percent of GDP (see Annex III). This implies that the primary balance (currently at about -4 percent of GDP) needs to be adjusted by 3 percent of GDP. The 3-percent fiscal adjustment will also ensure that the long-term management of the oil wealth remains sound and sustainable (SIP on fiscal rules). Efforts toward fiscal consolidation in the draft 2016 budget are in the right direction, but with oil prices expected to remain low (and below oil price in the draft budget) more will be needed. Figure 4. Nigeria: Non-Commodity Revenue Compared to Other Commodity Exporters General Government Non-Commodity Revenue, 2010-15 Non-Commodity Revenue, 2014 (Percent of non-resource GDP) Oil Exporters Weighted Average G-20 Weighted Average Source: WEO October 2015. Source: IMF Staff The composition of the adjustment should reflect a realistic pace for raising non-oil revenue, which is critical to allow budget to be implemented. At just 4 percent of GDP, non-oil revenues are simply too low for the government to be able to meet its expenditure priorities, including addressing lagging indicators for infrastructure and social development (Figure 4). Reforms could target a non-oil revenue-to-non-oil-GDP ratio that is more in line with that of peers and yet achievable, such as 8 percent over the medium term (against a target of 6.4 under the current policies). Such an objective could be achieved, as a priority, by raising the standard VAT rate initially from 5 percent to 7.5 percent and further over the medium term to provide a strong revenue The World Bank estimates that capital expenditure of about $14 billion a year for over a decade is needed to close identified infrastructure gaps (Foster and Pushak, 2011). Page 18 base for SLG s (85 percent is distributed to SLGs), in addition, broadening the base (from currently 16 percent of GDP to about 50 percent of GDP), and revamping the design to allow the offsetting of input tax credits. Another priority is the strengthening of tax administration for corporate income tax and customs taxes and excises, which can increase collection efficiency by 20 percent by closing loopholes, reducing tax exemptions, and improving compliance. In particular, as an immediate revenue protection measure government could announce a moratorium on new tax incentives, which would stem revenue losses until an overall review of the Nigerian income tax system is concluded. While the draft 2016 budget prioritizes early action on administrative improvements— and steps are underway—adjustment in tax rates could provide greater certainty that revenue objectives could be achieved. Authorities’ views The authorities acknowledged the importance of non-oil revenue mobilization, especially in the context of permanently lower oil prices. They are open to consider an increase in the VAT rate over the medium term, but believe that a sufficient increase in revenue effort can result immediately from strengthening collection efficiency, with a focus on broadening the base, improving compliance, closing loopholes, and reducing tax exemptions. Streamlining recurrent expenditure is key to ensure the efficiency of public service delivery and foster fiscal adjustment The establishment of an Efficiency-Unit is a promising and important initiative to streamline the cost of government and improve efficiency of public service. A mechanism could also be introduced to promote cooperation with SLGs, strengthening expenditure rationalization across tiers of government. The broader streamlining review could also incorporate a strategic prioritization of spending towards high sustained growth and social development. Tax expenditures could be reduced to create space for higher-priority spending. Tax exemptions/incentives should be streamlined and phased. Where they exist, sunset clauses should be well-specified, and there should be a strict cost-benefit assessment, with strong monitoring of outcome-based performance indicators. Transfers should be well targeted. In particular, continuing the move (in the draft 2016 budget) to eliminate resources allocated to fuel subsidies would allow spending on innovative social programs for the most needy and for other public services. With regulated prices only just covering current costs, any increases in international prices (and/or currency depreciation) will require a decision on whether to discontinue the subsidy regime or request a supplementary budget (as occurred in 2015). The average VAT rate in ECOWAS (excluding Nigeria) is 16½ percent. Broadening the VAT base entails enforcing compliance across all tax types and taxpayers categories by focusing on audits and clearing backlogs; improving the registration of all taxpayer categories by focusing on unregistered corporate and other relevant governmental agencies; and using technology to block leakages through the introduction of the Auto-VAT collection platform for new sectors such as telecoms, power, hospitality, e-commerce, and financial services. Page 19 Authorities’ views: The authorities indicated that in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) for 2016-18, recurrent expenditure as a share of nominal GDP is projected to be broadly contained, from 2.6 percent of GDP in 2015 to 2.3 percent in 2018 (based on authorities GDP numbers). The authorities see scope for streamlining further, beyond measures reflected in the draft 2016 budget. They noted that they have already taken steps to contain recurrent expenditure at the Federal level through a Zero-Based Budgeting approach. On fuel subsidies, they noted that no provision is needed, given low oil prices. They stressed, however, that they would be clearing arrears to oil marketers, and reviewing product pricing on a quarterly basis. Capital expenditure should focus on high-impact and high value-added projects . Staff supports the government’s focus on power, integrated transportation (roads, rail, air, and ports), and housing, but noted the importance of ensuring the return on investment remains high. In this respect, staff welcomes the emphasis on monitoring and evaluation at the Ministry of Budget and National Planning. Staff also emphasizes the publication of those reports to improve transparency and public awareness of how tax money is used. Authorities’ views: The authorities agree that the process of implementing capital expenditure needs to improve in order to deliver the highest payoffs and indicated that publication of reports will be on a quarterly basis. They have given spending priority to the completion of high impact projects that are near completion and are streamlining the process to reduce the implementation delays. SLG finances remain a concern, with the risk of deepening arrears and, potentially constitute an important contingent fiscal liability . The combination of loan restructuring and soft loans provided during 2015Q3 to clear the wage arrears has improved current cash flows for the SLGs, but mortgaged a portion of future revenues and left open the potential for moral hazard. With data on SLGs sparse and varied, a clear picture has not emerged on how SLGs plan to adjust their spending and increase internally generated revenues to manage the projected lower oil revenue allocations. Staff supports an orderly adjustment of sub-national budgets, through emphasis on raising VAT receipts, encouraging reform of budget preparation and execution, and strengthening public financial management (including through technical assistance on TSA and cash management, a capturing of all committed (multi-year) liabilities, and strengthening of budget preparation and reporting). Further, terms for emerging assistance could be strengthened to enhance accountability and reduce the likelihood for additional bailouts. Authorities ’ views : The authorities expressed great concern about the sustainability of SLG finances. In particular, they noted that they intend to strengthen enforcement of guidelines that require bank loans to be spent for investment — including withholding irrevocable standing payment orders for non-investment-related loans — and to improve transparency and accountability of state government spending. They inquired about best practices in countries with federation structures, while noting that the best fora to discuss these issues with state governors are the Federal Accounts Allocation Committee (FAAC) and the National Economic Council (NEC) meetings. The authorities also see the need for more technical assistance to improve PFM at the state government level (Box 4). Page 20 Pursuing a minimum cost, risk-based debt management strategy is crucial. Continuing to rely heavily on domestic financing may constrain the government’s ambitious capital investment plan, especially as the exclusion from the J.P. Morgan local government bond indexes could lower participation of foreign investors. Instead staff recommends designing a medium-term debt management strategy (MTDS) that supports financing for development. This may entail rebalancing the external-domestic debt mix with more external debt, though access to international capital markets may be constrained by the deterioration in Nigeria’s credit profile and global market conditions.. A joint IMF–WB TA mission visited Abuja in February 2016 to provide assistance in developing a MTDS. Authorities’ views : The authorities are planning on tapping external resources going forward as proposed in the draft 2016 budget. Indeed, for 2016, the authorities plan to secure half of gross financing externally, with 80 percent of that to be secured from multilateral sources. Sukuk and Diaspora bonds are also options being explored. Furthermore, the debt management office (DMO) plans to revise the MTDS to take into account the current state of the economy. The fiscal framework needs strengthening. Under the current arrangement, the budget oil price is highly politicized and subject to negotiations between the Executive and Legislative branches. Fiscal buffers can be used flexibly to fund augmentations, discretionary allocations, subsidies, and social projects. As a result, the medium-term non-oil primary deficit is strongly linked to oil price fluctuations. In addition, the fiscal responsibility law applies mostly to the federal government while fiscal sustainability refers to all three tiers of government. Finally, the Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) is small ($1.75 billion including $500 million raised through Eurobond issuance) and currently excluded from the fiscal framework. The fiscal responsibility law has not proven sufficient to ensure sustainability of oil wealth . Staff estimates, for example, that a “depoliticized” budget rule using a combination of past 5-year average oil price, the current year oil price, and forward looking 5-year oil-price, together with a structural primary surplus target of 2½ percent of non-oil GDP, is one option (subject to pre- announced exceptions) that could provide a basis for long-term sustainability and the preservation of oil wealth, while limiting the effect of oil price volatility (SIP on Fiscal Rules). Authorities’ views: The authorities welcome the proposal to institutionalize budget oil pricing. It would help reduce the annual friction that results from fixing the oil benchmark and enhance overall budget preparation. However, they expressed caution, highlighting the possible need for flexibility to accommodate extreme price movements and specific circumstances (e.g., security issues), and noted that a similar model was being discussed with the World Bank. Page 21