Niger’s development strategy—as laid out in the Plan de Développement Economique et Social (PDES) — envisages leveraging its natural resource wealth into a dynamic and balanced sustained inclusive growth process . Implementation of the strategy requires large-scale investments to overcome longstanding obstacles to growth (SIP—Natural Resource Boom for Niger: From Public Investment to Sustained Economic Growth) : ongoing projects to complete the Kandadji hydroelectric dam and the exploitation and processing of coal from Salkadamna are designed to address deficiencies in energy supply; and the launch during this period of the regional rail loop will provide a strong and lasting link between Niger and its neighbors, with an historic opportunity to provide a permanent solution to the country’s isolation. Challenges are clearly numerous and diverse, but four stand out: (i) food security; (ii) security and governance; (iii) development of human capital; and (iv) infrastructure development. Under this development strategy, the medium-term outlook looks favorable . Growth is expected to average 5.6 percent in 2014-16 and 8.5 percent in 2017-19 as two large natural resource projects—crude oil export and uranium production—are scheduled to begin in 2017/18 and late 2019, respectively. In 2017, oil and mining output and exports are expected to increase significantly, and natural resource-related fiscal revenue should increase sharply (Table 3). On the external side, Contract negotiations with AREVA, the largest uranium mine which has been operating since 1971, were completed in May 2014 and are consistent with the provisions of the 2006 mining code, including the mines becoming subject to customs duties, the payment of VAT, and being managed by a Nigerien. The impact on fiscal revenues may, however, be modest due to the sharp decrease in uranium price, to US$38 per pound in 2014 versus US$148 per pound in 2008. Page 9 the decline in oil prices in the second half of 2014 will increase the current account deficit over the medium-term relative to previous estimates (about 0.7 percent of GDP in 2015), resulting in a lower but still significant accumulation of deposits at the BCEAO (Table 5). Risks to the outlook stem from both internal and external sources (Table 14 RAM). The main near-term risks are a further deterioration in the security situation in the region, which could severely impact FDI inflows, private sector activity, and fiscal outcomes. The timing, financing, and feasibility of government involvement in projects in the extractive industry pose particular risks, due to their inherent elevated uncertainty and the authorities’ limited implementation capacity given difficulties in the oversight of the sector. Finally, Niger remains vulnerable to climate shocks, commodity price volatility and limited predictability in donor support and low project execution rates. Although the (PDES) financing gap was almost closed (96.6 percent), donors indicated that less than 30 percent of resources were mobilized, due to the slow pace of project execution. Though Ebola-related risks are so far contained, they could be disastrous, should they materialize. The exchange rate remains broadly in line with fundamentals, but structural indicators suggest competitiveness concerns . Model-based assessments do not suggest significant current account disequilibria or real effective exchange rate misalignments (SIP—External Stability Assessment) (Text Table). However, broader measures of competitiveness point to persistent weaknesses in the business climate: The 2014 Doing Business report ranks Niger 176 out of 189 countries as Niger moved two notches down compared to the 2013 ranking. For instance, Nigerien firms face more severe challenges than average WAEMU and SSA in (i) trading across borders; (ii) starting a new business; (iii) resolving insolvency; and (iv) dealing with construction permits. WAEMU’s gross international reserves are adequate at around 5 months of imports of goods and services at end-December 2013. Text Table: Exchange Rate Assessment, 2013 CA Norm* NFA* NFA-Stabilizing CA* Underlying CA* GAP* Elasticity** Misalignment Approach Macroeconomic Balance*** Equilibrium Exchange Rate External Sustainability EBA-lite *Values are expressed as % of GDP. ** The elasticity of 0.63 is the median of the trade balance elasticity of small and low income countries from Tokarick (2010). The value is consistent with the elasticity used in the WAEMU exchange rate assessment. ***The CA account norm of -6.3 is the average for the model prediction for the period 2013-2019. The authorities are in broad agreement with the external sector assessment. Page 10