The banking system appears adequately capitalized and efficient relative to other countries in the region. At end- September 2016, prudential indicators (Table 6) suggest that capital adequacy ratios for most banks remain above the regulatory threshold of 8 percent. Although gross non-performing loans are at reasonable levels (18.5 percent of total loans at end-September 2016), they have risen slightly and are a source of concern for two banks (Text Figure 6). A shallow financial Text Figure 6. WAEMU: Non-Performing Loans, 2006–15 (Percent of total loans) system and increased exposure to the public sector could constrain growth and generate financial risks . Despite a significant improvement in the regional financial market, the domestic banking sector remains shallow, with limited financial instruments and four commercial banks controlling about 90 percent of total banking sector assets. The sectoral distribution of credit is skewed towards trade, services, and mining sectors, and Niger’s underdeveloped capital market is dominated by banks and the government. Agriculture, the largest contributor to economic growth, benefits marginally from bank financing. Key risks stem from growing exposures to the public sector, both through holding of government bonds and the incurrence of domestic arrears. Such arrears also hamper banks’ clients’ capacity to repay their loans. The authorities and staff concurred on the need to establish a consultative platform with the banking association. Staff highlighted the importance of strengthening Niger’s microfinance network to foster financial inclusion . Following the adoption in July 2015 of the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion, CFAF 300 million were earmarked in the 2016 budget for its implementation and another CFAF 300 million for the National Financial Sector Development Strategy (NFSDS) that was approved in late 2014. The objective is to make available through 2021, CFAF 35 billion in credits to small businesses, in particular those run by women and young entrepreneurs. The government plans to ask for donor assistance with this microfinance program at a forthcoming Round Table to be held in 2017. Staff highlighted the role of microfinance as a means to deepening financial inclusion and therefore reducing poverty. The authorities and staff concurred on the need for the quick establishment of the steering committee in charge of implementing the NFSDS. Page 33