Nigeria’s economy has been hit hard by global developments that have aggravated longstanding development weaknesses. Three major economic transitions—the slowdown and rebalancing of the Chinese economy, lower commodity prices, and tightening financial conditions and risk aversion of international investors—have impacted the Nigerian economy through trade, exchange rates, asset markets (including commodity prices), and capital flows. These shocks compounded an already challenging development environment—inadequate infrastructure, high unemployment (9.9 percent), and a high poverty rate (above 50 percent in the northern states). Prices Figure 1. Nigeria: Macro and Financial Impact of Lower Oil Macro-financial outcomes are closely linked with the price of oil . While the non-oil sector accounts for 90 percent of GDP, the oil sector plays a central role in the economy (Figure 1). With the fiscal and external accounts highly dependent on oil receipts, lower oil prices reduce aggregate demand from the public sector and affect growth in the non-oil sector through consumption, investment, asset (including equity) prices, and co s t channels. A lower supply of foreign exchange adversely impacts corporate sector activity, and combined with high costs of doing business (inadequate infrastructure, low access to credit, and high interest rates) weakens balance sheets in corporate and banking sectors and lowers investment and growth. Although the banking sector is relatively small (about 20 percent of GDP), the transmission of shocks has widespread impact as conditions in the formal sector have trickle-down effects on informal credit and trading activities. Policy uncertainty amplified the impact of global developments. President Buhari was inaugurated in May 2015, having led the All Progressives Congress (APC)—a merger of four opposition parties—to victory in the March 28 elections, the first democratic transition of government in Nigeria’s history. The administration has listed fighting corruption, enhancing transparency, improving security, and creating jobs as key elements of its policy agenda. While progress has been made against Boko Haram, in addressing corruption, and strengthening governance, the delay in appointing a cabinet until November 2015 limited the scope for a timely and comprehensive policy response to the oil price shock. Page 10 Capacity constraints have also limited the policy response Following the recommendations of the 2014 Article IV consultation, progress has been made in improving capacity, in particular in public financial management (PFM) at the federal government level, helping to strengthen fiscal discipline and accountability. This effort is now being extended to the State and Local Governments (SLGs) (Annex I).