Adjusting to the lower oil price environment will take time, with growth likely to remain well below past trends and with reduced buffers. For 2016, the weak growth seen in 2015 is expected to continue as the authorities put in place their policy package. Overall growth is projected at 2.3 percent, below the 2.7 percent recorded in 2015. The draft 2016 budget submitted to the National Assembly in December should provide some support to growth through a significant shift in the composition of fiscal spending towards capital investment (mainly power and transport), while increasing the allocation for a social safety net. The exchange restrictions and the large misalignment of the real exchange rate (no adjustment in the interbank exchange rate is assumed) will continue to provide a drag on private sector activity and non-oil growth is projected at just 3.1 percent (compared to 3.6 percent in 2015 and 7.3 percent in 2014). The oil sector also faces uncertain prospects and, despite ongoing efforts to enhance governance and reduce leakages, is likely to record another year of negative growth. For 2017, growth is projected to recover to 3.5 percent based on the results of policies under implementation—particularly in the oil sector—as well as an improvement in the terms of trade. Improved governance in the oil sector should facilitate an expansion in production with the greater clarity in the regulation of the sector and the gradual rebound in international oil prices supporting renewed investment. The revised Petroleum Industry Bill (PIB), focusing on industry structure and regulation, presented to the National Assembly could release significant investment in the oil and gas sector, though the impact could occur over time. The combination of the rebound in the terms of trade, and improvements in power and electricity generation as a result of the public infrastructure investments would support a recovery in non-oil growth to about 3.5 percent despite the continued drag on the private sector from the distortions in the foreign exchange market. This is significantly below past trends (non-oil growth averaged around 8 percent over the past decade) and barely above population growth estimated at 2.7 percent. Page 14 In this baseline scenario, there is insufficient progress in closing the existing macroeconomic imbalances, resulting in the further drawdown of buffers, heightening vulnerabilities . Fiscal deficits remain large resulting in the continued need for both domestic and external financing, with the FGN interest rate to revenue ratio—a key indicator of debt sustainability—likely to increase to above 40 percent. International reserves would be expected to decline throughout the medium term, though pressures on reserves would reduce with the anticipated recovery in international oil prices. A more accelerated adjustment path—could lower these risks and facilitate an earlier move of the economy to a more sustainable growth path, while further delays in policy adjustment would simply exacerbate the risks (Box 2). There are significant downside risks to this outlook: (Risk Assessment Matrix) Weaker global growth, particularly in emerging markets, a continued lull in commodity/oil prices, higher international interest rates, and a shift in investor appetite away from emerging and developing countries could delay a growth rebound. The spread between Nigeria’s Eurobond and U.S. Treasury has been widening, reflecting markets’ assessment of worsening economic conditions. Failure to achieve the envisaged reorientation of public spending to capital investment or low rates of return on public investment and/or absorptive capacity constraints could delay implementation and lower medium-term growth. Lower-than-expected oil revenue, shortfalls in yields from tax administration reforms, unbudgeted fuel subsidy payments, and late disbursement of external financing or an inability to access international markets at competitive interest rates could increase domestic financing requirements. Coupled with lower growth and potentially higher borrowing costs, these risks could push the federal government’s interest payments-to-revenue ratio to an unsustainable path. Needed adjustment at the SLG level could stall. The SLGs are reeling from the loss of oil revenues and, with few policy tools and generally weak public financial management, adjustment has been slow. In 2015, the FGN addressed salary arrears of SLGs through a partial bailout and facilitated the restructuring (longer maturities and lower rates) of commercial bank loans (N575.52 billion, 0.6 percent of GDP) to 23 states. Already wage arrears are reported to have started to accumulate again and would impact household consumption (the public sector provides the most reliable income flows to employees’ villages). Lack of timely or accurate data makes it difficult to assess the degree of adjustment needed—or the stock of cumulated arrears—at the SLGs. While banks (apart from two) remain adequately capitalized, rising NPLs and reduced creditworthiness of borrowers suggest some increase in vulnerabilities in the banking system and could dampen private sector credit growth—a doubling of NPLs from the corporate sector could reduce the ability of banks to extend credit by 11 percent. Further, with firms much more leveraged and exposed to FX debt (partly explained by global liquidity conditions), they are Page 15 more vulnerable to changes in external liquidity conditions and the exchange rate. Consequently, weaker profit margins/retained earnings and lower credit growth, both formal and informal, could constrain private investment and growth (Figure 3, Box 1 and SIP). There is a risk of a disorderly adjustment of the exchange rate. The combination of a wider fiscal deficit and accommodative monetary policy with a fixed exchange rate could lead to further pressure on the exchange rate, inflation, real appreciation of the naira, widening of the current account deficit, deepening distortions in access to foreign exchange, and further pressure on the exchange rate. Figure 3. Nigeria: Corporate Sector Vulnerabilities Firms are more leveraged and exposed to FX debt, making them more vulnerable to changes in external conditions. Nigeria Non-Financial Sector: Total Debt Outstanding (US$ billions) Other banking sector claims Bonds In Foreign Currency Bonds In Local Currency Syndicated Loans In Foreign Currency Syndicated Loans In Local Currency Sources: Dealogic, CBN, and IMF staff calculations Portfolio flows are highly sensitive to U.S. treasury yield, making them vulnerable to normalization of UMP. Portfolio Inflows Sensitivity to Shocks (Percent of GDP; one standard deviation shocks) Equity securities Debt securities Exchange rate U.S. Treasury Monetary policy easing Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. yield Oil price decline Total Firms are in much weaker conditions than in 2008-09, making them more vulnerable to the oil price shock. Real Sales Growth ( Percent) Real Sales Growth (Percent) Small Large Sources: Enterprise Survey; and IMF staff calculations. Indeed, an analysis of subsample of firms suggests a sharp increase in highly vulnerable debt (e.g., ICR<1) in Breakdown of debt by Interest Coverage Ratio (ICR) (US$ bns) ICR<1 1.5<ICR<2 2<ICR<3 ICR>3 Debt-at-risk Sources: Orbis, and IMF staff calculation Page 16