More frequent natural disasters periodically inflict substantial economic and social losses in Niger (Background Paper on Managing and Preventing Natural Disasters, Text Figure 4). Such disasters are linked to geographical conditions, climate change and high population growth. Dependence on rain-fed agriculture based on rudimentary technology has left Niger vulnerable to droughts and locust plagues that result in periodic food shortages. Floods also continue to cause significant damage in riverside communities, claiming lives and properties. Recent food crises (2005 and 2010) showed that a timely response coordinated through monitoring system (Early Warning System-EWS) could mitigate the impact of basic cereal shortages. The authorities presented the Text Figure 4. Niger: Frequency of Disasters, (Number of occurrences) main features and highlighted the effectiveness of their disaster risk management framework . They have established a donor-supported framework for preventing and managing disasters (DNPGCCA), including famine outbreaks, which has responded effectively to recent disasters. The framework is grounded on a bottom-up information system, collecting data from villages and counties, to the national level. The system comprises the vulnerability monitoring observatories (OSV) and an early warning network at Source: DESINVENTAR. village level (SCAPRU), which collects information and guides relief efforts to the exposed populations. These programs are financed under the Support Plan to Vulnerable Populations (PSPV), an essentially donor-funded plan with annual budgets (4-5 percent of GDP) reflected in the overall government budget. Authorities and Page 22 donors highlighted the effectiveness of the framework, indicating that it was strengthened by lessons from the 2005 and 2010 food crises. Staff concurred that existing contingent plans and the 3N Initiative were commendable achievements, but urged the authorities to improve institutional coordination The disaster prevention and related risk management framework and the recent investments in agricultural irrigation and access, helped to reduce significantly the impact of natural disasters and thus improved food security. Staff urged building on the policies under the 3N Initiative’s investment plan for 2016-20 and the recently signed Millennium Challenge Compact (MCC). Staff stressed that the information system under the early warning system could be expanded and the geographical coverage of the disaster management framework extended. Furthermore, staff highlighted the importance of coordination of all agencies involved in the framework to improve the response system.