The decline in commodity prices has placed Niger’s resource sector under considerable pressure . The government and its partners, the China National Petroleum Corporation and the state of Chad, have put on hold the construction of the pipeline to transport crude oil through the Chad-Cameroon pipeline, delaying its completion to around 2020 while considering other alternatives. Niger’s third largest uranium producer (SOMINA) was not able to finance its expansion, and has now suspended production. Imouraren, the largest uranium project, has been delayed Niger owes a small amount of pre-HIPC Initiative arrears to non-Paris Club creditors which continue to be deemed away under the revised arrears policy for official creditors, as the underlying Paris Club agreement was adequately representative and the authorities have made best efforts to resolve remaining arrears to Iraq and Libya. Page 30 pending a recovery in uranium prices. Also, the financial situation of the public mine-holding company (SOPAMIN) has not improved, with most of its commercial contracts expiring this year and the company barely exporting its quota of uranium production. In the meantime, structural reforms in the oil sector are progressing with exports gradually liberalized, which is expected to better align incentives in the sector and improve its financial standing. The government has taken steps to improve the financial status of the national refinery, SORAZ . It lowered the crude oil price from Niger’s oil fields to US$45 per barrel from US$47, and increased the contractually determined price to the government-owned fuel distributor (SONIDEP) by CFAF 10 per liter. These measures are expected to restore a comfortable operating margin for the refinery. Despite the decline in commodity prices, staff noted that natural resource endowments will remain the major source to finance Niger’s development . Accordingly, staff urged the authorities to enhance natural resource revenue mobilization by strengthening revenue evaluation, forecasting, and audit capacities. Drawing on peer country experiences and based on recent FAD technical assistance, staff advised pursuing a stronger institutional framework for natural resource management. To continue strengthening the existing overall framework, the authorities expressed interest in resuming the FAD Technical Assistance initiated two years ago. More specifically, in the energy sector, staff welcomed the recently created Agence de Régulation du Secteur de l’Energie , which the authorities agreed to operationalize promptly.