Vulnerabilities are increasing in the Nigerian banking system; although capital remains resilient, liquidity has declined and asset quality has deteriorated . The current economic challenges facing Nigeria represent an ongoing risk to credit quality that could put pressure on the capital adequacy and liquidity of the system, constraining the banks’ capacity to extend credit to the private sector. To preserve financial sector stability, the CBN should be ready to promptly address any undercapitalized banks, including by requiring that current shareholders provide new capital . If the necessary capital support is not forthcoming, the CBN should prepare for intervention and resolution (using existing instruments) so as to mitigate adverse spillovers to the wider system. Page 23 Given the sharp increase in NPLs, the authorities should actively promote corrective action for any bank where NPLs are rising rapidly. Authorities’ views : The authorities conveyed that they are fully aware of the rising risks to the banking sector and remain vigilant. They continue to monitor the health of the banking sector and have taken proactive measures by increasing the general provision for performing loans to 2 percent (from 1 percent). Staff recommends reviewing the framework for the provision of emergency liquidity assistance and ensuring active monitoring of liquidity conditions at weaker institutions to mitigate the potential impact of deposit runs. Staff also recommends advancing efforts to strengthen the legal framework for resolution, following the 2012 FSAP recommendations. Specific actions include enhancing statutory powers to override shareholders’ rights, ensuring effective implementation of existing resolution tools, and facilitating an expansion of the toolkit to include mandatory recapitalization; the power to write down capital; the power to carry out a bail-in; harmonization of statutory triggers for resolution across the Banks & Other Financial Institutions Act and the Nigeria Deposit Insurance Corporation Act; and amending the bank liquidation regime to address legal challenges and protracted delays. Authorities’ views : The authorities consider current arrangements are sufficient to pre-empt situations from developing into full blown crises and to provide assistance as necessary. It is important that the authorities increase their emphasis on price stability as the primary, overriding objective of monetary policy. While the legal framework for monetary policy is broadly adequate, in practice the use of multiple instruments—to pursue multiple, sometimes inconsistent, objectives—has sent mixed signals of the policy stance and marred the effectiveness of policy. A clearer focus on price stability and increased use of market-based instruments would assist the CBN in enhancing the credibility that is needed to implement monetary policy. Going forward, staff recommends elaborating a forward- looking monetary policy strategy that provides guidance on the path of monetary policy based on economic conditions and expected monetary policy transmission (see SIP). Authorities’ views The authorities consider promoting sustainable economic development as within the mandate of the CBN. In their view, the significant impact of the external shock has necessitated supporting growth as an overriding policy objective, even if inflation remains above target for some time. Page 24 The authorities view subsidized lending/on-lending schemes as promoting development, by reducing the high cost of financing, but these schemes have many adverse effects. Most recently, a waiver on the Cash Reserve Requirements (CRR) was introduced. That is, banks extending loans to employment-generating activities in preferred sectors (e.g., agriculture, infrastructure, and solid minerals) would be entitled to a reduction on the CRR. These schemes have many adverse effects: they distort the allocation of resources and investment decisions; impose unfairness between recipients versus non-recipients; increase quasi-fiscal expenditure; and create unnecessary uncertainty that impact consumption and investment decisions. Staff recommends encouraging competition among banks and lowering the cost of doing business to help lower the lending-to-deposit rate spread rather than resorting to specific interventions.