Ensuring Food Security Repeated food crises have adversely affected Niger’s poverty, inflation, terms of trade, and fiscal performance (SIP—Niger, Food Security for Macroeconomic Stability and Inclusive Growth). Given Niger’s continued reliance on rainfed subsistence agriculture, climatic shocks result in volatile food production and prices (Figure 1b), impacting food security, child malnutrition, and poverty, making the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals less likely. Low yields and high population growth aggravate grains deficit levels. Government policies have had limited impact in reducing output and price volatility, with markets playing an increased role in shaping food prices across countries (Figure 1c). Annualized fiscal costs were estimated at around 0.7 percent of GDP between 2006 and 2008, among the highest in a group of 31 countries. Niger launched the 3N initiative of US$2 billion for 2010-15 to address food insecurity and improve agriculture production and trade. Figure 1b. Niger: Food and Non-Food Inflation. (Percent Change) Price Index - All items Food and non-alcoholic drinks Maize Millet Sorghum Source: AFR database. Figure 1c. Niger: Production of Millet versus Estimated Needs. 1961-2012 (Total Production of Maize, Millet, Sorghum and Cow Peas - Kg per capita) Niger (59.4) Nigeria (31.5) Benin (19.1) Cameroon (24.4) Source: FAOstats, 2013. Prior to the 1980s, droughts were recorded on average every ten years, over the last 20 years they took place every five years. Over 1997-2004, there were three crises, and over 2005-10 there was one bad year and a semi-bad one. Page 18 Food security continues to have a substantial macroeconomic impact . The authorities estimated the food deficit had amounted to 373,000 tons in 2013-14, almost equivalent to that of the crisis years (2005 and 2010). Addressing such a deficit level required mobilizing the government food program, in particular its different social safety nets (cash for work, moderate price sales, free food) as support from the donor community fell short because of competitive demand at the international level (Syrian, Libyan, Central African Republic Crises): only 10 percent was provided by donors, this time. Staff noted the potential market distortions from government intervention, but the authorities indicated that government purchases are usually made at competitive prices to provide incentives for higher agricultural production, albeit in the short run there could be cases of depressed food prices. In addition, the authorities highlighted the role of the Office des Produits Vivriers du Niger (food operational government arm) in increasing accessibility and availability of food products to landlocked areas. In turn higher access and availability help communities to remain in place, thereby improving access to education and other public services. Staff stressed the need to address structural causes of food insecurity . Staff agreed with the authorities that the current food program is well targeted to address short-term issues such as a food crisis, but does not address the structural dimension of food insecurity. Therefore, staff advised to leverage the anticipated expansion in resource revenues over the medium term to enhance investment aimed at addressing food insecurity. In that regard, staff inquired on the progress of the 3N initiative and urged the authorities to step up resilience to food insecurity through increased food production by targeting investment in irrigated agriculture and support of small-scale food producers in line with the PDES. The authorities concurred that revenue windfalls from natural resources should contribute to increase infrastructure investment in agriculture, in particular to speed up the 3N initiative. The authorities are seeking to accelerate agriculture development and reinforce food security . The authorities are examining options for accelerating the implementation of the 3N initiative, following completion of its review in November 2014. In addition, the government is finalizing its national program for social and economic development (PDES) for the period 2016-20 that will also support progress in these areas. Staff strongly supported those objectives and encouraged the authorities to improve coordination between the PDES and the 3N initiative to improve efficiency and maintain long-term sustainability of public finances, while diversifying the economy and reducing its dependency to non modern agriculture and vulnerability to weather related shocks. Enhancing Trade to Improve Growth Increased grain trade with neighboring countries could spur growth and enhance food security . Niger has both formal and informal trade ties with neighboring countries, chiefly Nigeria, that meet around 60 percent of Niger’s food deficits (SIP—Regional Trade and Food Security: Food Crises in 2005 and 2010). Niger’s imports from Nigeria consist mainly of food and animals, while Niger’s exports to Nigeria are sizeable with respect to GDP (6.3 percent on average in 2008-10). Food trade flows have been limited by scarce information on grain markets, though Niger has made Page 19 progress in improving the Early Warning System (EWS). Progressive integration of markets through the reinforcement of regional integration mechanisms has also positively affected trade flows. The authorities recognize that expanding regional trade could foster inclusive growth Niger shares a long border with Nigeria, with the two populations having traditional ties and sharing cultural values. The resulting proximity facilitates important official and non-official trade flows. Niger exports onions, and livestock to Nigeria, and Nigeria’s trade flows to Niger are mainly grains, helping to stabilize stocks and markets in Niger. The authorities stressed the missed opportunities incurred as grains from Niger are bought by Nigerians at harvest time and later exported back to Niger at higher prices. At the same time, the authorities stressed that as most of Niger’s exports are raw materials (sesame, livestock), there are opportunities to move up the value chain through investments in small processing units for exports. They also emphasized that the different cycles of harvest of Nigeria and Niger bear opportunities for larger trade exchanges. However, they stressed that the inconvertibility of the Naira to the CFAF franc constitutes an obstacle for a full development of the commercial relationship between Nigeria and Niger. Staff emphasized the need to improve trade policies . Improved trade policies could help to smooth movement of goods and lessen the need for higher costly stocks. Accordingly staff stressed the need to minimize the costs associated with maintaining the Réserve Alimentaire Stratégique , and the opportunity costs of the Stock National de Sécurité , albeit they play important roles as Niger faces weather related shocks. To that end, staff urged the authorities to complement food buffers by better circulation of goods through continued improvement of markets. In that regard, the authorities reported that since December 30, 2013, the government has been implementing policies to reduce non-trade barriers: (i) reduction of customs check points; (ii) better definition of categories of control at check points; (iii) more leeway to get a fair arbitration in case of abuse; and (iv) reduction of required supporting documents for exports and imports from 8 to 4 and 10 to 6 respectively. They stressed however, the need to preserve food buffers given the magnitude of the shocks Niger faces, and the potential impact on food availability and accessibility of uncertain trade policies in neighboring countries, particularly at times of regional shortages or due to regional security events. The authorities also indicated the need to build a regional trade buffer as suggested by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Promoting the Middle Class Niger’s middle class is small relative to sub-Saharan African (SSA) peers . Budget and household surveys show that Niger’s steady growth over the past decade has helped reduce poverty, lifting a number of previously poor households into the middle class (SPI—Inclusive Growth Ahead of Oil Production)—estimated at 14 percent of the total population in 2010. With growth driven by the natural resource sector and agriculture with private sector development constrained EWS monitors food production and prices at the national level, to include regional trade flows and prices in neighboring countries. Page 20 by poor infrastructure and business environment, the middle class—a key sector for sustaining growth—has been slow to emerge. In addition, well-paid jobs with good benefits are still scarce; and social safety nets for education attainment, healthcare, and housing are still weak (SIP—Driving Factors of Middle Class’ Bulge: A Cross-Country View). There are a range of estimates for the size of the middle class . The authorities recently estimated the middle class at 45 percent of the total population against staff’s estimate of 14 percent. The differential reflects methodology: the authorities consider middle class as the segment of the entire population that is neither poor nor belongs to the wealthiest segment of society (usually defined as the richest 10 percent). Most of the middle class identified however is in the floating class, 39 percent, and only 6 percent are in the core middle-class, closer to staff estimates. Expanding the middle class can be achieved through accelerating economic diversification . Based on international experiences on middle-class development, staff urged the authorities to address key bottlenecks preventing the emergence of the private sector, including a better business climate and broader financial inclusion (SIP—Financial Inclusion, Accessibility and Development). Staff also stressed the need to develop human capital and to strengthen efficiency of public investment and promote its integration into the budget. Staff highlighted that the concept of middle class was only a partial indicator of the success of Niger’s development efforts as Niger’s middle class mainly reflects the prevalent inequalities. A recent Niger budget-consumption survey estimates show that concentration of household consumption is higher in urban areas, where the consumption ratio between the wealthiest 10 percent and the poorest 10 percent is 6.3 percent as compared to 3.7 percent in rural areas. However, the inequality between urban and rural areas is equally larger: a poverty rate at the national poverty line of 55 percent in rural areas in contrast to 18 percent in urban areas (source: authorities based on the 2011 poverty survey). Financial Sector Reforms Niger’s financial system and financial inclusion lag behind those of its peers (SIP-Niger: Financial Sector Profile). Financial depth, proxied by M2 to GDP, is among the lowest in the world at 24 percent in 2013 against an average of 37 percent in SSA and 30 percent in the WAEMU. Credit to the private sector is dominated by large corporations, while agriculture, livestock, forestry and fisheries sectors (which account for more than 40 percent of GDP) receive less than 1 percent of total bank credit (Figure 1d). Nonbank financial institutions and services, including the insurance sector, are similarly underdeveloped relative to regional and SSA averages. Figure 1d. Niger: Sectoral Credit Distribution and Contribution to Growth in 2013 Source: The Nigerien authorities. Page 21 Financial soundness indicators show that the overall banking sector is broadly sound Average capital adequacy ratios improved steadily during 2010-2013, reflecting government injections of capital into state owned banks and (to a lesser degree) private capital injections, and at end-2013 generally exceeded the regulatory threshold of 8 percent. However, one bank is not in compliance with the new minimum capital requirement of CFAF 5 billion and four of the ten banks do not meet liquidity norms as at end-August 2014. Credit concentration on the five largest borrowers is very high at 128 percent of regulatory capital at end-June 2014, representing a major source of risk. The limited development of the financial sector reflects a number of structural constraints . The main factors are: (i) the limited monetization of the informal agriculture sector, (ii) the incapacity of banks to discriminate among borrowers (due to imperfect information and lack of formal documentation); (iii) limited savings reflecting extreme poverty; (iv) the recourse to lenders in the informal sector; and (v) cultural/religious reasons. In this context, and considering the limited excess liquidity in Niger’s banks, the increased borrowing activity of the government on the regional market may cause further crowding out of the private sector. A financial development strategy has been adopted, seeking to address these issues The five-year development plan was drafted in 2012 drawing on the recommendations of the 2008 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) report prepared by World Bank and Fund staffs. The authorities noted that the action plan, adopted in November 2014, prioritizes measures aimed at increasing access, such as measures to broaden the territorial coverage of banks and microfinance institutions, and to develop new financial products targeting the agriculture sector. The plan also envisages measures to improve the functioning of the judicial system and enhance financial literacy. The plan was recently updated and approved by the government (structural benchmark).