The Norges Bank reduced its key policy rate to ½ percent in March 2016 in view of weakened growth prospects and the subdued inflation outlook. The outlook for inflation is stable (Figure 3). Wage growth in 2016 is expected to be about 2½ percent—down from 2.8 percent in 2015. With inflation expectations well anchored, this implies that the social partners assume approximately unchanged real wages in 2016. Inflation should stay slightly above target this year but return to target next year as low capacity utilization weighs on domestic inflation and the effects of the exchange rate depreciation unwind. Monetary policy can stay accommodative for now , although wage developments and the potential spillover risk from imported inflation to domestic inflation merit continued monitoring. Further easing could be considered in the event that growth turns out to be significantly weaker than currently projected, provided that inflation expectations remain well anchored, and negative rates should not be ruled out in a more adverse scenario. Financial stability concerns should be addressed primarily through macroprudential policy and structural measures. The output gap and the financial cycle have diverged as low interest rates helped push up asset prices. However, in view of the financial system vulnerabilities, greater caution may be warranted as the policy rate is lowered given risk of acceleration in property Exchange rate pass-through to inflation is discussed in the fourth chapter of the 2015 Selected Issues Paper (IMF Country Report No. 15/250). Page 19 prices and household debt growth. A gradual return from current negative real rates to the Norges Bank’s estimated normal real interest rate of about 1½ percent—corresponding to a normal nominal interest rate of about 4 percent given the inflation target—will be needed over time. Authorities’ Views: The authorities shared the same perspective on the monetary policy stance. They emphasized that monetary policy can facilitate the transition by easing credit and avoiding appreciation and thereby expedite restoration of competitiveness, provided that confidence in stable inflation remained firm. They also noted that there is still room for maneuver and the possibility of negative key policy rate cannot be ruled out should the economy be exposed to new major shocks. Further easing will however be considered with greater caution as uncertainty with the effects of monetary policy increases. They agreed that the risk that lower interest rates could increase financial system vulnerabilities needs to be monitored closely and macroprudential policy is the first line of defense in maintaining financial stability.