Fiscal policy was supportive last year with a fiscal impulse of ½ percent of mainland trend GDP. The structural non-oil budget deficit amounted to about 6¼ percent of mainland trend GDP. This is equivalent to 2.6 percent of Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) assets at year-end—well below the 4 percent “target” of the fiscal rule. GPFG assets have been growing rapidly in recent years, in large part due to the depreciation of the currency, which raises the krone value of foreign currency denominated assets. The authorities are expecting a 1.1 percent fiscal impulse this year. The revised 2016 budget forecasts a structural non-oil deficit of about 7½ percent of mainland trend GDP, or 2.8 percent of staff’s projected GPFG assets at year end. An additional 0.4 percent of mainland GDP Oil and gas income Krone rate Investment return Annual Change in GPFG Market Value, by Source (Billions of NOK)Sources: Norges Bank Investment Management Annual Reports and Fund staff calculations. Page 17 is included in a broadly budget-neutral manner to cover expenses related to the increased inflows of asylum seekers (see Annex III). The 2016 budget includes a package of special employment-enhancing measures and tax reductions. Special measures amounting to NOK 4 billion (nearly 0.2 percent of mainland GDP) aim to create jobs in areas and sectors particularly affected by the downturn. The revised budget introduced new, targeted measures worth NOK 900 million (0.04 percent of mainland GDP) to support employment in southern and western Norway. As part of the government’s tax reform proposal covering the 2016–18 period, net tax reductions worth NOK 8.3 billion (0.3 percent of mainland GDP) would be implemented this year, including a reduction of the statutory corporate income tax (CIT) rate from 27 to 25 percent and a reduction of the top marginal tax rate on personal income by 0.3 percentage points. The CIT rate would be reduced further to 23 percent by 2018. The expansionary fiscal stance this year is justifiable. Staff views the level of fiscal stimulus planned this year as appropriate given the widening output gap (estimated by staff at -1.4 percent), rising unemployment, the ample fiscal space, and low risk to debt sustainability (see Annex II). The fiscal support would also complement monetary policy efforts at a time when there is arguably less monetary policy space, given that the key policy rate is approaching zero (see Section B). The composition of fiscal policy should strike a balance between counteracting the downturn and facilitating the necessary economic adjustment. The proposed tax reductions, would promote private saving and investment and an efficient allocation of resources, while bringing Norway’s tax system closer to international best practice. Public expenditure aimed at boosting the economy’s productive capacity and external competitiveness would be conducive to the ongoing transition. On the other hand, public spending should avoid interrupting the shift of resources and employment to non-oil tradable production by increasing public employment or increasing expenditures on domestic goods and services. As economic growth gathers steam, the fiscal stance should gradually shift to neutral to relieve so-called “Dutch Disease” pressures. Fiscal policy in Norway has generally been 8101220022004200620082010201220142016 budget Structural non-oil deficit 4% of GPFG Structural Non-oil Deficit and 4% of GPFG Assets (Percent of staff trend mainland GDP)Sources: Ministry of Finance, IMF World Economic Outlook, and Fund staff calculations. -50510152025200020022004200620082010201220142016 budget Net transfers to GPFG Revenues from oil activities Non-oil fiscal deficit Net Transfers to GPFG Sources: Ministry of Finance and Fund staff calculations. Page 18 prudent, with spending of oil revenues well below 4 percent of GPFG assets in recent years. Nevertheless, as the size of the fund has been growing much faster than mainland GDP, the fiscal rule’s 4 percent target is no longer appropriate as a short-term operational guidance for fiscal policy, and a target more like the current transfer to the budget as a share of GPFG assets (2.5– 3.0 percent) would be more appropriate. Such a target would also be closer to the likely returns for the next decade and would help conserve the GPFG’s resources to address long-run aging-related costs. More importantly, there should also be a supplementary rule, such that the fiscal impulse would be neutral or negative when the economy is at or above capacity, respectively. This latter rule would help prevent crowding out of production of tradable goods and services. The authorities agreed that fiscal policy should support employment and growth without inhibiting the necessary adjustment to a non-oil growth model. They noted that given the significant size of the shock that has hit the economy and the available fiscal space, the planned fiscal expansion this year can be justified, and the revised budget contains targeted measures to stimulate activity in the hardest hit regions. However, they agreed that it would not be a desirable outcome if the public sector rather than the competitive industries were to absorb a large part of the labor released from the oil-related sectors, or if fiscal expansion becomes a new norm.