The Norges Bank cut the policy rate twice by a quarter point in December 2014 and June 2015 bringing it to 1.00 percent. The rate was lowered in December to counter the risk of a pronounced economic downturn, but the March and May 2015 decisions to hold the rate at 1¼ percent took into account relatively limited impacts of low oil prices on the economy so far as well as financial stability concerns. Updated projections in June showed only slightly weaker output (and an upward revision of petroleum investment in the medium-term), but inflation is now projected to be lower and slightly below the inflation target for the year, and annual wage settlements in May were very restrained and look likely to deliver a small real wage reduction over the period of the wage settlement. The current monetary policy stance is appropriately supportive. Going forward, monetary policy will need to balance different objectives. Inflation has been stable and close to the target, and staff’s baseline forecast is for inflation to stay slightly below target this year and next. On the one hand, the recent weakening of the Norwegian krone has exerted upward pressures on the prices of imported consumer goods, and staff analysis suggests that the exchange rate pass-through to imported prices in Norway—although limited—can be persistent. On the other hand, interest rates in key trading partners are low or even negative, growth is moderating, and lower wage growth this year—the spring 2015 wage agreements are likely to result in 2.7 percent growth in nominal wages (y/y), down from 3.1 percent last year—is likely to reduce the risk of imported prices spilling over to higher domestic inflation. In the scenario that growth turns out significantly weaker than currently projected, monetary policy needs to be the first line of defense against economic weakness, provided that inflation expectations are well anchored. Financial stability concerns, at the current juncture, need to be addressed primarily through macroprudential policy. However, Norway’s inflation targeting framework contains an element of mitigating the risk of the buildup of financial imbalances, and monetary policy could take financial stability into account if macroprudential policies have limited effects. In such an event, any increase in the policy rate would need to be gradual and balance the negative impact on growth against that of a further buildup of financial sector risks. More generally, the current policy stance implies a slightly negative real rate, but a negative real rate is unlikely to be sustainable or desirable in the medium-term, and a gradual return to a normal (nominal) interest rate of about 4 percent— corresponding to a normal real interest rate of about 1½ percent given the inflation target—is needed over time. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with the staff assessment . They noted that the June decision to lower the policy rate was based mainly on the assessment that growth prospects and the See fourth chapter of Selected Issues Paper for detail. Page 14 forces driving inflation further ahead have weakened. To counter the risk that a lower interest rate may fuel house price inflation and debt growth, the government has strengthened the guidelines on mortgage loan-to-value limits by changing them into requirements as of July 1, 2015 (see Annex IV), and increased the countercyclical capital buffer from 1 percent to 1½ percent from July 1, 2016.