Norway needs to improve cost competitiveness. Between 1995 and 2013, Norway’s ULC measured in common currency has appreciated by over 70 percent relative to trading partners, driven by high wage growth—particularly in oil- and gas-related sectors—and subdued productivity gains (also see Figure 4 and Annex I). The recent weakening of the exchange rate has reversed some of the lost ground in cost competitiveness, providing a boost to traditional goods exports. Nevertheless, reducing Norway’s high common currency ULC relative to trading partners in a sustainable way is crucial for non-oil tradable producers to compete in international markets. Curbing future real wage increases is particularly important in this regard. The social partners demonstrated the needed wage flexibility in this year’s bargaining round by agreeing on a nominal increase in centrally-negotiated pay of only 0.3 percent—similar to last year and substantially lower than the years before. Economy-wide nominal wage growth for 2016 is estimated Z AA Productivity Wages ULC Contribution to Change in Unit Labor Cost (Annual percentage points, 1995-14) Page 22 at about 2.4 percent, implying flat real wages. Continued restraint in wage settlements will be critical to deliver a sustained downward adjustment in ULC relative to trading partners. Boosting productivity growth remains a challenge. Despite robust economic performance, productivity growth in mainland Norway has fallen considerably since the mid- 2000s for both cyclical and structural reasons (e.g., rising labor immigration, resource reallocation as a result of booming oil prices). The Productivity Commission’s second-phase report outlined several recommendations in the areas of education, research and innovation, mobilization of the workforce, and public sector efficiency to improve productivity and help the Norwegian economy adapt to the ongoing structural changes. These include fostering better cooperation between the higher education sector and industries, softening regulation of working hours, making social security benefits more activity-oriented and enforcing activity requirements, and reforming local government organization, among others. The authorities should continue with the ongoing reforms, prioritizing and implementing measures that would likely generate large productivity payoffs. Past labor market reforms have proven effective, but challenges remain. The 2011 pension reforms have resulted in higher labor force participation among older workers in the private sector. Now, the public sector pension reforms need to be completed along lines similar to those of the private sector in the context of current discussions with social partners. In addition, although Norway’s labor force participation is enviable compared with that of peers, disability and sickness claims account for a large fraction of lost labor. Welcome changes were recently made to the disability benefits system to enhance incentives to work while receiving benefits, and pilot programs for new measures to enforce activity requirements for sickness benefits are showing encouraging results. Nevertheless, further reforms to sickness and disability benefits would help maintain labor force participation in the face of population aging, and relieve pressures on the welfare system at a time of rising unemployment and refugee inflows. In addition, active labor market policies can improve the efficiency of the search and matching process, thereby facilitating labor reallocation during the transition. Other reforms would help promote efficiency and support the transition to a new growth model. Tax reforms should shift the burden of taxation from labor and corporate income to property and consumption. In particular, reducing tax preferences for housing would help channel new investment toward more productive uses, including in non-oil-related tradable sectors. The recently introduced tax reform contains welcome reductions in the corporate tax rate and the See Annexes 7 and 8, and also the first and second chapters of the Selected Issues. 0123452011201220132014201520112012201320142015NHO manufacturing employeesState employees Carry-over Centrally-negotiated Wage drift Decomposition of Annual Wage Growth (Percent)Sources: Norwegian Technical Calculation Committee for Wage Settlements 2016 Report and Fund staff calculations. Page 23 marginal tax rate on personal income, but a shift to higher taxes on property has not been implemented. The recent political agreement for additional reductions in personal and corporate income tax rates would if implemented also be a step in the right direction. Additionally, relaxing constraints on new property construction, including at the municipal level, could boost the supply of housing, thereby taking some of the pressure off elevated housing prices. Reducing the level of protection and subsidy to agriculture would have positive distributional effects and also help free up resources for less expensive and more effective policies to preserve rural communities. The authorities agreed with staff on the need to restore competitiveness and continue with structural reforms. They noted that the recent downward adjustment in unit labor costs due to the weak currency has been quite substantial, and they forecast wage growth to remain low by historical standard also for next year. They also pointed to ongoing reforms in the areas singled out by the Productivity Commission, including higher education, research and innovation, and local government organization. On reducing tax preferences for housing, the discount on the taxable values of second dwellings and commercial property has been reduced from 50 to 20 percent over the last three years.