A modest recovery should take root next year. Mainland economy growth should be about 1 percent this year and pick up to close to 1¾ percent in 2017. Private consumption and investment are expected to remain slow this year, but offset by higher public sector demand and mainland exports. Expansionary fiscal and monetary policy, the lagged impact of the weak krone, a gradual upturn in oil prices, and a slowing of the pace of decline in oil investment are expected to support the recovery. Unemployment is projected to rise further this year to 4.7 percent before declining to 4.5 percent in 2017. Headline inflation is expected to stay above the 2.5 percent target at 2¾ percent this year, but should return to target next year as low capacity utilization weighs on domestic inflation and the effect of exchange rate depreciation wears off. Norway: Selected Economic Indicators (Y/Y percent change, unless noted) M X Y Strong Influx Compared to Other European Destinations (Inflows of asylum seekers in 2015, as percent of population) Real GDP1.60.91.4 Real mainland GDP1.01.11.7 Domestic demand0.60.91.6 Mainland exports4.82.83.2Unemployment rate (percent of labor force, LFS)4.44.74.5Output gap (percent of potential GDP)-0.7-1.4-1.0CPI inflation (average, percent)2.22.82.5 Norway: Selected Economic Indicators (Y/Y percent change, unless noted) Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook, Statistics Norway, and Fund staff calculations. Page 14 Medium-term growth hinges on a successful transition away from oil dependence. Even before the plunge in oil prices, investment on the Norwegian continental shelf had been expected to trend downward. At the same time, the mainland economy has grown increasingly dependent on offshore demand, with about one in ten jobs being oil-related. As the offshore sector no longer provides the impetus to mainland growth, the mainland economy faces the challenge of shifting its driver of growth from oil-related industries to non-oil tradable industries. Recent oil price developments make such a transition more urgent. A gradual recovery and continued growth into the medium term is conditional on the assumption of a smooth transition. Risks are skewed to the downside (Risk Assessment Matrix, Box 1). A sharper-than-expected global growth slowdown or persistently lower oil prices could derail the projected recovery. Slower growth in key advanced and emerging economies could hinder the recovery of non-oil-related exports, or put further downward pressures on oil prices. Persistently lower-than-projected oil prices could intensify the fall in oil investment and take further toll on oil-related demand for mainland goods and services, with adverse spillover effects on confidence and consumption in the rest of the economy. A substantial correction in property prices could depress private demand and reduce output. A large fall in house prices―caused by further negative shocks to the oil and gas sector, interest rate hikes, or a significant change in sentiment―could result in an abrupt reduction in consumption and residential investment with ripple effects on corporate earnings and banks. The staff’s analysis suggests that a 10 percent decline in real house prices could reduce private consumption by 0.9 percent. However, the probability of a sharp increase in the mortgage default rate is low and risks to financial stability are contained, as concluded by the 2015 FSAP Update. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions could lead to liquidity strains and raise costs for Norwegian banks that rely on wholesale funding. A bumpy QE exit in the United States, a British exit from the EU with potential widespread contagion, or Euro Area turbulence could raise volatility and wholesale funding costs. See Annex 7 and also the first chapter of the Selected Issues. See IMF Country Report No. 15/429. The full-recourse nature of Norwegian mortgages and the ample social safety net has accounted for limited credit risks on household loans, as households have incentives to or are enabled to make payments. Oil Investment, Historical and Projection (Y/Y growth rate, percent) Page 15 A hesitant or even stalled transition to a growth model less dependent on the oil and gas sector could lead to higher unemployment for a longer period, with adverse consequences for income and consumption. If wages fail to adjust quickly or resources fail to move from oil- related sectors to non-oil tradable sectors efficiently, the expected pick-up in non-oil parts of the economy may not be enough to absorb the slack caused by lower oil prices. The increased number of refugees, if not effectively integrated into the labor market, could weigh on the public finances and raise structural unemployment. Downside risks could interact. For example, persistently low oil prices could trigger a sharp correction in house prices through its deleterious impact on growth, employment, and consumer confidence. A housing market hard landing would in turn prolong the transition through negative wealth effects reducing household consumption and business demand, as well as through its potential implications for banking sector performance and credit supply. Protracted weakness in global growth could also slow the transition by dampening external demand for Norway’s traditional goods exports, thereby depressing business investment and job creation. Potential Interaction of Downside Risks Domestic Shock 2 HousingMarket Hard Landing Domestic Shock 1 SlowTransition External Shock 1 PersistentlyLow Oil Prices External Shock 2 ProtractedWeakness in Global Growth -Income and consumption lower-Banks'balance sheet hurt; credit crunch-Unemployment higher-Weakgrowth-Confidence dented-Traditional goods exports hurt -Investment and hiring depressed-Weakgrowth-Weak growth-Confidencedented -Unemploymenthigher-Weak growth-Confidence dented Potential Interaction of Downside Risks Impact on Unemployment in Slow Transition Scenario Sources: Fund staff estimates. Notes: The `slow transition' scenario assumes that out of 40,000 likely lost oil jobs, only a third would be replaced in 2016, and it would take the next five years to replace all lost jobs. Also see Chapter 1 of Selected Issues. Impact on Mainland Growth in Slow Transition Scenario Sources: Fund staff estimates. Notes: In estimating the growth impact, it is assumed that higher unemployment would subtract 1ppt from household consumption and private investment growth in 2016 and 0.5ppt for each year during 2017-21, using empirical relationship between employment and consumption/investment. Mainland exports would also be affected given lower investment. Also see Chapter 1 of Selected Issues. Page 16 The authorities generally agreed with staff’s assessment of the outlook and risks. They noted the large regional variation in labor and housing market developments, reflecting, in part, different levels of dependence on oil and gas within Norway. They noted that lower consumer confidence may translate into lower consumption growth than expected, and high household debt can be a challenge if unemployment increases. However, they also pointed to shock absorbers, including supportive macroeconomic policies, the sound fiscal framework, the weaker exchange rate, flexible labor force, and the solid financial positions of Norwegian banks and households. On the risk of a British exit, the main direct links to the U.K. are in trade; banking system linkages are mostly to the euro area (long-term) and the U.S. (short-term). The authorities saw small direct impact on the Norwegian economy in a British exit scenario if a bilateral trade agreement can be put into place quickly and financial market disruptions do not severely affect euro area and U.S. financial