The 2014 revised budget entails an expansionary fiscal stance with a non-oil structural deficit of 5.8 percent of mainland GDP. This is equivalent to 2.8 percent of the GPFG assets rather than the 4 percent average real return on GPFG assets assumed for the fiscal rule. However, the 2014 fiscal impulse is projected at 0.7 percent, adding stimulus in an economy roughly at capacity. A neutral fiscal stance would be appropriate with still-low unemployment. Because GPFG assets are growing more rapidly than the mainland economy, even keeping the non-oil deficit at the current share of assets would imply a growing deficit relative to GDP and a positive fiscal impulse. The government’s implementation of the fiscal rule in a manner that keeps the non-oil deficit well below 4 percent of GPFG assets is appropriate, but an even smaller transfer of GPFG resources to the budget to maintain a neutral fiscal stance would be better so long as the economy remains near potential. The 2014 budget includes some minor tax reductions. These include: (i) a reduction of the tax rate on personal income from 28 percent to 27 percent; (ii) a reduction of the tax rate on net wealth by 0.1 percentage point to 1 percent; and (iii) elimination of the inheritance tax. T hese changes reduce taxes by ¼ percent of GDP in 2014 on an accrual basis. Further reforms are planned, and a tax commission is looking into options. Staff argued for a phasing out of tax preferences for housing and eliminating other distortions in capital taxation, and noted that more neutrality in the tax system could help to promote efficiency and support the transition to a new growth model (see Section D). Authorities’ views The authorities recognize the risk of excessive fiscal stimulus from spending too large a fraction of GPFG assets, and this is reflected in their 2014 budget. However, they placed greater emphasis on reducing the overall tax burden as a means of promoting competitiveness. In their view, the most effective means of doing this is to simplify the tax code and reduce overall rates, particularly on corporate income taxes, and improve the efficiency of public expenditures without reducing services. Page 18 Figure 7. Norway: Household and Corporate Sector Household debt continues to be elevated while net financial assets remain below pre-crisis levels. Household Financial Position (Percent of disposable income) HH debt/disposable income HH net financial assets/disposable income (RHS) The housing market is showing signs of cooling with real house prices falling in 2013. House Prices (Y/Y percent change) Nominal Real …and the debt-service capacity of NFCs has also fallen, suggesting a possible future rise in bank losses. Debt-Service Capacity of Listed Enterprises 1/ On the other hand, the household savings rate is on the rise, partly reflecting concerns about elevated debt levels. Household Savings Rate (Percent of disposable income) Household saving rate Average 1979-2008 Net financial assets of non-financial corporations (NFCs) have been declining recently... Nonfinancial Corporation Financial Position (Percent of mainland GDP) Gross liabilities Net financial assets (RHS) At the same time, the number of bankruptcies has picked up while remaining higher than the pre-crisis period. Number of Bankruptcies (Total bankruptcies, 12 months MA) Enterprises Personal Sources: Haver Analytics, Norges Bank, Statistics Norway and Fund staff calcuations. 1/ Pre-tax profit plus depreciastion and amortisation for the previous 4 quarters as a percent of interest-bearing debt for non-financial enterprises included in the OBX index, excluding Statoil. Page 19 Figure 8. Norway: Credit Developments Recently, Norges Bank’s monetary easing has been effectively transmitted into domestic lending rates… Real Interest Rates (In percent, adjusted for Norway's one-year ahead inflation) Key policy rate 3-month effective interbank rate Lending rate to NFCs Lending rate to households Lending to the private sector has continued to grow moderately in recent years… Growth in Domestic Credit (Year-on-year percent change, seasonally adjusted) Municipalities NFCs Households In late 2013, banks modestly relaxed loan standards for households as credit demand slowed, in part reflecting wider lending margins… Household Loans: Demand and Credit Standards (In percent of responses, negative net percentage balances indicate lower demand/ tighter standards/ wider margins relative to previous quarter) Lending margins Credit demand Credit standards …while bank margins on mortgage lending are at a three-year Margins on Private Sector Lending high. Mortgage lending Corporate loans …broadly in line with the growth in the mainland economy while the ratio of debt to GDP has stayed at roughly the same high level since 2011. Domestic Credit (Percent of GDP) Municipalities NFCs Households …whereas corporate credit demand remained broadly unchanged, even though credit standards and margins on lending to enterprises have softened. Corporate Loans: Demand and Credit Standards (In percent of responses, negative net percentage balances indicate lower demand/ tighter standards/ wider margins relative to previous quarter) Lending margins Credit demand Credit standards Sources: Consensus Economics, Haver Analytics, Statistics Norway and Fund staff calculations. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 20