The FSAP update concluded that the Norwegian financial system is generally sound and well managed (Figure 6). The authorities have taken significant measures to address financial stability risk, including early implementation of the CRD IV. More recently, risk weights for residential mortgages used in banks’ IRB models have been tightened. A countercyclical capital buffer of 1 percent took effect on July 1, 2015, and the buffer will be increased to 1½ percent from July 1, 2016. FSAP bank stress tests suggest that financial institutions’ capital needs in the face of severe shocks would be nontrivial but manageable. Nevertheless, there are important challenges with a potential impact on financial stability. High house prices and household debt and banks’ reliance on wholesale funding are areas of concern. House prices remain elevated, and the household debt-to-disposable income ratio is one of the highest among the OECD countries. To finance this, banks have relied extensively on wholesale funding. In particular: High household indebtedness makes households potentially vulnerable to house price and income corrections and interest rate risks. Lower house prices or income could force households to cut consumption sharply, negatively affecting retail businesses and construction, See second chapter of Selected Issues Paper for household stress tests that assess household vulnerability under various scenarios. Page 16 and creditors to these sectors. Staff’s empirical analysis suggests that a 10 percent decline in real house prices could reduce private consumption by 0.9 percent in Norway (see Annex VI). Although this is smaller than the estimated impact for other Nordic countries (e.g., 3.5 percent for Denmark), the aggregate analysis ignores the distributional impact: the effect could be substantially larger for younger families with more debt and fewer assets. Banks are vulnerable to turbulence in foreign financial markets as 60 percent of wholesale funding is from foreign sources. Reliance on wholesale funding in part reflects relatively small domestic markets for liquid assets. Given the low stock of high-quality liquid assets denominated in krone, Norges Bank has proposed that the Liquid Coverage Ratio (LCR) requirement should be set at 60 percent in domestic currency and the total “all currency” LCR requirement at 100 percent. The FSA has recently proposed that Norwegian SIFIs and other large institutions shall fulfill a 100 percent LCR from January 1, 2016 while LCR should be phased in for other institutions in line with the EU regulation. The FSA proposal does not specify LCR requirements for individual currencies in the regulation. These proposals are currently under consideration. In light of these concerns, continued vigilance and proactive efforts toward mitigating systemic risks are warranted. Staff recommended further measures to reduce risks as follows (also see Annex VII): Bank stress tests: The authorities should improve data on cross-border ownership of bank- issued unsecured and covered bonds, and resume regular monitoring of bank-to-bank direct and indirect exposures. They should consider regional stress test exercises, as well as further steps in liquidity monitoring, such as performing liquidity stress tests using the structure of cash flows at various maturities. Macroprudential policy: The authorities should take additional measures to contain systemic risks from the growth of house prices and household indebtedness, including stricter LTV and loan-to-income or debt service ratio to supplement the affordability test. The authorities have recently adopted regulation on requirements for residential mortgage loans, which converts the FSA’s existing guidelines into explicit requirements, taking effect on July 1, 2015. Staff noted that this is in the right policy direction in the current context. They should also take additional measures to contain risks related to banks’ wholesale funding; and improve the existing institutional structure for macroprudential policies, including a transparent “comply or explain” approach by decision-makers. Finally, they should consider greater delegation of decision- making powers over macroprudential instruments in due course to Norges Bank or the FSA. Micro-supervision: They should ensure de jure operational independence of the FSA, strengthen the FSA’s supervision of small banks through the conduct of more frequent comprehensive assessments, and upgrade its approach to AML/CFT supervision. Crisis management and bank resolution: They should initiate resolution planning for the largest banks, including assessing impediments of resolvability, and make explicit delegations to Page 17 the FSA regarding its role. They should also enhance the legal framework for resolution to comply with the FSB Key Attributes with regard to certain areas including the resolution toolkit. The Bank Guarantee Fund (BGF) should adopt policies specifying under what conditions board members must recuse themselves, considering actual and prospective conflicts of interest. Authorities’ view The authorities generally agreed with staff’s conclusions. They noted that FSAP recommendations will be carefully examined in due course. On macroprudential policy, the authorities noted that new measures to strengthen mortgage lending practices have been implemented with effect from July 1, 2015 and that the countercyclical buffer will be increased to 1½ percent from July 1, 2016. The work for implementing the EU Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) is underway, and the transposition of the BRRD into national law would address some of the staff’s recommendations on the bank resolution framework. More generally, the authorities stressed that measures such as countercyclical buffers should not be seen as a tool to fine-tune financial cycles.