The near term outlook has weakened due to lower oil prices. The impact of the oil price decline on the mainland economy has been limited so far, and the fiscal position is almost fully insulated from oil price volatility. Nevertheless, mainland GDP growth is projected to slow to 1.3 percent this year with weaker private investment and consumption as demand for mainland inputs to the offshore sector declines. Mainland growth is projected to recover moderately next year as private consumption rebounds in line with a modest increase in oil prices. Inflation is expected to increase slightly as import prices rise with the exchange rate depreciation but stay below the 2.5 percent target. Unemployment is expected to rise further but remain at a relatively low level. Petroleum Investment (Index: 1992=100) The medium and longer term presents complex challenges and uncertainties, particularly given lower oil prices and slowdown of offshore investment. Steadily increasing oil and gas investment over the last decade has provided persistent demand stimulus to the increasingly oil- and gas-focused mainland economy (see Annex III for the real sector links between the offshore and mainland economies). However, investment flattened out last year and is expected to decline significantly in the coming years, and impulse from the offshore sector to the mainland economy has turned from positive to negative. Oil and gas production will continue for many decades to come, so the problems of managing the oil dependency of the mainland economy are not yet over. However, they will abate—particularly if the recent drop in oil prices is sustained—and will be replaced by the challenges of managing a transition away from the oil-dependent growth model. The staff’s central forecast is a recovery of growth in the medium term with somewhat higher unemployment in the transition process, and inflation that remains close to the target. However, this is based on a scenario in which the sources of growth shift smoothly away from supplying the oil and gas sector and move toward other tradable sectors of the economy or exports of oil-related goods and services. Sources: June 2015 Monetary Policy Report and Fund staff calculations. Petroleum investment Projection There are downside risks to this central scenario (also see Box 2 for the Risk Assessment Matrix). Deceleration of global demand or excess oil and gas supply could lead to a protracted period of low oil prices. This would undercut growth through a further reduction in the oil- Page 12 related demand for mainland goods and services. A deceleration in global demand could also make it more difficult for non-oil and gas export industries to expand. A significant reduction in property prices could occur. House prices rose rapidly over the last decade and most estimates suggest that house prices are significantly overvalued. The recent FSAP update finds that risks to financial stability are contained. However, with high household debt, a large fall in house prices—for example, due to a slowdown in real income growth, higher unemployment, or a large increase in interest rates—could depress private demand with adverse consequences for retail trade, domestic services, construction and commercial real estate and lenders to these sectors. The expected decline in oil-related output in the mainland economy may not be offset by a pick-up elsewhere in the mainland economy. Resources need to shift from oil-related to non-oil related tradable sectors to realize the transformation, and labor market flexibility in particular will be tested in the process. A less smooth transition might lead to further increase in unemployment, with consequences for income and consumption. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions stemming from, for example, asymmetric monetary policy exit or the re-emergence of sovereign and financial sector stress across the Euro area could cause renewed stress in the global wholesale funding markets, leading to liquidity strains for Norwegian banks that rely on wholesale funding. Authorities’ views The authorities generally agreed with the risk assessment. They noted that the oil price drop has curbed economic growth in some regions. Even though the impact of the oil price drop on the macro economy has been limited so far, sustained lower oil prices will slow oil investment further. The authorities stressed that a decline in oil investment was expected even before the recent oil price fall, and the Norwegian economy will need to shift to a new growth model less dependent on offshore activity in any event. In this regard, current fiscal and monetary policies are supportive of the transition. The authorities agreed that high household debt is a risk but also noted that both banks and households had increased buffers through higher capital and saving respectively.