Vulnerabilities Banking sector performance remains relatively strong, and overall financial stability risks appear contained. Banks are profitable compared with peers, and the NPL ratio trended down to 1.1 percent of total loans (Figure 7). Banks’ profitability positions them to meet the core equity (CET1) capital requirement. FSAP bank stress tests in 2015 suggest that banks’ buffers render them well-positioned to withstand severe shocks―such as a combined shock of persistently low oil prices and a contraction in house prices. However, there are vulnerabilities in the financial system. Elevated household debt, overvalued house prices, and banks’ heavy reliance on external wholesale funding are the main sources of financial stability risks. In addition, persistently low oil prices could trigger a deterioration of household and corporate balance sheets, which will build up banks’ credit risks. Household debt, house prices, and banks’ real estate sector exposures are all high (Figures 5 and 6). A large increase in interest burdens or severe deterioration in macroeconomic conditions could translate into losses on banks’ loan portfolios. In Norway, banks’ losses are more likely to accumulate to the corporate (rather than household) portfolios, given that: (i) households have sound repayment buffers in view of their high financial asset holdings; and (ii) the full (continued) Credit gap, Norges Bank augmented HP filter Output gap, staff estimates, right Output and Credit Gaps (Percent of potential output; percent of mainland GDP)Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook, Norges Bank, and Fund staff calculations. Page 20 The use of external wholesale funding makes banks vulnerable to turbulence in foreign financial markets. This exposure could be compounded by a potential inability to roll over the currency swaps used to hedge foreign currency funding risks. Banks’ direct exposure to the oil sector is small at 1 percent of banks’ corporate lending portfolios, but their indirect exposure could be much higher. When measured by the percentage of banks’ equity returns attributable to oil-related firms, banks’ total exposure to the oil sector could be as high as 30 percent. Progress has been made on several FSAP recommendations to address key risks (Annex IV). The countercyclical capital buffer will be increased to 1½ percent from July 1, 2016. Late last year, the authorities adopted new liquidity rules which set the minimum total “all currency” liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirement at 100 percent, effective from 2016 for the three systemically important banks and gradually phased in for other credit institutions. The authorities have also implemented several housing sector-specific measures. These include introducing lending guidelines on new mortgages in 2010, which were converted into regulations in mid-2015 that are set to expire at end-2016. These measures should be made permanent and tightened if house prices and mortgage credit continue to grow faster than income. The FSA also tightened parameters for IRB model estimation of residential mortgage risk in 2014– 15. Staff analysis suggests that these measures have had an impact on mortgage growth, but may not be enough to contain housing market vulnerabilities. Action on other key FSAP recommendations would help mitigate systemic risks. Additional targeted measures could help contain systemic risks arising from the growth of house prices and household indebtedness. The current loan-to-value (LTV) ratio cap of 85 percent is relatively high, and additional tools to be considered include: (i) higher mortgage risk weights; (ii) tighter LTV limits; and (iii) supplementing the affordability test by adding loan-to-income (LTI) or debt-service-to-income (DSTI) ratio limits. Given the divergent housing market developments across regions, some measures could be tailored towards individual regional recourse nature of mortgages has typically meant that households prioritize mortgage payments over other payments. See Technical Note on Bank Stress Testing for Norway 2015 FSAP Update. See Annex 9 and also the third chapter of the Selected Issues. 405060708090100KORDNKIRLCANLUXAUSUSASWENORFINSources: Fund staff calculations. Limits on LTV Ratios Page 21 Enhance stress tests to account for funding risks and take additional measures to monitor and possibly limit banks’ wholesale funding including on the mismatch between the maturity of currency swaps and underlying exposures. Strengthen the generally well-developed legal and institutional framework for crisis management, safety nets, and bank resolution. The authorities should finalize recovery plans, initiate resolution planning, and conduct resolvability assessments for the largest banks. Regional cooperation on financial stability issues should be strengthened. This is particularly important as Swedish-based Nordea, the second largest bank in Norway, plans to convert its Nordic subsidiaries into branches. In response, the Nordic finance ministries and financial supervisors are negotiating a new Memorandum of Understanding on issues raised by systemic branches. The authorities broadly agreed that there is scope to strengthen the policy framework. The authorities are monitoring housing market and household debt developments closely, and they are assessing the impact of existing macroprudential measures. On broadening the set of macroprudential instruments, they take the view that the current affordability test serves the same purpose as DTI or DSTI limits, and is more “granular.” Further proposals on individual currency LCR requirements and the implementation of the BRRD are expected in the second half of 2016.