The moderate fiscal expansion this year is broadly appropriate in light of the expected economic slowdown due to the sharp and largely unanticipated decline in oil prices. The 2015 budget entails an expansionary fiscal stance with a non-oil structural deficit of 6.4 percent of trend mainland GDP. This is estimated to be equivalent to 2.6 percent of the value of the GPFG, much less than the full amount targeted under the fiscal rule (4 percent) but still implies a fiscal impulse of about 0.6 percentage point. In the medium term, a shift to a broadly neutral fiscal stance would be more appropriate on the basis of current projections. Should growth turn out weaker than projected in 2016, the authorities should allow automatic stabilizers to operate. However, fiscal stimulus cannot substitute for lower structural demand, and therefore, the authorities should refrain from using stimulus to offset any decline in demand that appears to be due to a drop in oil-related demand for mainland goods and services. Replacing declining oil-related employment with public sector employment would inhibit the necessary shift of resources from oil-related to other tradable industries. Also, any fiscal stimulus would add appreciation pressures on the exchange rate. The government’s fiscal policy has generally been prudent with the non-oil structural deficit maintained well below 4 percent of GPFG assets in recent years. However, the fact that GPFG is growing much faster than the economy has allowed widening non-oil deficits as a share of trend GDP. Also, as the size of GPFG grew, market returns, capital gains, and foreign exchange valuation effects have replaced oil and gas income as both the main sources of annual growth in the GPFG and the main contributors to its volatility. The staff took the view that this may call for Annual Change in NBIM Assets by Source (Billions of NOK) GPFG: Volatility of Components of Annual Net Assets (Billions of NOK) Investment Income Net FX Gains Net Capital Gains Oil and Gas Income Sources: Norges Bank Investment Management Annual Reports and Fund staff calculations. Investment Income Net Capital Gains Net FX Gains Oil and Gas Income 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Sources: Norges Bank Investment Management Annual Reports and Fund staff calculations. Page 15 supplementary provisions for the fiscal rule. In particular, some consideration of smoothing over asset price cycles and exchange rate volatility in addition to the business cycle would be in order. Consideration should also be given to a more explicit approach to avoiding fiscal stimulus at times when the economy is at or near potential. Staff stressed that proposals along these lines from the Fiscal Rule Commission would be welcome. Authorities’ view The authorities agreed that using fiscal stimulus to replace declining oil-related demand in the mainland economy could inhibit the necessary shift of resources to other tradable goods sectors. They emphasized that the 2015 budget takes into account this consideration and strikes the right balance while supporting the economy. On the fiscal rule, the government created a Commission to recommend modifications or supplementary provisions to the fiscal rule because they were aware of the evolving pressures as the GPFG has grown. The Commission’s report in mid-June 2015 recommended supplementary rules to (i) limit use of the GPFG over the next 10–15 years to better align the peak use of the GPFG resources with the costs of population aging; and (ii) set a limit on the fiscal impulse to 0.1–0.2 percent of mainland GDP (see Annex V). They also noted that they were studying the recommendations of the Commission carefully, and have issued a public consultation document soliciting input on the Commission’s recommendations.