Emerging from near-crisis conditions in 2013, substantial progress has been made in addressing economic vulnerabilities . Efforts to reduce power subsidies and raise tax revenue have lowered the budget deficit from 8.4 percent of GDP in FY2012/13 to 5.4 percent of GDP in FY2014/15, although part of this adjustment reflects clearance of quasi-fiscal liabilities in the energy sector in 2012/13. Helped by low oil prices and strong remittances, foreign exchange reserves of the SBP have been rebuilt from 1.5 months of imports in FY2012/13 to 3.8 months of imports in September 2015. Nonetheless, long-standing structural impediments and a difficult security setting remain key obstacles to growth . Pervasive tax evasion combined with still wide-ranging tax exemptions and loss-making state-owned enterprises constrain the fiscal space for public investment and social spending. The resulting reliance on domestic financing—more than 60 percent of banking credit as of end-FY2014/15—constrains access to credit and investment by the private sector. The cash-strapped energy sector has been accumulating payment arrears (also called “circular debt”) and is unable to meet growing demand, resulting in power outages still averaging 6–8 hours a day. The economy’s competitiveness is further hampered by a business climate that lags regional peers and, despite relative stability of the rupee vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, a real effective exchange rate appreciation of 17 percent over the past two years. Foreign direct investment has also been held back by a difficult security situation. ExportsPrivate InvestmentFDIReservesTax Revenues EM average Pakistan Relative to Emerging Market Economies (In percent of GDP)Sources: Pakistani authorities; IMF WEO Database; and IMF staff calculations. 050100150200Starting a BusinessDealing with Construction Permits Getting ElectricityRegistering Property Getting CreditProtecting InvestorsPaying TaxesTrading Across Borders Enforcing Contracts Resolving Insolvency EM median EM worst performer Doing Business Ranking 2016 1/ (Out of 189 countries) Sources: World Bank Doing Business 2016.1/ Pakistanranks 138 out of 189 countries for overall eas of doing business. Page 13 Pakistan’s main policy priorities are to reinforce gains in economic stability and generate a strong and sustainable growth momentum . Helped by strengthened macroeconomic stability and improved terms of trade, economic growth already gradually increased from 3.7 percent in 2012/13 to 4.2 percent in FY2014/15. Nonetheless, with population growth estimated at over 1.9 percent, GDP per capita posted only a moderate increase relative to regional peers and other emerging economies (Figure 1, top right panel). Substantial acceleration of growth will be needed to absorb a growing number of entrants into the labor market and raise living standards. The authorities’ policies have been generally in line with staff’s policy recommendations (Box 1). Several growth-supporting structural reforms are in various stages of preparation or implementation, including in the energy sector, privatization/restructuring of public enterprises, tax administration, as well as monetary and financial sector policies. Completing this agenda will be critical for Pakistan to strengthen its external position (Box 2) and achieve its broader economic objectives. Box 1. Authorities’ Policies Have Been Generally Consistent with Policy Recommendations in the Previous Article IV Consultation Fiscal policy has achieved a substantial consolidation and needs to solidify these gains . The budget deficit (excluding grants) declined by 3.1 percentage points of GDP from 8.5 percent in FY2012/13 to 5.4 percent in FY2014/15, on account of notable progress with reducing energy subsidies, improving the amount and targeting of social assistance, and increasing tax revenues, especially by eliminating tax concessions and exemptions. The underlying fiscal adjustment after accounting for clearance of circular debt in the energy sector (1.4 percent of GDP in FY2012/13) was 1.7 percentage points of GDP over the same period. In the meantime, despite a sustained improvement over the past three years, tax revenue is still very low (at 11 percent of GDP) and widening of the tax net remains a challenge. Little progress has been made in reforming the fiscal federalism system. Monetary policy has improved and foreign exchange reserves have been rebuilt, and some progress has been made in enhancing central bank independence, though further progress is needed . Monetary policy has remained prudent in recent years and, helped by low oil prices and strong remittances, reserve buffers strengthened to 3.8 months of imports in September 2015. The improved interest corridor promises to strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, progress with enhancing central bank independence and strengthening the anti-money laundering (AML) framework has been partial. While several important aspects of central bank independence still need to be addressed, the recently passed amendments to the SBP law, including the legal formation of an independent monetary policy committee, were a major step forward. Legal amendments strengthening the AML framework have been passed, and further progress is needed to allow for appropriate coverage of tax crimes under the AML framework. Structural reforms advanced but remain incomplete in critical areas . Achievements were made in removing tax exemptions and concessions, launching an ambitious privatization agenda, and improving the functioning of the power sector and reducing power outages. At the same time, quasi-fiscal losses in the power sector, which have accumulated to a stock of about 2 percent of GDP, and in large public enterprises continue, calling for accelerated implementation of the privatization/restructuring agenda for loss-making public enterprises and completing the energy sector reform. In addition, there is a need to review efforts to strengthen the business climate. Page 14