Low oil prices present a unique opportunity to solidify external stability . The SBP has continued with spot purchases of foreign exchange, netting US$750 million in Q1 FY2015/16 to further raise the reserve coverage and bolster resilience against external shocks. While the expected tightening of global financial conditions and possible turbulence in international financial markets can affect near-term capital inflows, staff and the authorities agreed that further accumulation of reserves is desirable as the balance of payments position remains vulnerable. Staff noted that further accumulation could also help arrest the recent trend of REER appreciation, which has been eroding competitiveness, although staff agreed with the authorities that a range of other issues (such as electricity shortages, security issues and the business environment) are adversely affecting it as well. A cautious monetary policy stance is warranted in the period ahead . The SBP has pursued an accommodative monetary policy stance in the wake of declining inflation. Staff and the authorities agreed that, as global financial conditions remain uncertain and inflation is expected to rebound in the coming months, monetary policy needs to remain prudent and target clearly positive real interest rates to preserve achievements in anchoring low inflation expectations and meet the program’s monetary targets. Smooth functioning of the newly improved interest rate corridor should continue to improve the SBP’s credibility among market participants, and the government should continue supporting this credibility by continuing fiscal discipline and further improving cash management. Staff supported the authorities’ medium-term plans to gradually move toward inflation targeting . With various pre-conditions being put in place—strengthening of the interest rate corridor, advancement of fiscal consolidation, establishment of an independent monetary policy committee (MPC), development of technical forecasting capacity, and strengthening of the SBP’s communication strategy—the SBP is planning to gradually move toward flexible (or soft) inflation targeting over the medium term. Staff supported these plans and urged strengthening the monetary policy transmission mechanism, including by further reducing fiscal dominance, while pointing out that increased exchange rate flexibility under inflation targeting underscores the need to increase reserve buffers to more adequate levels. In addition, staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to further strengthen central bank independence, by addressing the remaining recommendations of the 2013 Safeguards Assessment during the current fiscal year (MEFP ¶7). Page 20 Staff and the authorities agreed on the need to firmly reduce public debt through fiscal consolidation . Pakistan’s public debt-to-GDP ratio remains vulnerable to shocks due to still significant reliance on short-term debt instruments and, consequently, high gross financing needs (Annex I). Further fiscal consolidation in the period ahead consistent with a budget deficit (excluding grants) of 3½ percent of GDP in FY2016/17 and 2½ percent over the medium term, will help keep debt on a firmly declining trajectory. The authorities agreed with the need for fiscal consolidation while noting a preference for a somewhat more gradual path to address the country’s development needs. In their view, removing constraints to private sector investment and FDI will take time, and activity will need to be stimulated by the public sector in the interim, albeit with increased private sector participation, e.g. through public-private partnerships (PPPs). There was agreement that fiscal consolidation needs to be based on a concerted effort toward raising the tax-to-GDP ratio to 14.5 percent over the medium term . Pakistan needs substantial fiscal space for growth-enhancing priority spending on infrastructure, education, healthcare, and targeted social assistance. But the current level of tax collection is too low to provide this space, and mobilizing additional revenue with focus on widening the tax net will be critical to address the country’s pressing development and social needs. Despite increasing by one percent of GDP since FY2012/13 to 11 percent of GDP in FY2014/15, tax revenue remains well below the level observed in comparator developing countries and Pakistan’s estimated potential of over 22 percent of GDP (see accompanying Selected Issues Paper: “Unlocking Pakistan’s Revenue Potential”). In this context, a comprehensive and frontloaded tax reform agenda is needed . Federal and provincial policy adjustments and institutional changes are needed to expand tax bases, reduce concessions and exemptions, address fragmented tax administration, and improve tax compliance across all sectors of the economy. The authorities agreed with the need to pursue such an agenda while noting the substantial progress already achieved in tax administration reforms and reducing tax expenditure. There was broad agreement on key elements of the reform agenda: Continued removal of concessions and exemptions , most importantly from the General Sales Tax (GST) and customs duties. Staff welcomed the authorities’ success in reducing the cost of tax concessions and exemptions from 1.9 percent of GDP in 2013/14 to 1.5 percent in 2014/15 and strictly limiting the authorization of administrative tax concessions and exemptions through Statutory Regulatory Orders (SROs) to be temporary and only applicable in a number of exceptional circumstances. It was agreed that continued removal of SROs will be needed to widen the tax base and increase evenhandedness and fairness of the tax system. Broadening the base and improving compliance To increase the number of active taxpayers, the authorities have introduced a variety of measures that are yielding some results (MEFP ¶14). With this, the number of personal income tax (PIT) filers has increased by more than 200,000 over the last two years. Nevertheless, at around 970,000 as of end-November, the number of active PIT filers is still significantly below the estimated 5.7 million potential taxpayers and the number of corporate income tax (CIT) filers is less than one percent of all commercial and Page 21 industrial electricity users. Staff encouraged swift implementation of the newly adopted risk- based audit policy to identify noncompliance, and further measures to assess compliance risks, improve access to taxypayers’ financial information, and pursuing a stepped-up agenda to improve governance in tax administration (MEFP ¶15-16). Staff welcomed the authorities’ work on legislation against “benami” transactions (SB), which will help reduce tax evasion. Adopting amendments to the AML Act to include serious tax crimes and implementing measures targeting the laundering of proceeds of tax crimes will also allow better detection and deterrence of tax evasion (MEFP ¶29). Compliance can also be encouraged by swift handling of tax refunds: the authorities plan to continue reducing the backlog of GST refund claims to a level consistent with a three-month flow (or about PRs 20 billion) from PRs 87 billion in September 2015 (MEFP ¶13). Supported by IMF technical assistance (TA), they are exploring further options for modernization of GST and other taxes. Improving taxation and collection at the provincial level The seventh National Finance Commission (NFC) award grants 57.5 percent of most revenues to the provinces. And although some expenditure responsibilities have been devolved as well, the existing fiscal federalism system remains unbalanced and tax revenue collection under provincial authority—GST on services as well as agriculture and property taxes—is very low. Going forward, it will be important for the government to seek a better balance in the demarkation of revenue and expenditure responsibilities and encourage improvement in provincial revenue collection (MEFP ¶18). Staff also urged the authorities to reduce fragmentation in tax administration and improve cooperation with provincial tax authorities. Strengthening of debt and public finance management is needed to further reduce fiscal risks . A debt management strategy based on building funding buffers, assessing off-budget fiscal risks, diversifying financing from both domestic and external sources, and lengthening the maturity profile of domestic debt will help mitigate these risks. In this context, staff welcomed the authorities’ plans to continue enhancing the capacity and effectiveness of the Debt Policy Coordination Office and to update the medium-term debt strategy by January 2016 (MEFP ¶23). Meanwhile, proposals to further strengthen the existing fiscal responsibility framework, improve intergovernmental policy corrdination, and develop a PPP framework at the federal level are being developed with support from IMF TA. Their implementation will help provide a more effective guidance for fiscal policy and ensure sound practices in the evaluation, prioritization, and implementation of public investment projects (MEFP ¶19). In “benami” transactions, assets are held by (or transferred to) a person but have been provided for (or paid by) another person. These transactions can be used to conceal one’s assets and evade taxes. Page 22