Policies to Increase Competitiveness Decisive policy action can ease growth-limiting bottlenecks . Staff argued that, with swift improvements in supporting policies, medium term growth could reach 6½ percent (Box 4). Staff and the authorities agreed that policy priorities include broadening the tax base and further reducing energy subsidies to free resources for higher public investment, strengthening the power sector, improving the business climate, and restructuring or privatization of loss-making public enterprises. Alongside, improving access to finance and further reducing public borrowing will be critical to raise private investment. Within this agenda, staff emphasized the importance of improving export performance . Pakistan lags behind most of its regional peers in terms of growth and level of exports. The country’s exports are highly concentrated, with textile and clothing accounting for about a half of total exports of goods. Moreover, Pakistan’s world market shares, both for these products and across the full spectrum of exported goods, have been either stagnant or declining in recent years (see accompanying Selected Issues Paper: “Improving Pakistan’s Competitiveness and Business Climate”). In staff’s view, this is reflective of both structural impediments to business productivity and security issues. Moreover, the marked appreciation of the real effective exchange rate over the last two years points to the need for continued structural reforms and supportive monetary, fiscal, and financial sector policies to maintain a competitive real effective exchange rate, supporting exports and import-competing industries. The authorities agreed with many components of staff’s analysis . They agreed with the importance of raising business productivity and investment to stimulate exports and growth, while also pointing to security-related constraints during the past decade which have affected outcomes. They pointed to plans to work with the World Bank to develop a new reform agenda with specific time-bound measures to strengthen the business climate (new end-February 2016 SB, MEFP ¶42). They also highlighted their existing agenda to promote financial inclusion, develop alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, simplify property registration, and develop the regulatory framework for credit bureaus. The authorities were skeptical that public borrowing might crowd out private sector credit amid adequate liquidity in the banking sector and low nominal loan demand for working capital amid falling commodity prices. Pointing to the inherent imprecision of estimates of exchange rate alignment, they held the view that the nominal exchange rate, being market- determined, is in line with fundamentals. Page 23 Box 4. Raising Medium-Term Growth Improving competitiveness can significantly raise potential GDP growth . Pakistan currently ranks 138 out of 189 economies in the World Bank’s Doing Business Report 2016 and 126 out of 140 countries in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2015–16. The latter indicates that Pakistan ranks below the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan (MENAP) comparator group in every subcategory but market size and its score gradually deteriorated over the past 10 years. The results of Mitra and others (2015) suggest that an improvement in the overall Global Competitiveness Index (GCI) score is significantly correlated with economic growth through its positive effect on productivity. Staff estimates suggest that regulatory reforms leading to improved business climate sufficient to reach average MENAP levels of the GCI and the FDI technology transfer index, and increasing the shares of trade and public investment to GDP by one percentage point each, could raise Pakistan’s medium-term potential growth rate to 6.5 percent in 2017–21. See accompanying Selected Issues paper: “Improving Pakistan’s Competitiveness and Business Climate.” Mitra, P. and others, 2015 (forthcoming), “Avoiding the New Mediocre: Policies to Strengthen Potential Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia,” Staff Discussion Note (Washington: International Monetary Fund). The energy sector has begun to show improvement and completing this reform will significantly enhance business productivity . Staff noted the progress achieved with reducing untargeted energy subsidies from 2.3 percent of GDP in FY2011/12 to the planned 0.4 percent of GDP in FY2015/16, along with improved collections and loss reduction. Staff also welcomed that the end-September indicative ceiling on accumulation of power sector arrears was met, quarterly loss reduction targets have been set for distribution companies (DISCOs) (October 2015 SB), and progress is under way with setting multi-year tariffs, albeit with some delay owing to late finalization of DISCO’s multi-year investment plans (missed end-November 2015 SB) (MEFP ¶37). Staff emphasized the importance of implementing other aspects of the energy sector reform (Box 5), including the privatization of DISCOs, overcoming legal challenges to electricity surcharges, and completing the gas sector pricing reforms (MEFP ¶40). The authorities reiterated their commitment to the energy sector reform and were optimistic about eliminating the power deficit in the medium InstitutionsInfrastructureMacroeconomic environmentHealth and primary educationHigher education and trainingGoods market efficiencyLabor market efficiencyFinancial market developmentTechnological readinessMarket sizeBusiness sophisticationInnovation MENAP average Competitiveness Index, 2015-2016 (1-7 (best))Source: WEF Competitiveness Database. MENAP average Global Competitiveness Index (1-7 (best)) Sources: WEF Competitiveness Database; and IMF staff calculations. Page 24 term through significant capacity increases and implementation of the power sector arrears reduction plan. Notwithstanding a number of setbacks, the authorities remain committed to their privatization and restructuring program . This agenda is critical to improve resource allocation in the economy and contain fiscal risks from loss-making public enterprises (including power sector arrears). A Presidential Ordinance has amended the Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) Act, paving way for soliciting expressions of interest by end-December 2015 (SB). Privatization of Pakistan Steel Mills (PSM) has been put on hold as the company was offered to a provincial government. Should this offer be declined, the authorities are optimistic that the privatization process can be completed by end-September 2016. A number of other delays have led to bunching of a large number of planned transactions in the next nine months, and staff felt that the overall agenda appears quite ambitious despite the progress under way in most cases. The authorities expressed a strong preference for swiftly advancing in this key reform area in light of the potential benefits for growth and containing fiscal risks (MEFP ¶45). Improving access to finance and financial sector stability Improving access to finance, notably to the small and medium enterprise (SME) sector, will be important to boost medium-term growth . Access to finance for Pakistan’s 3.3 million SMEs (about 90 percent of enterprises) is extremely limited, with only 7 percent of SMEs receiving bank lending. Given the potential of the SME sector to generate growth and jobs, staff welcomed the authorities’ plans to continue implementing policy reforms to improve SMEs’ access to finance (Box 6). Strengthening financial sector resiliency and stability by reinforcing the regulatory and supervisory frameworks remains a priority . Bolstering regulatory and supervisory frameworks, strengthening corporate insolvency and bankruptcy regimes, instituting the deposit insurance scheme, and enhancing consolidated supervision are essential to safeguard the financial system. Also, improving the regulator’s contingency planning framework, including for domestically important banks (D-SIBs), would strengthen financial resiliency. The authorities are evaluating policy options to enhance supervision for D-SIBs (MEFP ¶26). Dec-13Mar-14Jun-14Sep-14Dec-14Mar-15Jun-15Sep-15 T&D losses Collection (RHS) Collections and T&D Losses in Electricity Bills (12-month rolling sums, in percent)Source: Pakistani authorities. Page 25 Box 5. Reforming the Power Sector is Critical to Raising Potential Growth The power deficit has been a major constraint on growth in the past decade . Utilizing less than 70 percent of its installed capacity, Pakistan’s cash-strapped power sector has been unable to meet the growing demand for electricity resulting in widespread outages affecting both businesses and households. At the heart of the problem has been the power sector’s chronic inability to cover costs . A combination of an unfavorable fuel mix, unsupportive policies, high line losses not fully covered by tariffs, and poor governance produced persistent payment arrears by the distribution companies (DISCOs). Over the years, these arrears, also known as circular debt, gradually stripped the sector of working capital, constraining investment and capacity utilization. As a quasi-fiscal liability, circular debt has also increased fiscal risks. Since 2013, the authorities cleared a large part of circular debt from the budget and moved another PRs 335 billion to the books of the specially-created Power Holding Company Ltd. (PHCL). This helped relieve pressures in the system, but DISCOs’ continued loss-making led to re-accumulation of arrears which, together with PHCL, amounted to about 2 percent of GDP in 2014/15. The power sector is gradually improving amid the authorities’ efforts to eliminate the power deficit . Improved load management has reduced power outages from 8–11 hours to near zero in industry and 6–8 hours for households. Capacity utilization improved to 80 percent owing to improved fuel mix and management of generation. The flow of circular debt has begun to decline with improved recoveries and lower line losses. Various planned investments, including in the context of CPEC, envisage raising the sector’s installed capacity by GW 9 in the next five years. Alongside, the authorities have begun to implement a plan to reduce the flow of circular debt envisaging, among other things, improving efficiency in DISCOs, taking advantage of low oil prices to bridge the gap between costs and tariffs while minimizing the impact on final consumers, efforts to improve the fuel mix, resolving non- payment by provinces and special areas, strengthening of the regulatory environment, and introduction of multi-year tariffs to incentivize investment. At the same time, privatization of DISCOs will help pay off part of the circular debt. International experience points to the importance of a sustained reform effort . Continued improvement of governance of the DISCOs and other aspects of the reform will be important to reap potential gains. For example, starting from a similar position as Pakistan, Turkey moved fast to reform its energy sector, achieving a remarkable turnaround in closing the energy gap and improving services between 2006 and 2014. Similar reforms in the Philippines reduced system losses by 30 percent between 2007 and 2013, and decisive reforms in Chile doubled annual generation capacity between 1990 and 1998. Demand Supply Power Sector Generation and Demand (In gigawatts)Source: Pakistani authorities; and IMF staff calculations. 2021 Page 26 Progress is under way to strengthen banks that are below regulatory capital requirements . A rights issue for the only remaining CAR-non-compliant bank has been completed and, after the due diligence of the investor is completed (expected by end-December 2015), application of the full amount of the rights issue would enable it to become CAR-compliant (MEFP ¶25). Time-bound plans are under way to bring three other small banks into compliance with the minimum requirement for paid-up capital (MCR) by raising equity or privatizing affected public banks. Staff stressed the need for the supervisor to continue to engage with noncompliant banks for early compliance with statutory requirements, and, subsequently, for continued engagement to ensure that banks remain in compliance. Nonperforming loans in the banking system have gradually reduced but remain high at 12.5 percent in September 2015 amid complex legal procedures, difficulties in enforcing collateral, and limited creditor rights. The authorities have introduced legal amendments to parliament that would strengthen collateral enforcement. They are also improving mortgage foreclosure and corporate restructuring legislation, with the aim to improve recovery while preserving appropriate safeguards for borrowers (MEFP ¶26). The size of this bank is about 0.9 percent of the banking system assets (or 0.4 percent of GDP), and the CAR shortfall has decreased to PRs 0.3 billion. These MCR non-compliant banks represent about 0.5 percent of banking sector assets (0.23 percent of GDP). PSEsTransactionTimeline 1United Bank Limited (UBL)Sale of 19.6 percent of company sharesJune 20142Pakistan Petroleum Limited (PPL)Sale of 5 percent of company sharesJune 20143Allied Bank Limited (ABL)Sale of 10 percent of GoP sharesDecember 20144Habib Bank Limited (HBL)Sale of 42 percent of GoP sharesApril 20155National Power Construction Corp. (NPCC)88 percent sell-out of strategic assetSeptember 20156Pakistan Steel Mills (PSM)Strategic & Asset SaleEnd-September 20167State Life Insurance Corp (SLIC)Sale of 10-15 percent company sharesEnd-June 20168Kot Addu Power Company (KAPCO)Sale of 40.25 percent of GoP sharesEnd-June 20169Pakistan International Airlines (PIA)Sale of 26 percent of GoP sharesEnd-June 201610Mari Petroleum LtdSale of 18.39 percent of GoP sharesEnd-June 201611Faisalabad Electric Supply Company (FESCO)Strategic & Asset SaleEnd-September 201612Northern Power Generation Company Limited (NPGCL) Strategic & Asset SaleEnd-December 201613Islamabad Electric Supply Company (IESCO)Strategic & Asset SaleEnd-June 201614Lahore Electric Supply Company (LESCO)Strategic & Asset SaleEnd-June 201615Jamshoro Power Generation Company Limited (JPGCL) Strategic & Asset SaleEnd-December 2016 Timeline of Completed and Projected Privatization of PSEs Page 27 Box 6. Improving Access to Finance for SMEs The SME sector has the potential to become an engine for jobs and growth . Pakistan’s SMEs represent about 30 percent of GDP, account for 25 percent of exported manufactured goods, and employ about 80 percent of the non-agricultural labor force. However, bank lending to SMEs is only about 1.2 percent of GDP, and SMEs’ access to finance is very low, also in comparison with regional peers, constraining opportunities for growth. Supply side factors constraining access to finance : Banks’ propensity to lend to the private sector, particularly SMEs, remains low because of high NPLs (32 percent among SME loans in September, 2015) and loan losses, lack of credit information and adequate creditor rights, and limited competition among banks (banks tend to orient activities toward profitable and low-risk government lending). The absence of an effective, secured lending chain with ease of registration, and transfer and liquidation of collateral, especially for movable collateral, is an obstacle to increasing SMEs’ access to finance. As result of these constraints, SMEs are charged high collateral (130– 140 percent of the total loan amount) and banks apply more stringent risk-management tenets on SMEs. In addition, most banks do not have the required expertise, instruments, or capacity to gauge the feasibility of granting access to finance to SMEs, and banks face high administrative costs to process loan applications, which may reduce the marginal profit on already small facilities. Demand side factors constraining access to finance : In an environment of insufficient access to finance and market-based development solutions, the obstacles that SMEs face include the lack of financial literacy and capacity skills, high rates of interest, high collateral requirements, and cumbersome documentation processes. Banks are only the third preferred source of borrowing for SMEs, after nongovernmental organization MFIs and family/friends networks, mainly due to high direct and indirect borrowing costs and complexity of loan products. Policy options : Bolstering the financial sector’s development is vital to broadening access to finance, and to that end, the authorities adopted a National Financial Inclusion Strategy in May 2015. It will be important to continue developing the underlying legal and regulatory framework (bankruptcy and foreclosure proceedings) and to implement a viable secured lending chain to strengthen creditor rights. Improving the financial infrastructure, including the credit information system, collateral and insolvency regimes, and accounting and auditing standards would enhance the operation of financial intermediaries by reducing information asymmetries and legal uncertainty. The recent enactment of the Credit Bureaus Bill was an important step toward improving the credit information system and supporting financial institutions to extend credit to a broader base of SMEs. Public sector support could include efforts to sponsor technical assistance programs with lines of credit to encourage banks and non-bank financial institutions to increase SME lending. Also, the Prime Minister’s Youth Business Loans scheme—with a mark-up subsidy and partial guarantee facility for the extension of SME loans up to PRs 2 million—could be revisited to enhance its effectiveness. 10152025303540PakistanIndiaBangladeshSouth Asia average Access to Finance for SMEs, 2014 (Percent of SMEs that have a bank loan or a line of credit) Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey. Page 28 Staff supports the ongoing reforms to strengthen financial stability . To put in place a modern deposit insurance mechanism in support of financial stability and resilience, the SBP has finalized the draft Deposit Protection Fund (DPF) Act, which is on track for enactment by end- February 2016 (SB), and has begun the preparatory work to make the DPF operational by March 2016 (MEFP ¶28). The SBP is also strengthening, supported by IMF technical assistance, the framework for supervision of financial conglomerates and its contingency planning framework for systemically important banks. The authorities are pursuing a legislative agenda to put in place a Futures Trading Bill and strengthen the regulatory powers of the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) (MEFP ¶26). The SBP is also moving forward with phased implementation of Basel III capital and liquidity standards (MEFP ¶27). Improving the anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) legal framework remains a priority for financial stability, detecting proceeds of corruption, and tax compliance (MEFP ¶29). The government submitted draft amendments to the AML Act to the Senate that would include serious tax crimes in the Schedule of Offenses and enable the use of AML tools to combat tax crimes. The Senate amended the draft legislation to significantly limit the scope of tax crimes in the Schedule of Offenses and the National Assembly adopted it without further changes. While not covering many important tax crimes, including related to personal and corporate income taxes, these amendments are nonetheless a first step toward widening the application of AML tools to proceeds of tax crimes. To further increase the scope, the authorities plan to introduce to parliament by January 2016 amendments to the AML Act to cover additional important tax crimes (new SB), for parliamentary passage and enactment by May 2016 (modified SB). Going forward, staff and the authorities agreed that, once the amendments are adopted, there is a need to upgrade the regulatory framework to mitigate ML/FT risks, including with regards to the proceeds of corruption and tax crimes; bolster the Financial Monitoring Unit’s analytical capability; and strengthen the effective implementation of relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs) to freeze terrorist assets. Protecting the Vulnerable and Promoting Inclusiveness Staff supports the authorities’ work in expanding the targeted income support to the vulnerable groups through the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP) . The BISP program increased coverage to reach 5.14 million beneficiaries at end-September 2015, and is on track to expand the number of beneficiaries to 5.3 million by the end of current fiscal year. The authorities are in the process of securing support from development partners to protect the real purchasing power of cash transfers. Furthermore, in partnership with the provincial governments, they rolled out education-conditional cash transfers covering over 70 thousand children (48 percent are girls) in 32 districts at end-September 2015. Staff recommended policies to promote gender equality and female labor force participation to help improve productivity . International evidence points to significant potential gains from greater female labor force participation. Policies to promote gender equality include facilitation of access to credit, strengthening legal and property rights, securing quotas for women in senior/managerial positions, improving work/life balance with paternity leave, childcare and flexible Page 29 work arrangements, enhancing transfers under the BISP program, as well as improvements in rural infrastructure (see accompanying Selected Issues Paper: “Macroeconomic Gains from Gender Equity in Pakistan”). The authorities agreed with gender equality as an important policy priority and emphasized a number of recent measures, including in the financial inclusion strategy, enhancement of BISP, and their efforts toward improving gender-responsive budgeting (MEFP ¶20).