Pakistan’s macroeconomic outlook is favorable, contingent on sustained fiscal consolidation and implementation of structural reforms (“reform” scenario, Box 3). Growth is expected to increase to 4.5 percent this fiscal year and gradually reach about 5.5 percent in the medium term supported by ongoing strength in services and construction, second-round effects of the marked decline in oil prices, expected improvements in the supply of gas and electricity, investment related to the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), gradual strengthening of domestic demand, and an improving investment climate and security situation. Inflation is expected to rebound to an average rate of about 3.7 percent this year due to bottoming out of the effects of low commodity and food prices. In the medium term, inflation is likely to hover around 5 percent, anchored by prudent monetary and fiscal policies. The current account deficit is expected to remain at close to 1 percent of GDP in FY2015/16 as the benefits of lower oil prices will continue to be offset by weak export performance and a more moderate growth in remittances owing to a weakening outlook for non-oil growth in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, the main source of remittance flows. Foreign exchange reserves are on track to reach US$16 billion by end- December 2015 and close to US$ 18 billion (about 70 percent of the ARA metric) by end of FY2015/16. Near-term risks to this outlook have slightly tilted to the downside (see Risk Assessment Matrix). External vulnerabilities include a protracted period of slower growth in key advanced and emerging market economies (including in China and the GCC), hurting exports and remittances. Continued appreciation of the U.S. dollar combined with limited variation in the rupee’s exchange rate could further erode export competitiveness. Exports, and consequently growth, will be adversely affected further if Pakistan falls behind its competitors in securing favorable treatment in major markets. Ongoing legal challenges to electricity surcharges, and the still challenging political and security conditions could affect economic activity and undermine fiscal consolidation efforts. Conversely, fast implementation of CPEC projects and an improvement in the security situation could boost investment and growth, and removal of international trade and financial sanctions against Iran could have a positive impact on energy supply to Pakistan. For a macroeconomic assessment of CPEC, see Box 1 in EBS/15/106. For example, Pakistan is not a participant in the forthcoming Trans-Pacific Partnership, while some of its competitors in textiles and clothing are. Page 17 A key medium-term risk could lie in slower reform implementation (“no reform” scenario, Box 3). Slowdown or suspension of fiscal consolidation and key energy and other structural reforms could reverse recent stability gains and affect total factor productivity and potential growth. Deterioration of the power sector’s and other SOEs’ financial performance would lead to higher budgetary transfers to compensate for companies’ losses. Together with lower tax revenue, this would reduce the fiscal space for public investment and raise the deficit, potentially crowding out private investment and fueling inflation. A reversal of stability gains together with slippages in energy sector and other structural reforms would imply that economic confidence and the business climate could deteriorate quickly, with increased instability and resumed power outages in the industry. As a result, medium-term growth could slow to about 3.5 percent (the estimated long-term growth in the absence of significant structural reforms to lift productivity and investment), with increased domestic and external vulnerabilities. The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment of the economic outlook and risks While concurring with the overall risk assessment, the authorities noted that Pakistan is now better prepared to withstand external shocks with improved policy instruments and the significant fiscal and current account adjustment that took place over the past several years. The authorities also emphasized the importance of maintaining the political momentum to implement reforms beyond the program period, and requested continued technical assistance, notably with tax reforms. Box 3. Pakistan: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenarios Sources: Pakistani authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Reform No Reform GDP Growth Rate (In percent) Reform No Reform Average Inflation (In percent) Reform No Reform Fiscal Deficit Reform No Reform Debt Page 18 Pakistan: Risk Assessment Matrix Risk Medium Term Expected Impact Policies to Downside ↓ / Upside ↑ Likelihood Upon Realization Mitigate Risk ↓ Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions. High Changes in assessment of growth prospects across the world and the Fed policy rate path may lead to sharp adjustment in asset prices. Improving U.S. economic prospects versus the rest of the world may lead to a further dollar surge. Poor market liquidity may amplify the effect on volatility. -More difficult and costly external financing; -Deterioration of the KSE stock market; -Possible difficulties with privatization. -Sustain build-up of external buffers; -Allow for exchange rate flexibility to support competitiveness; -Maintain adequate medium- term debt strategy; -Ensure strong financial regulation and supervision. -Sustain build-up of fiscal and external buffers; -Allow for exchange rate flexibility to support competitiveness; -Improve business climate. ↓ Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies (incl. GCC countries). High Failure to fully address the euro area crisis legacies, maturing of the cycle in the EMs and insufficient progress with reforms may lead to low medium-term growth and accumulation of financial imbalances in these countries. -Impaired exports; -Reduced remittances; -Weakened FDI prospects; -Dampened growth. ↓ Security conditions Medium to High Continued insurgency at the Afghanistan border, possible retaliation against ongoing security operations, and domestic sectarian violence may increase security concerns. ↓ Slippages in policy implementation and judicial challenges ↓ Sharp China slowdown in 2015–16. Disagreements on policy priorities, lack of a majority in the senate, implementation capacity constraints, and court rulings may lead to failures to sustain fiscal consolidation, to reduce external vulnerabilities, and to implement structural reforms. Low Growth in China may fall significantly, possibly due to a severe housing downturn or a shock in the shadow banking sector. -Eroded confidence; -Discouraged investment; -Increased military spending; -Increased fiscal burden. -Disrupted economic activity. Medium to High -Eroded confidence; -Discouraged investment; -Weakened growth prospects. -Instill confidence through a strong medium-term program; -Maintain engagement with donors; -Maintain fiscal and external buffers. -Continue outreach to strengthen ownership of the program; -Strive to prevent further competitiveness losses. -Impaired exports; -Reduced remittances; -Weakened FDI prospects, including in the context of CPEC; -Dampened growth -Sustain build-up of fiscal and external buffers; - Allow for exchange rate flexibility to support competitiveness; - Improve business climate. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 percent and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 percent and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 19