While progress has been made, there appear to still be important shortcomings in the financial integrity and AML/CFT framework. The FATF recognized the progress in the AML/CFT framework by removing Panama from the “gray list” at the February 18 plenary meeting. Going forward, the government and regulators are now working to bring the framework into line with the revised 2012 FATF standard, including the designation of tax-related crimes as a predicate offense to money laundering. Panama is scheduled to undergo an assessment against the revised 2012 FATF standard in mid-2017. However, the recent designation by the U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control of an extensive money laundering operation involving Panamanian corporate and financial institutions indicates there is an urgent need to both enhance the framework and more assertively enforce its provisions. The authorities reiterated that they see substantial long-term benefits in having a financial sector grounded in transparency and were committed to that end goal. They believe that ongoing improvements in the AML/CFT framework will help banks withstand pressures from global de-risking, and noted that some foreign credit lines and new correspondent banking relatonships have been established after Panama’s removal from the FATF gray list. The authorities are also enhancing financial integrity in the context of their anti-corruption efforts and measures to combat tax evasion. Panama’s approach to sharing information related to tax issues has evolved with the recent initiatives to strengthen tax transparency. A recent OECD report to the G-20 Finance Ministers had listed Panama as one of the few countries that had not been willing to adhere to the Common Reporting Standard (CRS) proposed by the OECD (Box 3). In April 2016, the Communique of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors called on all relevant countries, including all financial centers and jurisdictions, to commit to implement the standard on automatic exchange of information by 2017 or 2018 and to sign the Multilateral Convention. The Communique further indicated that the G20 will consider defensive measures against noncooperative jurisdictions if progress is insufficient (as assessed by the Global Forum on Transparency and the Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes). Subsequent to the OECD report, on April 14, the Panamanian authorities announced their full commitment to the bilateral Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI), following the OECD’s Common Reporting Standard by 2018 and that the government intends to immediately begin implementing the CRS regulatory framework. The authorities Page 21 underlined that they would work on a bilateral and reciprocal basis with other jurisdictions in the automatic exchange of information. In late April they initiated a number of bilateral negotiations, including with Colombia, France, Germany, and Japan on tax information sharing. On April 27, Panama and the United States signed an intergovernmental agreement for the automatic exchange of tax information, governed by the U.S.’s Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) The changing global environment may ultimately lead to consolidation in the banking sector. Discussions with Panamanian banks revealed their expectation that there would be consolidation going forward, partly as a result of the challenges faced by certain banks in conducting international business. A healthy legal and regulatory environment would help ensure an orderly consolidaton process without major interruption to the banking system as a whole. Staff and the authorities agreed that Panama should first and foremost continue to improve domestic implementation of relevant international standards, as well as expand its outreach to regional banks, supervisors, the U.S. Treasury, and foreign correspondent banks to better understand the drivers of the loss of correspondent banking relationships. Staff also encouraged the authorities to develop a graduated contingency plan to handle the eventuality of a broader loss of correspondent banking relations, should that occur. Box 3. Panama: Tax Transparency and Exchange of Information Several initiatives using different approaches have been employed to strengthen tax transparency and facilitate exchange of information among jurisdictions in recent years. Global Forum and Common Reporting Standard: The Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes, which includes 133 jurisdictions as members and 15 international organizations participate as observers, aims to ensure high standards of tax transparency and exchange of information. In 2014 the OECD developed the Common Reporting Standard in response to a G-20 request for putting in place a global standard for automatic exchange of 2015 Financial Secrecy Ranking information. The Global Forum initiated a commitment process among its members for adoption of the CRS, and until now, 98 member jurisdictions have committed to implementing the CRS by 2017 or 2018. FATCA: In 2010 the U.S. Congress enacted the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) to target noncompliance by U.S. taxpayers using foreign accounts. This act requires foreign financial institutions to report to the U.S. tax authorities information on accounts held by U.S. taxpayers or on foreign entities with substantial ownership interest of U.S. taxpayers. As of April 2016, the U.S. has negotiated Intergovernmental Agreements (IGA) to implement FATCA with 113 jurisdictions (of which 55 entered in force, 27 were signed, and 31 were agreed in substance). Not being included in the list of countries that have committed to implement the CRS, the U.S. has indicated that it is undertaking automatic exchange of information pursuant to FATCA from 2015 and has entered into IGAs to do so. Panama has been addressing international tax cooperation and exchange of information on bilateral and reciprocal basis and the authorities stated that over 30 bilateral Tax Treaties and Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEA) have been signed since 2009. In 2010, Panama also signed a TIEA with the U.S. that entered into force in 2011. On April 14, 2016 the Panamanian authorities affirmed that Panama would be fully and immediately committed to the bilateral Automatic Exchange of Information related to tax matters, following the OECD’s Common Reporting Standards. Jurisdiction 1 Switzerland 2 Hong Kong 3 USA 4 Singapore 5 Cayman Islands 6 Luxembourg 7 Lebanon 8 Germany 9 Bahrain 10 UAE (Dubai) 11 Macao 12 Japan 13 Panama 14 Marshall Islands 15 United Kingdom Source: Tax Justice Network. FSI Page 22 Box 3. Panama: Tax Transparency and Exchange of Information (Concluded) Financial Secrecy Index (FSI), prepared by the Tax Justice Network, aims to rank jurisdictions according to their financial secrecy and the scale of their offshore financial activities. Although it is difficult to evaluate the representativeness of this index, the 2015 FSI places Panama among the most secretive jurisdictions, though it ranks Panama as less secretive than several major economies. Liquid Assets to Total Assets (%) The banking sector remains generally healthy, but certain business lines will require greater vigilance. The banking system is well capitalized and profitable, with an overall nonperforming loan ratio of below 2 percent. However, some banks have significant exposures in the CFZ where economic activity and property prices have been declining in recent years. In light of some signs of overcapacity in the commercial real estate market (office space, hotels, and shopping malls) and saturation in the high end of residential property, staff flagged possible risks of significant correction in prices. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some banks are competing aggressively in the low- income residential mortgage market by offering financing with high LTVs. The authorities are closely monitoring these developments and introduced preemptive measures such as requiring additional loan-loss provisions for exposures in the CFZ and imposing higher risk weights for high LTV loans. They also underlined that banks’ exposure to commercial real estate is rather limited, as project developers typically provide most of the financing, and pointed out that the expected release of a real estate price index in mid-2016 should help them improve monitoring. Sources : Financial Soundness Indicators (FSI), Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER), and Fund staff calculations. Stabilized arrangement Crawling peg Crawl-like arrangement No separate legal tender Currency Conventional Floating Free floating Other managed arrangement Panama board peg EMU Free floating (ex EMU) In the absence of a lender of last resort and deposit insurance, regulatory requirements need to be adapted to generate larger liquidity buffers. At around 60 percent of deposits (twice the required 30 percent), liquidity appears high according to an official definition. However, supervisory data collection and liquidity regulation are not in line with the Basel III framework, which makes a comprehensive assessment of bank liquidity difficult. For example, the current regulation allows the inclusion of all assets receivable within 186 days in the liquid assets and certain below-investment-grade assets, which has the effect of inflating the liquidity ratio. Moreover, liquid assets to total assets of Panama’s banking system are relatively low compared with other countries that have a similar exchange rate regime (see figure). Staff urged the authorities to harmonize liquidity regulation with Basel III standards, including through a more stringent definition of liquid assets, a broader interpretation of short-term bank liabilities, and collecting more granular sectoral and maturity breakdowns of balance sheet exposures. Although significant progress has been made, various steps remain from the 2011 FSAP recommendations (Annex I). Complementing an effective microprudential liquidity regulation, an immediate priority is to establish a temporary liquidity facility for banks to address systemic shocks. The authorities also need to enhance cross-border supervision and monitoring of Page 23 systemic risk. Since risks deriving from nonbank financial institutions can potentially spill over to the banking sector and threaten financial stability, the supervision of the nonbank financial institutions needs to be significantly strengthened. The authorities agreed on the need to modernize financial supervision according to international standards and to strengthen the financial safety net. They pointed to recent efforts to adopt parts of Basel II/III banking regulations, including a pilot project exploring the implementation of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. In addition, they agreed on the need to establish a liquidity facility for banks and to develop a plan to coordinate the response to a large unexpected adverse shock to the financial system. Nevertheless, the authorities pointed out that the Panamanian banking sector has been remarkably stable, including during the 2008–09 global financial crisis, so they do not perceive significant financial stability risks at present. The authorities shared staff’s concern about the slow progress towards risk-based supervision of nonbank financial intermediaries, pointing to capacity constraints as an important impediment.