The fiscal framework needs to be revamped. Over the past 5 years, the deficit ceilings in the original SFRL have been repeatedly changed through amendments to the law. Under the current fiscal framework, the threshold for the Canal contribution to the budget is too high compared with current projections, thus allowing for overall fiscal deficits larger than the SFRL ceilings applicable to the adjusted deficit over the medium term. Based on current projections, the overall fiscal deficit is expected to Deficit Ceilings as % of GDP (Percent, annual) 2014 Amendment 2012 Amendment 2011 Waiver Original SFRL of 2008 Authorities projection 2013 Supplementary budget 2012 Carryover 2009 Waiver Actual results Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 exceed the adjusted overall fiscal deficit by a cumulative 6 percent of GDP over the next five years Meanwhile, no resources are expected to be transferred to the Sovereign Wealth Fund in the foreseeable future. VEN ARG UKR EGY BLZ GHA ECU HND DOM BOL CRI PAN SLV PAK KAZ CHL CIV TUR COL IDN TTO GTM ) ( Debt is moderate but fiscal shocks could push it into a range where spread rises quickly 1/ Strengthening the fiscal framework is a priority. To ensure fiscal discipline and enhance the role of the medium-term fiscal framework as an anchor, staff urged the authorities to refrain from changing the SFRL ceilings and to review the fiscal framework taking into consideration updated projections of Canal contributions relative to GDP (or to consider alternative smoothing frameworks, such as cumulating all Canal contribution in the FAP and spending a smoothed disbursement from the fund). In addition, to further strengthen the fiscal framework, consideration should be given to lowering the level and broadening the definition of the net debt target that is embedded in the SFRL. Indeed, exposures to shocks and contingent liabilities, large unfunded future pension liabilities, and the temporary financing needs of a liquidity facility to backstop the banks argue for larger fiscal buffers (especially in light of the absence of monetary policy). The net debt definition could be broadened to include, for example, other outstanding public liabilities (such as obligations associated with turnkey projects) and liquid public financial assets. It would also be important for any congressional approval of a deficit that temporarily exceeds the medium-term path to be accompanied by compensatory adjustments in future years. Automatic remedial actions (e.g. to limit future spending in the years following a deficit overrun) could also be considered. Finally, to ensure the effectiveness of the revised SFRL, a more explicit and comprehensive accountability and transparency framework will also need to be put in place. Accompanying the improvements in the fiscal framework, a comprehensive strategy should be developed to manage public assets and liabilities, and to undertake a public risk assessment of the liabilities for which the government may be responsible. TOTAL as % of GDP To Households To Social Security To Corporates Source: National Authorities. Sources: World Economic Outlook (WEO) and Bloomberg. 1/ 2014 data. Green dots correspond to LAC countries; red to Panama; and blue to others. Budget Subsidies (in $ millions) Public Debt (Percent of GDP) Actual POL MYS BRA HUN JAM LBN PRY PER BGR ZAF MEX IND URY PHL CHN The SFRL prescribes a limit of 40 percent to GDP for net debt (Non Financial Public Sector debt minus the Sovereign Wealth Fund assets) to GDP. Page 17 Policy efforts should be bolstered to raise tax revenues and streamline current expenditures. An increase in revenues could be achieved by strengthening tax collection and reviewing tax policy. The newly established Dirección General de Ingresos (DGI) should continue its efforts to expand capacity and enhance efficiency. Addressing the unfunded pension liabilities will require not only public funding, but also reforming the pension system (for example by raising and unifying the retirement age, and by closing the gap between contributions and payouts). The planned revision of the electricity subsidies is a positive step and is in line with the authorities’ broader objective of aligning tariffs with costs through the existing automatic adjustment framework (while planned investments are expected to reduce inefficiencies in the energy sector, see Box 3). More broadly, the targeting of other subsidies should be improved. In addition, meeting the authorities’ fiscal deficit limits presented in the five-year strategic plan may require fiscal adjustments. Staff’s nominal GDP projection (with 2007 as the base year) for 2015 is 5 percent lower than the one in the five-year strategic plan, which implies that meeting the authorities’ deficit limit of 3.7 percent of GDP for 2015 is likely to require an adjustment of 0.2 percent of GDP from the Budget. Additional adjustments (totaling about 0.4 percent of GDP) would be necessary to keep the 2019 Non Financial Public Sector (NFPS) debt (i.e. excluding the Canal-related debt) below the authorities’ implicit target of 35 percent of GDP. The authorities shared staff concerns . They agree that regularly changing deficit ceilings undermine credibility. They furthermore mentioned that the fiscal framework envisaged in Law 38 of 2012 was created at a time when Canal contributions were projected to be much higher as a share of GDP than currently envisaged. As such a framework is helpful for expenditure smoothing and for counter cyclical purposes, the authorities were inclined to amend the law rather than either eliminate it or replace it with an alternative framework. They are considering asking for technical assistance on the fiscal framework. They are committed to empowering the DGI as well as lowering subsidies and enhancing the associated targeting. The authorities unified the taxation rate on alcoholic content, with an expected tax revenue increase of $38 million, and plan to reduce special tax advantages and close loopholes, such as those on preferred shares. This would help fund the increase in nominal pension payments (which are not indexed to inflation) planned for this year. The authorities are aware of the optimism embedded in the GDP projections, and are committed to maintaining both the deficit within the limits announced in the five-year plan and the 2019 NFPS debt below 35 percent of GDP. The adjustment is likely to fall on capital expenditure in 2015 and on both capital and current expenditure in subsequent years. The authorities are also committed to continue strengthening public financial management tools. The government just launched a new platform for centralized management of financial information (Integración y Soluciones Tecnológicas del Modelo de Gestión Operativa, ISTMO), which would enhance transparency and efficiency, as well as help cap budgetary allocations. The new system should encompass twenty-four central government agencies by end-2015, and the decentralized institutions by end-2016. Regulation related to the Single Treasury Account was approved in the fall of 2014 and the implementation is starting. By end-2015 the accounts of the central government agencies that participate in the first phase of ISTMO (representing about two thirds of total funds in those accounts) should be unified in the single account, while the accounts of other agencies should be included in the subsequent two years. Page 18 Box 3. Panama’s Electricity Subsidies Other FACE+FET (est.) Sources: Panama National Authorities, and IMF staff calculations. Electricity Subsidies (Percent of GDP) Electricity tariffs in Panama are subsidized, and about three-quarters of the subsidies are not targeted . Panama has two main electricity subsidies. The Tariff Stabilization Fund (FET), established in 2004, is targeted at low-energy users and is intended to cushion tariffs against movements in international oil prices. The Energy Compensation Fund (FACE), established in 2011, aims to stabilize tariffs for all users, and to compensate three generation companies for forgone earnings due capacity constraints in transmission (associated with weak investments by the state-owned ETESA). In 2014, FACE represented about 75 percent of total electricity subsidies. Subsidies increased in 2014 owing to external and internal factors, uncovering vulnerabilities in the energy sector. Pre-tax subsidies experienced a marked increase in 2014 on the back of high oil prices, a drought, and an explosion in a large thermal plant (the last two prompted the government to purchase energy from less efficient plants). Total pre-tax subsidies are estimated to have reached US$320mn in 2014, or about 0.7 percent of GDP, while post-tax subsidies are estimated to be about US$60mn higher on account of foregone tax revenues. Lower oil prices and an increase in tariffs are expected to reduce the fiscal burden in 2015 Tariffs have been increased in January 2015 by between 6 and 25 percent, for about one-fourth of consumers. Coupled with lower oil prices, this is expected to cause a significant reduction in subsidies from the levels envisaged in the 2015 budget (prepared in September 2014), which projected electricity subsidies at about US$350mn. Going forward, investments in the energy sector are expected to bring about necessary efficiency improvements in generation and transmission With the economy growing rapidly, energy consumption has been increasing steadily , while investments in thermal generation and transmission have remained subdued in the last few years. Authorities pointed out that, as a result, transmission capacity is below generation capacity, and thermal generation is partially inefficient. The government announced plans for US$5bn investments in the energy sector during 2015– 2019, with ¼ expected to come from public sources. Investments plans in generation are expected to total US$3.2bn (US$1.3bn in hydro, US$0.9bn in coal, and US$1bn in gas). Investments in transmission, estimated at US$1.2bn, include US$0.5bn for the interconnection with Colombia, and US$0.2 and US$0.5bn for the third and fourth transmission lines, respectively. Investments in the Energy Sector (US$ million) Electricity Generation Costs in the Region Average 2011-2013, US$ per MWh 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Distribution Transmission Thermal generation Hydro generation Sources: Panama National Authorities. x K V V Sources: Di Bella et al. (IMF WP/15/30), and Panama National Authorities. Page 19