Near-term risks mostly relate to the global outlook. With around 5 percent of world trade passing through the Panama Canal and a very globalized financial system, the country is highly exposed to external shocks. Slower-than-expected global growth or weaker trade represents a key downside risk. An abrupt surge in global financial market volatility or an upward shift in global interest rates would feed quickly into the local financial system. However, strong fundamentals and the room to implement a countercyclical fiscal response would mitigate the impact of such external shocks. Perhaps more serious is the potential negative impact from inadequately tackling financial transparency shortcomings. Conducting international transactions has become somewhat more difficult due to concerns over transparency and weaknesses of the AML/CFT framework, including through increased due diligence by correspondent banks. Delaying reforms to financial integrity and transparency could have negative implications for the economy through higher costs of trade settlements, difficulty in obtaining cross-border borrowing, and potential decline in FDI. Page 14 Box 2. Panama’s Financial Sector Remains Sound Credit, funding, and spillover risks for Panama have declined. Lower credit risks result mainly from the recent deceleration in credit growth. Market and liquidity risks have declined as the banks have become less reliant on nonresident deposits and foreign liabilities to fund their domestic credit. Inward spillover risks have waned as the economy has become less trade dependent. Macroeconomic risks to the financial system are low, but have been shifting. The higher budget deficit and lower investment growth have been more pronounced in 2014 than in the past few years, but these are currently offset by lower spreads, open access to international markets, and low unemployment. Largely reflecting global forces, financial conditions in Panama and investors’ appetite for Panamanian assets have been broadly unchanged over the past year. Panama’s financial system displays low vulnerability. The Financial Soundness Indicators heatmap provides a snapshot of banking sector vulnerabilities, suggesting a low credit cycle risk, good loan-to-deposit ratio, adequate balance sheet buffers, good asset quality, and very low NPL ratio despite recent increases. However, anecdotal evidence points to possible overcapacity in commercial real estate. Panama Inward spillover risks 2013Q3 2014Q2 Credit risks Macroeconomic risks Monetary and financial conditions Market and liquidity risks Risk appetite Source: National authorities and staff calculations. Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. Emerging Markets 1. Macroeconomic risks 2. Emerging market risks October 2013 October 2014 3. Credit risks 6. Risk appetite 4. Market and liquidity risks 5. Monetary and financial conditions Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite Source: GFSR (2014), national authorities, and staff calculations. Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or higher risk appetite. *The Financial Stability Map methodology is explained in Ricardo Cervantes, Phakawa Jeasakul, Joseph F. Maloney, and Li Lian Ong (2014), IMF Working Paper 14/99. Page 15