Panama’s growth has slowed to its robust medium-term potential. Real GDP decelerated from an average of 8.2 percent during 2006–2012 to around 6 percent in 2014 and 2015 (Table 1), mainly reflecting the winding down of the canal expansion project and a normalization of public investment from the high levels of recent years. While most sectors in the service-driven economy remain buoyant, activities in the Colon Free Zone (CFZ) continue to decline, in part due to difficulties in trade relations with Venezuela and Colombia and lower demand from the region. Unemployment has risen to 5.1 percent but remains below the average of the past decade. Inflation is moderating As a result of the strong dollar and lower oil prices, inflation decelerated from 2.6 percent (period average) in 2014 to 0.1 percent in 2015. The government has taken advantage of lower oil prices to reduce energy subsidies. The minimum wage increased by 8.5 percent in 2016 compared with 2014, but real unit labor costs have declined over the past several years. CPI Contribution (Weighted yoy percent change, 2013 base) Transport Food & Beverages Consumer Price Index (CPI) Sources: Panama National Authorities, and IMF staff estimates. The fiscal consolidation since mid-2014 has helped contain the fiscal deficit . In 2015, tax revenue increased 0.8 percent from the previous year. Capital expenditures declined by 4.8 percent, while current expenditure increased by 6 percent. The annual overall deficit of the Non- Financial Public Sector (NFPS) was 2.8 percent of GDP, below the budget of 3.7 percent of GDP. The adjusted deficit is estimated at below 2 percent of GDP , in compliance with the Social Fiscal Responsibility Law (SFRL). The difficulties were caused by the controls on foreign exchange payments in Venezuela, and the import tariffs imposed by Colombia on textile and footwear. The minimum wage is re-negotiated every two years between the employers and the workers as represented by the National Council of Organized Workers (Consejo Nacional de Trabajadores Organizados) and the National Confederation of Independent Unions (Confederación Nacional de Unidad Sindical Independiente). The government will set the minimum wage if the two sides fail to reach an agreement. The adjusted balance is the overall fiscal deficit adjusted by the difference between the actual canal contribution to the treasury and a threshold of 3.5 percent of GDP. Page 10 The external current account deficit has declined and is being financed by FDI inflows. Due in part to slowing growth, the completion of large investments (e.g. the canal locks), and the decline in oil prices, the current account deficit declined from the elevated level of close to 10 percent of GDP in the previous years, to 6.5 percent of GDP in 2015. The deficit is expected to further contract to around 3 percent of GDP in the medium term as other large investment projects wind down and start exporting. Robust and diversified foreign direct investment is projected to continue to finance the current account deficit. Private sector credit conditions remain supportive of economic activities. Overall credit to the private sector grew faster than nominal GDP (see Figure 3). However, growth in credit to commerce slowed sharply since 2013 (-30 percent y-o-y in 2015) largely due to the difficulties in the CFZ. Banks have increased provisions against their exposure to CFZ companies and intensified scrutiny on loans to CFZ. Mortgage and consumer loans maintained their strong growth. 2. Inward spillover risks Financial Stability Map Formal progress in improving financial integrity and transparency has been recently acknowledged by the FATF. Panama was put on the FATF “gray list” in June 2014 due to strategic deficiencies identified in the AML/CFT assessment. An action plan was agreed between the authorities and the FATF to enhance compliance with the standard. The FATF conducted an on-site visit in January and removed Panama from its “gray list” on February 18, 2016 after steps were taken by the authorities to implement items of the action plan, notably in the form of legislative reform (Box 1). Sources: IMF Staff Calculations 5. Monetary and financial 1. Macroeconomic risks 6. Risk appetite 2014Q2 2015Q2 3. Credit risks 4. Market and liquidity risks Note: Away from center signifies higher risks, easier monetary and financial conditions, or conditions Text Table 1. Heatmap of Financial Sector Risks Panama Credit cycle Change in credit / GDP ratio (pp, annual) Growth of credit / GDP (%, annual) Credit-to-GDP gap (st. dev) Balance Sheet Structural Risk Deposit-to-loan ratio Balance Sheet Buffers Leverage Leverage ratio (%) Profitability ROA ROE Asset quality NPL ratio NPL ratio change (%, annual) Source: National authorities and staff calculations. 2013Q1 2013Q2 2013Q3 2013Q4 2014Q1 2014Q2 2014Q3 2014Q4 2015Q1 2015Q2 2015Q3 2015Q4 H H H *Based on the credit cycle and financial soundness indicators heatmap developed by the IMF's Monetary and Capital Markets Department. **Credit cycle risk is assessed as: low (L) when the change in credit/GDP ratio is less than 3 percent; medium (M) when it is between 3 and 5 percent; and high (H) when it is above 5 percent or when the credit-to-GDP 'gap' is above 1.5 s.d. and the growth of credit/GDP is above 10 percent. Balance sheet structural risk is L when deposit-to-loan ratio is above 100 percent; M when it is below 100, but above 85; and H when it is equal or lower than 85 percent. Leverage risk is L when the leverage ratio is above 7 percent; M when it is between 3 and 7 percent; and H when it is below 3 percent. Profitability risk is H when ROA or ROE is negative. Asset quality risk is L when the change in the NPL ratio is below 5 percent; M when it is between 5 and 20 percent; and H when the NPL ratio is in the top 10th percentile of a pooled distribution or the change in the NPL ratio is over 20 percent. Page 11 However, the “Mossack Fonseca documents” and recent U.S. sanctions related to the laundering of drug trafficking proceeds by Panamanian entities point to important remaining deficiencies in the AML/CFT and transparency frameworks and in their implementation. In April 2016, a leak of 11.5 million documents from the law firm Mossack Fonseca detailed nearly four decades of global business practices related to the establishment of opaque offshore companies for clients around the world (Box 2). In May 2016, the U.S. imposed sanctions under the U.S. Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act on the Waked Money Laundering Organization, targeting the activities of two Panamanian citizens, six Panamanian-based associates (including two attorneys involved in incorporating shell companies), and 68 companies in laundering narcotics and other illicit proceeds. Panama’s Superintendent of Banks (SBP) subsequently took operating control of a local bank that was designated by the U.S. authorities as part of that money laundering organization. This also triggered the opening of criminal investigations, taking control of a local brokerage house, and beginning extraordinary inspections of nonfinancial entities by the Panamanian authorities.