The banking sector remains generally healthy, but greater vigilance will be needed in the context of slowing growth. The banking system is well-capitalized and profitable, but pockets of vulnerability exist. Strong lending activity in recent years has generally not impaired credit quality, as evidenced by a low nonperforming loan ratio (below 2 percent). Capital buffers are well above the required Basel I minimum, profit margins are large, and liquidity holdings remain ample as banks self-insure against sudden stops. Credit risk stress-tests conducted by the mission confirm that banks would be able to withstand significant real and financial shocks. However, the authorities need to continue enhancing cross-border supervision and the monitoring of idiosyncratic, systemic, and external risks. For example, developing an indicator of core liquidity and analyses of the transmission of financial shocks would be valuable. Macrofinancial linkages also need to be monitored closely . Mortgage delinquencies stand at just below 5 percent of loans, household indebtedness is growing faster than the economy, and there are signs of overcapacity in segments of the commercial real estate market. These growing imbalances may dampen price developments and construction activity, which underscores the need for active macroprudential policies. Macroprudential policy-making is still at an early stage, and recent efforts to collect real estate price data need to be complemented with additional information (such as on commercial real estate prices and corporate leverage). Efforts should be made to develop instruments (such as loan-to-value and debt-service-to-income ratios) and build a coherent macroprudential policy framework. The authorities need to undertake further steps to fully implement the recommendations of the 2011 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) (Annex III). A key priority is to create a facility for the provision of temporary liquidity to banks (which may need to be financed with public funds initially). Although the nonbank financial sector is relatively small , there is a need for upgrading legislation on nonbank financial intermediaries—especially cooperatives and insurance companies, but also trust funds and public accountants—in order to improve the regulation, supervision, and accountability of these entities. A deposit insurance scheme for small deposits would protect the majority of depositors, mitigate the risk of runs, and complement social protection policies. The authorities broadly concurred with the need for such reforms. They pointed to recent efforts to adopt parts of Basel II/III banking regulations, improve loan classification and provisioning, identify systemically important banks, monitor systemic risks, and improve the bank supervisor’s financial stability report. They plan to revisit the accounting regulation for insurance companies in light of international standards. The authorities do not perceive significant financial stability risks at present, as they see economic prospects as being favorable over the next five years. However, they share the concern about the weakening of relations with corresponding banks. They As of 2013, the assets of insurance companies, credit cooperatives, and finance companies accounted for 5 percent, 4.4 percent and 3 percent of GDP respectively. Page 20 consider financial sector exposures to the real estate as still healthy, despite some excesses in the commercial segment.