Staff recommended targeting a fiscal deficit below the revised SFRL ceiling. First, tighter fiscal policy in the near term will help rein in domestic inflationary pressures and prevent them from becoming entrenched in wage dynamics (especially in light of the authorities’ inability to rely on monetary policy). Second, further fiscal restraint would leave room for maneuver in case of a serious deterioration of the external environment. Third, a tighter fiscal policy would help build up public assets that may be valuable in financing the liquidity facility under discussion (more below).Fourth, targeting a fiscal deficit below the Original 2008 SFRL deficit path 2011 waiver path of deficits 2012 amendment path of deficits Actual results 2009 waiver path of deficits 2012 carryover 2013 supplementary budget Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. year, as long as FAP assets are above 5 percent of GDP. Article 4 of the Executive Decree 1068 of 2012 also calls for the transfer of overall investment returns to the Treasury on an annual basis. Page 12 ceiling would reduce the risk of revising or exceeding the ceiling, which would erode the credibility of the fiscal rules and investors’ confidence (see Chart 9). In this regard, the significant revision of nominal GDP in 2014 offers an opportunity to remain below the SFRL ceiling, by maintaining the moderate fiscal tightening imbedded in the nominal deficit path that would have otherwise been envisaged with the unrevised GDP. However, the 2014 fiscal deficit presented in the budget corresponds to about 3 percent of the 2014 unrevised GDP projection (see Table 1) and may require small adjustments in order to remain within the SFRL ceiling (2.7 percent) on the basis of revised GDP. The authorities indicated that they managed to keep the fiscal balance below the SFRL ceilings in recent years (in part due to lower than budgeted expenditures, but also to improvements in tax collection), that they expect substantial underspending in 2014 vis-à-vis the budget due to the election and the transition between administrations (as in 2009), and that they are committed to adjusting expenditures if necessary to keep the 2014 fiscal deficit within the ceiling. Regarding the potential overheating risks, the authorities expect inflation to come down, due in part to the effect of the ongoing U.S. monetary policy normalization. Staff and authorities agreed on the fiscal reform agenda to strengthen the capacity in budgeting and public financial management. Authorities are confident that tax evasion has been declining owing to the strengthening of fiscal institutions, including the recently created independent revenue agency ( Autoridad Nacional de Ingresos Publicos , ANIP). The Large Taxpayers’ Unit is operational and being enhanced. The authorities plan to make public the first debt strategy plan in the spring of 2014. The authorities should press ahead with the creation of a Single Treasury Account and the establishment of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. Staff also highlighted the importance of enhancing the strategy for a joint management of public assets and liabilities: a consistent vision should jointly guide the government decisions related to the management of the sovereign wealth fund, public debt management, the path for fiscal tightening, the funding of the financial liquidity facility, the management of public enterprises’ liabilities, and the use of contingent instruments (such as catastrophic insurance).