The current fiscal stance is appropriate. Staff project the fiscal deficit for 2016 to be 3.1 percent of GDP, consistent with the fiscal rule and with a projected decline of debt-to-GDP of the NFPS in the medium term. Given that growth is high and stable and inflation is subdued, there is no compelling reason at this time to deviate from the medium-term fiscal consolidation path for economic stabilization goals. Comparison of Fiscal Policy Stance The current fiscal framework has played an important role in strengthening fiscal discipline and maintaining fiscal sustainability . Since the current fiscal framework became effective in 2009, the primary balance and debt-to-GDP ratio of the NFPS on average have improved significantly compared with those in 2000–2008. The Social and Fiscal Responsibility Law (SFRL) and the Savings Fund Law have established an operating target—deficit ceilings for the NFPS—with the objective of preserving debt sustainability in the medium term. The deficit ceilings reflect the government’s intention to consolidate the fiscal position in the medium term. The framework also provides flexibility to respond to shocks, by allowing the fiscal balance to exceed these ceilings during large economic downturns and/or adverse external shocks. 1/ In 2000-2008, budget relied heavily on one-off privatization proceeds, resulting in better overall fiscal balance but worse primary and structural balance. 2/ Cyclically adjusted primary balance. Source: Panama National Authorities and IMF Staff calculation. (as percent of GDP) 2000-2008 2009-2015 Average Overall Fiscal Balance Average Primary Balance Average Structural Balance Average NFPS Debt Nonetheless, the fiscal framework has a number of shortcomings. The objective of maintaining net debt below 40 percent of GDP is merely an “indicative” target that does not provide Page 18 Deficit Ceilings as % of GDP (Percent, annual) sufficient guidance for setting deficit ceilings given that current net debt is already below 40 percent of GDP. The definition of net debt does not encompass a range of relevant government assets and liabilities. Since the SFRL came into force in 2009, deficit ceilings have been repeatedly relaxed through waivers and amendments to the law, signaling a weakness in the accountability framework. The SFRL does not provide for any sanctions in such cases and does not have any automatic mechanisms for detecting and correcting slippages during the budget year so as to avert deviations by year-end. The deficit ceiling target lacks transparency, given that the deficit target is allowed to increase by the amount that the canal contribution to the budget falls below an assumed long run average (3.5 percent of GDP) that has become unrealistic. In addition, the combination of deficit ceilings and rapid growth of operating expenses has been putting pressure on capital spending. Lastly, although the medium-term fiscal plan and the five-year investment plan are publicly available, they are not binding when the budget is formulated. 2013 Supplementary budget 2012 Carryover 2009 Waiver Actual results 2014 Amendment 2012 Amendment 2011 Waiver Original SFRL of 2008 Authorities projection Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. There was agreement on the need to improve the fiscal framework and establish an independent assessment of compliance with the fiscal rule . The authorities committed to abide by the deficit ceiling targets without additional waivers. They also plan to implement a top-down budgetary process to curb the excessive expansion of operational expenditure and would like to establish limits on its growth rate. They intend to publish the liabilities of the state-owned enterprises and those derived from turn-key projects. The authorities are considering establishing an independent fiscal council to evaluate macroeconomic projections and underlying assumptions in the budget. The fiscal council could also be charged with monitoring and assessing the implementation of the fiscal rule, including reviewing the structural contributions from the canal and the link between the net debt target and the future path of deficit targets. The authorities are willing to consider introducing a multi-year budgetary process to provide guidance to policy makers and ensure that they are accountable for adhering to targets. There is an urgent need to strengthen revenue administration. Tax compliance is considered low for a country with the level of development and dynamism of Panama. Panama’s revenue-to-GDP ratio was 9.6 percent in 2014, while the average for CAPDR and South American countries was 13.9 and 20.3 percent, respectively. VAT evasion has been estimated at about 40 percent and the tax authorities have applied three tax amnesties in the past six years. The authorities have taken a number of measures to increase revenue collection. A mechanism for partial VAT withholding by the 160 largest companies was implemented in February 2016 to assist the revenue authority in collecting VAT with an estimated collection of US$100–200 million (0.2–0.4 percent of GDP). The revenue authority also set up a call center to notify taxpayers of their pending obligations and speed up collection. The authorities also plan to launch a new tax filing The indicative target on net debt is defined as NFPS debt net of the assets of the Trust Fund for Development, which was later transformed into the sovereign wealth fund. The target of 40 percent of GDP effectively became applicable since 2008. Page 19 system (eTax II) to facilitate tax compliance. They also recognize that tax amnesties erode tax compliance and undermine the credibility of the tax authority when used repeatedly. Efforts to enhance the human capital of the revenue administration are ongoing. There is no plan, however, to review and streamline the numerous and complicated schemes of tax exemptions. The authorities are working to improve public services and strengthen public procurement. The investment and maintenance of water and sanitation infrastructure has not kept pace with economic and residential development, partly due to low and outdated tariffs. The authorities plan to improve the reliability and access to public services through investments in infrastructure. In an effort to combat corruption and increase transparency, the authorities proposed a modification to public procurement processes, including to identify contractors’ beneficiary owners and to eliminate the practice of holding abbreviated and urgent tenders that had lower standards for eligibility of contractors, auction tendering procedures, and transparency. Expected Cash Deficities of the Exclusively Defined Pension System (% GDP) Addressing the unfunded liabilities of the pension system will be needed to avoid crowding out other components of public spending. The pension system includes two subsystems: a subsystem of defined benefit and a subsystem of mixed defined benefit and defined contribution. Actuarial studies indicate that, absent parametric reforms, the exclusively defined benefit subsystem starts to incur cash losses in 2015, and reserves will be depleted in 2027. Between 2027 and 2060, expenditure of the defined benefit subsystem would impose fiscal pressure of 1–2 percentage points of GDP. Parametric reform is needed to ensure adequate financing of the pension system. Staff suggested reform options that include increasing the retirement age and reducing the replacement rate. There would also be merit in combining the reserves of the two systems, so as to take a consolidated approach to asset-liability management. Contributions Sources: Panama National Authorities, and IMF staff estimates. Expenditures Starting in 2008, all new affiliates entering the system started to contribute to the new subsystem of mixed defined benefit and defined contribution. For affiliates under the old system, workers earning less than US$500 a month as well as workers older than 35 years of age continued to contribute to the exclusively defined benefit scheme. Workers below 35 years of age and earning more than US$500 a month had the option of either staying in the old system or contribute to the new system. Reserves in one subsystem cannot be used to finance the other subsystem. The current dependency ratio is about 16 percent (ratio of population aged 60 years and above to those aged between 19 and 60) and is projected to reach 36 percent in 2060. Page 20 Projection of Demographic Change Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. ODR (right axis) Reserves will be depleted in 2027 (%GDP) 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations.