The presidential election took place in May 2014. President Juan Carlos Varela, the head of the Partido Panameñista, took office in July 2014. The new government is continuing a pro- growth economic policy agenda, with a deeper emphasis on social issues as well as transparency and equity. The lack of a government majority in the National Assembly could, however, complicate policy efforts. The country is undergoing an important anti- corruption campaign. This has led to a greater scrutiny in awarding construction permits and public contracts, which in turn is likely to slow down investment. Unemployment is in line with Okun's Law y = -0.50x + 6.22 R² = 0.21 Panama’s economic growth continues to slow towards its medium-term potential. Real GDP growth slowed down to 6.2 percent after reaching 8.4 percent in 2013 (Table 1) . This mainly reflects a slowing in the pace of public investment from the high levels of recent years, continued weakness in Colon Free Zone activity (in part linked to difficulties in trade relations with Venezuela and Colombia), and delays in the Canal expansion. Unemployment has risen modestly, reflecting the economic slowdown, but still remains low by historical standards. Output gap Sources: Panama National Authorities; and World Economic Outlook (WEO). CPI Contribution (Weighted yoy percent change, 2013 base) Transport Food & Beverages Consumer Price Index (CPI) F O F O Sources: Panama National Authorities, and IMF staff estimates. Growth is expected to remain stable in 2015. Lower oil prices and the U.S. recovery will be positive forces, but will be offset by U.S. dollar appreciation and some lags in new public investment. Once operational, the expanded Canal (in 2016) and the new copper mine (Minera Panama, in 2018) are expected to help maintain growth at 6–7 percent over the next five years. World Oil Prices and Energy Prices in Panama (2010=100 ) Electricity prices Word oil prices Fuel prices Inflation has been declining. As promised during the electoral campaign, the government imposed price controls on 22 food items in Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Ratios to GDP in our Tables are based on the 1996-base GDP (unless otherwise indicated), as the full set of 2007- base national account statistics is not yet available. Page 10 July 2014, initially for 6 months, and subsequently until June 2015. As a result of these price controls, coupled with lower oil prices, headline inflation decelerated from 3.4 percent (yoy) in June 2014 to -0.4 percent in February 2015. The government has taken advantage of lower oil prices to reduce energy subsidies. Inflation is projected at around 1 percent in 2015, taking into consideration the January increase in electricity tariffs, a slow upward trajectory for oil prices, and the elimination of price controls in July. (in millions of USD) Operations of the Non-Financial Public Sector The 2014 fiscal deficit required a modification of the Social and Fiscal Responsibility Law (SFRL) ceiling. The fiscal deficit reached 4.1 percent of 2007-base GDP (4.3 percent of 1996-base GDP, see Table 2), within the revised ceiling approved by the National Assembly, but 1.4 percent of GDP beyond the limits in the original law. Noninterest current expenditures increased by 13 percent in 2014, reflecting increased spending by the previous administration, higher electricity subsidies, and rising operational costs (linked to the step-up in public investment over the past few years). Revenues were flat in 2014, despite a temporary tax moratorium to encourage settlement of unpaid taxes. Balance Balance as % of 2007-base GDP Source: Panama National authorities. of which Current Primary Expenditure Current Expenditure of which tax revenues Capital Expenditure Capital Revenues Current Revenues Expenditures Revenues 2014 % change NFPS debt (% of 2007-base GDP) NFPS debt (% of 1996-base GDP) Debt (Percent of GDP) ACP external debt for expansion (% of 2007-base GDP) ACP external debt for expansion (% of 1996-base GDP) Starting in 2015, the current design of the fiscal framework implies that the overall fiscal deficit will systematically exceed the SFRL deficit ceilings (that apply to the adjusted fiscal deficit) under current projections, while the adjusted overall fiscal deficit specified by the framework would remain in compliance with the SFRL ceilings. The Law establishing the Sovereign Wealth Fund (Fondo de Ahorro de Panama, FAP) revised the fiscal framework and aimed at removing the cyclical effect on government spending of the Canal contributions. In particular, from 2015 onwards, it allows the overall fiscal deficit to exceed the SFRL deficit ceilings (that apply to the adjusted fiscal deficit) insofar as contributions from the Canal to the budget are below 3.5 percent of GDP. (If above 3.5 percent of GDP, the difference would instead be credited to the FAP.) In line with this feature of the fiscal framework, the 2015 overall fiscal deficit is budgeted at 3.7 percent of 2007-base GDP, in order to accommodate past commitments on capital expenditures as well as a projected weak revenue performance. In the coming years, Canal contributions are likely to continue to fall short of the 3.5 percent of GDP threshold and, as a result, the overall fiscal deficit is expected to exceed the SFRL ceilings (that apply to the adjusted fiscal deficit) by 1–2 percent of GDP per year. Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Public debt to GDP increased in 2014 but, even with the higher deficit path, will start to move onto a declining path. Total public sector gross debt (including Canal-related debt) increased to about 46 percent of 1996-base GDP in 2014, reversing the declining trend seen Page 11 since 2005. Nonetheless, public debt is viewed as sustainable (Annex V) and, under the planned policies outlined in the authorities’ five-year strategic plan (see below), total public sector gross debt is expected to decline by about 5 percentage points of GDP by 2019. However, the broad set of potential public liabilities is larger, encompassing the unfunded pension liabilities (estimated at about US$10.7 billion or 24 percent of 2014 GDP, see Box 1), pending government obligations associated with turnkey projects (currently about US$3 billion) or the contingent liabilities linked to public companies (about US$ 4 billion). In September 2014 and March 2015 Panama issued two ten-year bonds, each for US$1.25 billion. Both issuances included strengthened pari passu clauses that expressly exclude the obligation to effect ratable payments, in line with IMF recommendations. The March 2015 bond (which further includes an enhanced collective action clause) priced at a spread of 178 basis points—very low by historical standards—above the ten-year U.S. Treasury bonds, with an effective interest rate of 3.89 percent. The authorities released a five-year strategic plan in January. The plan was focused on social, economic, fiscal, and financial issues, and was designed in consultation with the private sector, within the fiscal constraints of the existing SFRL. Its goals are to catalyze investment and support growth in key sectors (logistic, agriculture, tourism, and mining), and promote socio- economic developments (in part by enhancing the education system, social programs, infrastructure, and labor markets). SYC NER ) ( w FDI Tends to Finance the CA More Than in Most Countries 1/ The external current account deficit remains elevated, with FDI as the main source of financing. The current account deficit reached 12 percent of GDP in 2014— owing in part to strong investment-related imports—but should moderate over time (to around 6 percent of GDP in 2019–20) as investment winds down and the corresponding projects start generating exports. The deficit is expected to continue to be financed by buoyant foreign direct investment inflows (including in the mining, logistics, and energy sectors). For example, the ongoing copper mining project is expected to bring additional investments of about US$4½ billion in 2015–17. By end-2014, Panama had signed thirteen Free Trade Agreements and three more are under negotiation (see Annex VI). The overall effect on bilateral trade is expected to be substantial over time. Sources: World Economic Outlook (WEO). 1/ 2014 data. Green dots correspond to LAC countries; red to Panama; and blue to others. The grey line corresponds to a regression line of all countries in the sample NAM SUR BLZ MKDMDG URY DOM PER CHL BRA MAR GTM CRI LKA ZAF COL IND MEX IDN TUR POL DZA CMR ARG UKR Current Account (percent of GDP) FJIGEO HND KOS BRB JAM TUN BFA KEN KAZ BGR ROM EGY HRV LTU RUS PAN NIC BEN MLI TGO THA PHL HUN MYS BHR VEN ZMB CHN GUY SLB ZWE LBY ALB LBN BIH SEN F TTO AZE SAU VNM BWA AGO STP BHS GIN PNG MUS Page 12 Box 1. Panama: The Exclusively Defined Benefit Portion of the Pension System Source: National authorities. Benefit IVM (2015-2032, $ millions) Main Parameters of the Defined Benefit Public Pension System Reserves of Subsystem of Exclusively Defined The Social Security Agency (CSS) is an autonomous public agency in charge of managing the social security system The CSS runs four independent programs: 1) disability, old age and death benefits; 2) health and maternity care; 3) professional risks; and 4) administration. The main pension program was reformed in 2005 . The disability, old age and death benefits (Invalidez, Vejez y Muerte, IVM) accounts for more than one half of the CSS revenues and expenditures. Before the reform in 2005, the IVM was entirely a defined benefit system and overly generous. As the IVM faced both actuarial and cash deficit, the eligibility requirements were tightened and contribution rate was raised. However, the reform was incomplete due to strong public oppositions, and only postponed the actuarial imbalance of the defined benefit portion of the system. The IVM after the 2005 reform includes two subsystems : the subsystem of exclusively defined benefit (old system) and the subsystem of mixed defined benefit and defined contribution (new system). Affiliation to the CSS is mandatory for most workers in the private sector and all workers in the public sector. The subsystem of exclusively defined benefit covers most of the affiliates from the pension system before the reform. Starting in 2008, all new affiliates entering the system started to contribute to the new system. For affiliates under the old system, workers earning less than US$500 a month as well as workers older than 35 years of age in 2008 continued to contribute to the exclusively defined benefit scheme. Workers below 35 years of age and earning more than US$500 a month had the option of either staying in the old system or contributing to the new system. Surpluses in one subsystem cannot be used to finance deficits in the other subsystem. The unfunded pension liabilities in the exclusively defined benefit system are estimated at almost US$11 billion. Actuarial studies indicate that the exclusively defined benefit subsystem will incur losses in cash terms from 2016 onward and reserves will be depleted in 2024. The projected actuarial deficit by 2032 amounts to US$6½bn in NPV terms. No actuarial study covering the period beyond 2032 has been conducted. However, since the last associate is currently expected to retire in 2048, the CSS estimates that the NPV of all future liabilities of this system could amount to US$10.7 billion in NPV terms. To the extent that the defined benefit component of the new system has similar features, it is also expected to eventually become unsustainable. Urgent reforms are required to ensure the financial sustainability of the system . Even after the 2005 reform, the IVM program remains generous by international standards, more than in most Latin American and several West European countries. Raising retirement ages, and unifying female and male retirement age, would not only enhance CSS sustainability but also have a positive impact on labor supply and GDP (measures would need to be taken to protect the income of those that cannot continue to work). Further reduction in replacement rates could also be considered. 1. By equalizing retirement age for women and men at 62, the number of active contributors to the exclusively defined benefit system could increase by about 22,700, or 1.3 percent of the labor force based on current demographic structure. 60% of average best 10 years wage Source: Pension at a Glance, OECD and G20 indicators Eligibility Minimum years of Contribution Retirement Age: Male Retirement Age: Female Benefits Replacement rate Financing Total contribution of eligible earnings Contribution rate: Employee Contribution rate: Employer 5% of the relevant average earnings Median replacem ent rate of 59.1% average of 25 years 1994 to retirement 80% of average Spain France Germany Panama Brazil wage of Jul- 50% of wage Page 13 Banking sector conditions remain supportive of growth but some signs of exuberance are visible. Overall credit to the private sector grew in line with nominal GDP in 2014 (remaining at about 90 percent of GDP) and is expected to continue to do so in the medium term. Construction credit has slowed, converging to the lower growth rate of mortgage and consumer credit (see Figure 3). However, due to the difficulties in the Colon Free Zone (ZLC), growth in credit to commerce stalled in 2014. Panama’s credit and funding risks have declined and the banking system remains sound. Bank performance indicators are sound with low credit risk, significant balance sheet buffers, and robust asset quality (see Box 2 and Table 5). At the same time, mortgage delinquencies are somewhat elevated (at about 4 percent in December 2014), and there is anecdotal evidence of overcapacity in commercial real estate (although data on the property sector is poor). The authorities are working to strengthen the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework. A 2012 assessment by Fund staff highlighted significant shortcomings in Panama’s AML/CFT framework. Subsequently, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) publicly identified Panama among countries which have strategic AML/CFT deficiencies. The authorities and the FATF agreed on a plan to address these deficiencies and to bring the framework in line with the international standard by mid-2015. The plan includes strengthening laws and regulations, implementing measures to freeze terrorist assets, improving customer due diligence (CDD) practices, strengthening the Financial Intelligence Unit (UAF), expanding suspicious reporting to all financial institutions and Designated Non-Financial Businesses and Professions (DNFBPs), and improving international cooperation. In February, the FATF recognized Panama’s progress in the areas of issuing guidance about suspicious reporting, improving the UAF’s capacity, and issuing regulations on bearer shares, but noted that Panama needs to complete its plan to address all the identified deficiencies.