deficit . The current account has recently been wider than consistent with the current policies and fundamentals, but there is no compelling evidence of a significant real exchange rate misalignment (see Box 6). Staff and authorities agreed that the widening of the current account deficit is associated with the strong-but-temporary investment agenda and is expected to continue being financed mainly by FDI, while external debt remains sustainable (see Annex II). The authorities indicated that the dollarization served them well for over a century and that the Panamanian economy has strong self-adjusting mechanisms; staff argued that the recent strong domestic demand may induce risks of unusual persistence in inflation and strain the self-adjusting mechanism. Hence, going forward staff recommended containing inflationary pressures to prevent further appreciation of the real exchange rate, monitoring the buildup of external liabilities, and continuing improving external sector statistics, thus allowing a more informed assessment of the external position. Staff and the authorities agreed that emphasis on social and institutional reforms should continue. Reduction in poverty and income inequality has been sizable in recent years, thanks not only to strong growth, but also to social reforms. The authorities highlighted that they are continuously enhancing social protection. For example, they recently increased the cash transfer to the elderly from 100 to 120 dollars a month ( 120 a los 70 ) and launched a program for citizens with severe disabilities ( Angel Guardian ). The effectiveness of social programs has been favorably assessed on the basis of opinion surveys answered by program beneficiaries, and the authorities are working on additional (and more neutral) assessment tools. Nonetheless, poverty still affects about one-quarter of the population, and incidence is higher in rural areas. Institutional reforms (such as to enhance the judicial system and reduce corruption) would be necessary to address shortcomings often highlighted in international comparison statistics (see charts in Box 6). Staff and the authorities concurred that, with the large infrastructure projects nearing completion, further improvements in training, education, and health will be necessary to facilitate job reallocation, complement capital investment, raise productivity, and improve living standards. In the high-growth period of 2007–13, capital accumulation contributed to more than a third of GDP growth, with the remaining contribution resulting equally from labor and total Net of gross foreign asset accumulations, external debt to GDP would decline in all the risk scenarios envisaged. The poverty rate fell from 36.8 percent in 2003 to 27.6 percent in 2011. Between 2003 and 2011, income growth of households in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution reached 8.9 percent, compared with an average for Latin American countries of 4.8 percent, and with Panama’s average household income growth of 6.6 percent. The Gini coefficient dropped from 0.56 in 2003 to 0.53 in 2011. Other social programs aim at addressing poverty and adult illiteracy, or at promoting community empowerment, crime prevention, child development, and job training. Page 16 Labor Private inv Public inv TFP GDP growth Chart 10. Panama: Growth and Input Contribution (Percent) factor productivity (see Chart 10 and Annex III). Going forward, staff and the authorities agreed that public investment is likely to decelerate, and supporting sustainable growth will need to rely more on promoting the role of other contributing factors. Staff reiterated the importance of undertaking measures to improve the quality of public education and the availability of vocational training—particularly in rural areas—as well as to ensure better access to secondary and tertiary education, in order to enhance human capital and job mobility as well as to reduce skill mismatches and youth unemployment. Staff highlighted that stimulating female labor force participation—for example by providing wider access to childcare and flexible working hours—may not only relax labor market capacity constraints, but also enhance the average productivity of the labor force, given the comparatively high level of education attained by women (see Box 7). The authorities emphasized that there are no legal restrictions to female labor force participation. They also recently promoted several enhancements in the education programs (aiming at the acquisition of soft skills and the knowledge of foreign languages), improved training programs for teachers, and deepened the dialogue between teachers and firms to address skill mismatches. School dropouts declined from 5.1 percent in 2009 to 3.1 percent in 2012, and school enrollment (especially for middle and high school) increased. 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013 Sources: WEO; and IMF staff calculations. Staff urged the authorities to swiftly progress with efforts towards the SDDS