The authorities emphasized that achieving more inclusive growth is one of their top strategic objectives. Strong economic performance led to significant poverty reduction over the last decade, but important challenges remain for achieving a more inclusive growth path. In particular, indigenous areas continue to experience substantially higher poverty and worse social outcomes than the rest of the country. While the authorities have increased public policy attention to address the specific needs of the indigenous communities, progress has been limited, partly due to low connectivity and the difficulty of accessing public services from remote locations. More broadly, the government has undertaken measures to improve the targeting and effectiveness of social assistance programs, strengthen the monitoring of conditional cash transfers, and provide specific support for the elderly and the disabled. The authorities reiterated their strong commitment to ensuring full access to public services and social assistance to the indigenous communities and other socially vulnerable groups. Staff and the authorities agreed that enhancing human capital is crucial for sustaining high and inclusive growth in the future. There is significant scope to improve the quality of public education, as Panama lags behind peer countries on student achievement scores, school enrollment, and education spending (Figure 6). The shortage of adequate skills in the labor market poses constraints on dynamic segments of the economy, impedes competitiveness, and limits social mobility prospects. The authorities agreed with staff that enhancing the quality of public education is crucial for improving competitiveness, and underlined that education reforms are one of the key priorities in the Government Strategic Plan. In particular, they aim to advance the education reform package, which is especially focused on indigenous and remote rural areas, and includes higher investment in education infrastructure, renovation of schools and classrooms, introduction of an extended school day, upgraded training curricula for teachers, and specific programs to improve foreign language and technical skills. In addition, recent initiatives to put greater focus on vocational training programs and foster closer collaboration between education institutions and companies will Page 24 help narrow skills gaps and facilitate the reallocation of labor, particularly following the completion of large infrastructure projects. Strengthened assessment and accountability at different stages of the education process will help translate reform efforts into desirable outcomes.