In the medium term, growth is expected to remain in the 6–7 percent range The canal represents 16 percent of Panama’s diversified services exports (travel, tourism, commercial, and financial services), and it continues to play an important role in economic development. The expanded canal (expected to become operational in June 2016) will open up new capacity and accommodate larger ships, including to facilitate the emerging trade of liquefied natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas between North America and Asia. Future investments, both public and private, are oriented towards developing Panama into a logistics hub, providing essential services on the trade routes passing through the country. Construction of a major copper and gold mine is ongoing with an estimated annual export capacity of about US$2 billion that will start in 2018. Investment projects that tackle capacity constraints in energy, infrastructure, and housing will directly support economic activity in the medium term, while preserving the country’s long-term growth potential. Public debt to GDP is sustainable. The NFPS debt-to-GDP ratio, at 39 percent in 2015, is expected to decline to about 35 percent in the medium term (Annex III). This projection is consistent with the policies outlined in the Government Strategic Plan (2015–2019). Stress tests show that public debt remains sustainable even after applying shocks to output and financial conditions, as well as adding in contingent liabilities. The external position is broadly consistent with fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Although the current account deficit is somewhat higher than the value explained by fundamentals and desirable policies, the gap can be explained by the temporarily high import demand of large investment projects, mainly linked Page 12 to the canal expansion. In the medium term the current account deficit is expected to decline from 6.5 percent to around 3 percent of GDP. Furthermore, the recent appreciation of the real exchange rate does not appear to be out of line with fundamentals given continued strong productivity growth and the positive terms of trade shock Panama experienced due to lower oil prices. In addition, Panama has maintained good performance in global competitiveness indicators (Annex III). Near-term risks mostly relate to global economic and financial conditions. The country is highly vulnerable to external shocks given its globally integrated financial system and reliance on canal traffic and other services exports. Full dollarization also limits the scope for adjustment to external shocks. A sharper-than-expected global growth slowdown represents a downside risk to canal revenues and to capital flows. Tighter and/or more volatile global financial conditions would quickly feed into the local financial system. Under these circumstances, the strong fundamentals of the banking sector and the room to implement a countercyclical fiscal response will help mitigate the impact on the domestic economy. Withdrawal from correspondent banking relationships by global banks is perceived as reducing access to international financial services . Changes in capital regulations in source countries, concerns over compliance with tax rules and international standards on financial sector integrity, and increased due diligence by foreign banks, particularly with links to the U.S., have curtailed some smaller Panamanian banks’ access to correspondent banks. According to data provided by the authorities, the total number of correspondent bank relationships has remained stable at 463-464 between March 2015 and end-February 2016, as 62 relationships have been lost, while Panamanian banks have managed to establish 63 new relationships. A significant loss of correspondent banking services could restrict access to global capital, cross-border payments, and trade finance, with negative implications for the economy. In addition, concerns over the complete loss of correspondent relations could compromise the day-to-day operations at certain banks, which could have repurcussions on the rest of the banking system through contagion effects. The authorities and local banks are in dialogue with the global banks and their home country regulators on this issue. Fallout from the release of the “Mossack Fonseca documents” and concerns linked to recent U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control sanctions could restrict access to global capital, cross-border payments, and trade finance, with negative macrofinancial implications . In particular, a loss of correspondent relations or the provision of a range of financial services to Panamanian entities by globally active banks could worsen the funding situation at certain banks, and have repurcussions on the rest of the banking system through contagion effects. It could affect the cost and availability of external financing and have unpredictable effects on the economy. The contraction in trading partners exacerbates the difficulties of the CFZ. The CFZ accounts for 60 percent of Panama’s merchandise trade, 6 percent of the workforce in nonfinancial companies, and 20 percent of the banking system’s commercial loan exposure. In this context, the Page 13 continuing dispute with Colombia on the tariffs imposed on textiles and footwear imports from CFZ is worrisome. Meanwhile, low commodity prices and the associated prolonged stagnation of the economies in the region—particularly in Venezuela—could further damage trade activities in the CFZ. Continued deterioration in the value of collateral in the CFZ would also have negative effects on the asset quality of the banking sector. Activities in the Colon Free Zone Declined (3-month MA yoy growth) Imports ($) Re-exports ($) Trade volume (metric tons) right axis Sources: Panama National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Climate change could disrupt the water supply for the canal operation. Canal operations currently share the same water source with the civilian water supply. Civilian water usage increased strongly along with economic expansion during the past decade. On the supply side, droughts related to El Niño have threatened to disrupt the canal operation. The ACP announced that it will impose draft restrictions starting on April 18, 2016 due to low water levels. Meanwhile, the authorities are considering investments to develop alternative water sources to ensure a secure and uninterrupted supply of water. In November 2015 a WTO panel ruled in favor of Panama in the dispute filed against Colombia in 2013. The panel recommended that Colombia modify its tariffs so as to conform to its obligations with the WTO. However, there is no timetable for Colombia to alter the tariff, nor specific actions stated. Page 14 Box 1. Panama: Key Measures in the Action Plan to Improve the AML/CFT Framework After June 2014, the authorities implemented an action plan agreed with FATF to address the strategic deficiencies in Panama’s AML/CFT framework against the previous FATF standard. In particular, Panama approved a set of 7 laws related to AML/CFT issues in February–April 2015. Some of these actions specifically aim to address shortcomings in two key areas: regulation and monitoring of operations performed by nonfinancial entities (lawyers, accountants, notaries, casinos, construction and real estate firms, and others) and improving the framework for identification of beneficial owners. Nonfinancial entities Extended the scope of covered entities for customer due diligence (CDD) by including nonfinancial entities in addition to all financial institutions Introduced suspicious transaction reporting (STR) requirements for all nonfinancial entities Established an intendancy for supervision and regulation of nonfinancial entities (Law 23 from 2015) Adjusted the legal framework to grant the financial intelligence unit (FIU) access to information maintained by all nonfinancial entities and resident agents Identification of beneficial ownership Amended the legal provisions to ensure identification of beneficial owners of all customers (natural and legal) in trust companies and associated services Introduced mandatory identification of all parties to a trust client and covered them by the CDD obligations Restricted the existence of bearer shares by creating a legal obligation for all bearer shares to be delivered to a custodian or to be replaced by registered share certificates Obliged all resident agents to gather and maintain information on beneficial ownership In addition, the legal and regulatory amendments adopted in 2015 aim to tackle a broad set of AML/CFT- related issues and strengthen the overall framework. Criminalize ML/TF Extended the scope of covered entities for customer due diligence (CDD) by including nonfinancial entities in addition to all financial institutions Included missing predicate offenses to ML under the previous FATF standard: piracy, forgery, forgery of money, smuggling, etc. Freezing of terrorist assets Mechanisms to freeze terrorist assets in accordance with UN guidelines without delay and outside of criminal court context Adopted procedure to freeze terrorist assets for cases initiated under other jurisdictions Page 15 Box 1. Panama: Key Measures in the Action Plan to Improve the AML/CFT Framework (Concluded) Strengthen the FIU Enhanced financial and human resources in line with its expanded responsibilities for new reporting entities Set the FIU as the central agency that receives STRs; strengthened STR quality by providing feedback to reporting entities and coordination with other supervisors International cooperation Explicit legal provision to regulate the principles and procedures for international legal cooperation in the absence of a treaty Engaged in signing MoUs with foreign FIUs The implementation of these measures is part of an ongoing process. In this context, starting in the second half of 2015, the authorities indicated that emphasis has been put on facilitating the implementation of the adopted legal changes by hiring more staff, and providing training and capacity development to staff at the competent supervisory institutions. In addition, they indicated that reporting entities, including nonfinancial institutions, have been receiving training on the format and practice of reporting suspicious transactions. FATF removed Panama from the gray list in February 2016 in recognition of Panama’s progress. This decision was based on a targeted review of technical items included in the previous FATF standard, and is not indicative of Panama’s level of compliance with the prevailing FATF standard, adopted in 2012. In fact, the “Mossack Fonseca documents” highlight potential deficiencies in the implementation of the AML/CFT controls by lawyers, as required by the FATF standard, as well as a lack of transparency of legal persons and arrangements established in Panama, which could make these sectors especially vulnerable to money laundering. Panama is scheduled to undergo an assessment against the prevailing 2012 FATF standard in mid- 2017, where the focus will be on the effective implementation of the AML/CFT regime. In addition, the 2012 FATF standard places a greater emphasis on a risk-based approach, according to which the authorities are expected to understand their ML/TF risks and, where appropriate, coordinate domestically the actions to combat ML/TF. The revised standard also adds tax crimes as predicate offenses of ML. Page 16 Box 2. Mossack Fonseca Documents: Global Dimensions and Impact on Panama The leak of about 11.5 million documents from Mossack Fonseca provided detailed information and unprecedented insights into the practice of setting up over 214,000 offshore companies over the period 1977–2015. Mossack Fonseca is a law firm specializing in commercial law, trust services, wealth management, and international business structures. It was founded in 1977 in Panama and has a global network of 34 offices in 26 jurisdictions. The investigation of the firm’s leaked archives was coordinated by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ), and involved around 400 journalists from more than 100 media organizations in over 80 countries. Although the law firm is Panamanian, the leaked documents shed light on a global phenomenon According to the ICIJ, more than 75 percent of the companies in Mossack Fonseca’s files were established in other jurisdictions outside Panama, with more than half of the companies incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. Mossack Fonseca worked with more than 14,000 banks, law firms, company incorporators, and other agents to set up companies, foundations and trusts for customers. The majority of these intermediaries are headquartered in advanced economies, such as the United Kingdom, Switzerland, and the United States. ICIJ’s analysis also suggests that more than 500 banks, their subsidiaries and branches registered shell companies for clients with Mossack Fonseca. Several large European banks are included on the released list of financial institutions that requested the most offshore companies for their clients. Jurisdiction of incorporation British Virgin lslands 100000 120000 United Kingdom British Anguilla Hong Kong Source: ICIJ Niue Samoa Panama Bahamas Seychelles Nevada Top 10 countries where intermediaries operate Banks requesting the most offshore companies for clients Hong Kong United Kingdom Switzerland United States Panama Guatemala Luxembourg Brazil Ecuador Uruguay Source: ICIJ Experta Corporate & Trust Services Banque J. Safra Sarasin - Luxembourg S.A. Credit Suisse Channel Islands Limited HSBC Private Bank (Monaco) S.A. HSBC Private Bank (Suisse) S.A. UBS AG (Succ. Rue du Rhône) Coutts & Co. Trustees (Jersey) Limited Société Générale Bank & Trust Luxembourg Landsbanki Luxembourg S.A. Rothschild Trust Guernsey Limited Source: ICIJ The direct macroeconomic impact of the leak on Panama has been limited, but reputational risks have risen. Legal services related to incorporations (the establishment and selling of companies, foundations, and trusts) are estimated to represent only around 0.7% of GDP and are associated with a very small cluster of business activities. However, the reputational damage raises unpredictable risks for customer relationships and external funding for other Panamanian activities, including by further increasing the due diligence costs of correspondent banks that may, in turn, respond by lowering their exposure to the Panamanian financial system. More broadly, Panamanian law firms, banks, and companies are likely to come under increased scrutiny by foreign governments, regulators, and international bodies with uncertain economic effects. Page 17 Box 2. Mossack Fonseca Documents: Global Dimensions and Impact on Panama (Concluded) Following the leak of the “Mossack Fonseca documents”, the authorities reaffirmed their commitment to ensure financial integrity and tax transparency. The Attorney General’s Office opened a criminal investigation into the activities of Mossack Fonseca and stated that all treaties and conventions for international cooperation will be used to obtain information from other jurisdictions. The firm has also been under investigation since January based on allegations from Brazilian authorities of the firm’s involvement in money laundering. The recently established Intendancy for Supervision and Regulation of Non-Financial Institutions initiated additional audits of law firms to verify their compliance with the requirements of the new AML/CFT legislation, particularly those related to strengthened due diligence. The government announced the creation of an independent “blue-ribbon” commission of international experts to evaluate the practices of the Panamanian financial center and propose measures to strengthen the transparency of the financial and legal systems, which will be shared with other countries.