The mission called for enhanced monitoring of risks to financial stability stemming from large gross external positions, rapidly rising real estate prices, and the leverage and liquidity positions of both banks and enterprises. As of end-2013, onshore banks reported about US$32 billion in foreign assets (79 percent of GDP), mainly in the form of loans to Latin American countries, and US$26 billion in foreign liabilities (64 percent of GDP). Most of these exposures belong to foreign-owned banks operating in Panama. Banks’ foreign lending and foreign deposits have increased less than GDP in recent years, owing in part to the strong growth record of Panama (see Table 4). Information on corporate foreign borrowing and on leverage of corporate and household sectors is limited. While no data are available on real estate prices, anecdotal evidence Foreign-owned (Panamanian) banks account for about 80 percent of foreign deposits and about 85 percent of foreign lending. Page 13 suggests that housing prices may have doubled in the last five years, with some signs of oversupply in the tourism and high-end real estate segments. The authorities see no tangible systemic financial sector risks at present . While acknowledging that more information on foreign exposures is needed, the authorities pointed out that the SBP coordinates closely with other banking supervisors within the region. They claimed that most Panamanian firms have limited foreign borrowing and that most of the nonbank private sector foreign liabilities relate to foreign companies with limited operations in Panama. The authorities indicated that they intend to start collecting data on real estate prices but argued that the presumed doubling of real estate prices in five years is consistent with fundamentals, as nominal GDP grew by about 76 percent during the same period, prices were previously suppressed due to the withdrawal of U.S. troops, and mortgage credit has been growing in line with GDP. Banks claimed that their exposures to the tourism and high-end real estate segments are limited, and their mortgage-related risks are kept low by the practice of automatic payroll deductions. The authorities explained that they are closely monitoring banks’ exposures to Venezuela and may take further measures if needed. The mission urged the authorities to swiftly implement the remaining recommendations of the 2011 FSAP (Annex I) and of the 2014 IMF Detailed Assessment Report on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). The authorities indicated that implementation of key FSAP recommendations is ongoing, with priority being placed on the liquidity facility for banks and the issuance of an AML law. While concurring with the priorities, staff encouraged the authorities to make progress also on other financial sector reforms.  Introducing a formal financial safety net . Staff and the authorities agreed that creating an adequately financed and well designed liquidity facility would help absorb liquidity shocks (at present, Panama has neither a lender of last resort facility nor a deposit insurance scheme, inducing banks to be conservative in lending and to hold more liquidity than required by regulation). The current proposal for the facility envisages the possibility that Banco Nacional de Panama (BNP), a public bank, is in the board of the facility. Staff argued that it is important that (i) the facility has a tangible and explicit funding plan, such as a gradual build up of assets from public and ideally private sources; (ii) the choice of the fiduciary and management of the facility avoids generating potential conflicts of interest and ensures a level playing field for all banks; and (iii) adequate liquidity and solvency standards for eligibility are carefully specified. The authorities argued that the potential conflict of interest related to the possible BNP involvement in the board of the facility is limited, because the BNP undertakes also public functions, has never abused the private information it has on commercial banks’ operations, and has provided liquidity to the banking system in the past. The authorities are receiving technical assistance from CAPTAC in this area, and details of the operational framework would need to be elaborated. Page 14  Maintaining momentum in financial sector reforms to enhance financial and corporate transparency. The law issued in 2013 providing for the custody of bearer shares and the publication of the 2014 IMF AML/CFT assessment report are positive steps towards improving the transparency of the corporate and financial sectors. Staff discussed with the authorities the possible economic impact of the FATF and Global Forum initiatives to increase compliance with their respective standards, particularly given Panama’s role as a financial and business services center. The economic impact is likely to be limited if authorities step up their efforts. Foreign deposits and insurance premiums are at risk of decline, and a decrease in activities related to legal and accounting services may, at least temporarily, affect output and employment. Otherwise, in a highly unlikely scenario, limited progress in this area might lead to international sanctions that could hinder broad access to international capital markets. In this context, staff encouraged the authorities to step up their efforts to comply with the FATF and Global Forum standards, including through technical assistance. The authorities argued that banks are required to know the beneficial owner of bank deposits and have generally not been accepting bearer shares accounts for several years, but acknowledged the need to improve Panama’s compliance with the FATF standards in line with the AML/CFT assessment’s key recommendations. They have requested technical assistance from the IADB, the Fund, and the U.S. Treasury, to support with the assessment of the economic impact, the implementation of the recommendations, and the enhancement of the Financial Intelligence Unit.  Building the capacity to monitor systemic risks and conduct macroprudential policies, as well as enhancing supervision . The SBP has identified systemically important banks and initiated a Financial Stability Report series. Coordination among the supervisory agencies has been improved through the establishment of a council of supervisors (FCC), which has taken measures against emerging risks, and cross-membership in supervisory boards. Nevertheless, no institution in Panama has the overall mandate to monitor systemic risks, and capacity constraints as well as data gaps (e.g. on real estate prices, loan-to-value ratios, and corporate sector financial conditions) prevent adequate monitoring of systemic risks. Staff welcomed the introduction of dynamic provisioning and urged the authorities to enhance its countercyclical capacity. The authorities should continue to improve the capacity for supervising nonbank financial institutions. Draft legislation and regulations on cooperatives, conglomerates, trust funds, public accountants, as well as capital adequacy and regulatory reporting standards for holding companies should be finalized and adopted. Efforts to enhance banking supervision should continue. The authorities should also promote the development of the interbank market.  A deposit insurance scheme could complement social policies. Deposit insurance capped at US$10,000 would offer protection to the majority of depositors (estimated at about 90 percent in the 2011 FSAP) while entailing a relatively small potential loss (5 percent of deposits). The cap would ensure that this scheme would particularly benefit the middle and poorer segments of the The law will come into force in 2015. For shares issued prior to the law coming into effect, there is a three-year transition period for compliance ending in 2018. Page 15 population. The authorities are adverse to deposit insurance as they fear that it may generate moral hazard and limit market monitoring of banks’ behavior. Staff analysis suggests that there are moderate signs of an excessive current account