Economic activity is expected to expand by 5.8 percent in 2014, largely driven by LNG production. With production reaching full capacity next year, real GDP growth is projected to surge to around 19.5 percent in 2015 (Table 1). However, given modest direct spillovers from the resource sector, non-resource sector growth is expected to remain weak in 2014 at only 0.5 percent, but rise in 2015 to 4 percent. Headline inflation is projected to exceed 5 percent in 2014, reflecting the effects of the kina depreciation in the first part of the year and fiscal stimulus, but moderate slightly over the medium term consistent with strengthening in the external and fiscal positions and recent decline in oil prices (Table 5). The current account deficit is expected to narrow substantially in 2014 and turn to a surplus in 2015, on account of increasing LNG exports. The GDP numbers cited in this report are based on a methodology using 1998 as the base period of a fixed weight index. Given the enormous structural change that has since taken place, the authorities are developing a chain- linking methodology to more accurately capture real GDP. Meanwhile, the authorities are extending GDP coverage, which will result in higher levels of GDP estimates. The recent large increases in minimum wages (up to 40 percent) are unlikely to result in a significant increase in inflation, as their impact is confined to a few formal sectors, such as plantation activity and retail services. Page 6 Risks to the outlook are increasingly tilted toward the downside (Appendix 1) . In the near term, global economic weakness could weigh on external demand and commodity prices, with room for fiscal stimulus limited by the need to ensure debt sustainability. The recent measure resulting in the effective appreciation of the exchange rate also heightens risks to the growth outlook and the external position, as non-resource exports could be adversely affected. Over the longer term, development of LNG production in Australia and shale gas elsewhere could reduce gas prices, export earnings, and government revenue. Lower LNG and mineral prices, together with higher funding costs in a post-quantitative easing era, could also affect foreign direct investment (FDI). Upside risks include the potential for a second LNG project and further mineral resource development (Box 1).