Monetary policy remains accommodative, in the face of weak non-resource activity and a benign inflation outlook, but policy transmission remains weak given excess liquidity (Box2). The Bank of PNG (BPNG) raised the cash reserve requirement (CRR) on banks from 9 percent to 10 percent in September 2014. However, to further reduce excess liquidity, staff recommended that government deposits and trust accounts be moved from commercial banks to the BPNG and that purchases of government paper by the BPNG at primary auctions be completely sterilized. A reduction in the liquidity overhang would also help alleviate the depreciation pressure on the kina by reducing kina supply. Despite a decline in banks’ lending rates, growth of credit to the private sector slowed and turned negative (y/y) in July 2014, reflecting the weak non-resource sector. In this environment, the Bank of PNG (BPNG) has kept its policy rate, the Kina Facility Rate (KFR), unchanged at 6¼ percent since March 2013. Staff recommended that were inflation pressures to intensify, the BPNG could tighten more aggressively, targeting broad money growth, through open market operations by issuing additional Central Bank Bills (CBBs) and by further raising the CRR, as necessary. However, recent changes in exchange rate policy are likely to exacerbate excess demand for FX. The foreign exchange market became disorderly in the early part of 2014 when banks quoted widely diverging rates from the official (interbank) rate in their transactions with customers. In early June 2014, the BPNG imposed a 150 basis points band on FX buy-sell spreads around the official rate and require banks to use the band, leading to a de facto kina appreciation of around 17 percent (Box 3). Staff welcomed the 5-10 basis points depreciation per week The Kumul Trust aims to reorganize and consolidate public assets under the umbrella of a single trust. See Box 5 in the 2013 staff report. See Appendix 3 for the authorities’ response to Fund policy advice in the past. Page 10 (6-12 percent per annum) since the introduction of the band, but noted that the pace is insufficient to meaningfully reduce excess demand for FX, as it incentivizes exporters to delay FX sales while encouraging importers to demand more FX. Continued FX sales by the BPNG could jeopardize its foreign reserve position if it is forced to intervene persistently and/or on a large scale. To mitigate this risk, the kina exchange rate should be allowed to move more quickly to a market-clearing level. Staff indicated that this could be better achieved if the BPNG conducted its FX interventions through transparent, competitive auctions rather than through outright sales, with the resulting exchange rate used as a first approximation of the market-clearing interbank rate. As market conditions improve, staff noted that the BPNG’s interventions should be two-sided and aimed only at smoothing short-term volatility. The trading band could also be removed once steps were taken to increase competition and transparency in the FX retail market in order to avoid excessive spreads. Such policy intentions should be clearly communicated to the market. Staff is currently assessing the trading band and tax clearance certificate regime in order to determine whether they are consistent with PNG’s obligations under Article VIII of the IMF Articles of Agreement. Papua New Guinea’s external position is expected to improve over time in line with its medium-term fundamentals. The exchange rate assessment suggests that the kina is moderately undervalued and is expected to strengthen over the medium term on account of expected LNG earnings (Box 4). Under these circumstances, staff noted that a major challenge ahead was to improve the competitiveness of the non-resource sector (including agriculture), whose export share in the world market has remained insignificant and stagnated over the past decade. To offset possible Dutch disease effects arising from a large resource sector, actions are needed to raise productivity in the non-resource sector, particularly in view of PNG’s comparatively high minimum wages. While foreign reserves are projected to increase from 2015 onward, their current level has limited room to fall before it becomes inadequate under the de facto crawl-like exchange rate regime effected by the trading band. Cross-Country Comparision of Minimum Wages (In US$; annualized) Sources: Minimum weekly wage for PNG is K3.2 per hour; minimum monthly wage for Timor-Leste is provided by the authorities; data for rest of the countries are based on U.S. Department of Labor and WageIndicators.org. The banking system remains stable, underpinned by strong capital adequacy and ample liquidity . Banks continue to be profitable and non-performing loans ratios are low (Table 7). Banks’ high liquidity ratios—with more than half of their assets held in government securities or cash—partly reflect the structurally low levels of lending. The loan-to-deposit ratio has been Total factor productivity growth in PNG was slightly negative over the period 2000-13. Page 11 consistently below 50 percent, among the lowest in the Pacific Island region. Banks’ direct exposure to the property sector is limited and their indirect exposure is confined to small liquidity risk arising from potential withdrawals of deposits by superannuation funds, which have invested heavily in the property sector. The recent price declines in the high-end property market have had limited impact on superannuation funds, which have also reduced their exposure to the market. Papua New Guinea was placed on the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) ‘gray list’ in early 2014 . The authorities have made a high-level political commitment to address anti-money laundering/combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) regulatory and operational deficiencies. They have developed an AML/CFT National Strategic Plan, which is aimed at addressing the action items within an agreed timeframe with the FATF, with assistance from Australia and the Asian Development Bank. Authorities’ Views The BPNG emphasized their continued commitment to a floating exchange rate regime. They argued that the trading band was imposed to restore orderly condition in the FX market by reducing the excessive margins that banks earned on their foreign exchange transactions. The BPNG dismissed evidence of any increase in excess demand for FX by banks since the introduction of the trading band and saw the FX market as normalizing under current policies. The authorities also believed that a slow kina depreciation would help ensure orderly market conditions in adjusting to FX shortages. To reduce excess liquidity, the BPNG indicated it was actively exploring options beyond the recent increase in the CRR, including coordinating with the government to move its deposits to the BPNG.