PNG has abundant resources including agriculture, cultural diversity, fisheries, forestry, minerals, and petroleum/LNG . Despite a series of mineral and petroleum/LNG discoveries since independence in 1975 that have provided the main growth drivers, PNG remains one of the lowest income countries in the region. Moreover, growth has been volatile over the past decade, reflecting the pace of new discoveries and fluctuations in international commodity prices. While the commencement of LNG production boosted overall GDP growth in 2014-15, slow growth outside of the mineral and petroleum/LNG sectors calls for a renewed policy focus on economic transformation through developing PNG’s many renewable resources and non-resource industries while continuing to tap its non-renewable resources in an environmentally sustainable manner that benefits the entire population. Lack of access to finance is a key constraint on inclusive growth, in tandem with poor infrastructure and chronic law and order problems . PNG is among the least-banked countries in the region, despite the fact that systemic liquidity is ample, and banks and other financial intermediaries are seeking alternatives to public sector financing given their large exposures to government debt. While there has been good progress with mobile banking very little bank credit is allocated to rural businesses and households. Factors contributing to limited financial access include the country’s level of income and economic development, relatively-skewed income distribution, lack of competition in the banking sector, weak contract enforcement, customary land ownership that impedes the use of land as collateral, large rural population with limited access to urban centers and banking services, and the large informal sector. Falling commodity prices and the temporary suspension of a large mining operation pose challenges for macroeconomic management in the near term. Revenue prospects have worsened significantly relative to the 2015 budget. A comprehensive policy response to these and related shocks is urgently needed that allows for a measured but ambitious medium-term fiscal consolidation path to safeguard fiscal sustainability, improved cash and treasury management practices, measures to reduce excess liquidity, and greater exchange rate flexibility. Although PNG’s medium-term external position looks favorable given the large projected LNG earnings and prospective new mineral and LNG projects, BPNG should allow the kina to move more quickly to restore equilibrium in the FX market and maintain an adequate level of international reserves. Political setting. The political situation is stable, with the coalition government representing almost all members of parliament. Governance reforms present an ongoing challenge. The next general election is scheduled to be held in 2017. Page 10