Despite strong ambitions, gains in inclusive growth have been elusive. In the context of multiple challenges and capacity constraints, priority should be placed on improving conditions for private sector development and making the most of non-renewable resource sector wealth. A renewed focus is needed on improving the conditions for private sector development, particularly in non-resource sector SMEs. Infrastructure (including notably access to affordable electricity and road construction and air and sea transportation to allow perishable products to reach markets), access to financing by implementing the authorities’ financial inclusion strategy, and law and order are key elements of the environment for private sector development. The non-resource private sector is particularly important to inclusive growth, by increasing economic diversification and expanding employment opportunities, particularly given the capital- intensive nature of resource sector firms. Agriculture in particular is likely to be a source of unrealized potential, and the government should continue to move forward with the ADB and World Bank to enhance productivity (i.e., the World Bank’s Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project for smallholder coffee and cocoa producers). Tourism also has considerable potential. The current SME reform process is a positive step but must be carefully tailored. In this regard, restrictions on foreign investors may adversely affect private sector growth. Measures to increase competition would also help increase economic efficiency and support inclusive growth. Non-renewable resource sector wealth can be better leveraged through tax reform and transparency. State equity participation increases the economy’s exposure to resource sector developments through additional fiscal risks, even though those risks can be off-balance sheet in nature and non-transparent. Against this background, tax reform coupled with enhanced transparency has the potential to improve the resource sector’s ability to contribute to broader economic growth. Recent publication of PNG’s first Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) report represented an important step forward for transparency, and highlighted deficiencies in the resource sector, including reporting by large multinational firms. International Monetary Fund (2015) “Structural Reforms for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth in PNG,” Papua New Guinea—Selected Issues (IMF Country Report No. 15/319). Page 22 Authorities’ Views The government will continue to implement structural reforms to boost investments and broaden the tax base through growth in the non-mineral sectors, especially agriculture. This is crucial because PNG will continue to face low world commodity prices and other supply shocks. The government will encourage and support SMEs by providing training on financial literacy and entrepreneurial skills, and financial inclusion initiatives. Given the constraints on the government’s capacity to formulate, implement, and monitor such projects, engaging in programs such as Public-Private Partnerships, including by SOEs, will be encouraged and the necessary legislation put in place to help ensure more cost effective service delivery.