The government’s structural reform agenda appropriately emphasizes agriculture and an enabling environment for business . In agriculture, the government should continue to move forward with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank to enhance productivity (i.e., the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project for smallholder coffee and cocoa producers), fill the infrastructure gap, and facilitate access to finance (see Selected Issues Paper on structural reforms). The government also needs to concentrate on reforms to lower the cost of doing business and increase competition. Continued investment in health and education will be important in this respect, as will improvements in infrastructure and law and order. Page 19 Infrastructure. In agriculture, lack of access to market is identified as a major obstacle to increasing the supply of perishable products. Lack of access to affordable electricity is also a critical constraint on development. The electrification rate in PNG is among the lowest in the world. Health and education. Social indicators point to the challenges of basic needs, despite recent efforts to improve access to health and education (including vocational training). Provision of services and necessary facilities such as health clinics should be expanded and improved, especially in rural areas. Law and order. Chronic law and order problems need to be addressed to enhance ease of doing business, promote more business startups, and unleash the potential in tourism. According to the 2014 World Bank Enterprise Survey, 81 percent of businesses reported that their decisions for further investment or expansion of their operations were adversely affected by the poor security situation in the country. Indeed, 67 percent of firms identified crime as a problem; this is more than four times the regional average for firms in East Asia and the Pacific (16 percent) and higher than all of the regional averages. Continued efforts to increase access to finance will also be important to support private sector development and growth. As noted above, PNG remains among the most under- banked economies in the region, despite recent efforts to promote financial sector development and financial inclusion. The high level of collateralization required to obtain loans, and the large share of customary land that cannot be used as collateral are the main obstacles to obtaining bank credit, including for SMEs. It will thus be important to address these constraints to allow better financial access for SMEs and support growth. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed that agriculture is a key area for inclusive growth given that a majority of the population relies on the sector, including those in the informal sector. They noted that increased competition in public utilities and telecommunications is also important. The authorities agreed that development of essential financial infrastructure is a priority, as set out in the 2014-15 National Financial Inclusion and Literacy Strategy. They are roughly halfway towards the goal of reaching 1 million previously un-banked citizens, 32 percent of which are women. Going forward, BPNG will begin considering a follow-up strategy for the coming year, benefiting from recent work and support from the World Bank, ADB, and Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP).