Near-term economic growth is expected to decline from recent highs, and inflation is edging upwards. Lower real GDP growth rates in 2016 and 2017 reflect base effects following the commencement of LNG production, as well as more modest growth in the non-resource sector (Tables 1–5). The latter will be supported by pre-election and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) related spending in 2017, but growth is expected to remain subdued in the absence of further private sector development. Headline inflation is expected to continue edging upwards in the near term, from 6 percent in 2015 to 7 percent in 2016, due to the gradual exchange rate depreciation and increases in prices of seasonal agricultural items. Continued moderate real GDP growth is consistent with a moderate expansion of private sector credit. Banks are expected to remain highly liquid, sound, and profitable. Final estimates of real GDP levels have yet to be released. In the meantime, staff’s macro framework assumes unchanged GDP deflators. On this basis, the revised nominal GDP data imply lower real GDP growth. PNG will host APEC in 2018. The historical average for the last 20 years is around 3 percent for total real GDP growth and 4 percent for non- resource real GDP growth. Long-run average working age population growth is nearly 3 percent. Page 11 Near-term risks are weighted to the downside, but medium-term risks are more balanced (Appendix I). Downside risks include the potential for fiscal consolidation to have a greater impact on the economy than currently expected. The political cycle could also increase fiscal pressures. In the external sector, there is a risk that the current FX allocation mechanism will prove unsustainable, which could lead to more rapid currency depreciation, possibly under disorderly conditions. A further drop in commodity prices would weaken the external and fiscal positions. In addition, natural disasters and other weather-related shocks pose continual downside risks, as demonstrated by the recent drought, although such drought conditions occur very infrequently. On the upside, the medium-term outlook could be boosted by additional LNG capacity expansion. Papua LNG (for which a final investment decision could be taken in 2017, with construction to commence as early as 2018, although this timetable is subject to delays) and the PNG LNG extensions, which together are expected to amount to around the same size as the initial PNG LNG project (which had an approximately US$19 billion investment cost), are not included in the baseline projections pending final investment decisions. Other resource sector developments such as the Wafi-Golpu gold mine, pose similar upside risk (Box 2). For inclusive growth, upside risk derives from the potential for improved structural reform implementation to boost non-resource sector growth, as well as increased regional trade integration. The Debt Sustainability Analysis indicates that the risk of debt distress in PNG remains low, based on an assessment of public and publicly-guaranteed external debt. In line with the 2015 Article IV consultation, factoring in public domestic and private external debt, the overall risk of debt distress remains heightened.