The large fiscal expansion of the past three years has reduced PNG’s fiscal space, with new LNG revenue not sufficient to replenish it and allow for spending to grow at the current pace. Under staff’s baseline, the overall fiscal deficit is expected to be 7.2 percent of GDP in 2014—a slight improvement from 8.0 percent of GDP in 2013 (Table 2). Reflecting this, gross central government debt is expected to exceed the 35 percent cap set under the government’s Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy (MTFS) for 2014 and the 30 percent cap for 2015 and beyond. Although PNG’s external debt burdens are low with the debt sustainability analysis continuing to suggest a low risk of debt distress for external public debt (see Annex I), there has been a significant increase in overall public debt, which amounts to about Baseline (MTFS) Extension of current fiscal stance Ceiling Government Debt Source: IMF staff calculations. Page 7 Keeping the debt ratio below the Non-Resource Primary Balance (In percent of non-resource GDP) 51 percent of GDP once arrears to a superannuation fund and other liabilities are taken into account. legislated ceiling will require somewhat faster fiscal consolidation than envisaged in the MTFS. Staff recommended continuing to anchor fiscal policy with the current debt target, but using the non-resource primary balance (NRPB) as the underlying fiscal target. Given the volatility of resource sector output and revenues, using the overall fiscal balance as a fiscal target tends to lead to procyclical spending—a shortcoming that NRPB targets can help overcome. Achieving the 30 percent debt target in 2015 would imply an NRPB deficit of about 3.6 percent of non-resource GDP (NRGDP) in 2014 (equivalent to an overall deficit of 1.0 percent of GDP), with a gradual reduction to 2.5 percent of GDP by 2019. If such a prudent policy is pursued over the longer term, PNG could eventually build up net financial wealth of about 20 percent of NRGDP by 2050, providing considerable resources for macroeconomic stabilization and intergenerational wealth sharing. To facilitate policy communication, budget documentation could continue to be framed on the basis of the overall fiscal balance but with policy measures geared toward achieving the underlying NRPB targets. Baseline (MTFS) Alternative Average 2002-12 = -5.4% NRPB (as of 2013) Source: IMF staff calculations. Development Budget Expenditure by Quarter To achieve these targets, the bulk of fiscal adjustment will need to come from expenditure restraint. In the near to medium term, limited scope exists to increase revenue, including from LNG production because of accelerated depreciation arrangements for the LNG project. On the other hand, a slowdown in the growth of development expenditure would help facilitate fiscal adjustment and ease capacity constraints. However, it will necessitate stricter discipline over the use of public resources, notably ceasing the practice of transferring unused funds stemming from poor project implementation into project trust accounts towards the end of the fiscal year. Sources: National Budget Documents (various years); and ADB calculations. ( ) is the percent of expenditure overbudget appropriation during each year. (87%) (95%) (97%) (82%) Quarterly development budget expenditure (cumulative, Kina, millions) Development budget appropriation (Kina, Millions) Generally speaking, the debt-to-GDP ratio tends to understate PNG’s debt burden due to its large net income outflows (about 10 percent of GDP). A selected issues paper has been prepared on fiscal adjustment based on a variant of the permanent income hypothesis. Under PNG’s previous expenditure classification, recurrent expenditure has seen rapid increases over the past two years. However, with the integration of recurrent and development budgets introduced in 2013 with IMF assistance, the new classification actually shows only a small increase in recurrent expenditure over the past two years (Table 2). Page 8 Within a more restrained resource envelope, the government should shift its policy focus towards improving expenditure quality. For 2014, staff advised the postponement of non- essential expenditures in light of an expected revenue shortfall (0.9 percent of GDP) and the recent spike in long-term government borrowing costs. Over the near to medium term, greater efficiency of public spending can be achieved through reprioritization of projects to bring planned infrastructure investments into line with implementation capacity (Appendix 2). The expenditure mix also needs to be carefully examined to prioritize improvements in the delivery of frontline health and education services and to allocate sufficient resources for maintenance of existing assets and other critical recurrent expenditure. Over the longer term, fiscal space is expected to be created by additional revenue stemming from an ongoing tax review as well as improved fiscal regimes of extractive industries. Staff noted that the tax review, which is being undertaken with IMF technical assistance (TA), presents an important opportunity to improve the efficiency and fairness of the tax system. Scope also exists to limit income tax holidays for new mining projects given PNG’s comparatively low collection of extractive industry revenues. Staff also stressed the urgency of conducting mining industry audits to eliminate potential revenue leakages. Recognition should also be given to the tax review’s overarching nature in the concurrent reviews of mining and SME policy, with strong cooperation imperative among relevant agencies. Staff welcomed ongoing efforts to implement IMF TA recommendations on improving extractive industries fiscal regimes, which so far have focused on tax progressivity and government equity participation Stronger public financial management (PFM) is needed to improve development outcomes. Progress has been made in operationalizing the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), integrating recurrent and development budgets, and undertaking public expenditure review and a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment. Further efforts will be needed to improve cash management and medium-term budgeting practices, which should help reduce the use of multiple trust accounts to roll-over project funding. Moreover, debt management practices will need to be strengthened to minimize funding costs and risks, including through better fiscal and monetary coordination. Care should be taken in the exercise to lengthen the maturity of domestic debt in order to reduce rollover risks posed by the government’s heavy reliance on short- term debt, while being sensitive to long-term borrowing costs. Staff urged that for all government- contracted loans, including those obtained via state-owned enterprises (SOEs), established procedures be observed and the terms and conditions of all loans be published to ensure fiscal transparency and debt sustainability. The proposed sovereign wealth fund (SWF) should be brought into operation as soon as practical. The organic law passed in early 2012 followed the Santiago Principles and established a sound legislative framework for the SWF. Staff encouraged the authorities to adhere to this framework in the current review of the legislation. Following protocols set out in the framework, resource revenue should be channeled through the government’s budget to the greatest extent Page 9 possible. At the same time, staff urged strong transparency and governance of the proposed Kumul Trust, given government plans to channel some resource revenue to this entity. Having attained candidacy for the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) in March 2014, PNG should move quickly toward full EITI membership to better safeguard public resources. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that fiscal consolidation will be needed to ensure debt sustainability. They remain committed to achieving legislated debt targets, but noted that anticipated spending pressures may necessitate a medium-term perspective. The authorities welcomed staff’s proposal to use the NRPB as the fiscal target while acknowledging the need for clear communication of fiscal targets. They agreed that capital expenditure implementation needs to be improved and that priority areas of recurrent expenditure should be protected. For 2014, they will consider postponement of some lower-priority projects.