Structural improvements in the financial sector will be important to enhance resilience to shocks and access to finance. As enumerated above, PNG suffers from a number of structural barriers to improving financial access and development that have impeded growth and hampered new investment. To promote financial development, greater efforts are required to, inter alia , address the lack of competition, facilitate development of the capital market, and improve the functioning of the FX market. Lack of competition for financial services impedes access to finance and economic diversification. For instance, small farmers and agribusiness entrepreneurs are facing credit constraints to scale up their business and invest in new processing capacity that is critical to achieving yield and quality improvements. Underdeveloped capital markets limit the sources of financing for government, enterprises, and individuals, while a shallow and inefficient FX market distorts the expectations and commercial behavior of market participants, and constrains the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber. Lack of competition. Three large banks (two Australian banks and one domestic bank) play a dominant role in providing credit to the economy. Wide interest rate spreads in PNG are associated with the oligopolistic nature of the banking system, while also reflecting the costs and risks of doing business. Similarly, a lack of competition can lead to relatively high levels of profitability, which can limit incentives for Interest rate spreads in PNG are relatively high PNG Samoa Tonga Australia Solomon Islands Fiji 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. See IMF Working Paper (WP/15/96) “What Drives Interest Rate Spreads in Pacific Island Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” by Jamaludin, Klyuev, and Serechetapongse. PNG’s banking sector was the fourth most profitable of 177 comparable countries in 2011, measured by return on equity. Page 18 banks to innovate and seek out new customers in order to expand their customer base. In this context, the priority is to facilitate financial deepening by reducing entry barriers, including for microfinance institutions, and encouraging the development and adoption of new technologies such as mobile banking and microfinance products. Banks' assets are concentrated in govt securities (In percent, as of end-2014) Underdeveloped capital markets. Commercial banks’ assets are largely concentrated in government securities reflecting few investment alternatives, while at the same time, excess liquidity suggests that government borrowing has not crowded out private sector borrowing. Banks and superannuation funds are reaching their internal limits for exposure to the government, forcing the authorities to diversify its financing sources, including via a prospective Eurobond offering of US$1 billion. Looking forward, authorities should promote development of the domestic capital market over the medium term, including by taking measures required to develop a secondary market for government securities. Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Foreign assets Currency Govt securities deposits others CBB Loans and Shallow FX market. The interbank FX market is currently one-sided given the overvalued exchange rate and there is a structural shortage of FX. Mineral tax receipts account for about two-thirds of FX inflows, while FX transactions are highly regulated by the BPNG. The authorities should focus on measures that would help to eliminate FX market distortions (see Selected Issues Paper on the FX market). Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly concurred with the need to promote financial development, improve the capital market, and reform the FX regime over the medium term. BPNG has put in place legislation for micro-insurance products and mobile banking services, and is taking steps to enhance financial literacy through education and safeguard consumer protection. Meanwhile, they have authorized five microfinance institutions.