The banking system is sound, but access to financial services remains limited and financial inclusion efforts should continue. Page 20 The highly liquid banking system is sound and profitable, while PNG’s financial sector is shallow compared to many other middle-income countries in the region. Three large banks (two Australian and one domestic) play a dominant role in providing credit to the economy. Return on assets is around 2.0 percent (June 2016) and has averaged a healthy 2.5 percent over the last 10 years, and the capital adequacy ratio is high (32.3 percent in June 2016). The ratio of non- performing plus past-due loans to total risk-weighted assets is currently around 6 percent (June 2016), above the stable 10-year average of around 5 percent. However, banks only hold around half of their assets as loans, with the other half held largely as short-term securities and cash, due to structural (e.g., collateral) constraints as noted above. PNG’s ratio of domestic private credit to GDP is well below the average for East Asia and Pacific developing countries, Pacific Island Small States, and other Middle Income Countries. Given high banking system liquidity, and notwithstanding the aforementioned structural constraints on private credit growth, BPNG should ensure that its macro- financial surveillance is focused on identifying any pockets of credit growth that could create spillover risks to the economy. Work is underway on financial inclusion and the payment system. PNG remains among the most underbanked countries on several indicators (numbers of branches, ATMs, and loan penetration). However, mobile access has been expanding, and financial inclusion efforts will benefit from the BPNG’s new KATS system, which represents substantial progress in payment system development and efficiency. While tiny compared to the banks, credit unions play a critical role in extending services to rural areas, in some cases being the only financial services provider. New credit union legislation will help to modernize the sector, but needs supporting regulations and guidelines. The authorities continue to strengthen the AML/CFT regime and address the risks of withdrawal of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs). Owing to significant progress in enhancing the legal and regulatory framework, PNG successfully exited the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) “gray” list in June 2016. The authorities are committed to ensuring the effectiveness of the AML/CFT regime through strengthening institutions and enhancing domestic cooperation. In the context of increased regulatory compliance costs and the FATF listing, some financial institutions and money remitters in PNG previously experienced withdrawal of CBRs. The volume of CBR transactions nevertheless increased, which suggests consolidation of CBRs in other financial institutions. To mitigate the risks of CBR withdrawals, including in light of Bank of South Pacific’s branch network in the Pacific, the authorities are encouraged to continue enhancing the compliance of their regulatory and supervisory frameworks with international standards, including for AML/CFT. Authorities’ Views The banking system remains sound and stable. Credit growth was slow last year reflecting the drought and Ok Tedi mine closure. Real estate prices grew modestly, with excess capacity of office space and rentals having come down since 2012-13, and banks are very cautious. Banks’ exposure to the government though their holdings of government securities is significant, International Monetary Fund (2015) “Financial Inclusion and Access—Supporting Inclusive Growth,” Papua New Guinea—Selected Issues (IMF Country Report No. 15/319). Page 21 accounting for nearly one third of their total assets. Commercial bank lending to SOEs has been minimal, with the exception of one SOE that borrowed from a commercial bank to make a dividend payment. A new law on credit unions is potentially important for increasing financial inclusion. After the passage of a suite of laws in July 2015 on AML/CFT, certain measures were implemented, including the recruitment of key personnel for the Financial Analysis and Supervision Unit (FASU). In May 2016, the Asia Pacific Group conducted an onsite audit of progress made on meeting the requirements of the FATF. These led to the delisting of PNG from the gray list by the FATF in June 2016.