Fiscal policy should balance the need to maintain macroeconomic stability against the needs of an inclusive growth agenda. In the near term, expenditure cuts should offset the revenue shortfall and any financing gap. While the 2017 budget targets strike an appropriate balance, financing constraints may force additional expenditure cuts in the remainder of 2016. Over the medium term, improvements in public financial management (PFM) and elimination of unproductive government expenditures should also contribute. A comprehensive tax reform package that would enhance efficiency and raise revenues based on the recent National Tax Review should be another pillar of medium-term adjustment. In 2015, fiscal pressures stemming from the sharp drop in world commodity prices and tightening domestic financing constraints necessitated significant expenditure adjustment: Revenues were K3.0 billion (or 5.0 percent of GDP) below original budget estimates, with three-quarters of the shortfall due to lower resource revenues. Expenditures were reduced by K2.7 billion (or 4.6 percent of GDP) relative to the budget. Spending cuts were concentrated at the national government level, and included large reductions in expenditure relative to original budget projections for health and education with virtually no reduction in provincial/district government expenditure. There were reports of payment arrears (particularly public sector wages). Proceeds from a large asset sale was included in the 2015 budget as financing but the sale has been delayed, increasing the need for financing from other sources. Government securities auctions have been undersubscribed and financing costs have increased. Local financial institutions reportedly have a low appetite for additional government securities, given current holdings and internal risk limits. The BPNG’s share of domestic debt has thus increased, reaching 20 percent in June 2016. T-Bill (1 year) Financing Cost CBB (28 days) 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Source: PNG authorities. The asset is a 4.27 percent interest in the PNG LNG project, and was budgeted at K2.5 billion. The sale was delayed due to disagreements concerning the sale price and a slow vetting process to verify the relevant landowners under the communal land ownership system. The future timing of this asset sale is unclear. Page 13 The authorities sought new financing sources for the 2016 budget: A 5-year US$500 million syndicated bank loan will likely finance the budget deficit in 2016. The US$200 million first tranche was disbursed in August, and the second tranche is under discussion. Market conditions permitting, a debut sovereign bond issuance for $500 million is now planned for 2017. The World Bank and ADB are providing project-related support. Domestic debt by holder BPNG Banks Other financial corporations Other Source: PNG authorities. ) e n u J ( Prospects for additional domestic budgetary financing are limited as banks and superannuation funds are nearing internal limits for holding government securities. The 2016 supplementary budget included expenditure cuts and one-off revenue measures to offset the effects of declining world commodity prices and the weak domestic economy. Total revenue and grants in 2016 were expected to fall K1.9 billion (or 3.1 percent of GDP) short of the budget. In response, parliament passed a supplementary budget in August that included expenditure cuts of K0.9 billion (1.5 percent of GDP) and K1.0 billion in higher revenues from state-owned enterprise (SOE) and statutory authority dividends and asset sales. The timing of the asset sales is unclear and the dividends may not be consistent with the financial performance of the SOEs and statutory authorities. In light of external financing of US$500 million (equivalent to nearly K1.6 billion) from the syndicated bank loan, it is unlikely that financing could be secured for the entire projected K3.1 billion deficit, necessitating further expenditure cuts. Such cuts should be concentrated in provincial/district government spending, which would have the least adverse growth impact according to a recent ADB study. In addition, PFM processes and governance are weakest for such expenditures. Cutting expenditures further, however, could be difficult in a pre- election year. The 2017 budget targets a fiscal deficit that is consistent with a steadily declining debt-to-GDP ratio over the medium term, built upon broadly realistic revenue projections. The fiscal consolidation in 2017 will be driven mainly by spending, as revenue measures were limited primarily to enhanced tax compliance efforts. Revenues and grants are budgeted at K11.5 billion, an increase of K0.7 billion over the projected 2016 level, declining by 0.7 percentage points of GDP, with limited revenue measures having been included in the pre-election environment. Expenditures are budgeted at K13.4 billion, K0.2 billion lower than in the 2016 level. This implies a fiscal deficit of K1.9 billion (equivalent to 2.8 percent of GDP) and a debt-to-GDP ratio of 33½ percent. The public debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to decline over the medium term, to just under 30 percent of GDP in Asian Development Bank, “Wok Bung Wantaim: Using Subnational Government Partnerships to Improve Infrastructure Implementation in Papua New Guinea,” Manila, Philippines, 2016. Page 14 2021, in line with the legislated limit of 30 percent in the MTFS, which serves as the fiscal anchor. The pace of fiscal consolidation should be carefully calibrated to avoid a sharp contraction, implying a more gradual adjustment than specified in the MTFS. The staff’s view is that the 2017 budget strikes an appropriate balance between the need to maintain debt sustainability and avoiding an economic contraction. Over the medium term, the authorities will need to specify the revenue and expenditure measures they will implement to achieve the targeted reduction in the fiscal deficit. As elaborated below, the National Tax Review provides a variety of recommendations on the revenue side but the contribution of each measure would need to be carefully assessed and quantified. On the expenditure side, also as elaborated below, there appears to be ample scope for increasing expenditure efficiency, particularly for provincial/district government capital expenditures. Fiscal consolidation is in progress... Fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) ... to keep the debt ratio on a downward path Public debt (in percent of GDP) Target in MTFS Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Going forward, a comprehensive revenue reform would help raise revenue collections and create space for maintaining efficient public spending. The National Tax Review completed in October 2015—while falling short of providing a quantified list of possible revenue measures— assessed the changes needed to PNG’s tax and non-tax revenue systems in support of the government’s sustainable development objectives. Key recommendations included reductions in personal and corporate income tax rates, broadening the personal and corporate income tax bases through reduced tax exemptions, improving the return from natural resource extraction, and increasing consumption tax rates. The Review recommends reduced state equity participation in the resources sector, to be offset by reforms to the Additional Profit Tax, as well as reforms to other aspects of the mining and petroleum tax regime. The Tax Review echoes 2013 FAD TA by noting that the tax arrangements for PNG’s mining and petroleum sectors are very generous compared to other resource rich countries and do not reflect the maturity of the PNG resource sector. Therefore, fiscal revenues from the resource sector may not improve significantly unless the government avoids granting tax holidays and concessions for subsequent resource projects. Finally, modernization of Fiscal deficit and debt to GDP ratios in the authorities’ 2017 budget are modestly lower than Fund staff projections reflecting staff’s cautious assessment of the 2016 supplementary budget revenue measures and Fund staff’s use of the WEO oil price projections to forecast the oil and gas sector GDP deflator. Page 15 the Internal Revenue Commission (IRC) and the PNG Customs Service is urgently needed to improve tax administration and compliance. The need to strengthen PFM was underscored by the recently published Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment (Box 3). Much scope remains to better deploy existing public sector resources towards effective public service delivery, including in core areas such as education, health, and law and order. The revenue shortfalls have provided impetus for stricter expenditure controls. The authorities have developed a high-level PFM reform strategy, known as the PEFA Road Map 2015-18, to address the deficiencies of the PFM systems identified in the PEFA. The first priority is placed on strengthening core PFM functions which will underpin and provide the platform for more advanced reforms, including the roll out of the new information management system (IFMIS). The road map is only a first step in the reform strategy, which should be complemented by fully articulated action plans and present more explicitly the role of line ministries. Commendable progress has been made towards the rollout of the IFMIS, while other PFM reforms should be accelerated . Further steps to improve cash management are urgently needed to ensure effective use of public financial resources, beginning with tracking inflows from tax and other sources, and ending with tracking of outflows through payments by line ministries. Thirty-three agencies that account for 95 percent of the national budget are nearly covered by the IFMIS. These efforts have been supported by TA from the European Union. Work is underway to strengthen cash management supported by IMF TA. Passage of an amended PFM Act in August is another major reform since this brings greater accountability through mandatory audits and enhanced financial controls to statutory bodies such as the IRC and local level governments as well. Financial monitoring and performance of SOEs should also be improved. Severe cash management problems should be urgently addressed, including by implementing a new government banking framework, drawing upon recent IMF cash management TA recommendations. There are plans to improve the public procurement act next year. The sovereign wealth fund (SWF) should be operationalized. With the legislation to establish the SWF now in place, the SWF should be operationalized as planned in 2016, even though little is expected to be saved in the near term under the current contribution rules and conditions. The Treasury Department is working on the establishment of a SWF for PNG, including the formation of the board, while the BPNG is examining possible models for the setting up of an administrative secretariat at BPNG. A technical report on the assessment of existing capacity in managing the assets and possible models for the establishment of the secretariat was completed in July 2016. BPNG is now working on developing a suitable model for the establishment of the secretariat. Authorities’ Views The government remains firmly committed to existing fiscal anchors. Fiscal discipline through expenditure cuts last year and this year in supplementary budgets are important steps in the direction favored by staff. The additional revenue raising and expenditure cutting measures in Page 16 the 2016 supplementary budget maintains the fiscal deficit in the original budget. The government aims to achieve the MTFS objective of a balanced budget by 2021. Thus, public debt will remain sustainable through the medium term. The two new priorities for the 2017 budget are the general election and APEC preparations. Government will likely be unable to increase national infrastructure spending next year. It is committed to including a realistic revenue projection in the 2017 budget. The prospect of issuing a debut sovereign bond has served as a helpful disciplining device for macro policies. The authorities are assessing and evaluating the National Tax Review recommendations. It will be difficult to include revenue raising tax policy measures in the 2017 budget given the upcoming elections but the government will nevertheless consider raising indirect taxes such as ‘sin taxes’ (excises on alcohol, gambling, and tobacco) and the General Sales Tax (GST). Modernization of IRC and Customs will continue.