Growth is robust and inflation remains contained . Real GDP is expected to expand strongly by about 9 percent in 2015, reflecting mostly the coming on stream of LNG production (Box 1) and notwithstanding temporary closure of a large copper and gold mine (OK Tedi). Non- resource GDP is likely to grow by 1½ percent this year and by about 3½ percent in 2016 with agriculture and construction dampened by unfavorable weather conditions and lower government spending, respectively. CPI inflation is projected to stabilize at around 6 percent in 2015, as the effects of lower oil and commodity prices are offset by the kina depreciation. The external current account balance is expected to turn into a surplus while international reserves remain below the staff’s assessment of reserve adequacy . The current account is expected to turn from deficit to surplus in 2015 as the LNG plant has its first full year of operation, while the overall balance of payments is expected to be near zero including since most commodity export receipts are kept offshore. Gross international reserves are projected to remain at around $2 billion in 2015 (equivalent to 3 months of total goods and nonfactor services imports) and to strengthen modestly over the medium term. Fiscal consolidation has become more difficult and the public debt to GDP ratio is rising, albeit from a low level. The Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) released in early August projected a K 2.5 billion revenue shortfall in 2015 (equivalent to 5.5 percent of GDP) compared to the K 1.3 billion shortfall expected in the budget. Non-resource revenues are also expected to be lower mainly due to the second round effects of lower commodity prices on the broader economy. Staff estimates that medium-term fiscal targets (i.e., a balanced budget by 2017 and debt-to-GDP ratio of below 30 percent by 2016 as envisaged in the Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy (MTFS)) are no longer feasible. Public debt has increased from 23 to 36 percent of GDP The path to consolidation is more difficult... Fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) ...and public debt has risen Actual Auth. proj (2015 Budget Book) Auth. proj (2015 MYEFO) Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 11 during 2011-14, as a result of a large expansion of the fiscal deficit, from 3.2 percent in 2012 to 7.2 percent of GDP in 2014. The non-resource primary balance (NRPB) also widened over this period. There are no signs of a generalized credit boom. Overall credit growth has continued at a moderate pace, broadly in line with nominal GDP growth since 2010. Commercial banks have solid capital buffers and the ratio of NPLs to total loans remains low. Nevertheless, PNG’s ratio of domestic private credit to GDP was well below the average for countries at a simliar level of development in the region and elsewhere (e.g., Pacific Island small states with 63 percent). Other indicators also point to low levels of financial development and access to finance (see Selected Issues Paper on financial inclusion).