Fiscal Policy The mission strongly encouraged the authorities to adopt a more ambitious package of fiscal measures. The baseline shows that the authorities’ plan to cut expenditures by K 1.3 billion in 2015 would still yield an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio (from 36 to 45 percent) over the medium term despite lower fiscal deficits from 2016-20 (see the text chart below). Staff encouraged the authorities to limit debt to 35 percent of GDP by 2020, as specified in the staff’s alternative adjustment scenario, which would require a more ambitious set of measures totaling K 2.0 billion in 2015 and lower deficits relative to the baseline by 1 percent of GDP in 2016, and by about 2 percent of GDP from 2017 through 2019. The under-execution of expenditure suggests there is room for cuts and reprioritization. This more ambitious set of measures aims to balance the need for stronger fiscal consolidation to ensure debt sustainability with the need to avoid an overly contractionary fiscal stance and protect vulnerable groups. Given the inherent volatility of resource GDP and revenue, the mission encouraged the authorities to consider using the NRPB as an underlying fiscal target. Use of the NRPB as a policy target can help insulate fiscal policy from resource revenue volatility and help capture the underlying fiscal policy stance, while using the overall balance as a fiscal target tends to promote pro-cyclical spending. A multi-pronged approach, including strengthening revenue performance and curbing low-impact expenditures, is needed to address the immediate fiscal pressures. Revenue measures. Staff would encourage the authorities to adopt measures to strengthen revenue collection, including by suspending the Infrastructure Tax Credit until the Internal Box 2 considers the effects of an additional 20 percent decline in commodity prices on the external and fiscal positions. See IMF (2012) “Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries.” For example, the NRPB identifies the impact of government operations on domestic demand, since resource revenues typically originate abroad. A higher non-resource primary deficit would indicate an expansionary fiscal stance. Page 13 Revenue Commission (IRC) makes recommendations based on an audit of the scheme, and other measures recommended by the Tax Review Committee. Revenue measures would, however, likely yield significant additional revenue only starting in 2016. Expenditure cuts. The bulk of the fiscal adjustment will have to come from reductions and reprioritizations of expenditure. The staff’s adjustment scenario requires a net expenditure reduction of about K 2.0 billion in 2015 (about 30 percent from goods and services and 70 percent from low-impact capital expenditures), and continued spending restraint in subsequent years, while focusing on improving the quality of spending (see the Selected Issues Paper on structural reforms for discussion of government spending inefficiencies). Care should be taken to ensure that consolidation does not affect high priority social spending, including in health, education, law and justice, and agriculture. Decisive consolidation is needed... Fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) ... to keep the debt ratio on a downward path Public debt (in percent of GDP) Alternative Target in MTFS Alternative Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. A sound framework for budgetary financing needs to be put in place . Identifying sufficient financing in 2015 is expected to be challenging, as planned asset sales are likely to be delayed due to complications associated with asset pricing, financing options, and negotiations with the large group of landowners. Given that the banks and superannuation funds have mostly reached their internal limits on sovereign exposure, there is limited appetite for holding additional government securities, which has led to a sharp rise in T-bill yields. Announcement of a Yield curve has steepened sharply 28 days 63 days 91 days 182 days 365 days CBB T-Bill Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The Tax Review Committee is currently recommending: (1) an increase of the goods and services tax rate from 10 percent to 15 percent; (2) raising the income tax threshold from K 10,000 to K 15,000; while (3) reducing the corporate income tax rate from 30 percent to 25 percent. They are also reviewing mining and petroleum taxes in line with IMF technical assistance. Page 14 suitably ambitious fiscal adjustment plan at an early date would be important to bolster market confidence, particularly given rising financing needs and a planned debut US$1 billion sovereign Eurobond placement in the coming months. In this context, it will also be important to put in place a Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) to increase the efficiency of financing and minimize the costs and risks associated with new external funding options. The central bank should refrain from providing direct financing to the government. An updated Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) indicates that PNG’s risk of external debt distress remains low. However, there has been a significant increase in overall public debt, which amounts to about 56 percent of GDP once arrears to a superannuation fund and other liabilities are taken into account. Stronger PFM is needed to improve the quality of spending and development outcomes. Implementing further reforms identified in the recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, including improving cash management and the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) rollout, will be important to support the authorities’ fiscal consolidation, building upon the recent publication of the PEFA document and the final roadmap. SOE reform is also needed to minimize fiscal risk and enhance transparency and governance. For example, the return on equity (ROE) averaged 10.5 percent between 2003 and 2007, but fell to 3.4 percent in 2007–12, outperformed by regional peers. Sustained political commitment is needed to improve the efficiency of SOEs by placing them on a sound commercial footing and ensuring adequate and timely disclosure and transparency. It is important to ensure that the proposed Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) is adequately resourced and effectively managed. The final stage of the legislation has been approved by the Cabinet. Ensuring that all resource revenues flow through the budget will help to improve transparency and better target national priorities for resource revenue use. The Kumul Trust, which will consolidate the PNG government’s interests in petroleum, mining, and other state- owned enterprises, under three holding companies, should be designed to ensure that transparency and efficiency of public investment are enhanced, with governance structures that can support the achievement of stated corporate goals. Continued commitment to implementing the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) will also be important. Authorities’ views . The authorities concurred with the need for ambitious fiscal consolidation while avoiding cuts in key priority areas such as infrastructure, health and education, and law and order. They acknowledged the importance of agreeing and communicating the budget adjustment measures ahead of the Eurobond issuance to reassure potential investors. For 2015, they will consider postponement of some lower-priority projects. The authorities reiterated commitment to adhering to the Santiago Principles in the operation of the SWF, while noting that little resource revenue would be saved in the near term owing to PNG’s huge development needs. They will also This includes the arrears to a superannuation fund (6.5 percent of GDP), SOE debt (7.5 percent of GDP), and the UBS loan (6.8 percent of GDP). Page 15 consider IMF technical assistance to support development of a MTDS that will help to provide a sound framework for future financing. Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate The kina has depreciated more slowly than other regional currencies (2014 July=100) The kina exchange rate should be allowed to move more quickly to a market clearing level. FX queues have reportedly increased despite the slow but steady depreciation of the kina vis- à-vis the U.S. dollar since the trading band was introduced in June 2014, amid reports that BPNG has intervened in the FX market. The restricted range of USD/kina movement resulted in a change in the de facto exchange rate regime classification, from floating to a crawl-like arrangement, effective April 2014. The mission stressed that the slow pace of depreciation would prolong the market imbalance, giving rise to the potential for costly disruptions to business activities. Given that the currencies of other commodity exporters had depreciated more against the U.S. dollar than the kina, the mission stressed that the kina should be allowed to depreciate more quickly to a level that would clear the FX market. This would also help restore the external competitiveness of non-resource exports, and is consistent with limited balance sheet currency mismatches. Should inflationary pressures arise from exchange rate pass-through, BPNG should tighten monetary policy. The mission also supported BPNG’s intention to maintain an adequate level of international reserves. Staff agreed that the FX trading band could be maintained in the near term to help avoid a sharp widening of bid/ask spreads. Over time, however, a plan should be developed to improve the efficiency and transparency of the FX market, drawing upon follow-up IMF TA, and underpinned by sound fiscal and monetary policies. It should be noted in this context that the medium-term, real effective exchange rate (REER) assessment produced mixed results (Box 3), while PNG’s external position is expected to strengthen as LNG exports increase over the medium term. PNG maintains an exchange restriction subject to IMF approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement arising from the requirement to obtain a tax clearance certificate evidencing the payment of all taxes prior to making payments or transfers for certain current international transactions. Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. 2015 Jan 2014 Jul NZD AUD Kina MYR 2015 Jul The mission advised the authorities to mop up excess liquidity to increase the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission, tighten the monetary stance, and dampen downward pressures on the kina. It also advised the government to support BPNG’s efforts to deploy effective monetary policy tools including by maintaining a tighter fiscal stance and avoiding recourse to central bank financing. In the near term, given the challenging fiscal environment, BPNG was advised to focus on withdrawing excess liquidity, including by increasing the cash reserve requirement (CRR), encouraging the transfer of government balances from commercial bank accounts to BPNG, and stepping up the use of open market operations. Staff also encouraged BPNG Page 16 to establish an interbank interest rate corridor as recommended by recent IMF technical assistance. As noted below, commercial banks are highly liquid, have sound capital positions, and are among the most profitable in the world. In this context, banks are in a strong position to adapt to reduced liquidity and a more rapid depreciation of the kina exchange rate in line with market forces without significant adverse balance sheet effects. Accordingly, staff does not anticipate that significant real sector effects would result from monetary tightening, particularly given the massive expansion in LNG production this year. Staff also advised BPNG to refrain from providing any direct financing to the government to safeguard its independence and operational effectiveness, and help maintain macroeconomic stability. Authorities’ views. The authorities emphasized that the USD/kina rate was market determined and that the market, not BPNG, was keeping the rate at its current level. Import payments were not, in their view, being unduly delayed as reflected in the absence of importer bankruptcies. They stressed the need to avoid undue exchange rate volatility and high bid/ask spreads. They also emphasized past experience has shown that a faster pace of depreciation may not necessarily have the desired results of stimulating FX supply and clearing the market, and would be inflationary as PNG is heavily reliant on imports. The authorities acknowledged that excess liquidity inhibits the monetary transmission mechanism while noting that, thus far, inflationary pressures had remained contained despite persistent excess liquidity. They agreed that suitably- tight monetary and fiscal policies were a precondition for the proper functioning of any FX market. BPNG nevertheless reiterated its request for follow-up IMF TA regarding its participation in the FX market, and will work on clarifying its focus. It stands ready to absorb excess liquidity and tighten monetary policy should inflationary pressures intensify. BPNG also reiterated its intention to avoid any direct financing of the government budget deficit. It saw no need to reform the Central Banking Act or to strengthen its balance sheet, given that negative capital was largely attributable to valuation losses on international reserves driven by the rapid appreciation of the kina in 2011-12. BPNG’s balance sheet has improved following the depreciation of the kina and a partial recapitalization of BPNG by the government using non-tradable securities. Financial Sector The mission stressed that BPNG should remain vigilant to emerging sector-specific risks. PNG’s financial system appears robust given strong indicators of bank capital adequacy, asset quality, liquidity, and profitability. Looking forward, BPNG, banks, and superannuation funds should carefully consider the potential impact of lower government spending and the temporary suspension of a large mining operation for assets exposed to affected sectors, including real estate, transport and logistics. Going forward, macroprudential policies should play an important role by limiting any buildup of systemic vulnerabilities. BPNG should continue to move forward to enhance the function of a macroprudential policy division, which is in the process of being established, and set up a comprehensive database including sectoral loan data and household and corporate debt measures. Page 17 The authorities are encouraged to continue strengthening the AML/CFT regime. Key legislation aimed at improving compliance with international standards for AML/CFT has been passed, which could facilitate removal from the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF’s) gray list. They should continue to implement AML/CFT tools effectively to address risks of politically exposed persons and ensure robust domestic and international cooperation on AML/CFT matters. Authorities’ views. The authorities pointed out that commercial banks’ balance sheets and future earnings prospects are strong. They saw banks' exposure to the construction sector through lending as a potential systemic risk, but thus far, NPLs have remained low and have not increased. They reiterated their commitment to further strengthening monitoring of potential systemic risks and implementing the legislation relating to AML/CFT.