Papua New Guinea (PNG) is a resource-rich country with significant potential facing daunting challenges. In addition to mineral, oil, and gas deposits, PNG enjoys abundant fisheries, forestry, and potential for expanded agriculture and tourism. However, economic growth is impeded by structural factors that weaken the environment for private sector development, and poverty remains widespread. Public expectations of benefits to the broader economy from resource wealth have yet to be realized, and there is much still to be gained from effective implementation of structural reforms to facilitate growth and development. In the lead up to the mid-2017 elections, the political situation has been more fluid than usual. The Prime Minister recently survived a vote of no confidence by a margin of 85 to 21. Strong real GDP growth has been driven by the new gas sector project coming on stream, while underlying growth is modest and inflation has increased. The large liquefied natural gas project (PNG LNG) led to high real GDP growth during the project construction phase through 2014, and again in 2015 as LNG production reached full capacity. The current account surplus reflects LNG exports and import compression, largely offset by financial account outflows. However, underlying (non-resource sector) growth has moderated since 2012, running below trend (a rough proxy for potential), which staff estimates to be around 3½–4½ percent per annum. The recent decline in commodity prices and drought in 2015 and early 2016 have weakened the external and fiscal positions and lowered economic growth. Commodity price declines have reduced the profitability of resource sector firms, leading to sharply lower tax revenues. An El Niño-related drought caused widespread food shortages and led to the closure of a river-linked large mining operation (Ok Tedi) for several months. The authorities responded to the recent shocks by cutting budgetary expenditures in supplementary 2015 and 2016 budgets and adopting a prudent 2017 budget. Fiscal spending and deficits were ramped up in 2012–14, financed through domestic borrowing. Late last year, expenditures were adjusted downwards sharply through a supplementary budget, spurred by lower revenue and tightening domestic financing constraints. Revenues fell short of the budget again in the first half of 2016 in response to recent commodity price declines, prompting the Parliament to approve a supplementary 2016 budget in late August that offsets roughly half the revenue shortfall through expenditure cuts. The 2017 budget approved by the parliament in early November The most recent official poverty rate estimate is 40 percent (from the 2009/10 Household Income and Expenditure Survey). The current account shifted from deficit during the LNG project construction phase, to surplus following the commencement of LNG exports. However, FX receipts are largely held offshore (consistent with project development agreements), so increases in exports have been largely offset by capital outflows. Page 10 maintains fiscal discipline by targeting a fiscal deficit broadly consistent with PNG’s Medium Term Fiscal Strategy (MTFS), as elaborated below. The Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) responded to the terms of trade decline with a gradual depreciation of the Kina and FX rationing. Concerned about excessive currency depreciation, it imposed an FX trading margin in June 2014. As a result, the Kina appreciated by about 17 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar initially, although it has since depreciated by 23½ percent. Despite significant unmet demand and FX queues, the exchange rate has been largely stable since May 2016. Consequently, and in contrast to many other commodity exporters, PNG’s real effective exchange rate (REER) remained broadly unchanged between end-2012 and end-2015. Gross foreign reserves were US$1.7 billion (3 months of imports) as of October 21, well short of the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric. Further reserve losses have been avoided thus far by FX rationing. There are, however, signs that a pick-up in agricultural exports such as coffee, the higher gold price, and the resumption of operations at the Ok Tedi mine have led to increased FX inflows, while compressed imports have reduced FX demand. Monetary policy transmission has been impeded by excess liquidity (Figure 4). Improved GDP compilation has found 2013 nominal GDP to be around 40 percent above earlier National Statistics Office (NSO) estimates. The NSO has released revised nominal GDP estimates for 2006–13, which incorporate improvements in GDP compilation. The new estimates make better use of taxation and business survey data, resulting in a significantly expanded view of economic output (Box 1). The new GDP estimates imply lower tax, fiscal deficit, and debt ratios.