The current FX allocation mechanism poses risks for sustainability of the external position and could result in disorderly exchange rate adjustment. Greater exchange rate flexibility and improved market efficiency and transparency would reduce the cost of adjustment to lower commodity prices and curtail risks. Steps to strengthen monetary policy effectiveness are urgently needed, as a tighter monetary policy stance may be called for to manage the pass-through from greater exchange rate depreciation to inflation. Since the introduction of a trading margin for FX transactions in mid-2014, exchange rate adjustment has stalled in real effective terms. While the lower Kina/USD exchange rate has pushed up import prices, limited access to FX has been equally, if not more, challenging for businesses than if the Kina had depreciated more quickly. Since mid-2014, the nominal value of the Kina depreciated by around 5 percent against the Australian dollar, a key trading partner currency, and in real effective terms has depreciated by only 2 percent. Despite this depreciation, the FX market has remained short as reflected in the long queues of unmet import payment orders reported by banks, importers, and business associations, although the tightness of the FX market has moderated somewhat recently as FX inflows have picked up and imports have been compressed. Staff found an additional restriction on current international payments and two multiple currency practices (MCPs) that are inconsistent with Article VIII of the IMF's Articles of Agreement (see Informational Annex). In last year's Article IV consultation, staff found that the tax clearance certificate regime was inconsistent with Article VIII and this restriction remains in place. This year, the mission found that the authorities had prioritized FX orders related to import payments, and among these, had given priority to the payments of selected importers and rationed FX causing shortages, delays, and arrears in current international payments (e.g., those related to non-priority imports, dividend payments, and consultancy fees). There are also indications from market participants that the reference rate/mid-rate is not truly market determined. The mission observed the presence of two MCPs. One MCP arises from the actual deviation of more than 2 percent between the rates used by the BPNG for its FX allocations to authorized FX dealers Page 17 (AFEDs) and the rates used by the AFEDs in transactions with their clients. In addition, a MCP arises from potential spread deviations of more than 2 percent between the rates set by the BPNG for its transactions with the government and embassies, and the exchange rates used by AFEDs in transactions with their clients. Faced with an excess demand, BPNG has intervened to supply small amounts of FX and slow the rate of Kina/USD depreciation. Between 2010 and 2012, FX supply was abundant due to partially sterilized inflows associated with the PNG LNG project construction phase, and strong commodity prices. This upswing reversed in 2013, as FDI inflows declined and commodity prices fell, and the subsequent increase in LNG exports was not matched by increased FX inflows. BPNG has been providing limited FX amounts to the market, and in 2015 spent nearly US$830 million in FX intervention, which was however insufficient to clear FX demand. By limiting its FX sales to the market, BPNG has avoided large reserve losses. Despite the FX shortage, the Kina/USD exchange rate has remained overvalued, which is expected to dissipate assuming a gradual depreciation into the medium term (Box 4). In addition, FX rationing has increased the risks of balance of payments problems, and hampered private sector investment by compressing imports, discouraging non-resource exports, and impeding dividend transfers abroad. Import compression has lifted the import coverage of foreign reserves. Staff found no evidence of a parallel FX market given recent actions by the authorities to monitor and close vostro bank accounts that could previously be used to channel parallel market transactions. However, there are clearly strong incentives for such a market to develop. Staff urged BPNG to allow greater flexibility in the Kina/USD exchange rate and promote market efficiency and transparency. More flexibility in the exchange rate would allow the exchange rate to act as a shock absorber, which would help facilitate the adjustment to external shocks while maintaining adequate foreign reserves. It would also promote a greater economic growth contribution from net exports. Coupled with fiscal adjustment, more exchange rate flexibility would likely reduce overvaluation over time. At the same time, a return to a more effective auction system for FX would help allocate reserves more transparently and efficiently. An auction system would need to be underpinned by appropriate macroeconomic policies. Follow-up Fund TA could be helpful in this regard, including to develop measures that would increase market efficiency and transparency. Risks of faster depreciation include higher inflation, which should be contained by tightening liquidity as elaborated below, while balance sheet effects are limited given the low public external debt, and the bulk of private external debt has a natural hedge in the form of LNG exports. A tighter monetary policy would likely be needed to manage the pass-through to inflation if faster currency depreciation were to take place, but monetary policy effectiveness appears constrained by excess liquidity. BPNG has kept the monetary policy interest rate (the Kina Facility Rate (KFR)) on hold at 6.25 percent since early 2013, which is roughly zero in real terms. However, changes in the monetary policy interest rate are not effective due to excess liquidity, as International Monetary Fund (2015), “Evolution of PNG’s FX Regime,” Papua New Guinea—Selected Issues (IMF Country Report No. 15/219). Page 18 explained below. Moreover, bank lending rates are significantly higher in part due to pricing of credit risk. The liquidity build-up reflects domestic financing of large fiscal deficits and unsterilized FX purchases. The current liquidity overhang has not resulted in rapid private credit growth thus far because of long-standing structural impediments. Although some interest rates are low or negative in real terms, private credit remains constrained, as near-zero deposit rates are coupled with significantly higher lending rates, in part due to pricing of credit risk. Structural factors— including with regard to law and order, contract enforceability, property rights, and land tenure—are key impediments to private credit growth that will take time to address. In this environment of constrained private sector credit, the large volume of banking sector liquidity has not fueled inflation but this could change if the economy picks up. Staff advised the BPNG to absorb excess liquidity, following which it would be in a better position to evaluate whether there is a need to raise the current monetary policy interest rate. BPNG should absorb excess liquidity by active sterilization, stop monetizing the fiscal deficit, and improve liquidity management, drawing on MCM TA recommendations. Absorption of excess liquidity is impeded by the existence of public sector trust accounts held in the banking system rather than with the BPNG. MCM TA recommendations include: (1) moving government funds from the banks to the BPNG (which would also assist with cash management); and (2) until this transfer fully takes place, the BPNG should apply an additional reserve requirement to government funds held in the commercial banks. Reducing fiscal dominance and strengthening the BPNG’s capacity to absorb excess liquidity through issuing central bank bills would allow the higher reserve requirements to be phased out. The BPNG is reviewing its plans to change the specification of the monetary policy interest rate to improve monetary policy transmission. BPNG announced in March plans to change the policy interest rate from the overnight KFR, to the 63-day Treasury bill yield. However, staff noted that without measures to adjust liquidity, this proposed change is unlikely to be effective. Moreover, any new monetary policy interest rate should be an overnight or other shorter-term rate, to better reflect the stance of monetary policy, and the use of a Treasury bill yield for this purpose should be avoided to preserve central bank independence. Authorities’ Views The low FX inflows resulting from continued low export commodity prices, and persistent import demand, contributed to the FX market imbalance and led to the depreciation of the Kina. In 2014, the BPNG introduced a trading margin of 75 basis points above and below the daily interbank rate to abolish the parallel market conducted by AFEDs. This measure reestablished a single market for FX transactions. The Kina has depreciated significantly vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar since then and is not overvalued in BPNG’s view. There has been an increase in FX inflows starting in the second quarter of 2016, particularly from the mining and agriculture sectors, though supply is still low. Together with the intervention by BPNG, the recent increases in inflows assisted in meeting some of the import orders in the FX market, reduced the size of FX queues reported by Page 19 banks, and slowed the pace of depreciation of the Kina exchange rate. The supply of FX from these sources would have been sufficient to clear the outstanding import orders in the spot market. However, this did not happen because AFEDs used some of the spot inflows for foreign currency loans (trade finance) and forward contracts, instead of serving the spot market. The BPNG is discussing ways to improve the functioning of the spot market with authorized dealers. Further exchange rate depreciation would not stimulate export volumes due to production constraints but would only feed through into inflation. The authorities disagreed with staff’s findings of Article VIII breaches. BPNG’s ability to draw down reserves is curtailed by the need to hold sufficient reserves for government payments and to maintain an orderly movement in the exchange rate. FX market efficiency is impeded by the oligopolistic behavior of commercial banks and importers. The BPNG does not impose any restrictions on commercial banks’ operations in the spot FX market. The interbank/mid-rate for the Kina is determined by market participants. This market is not hampered by BPNG and is transparent. While BPNG advises commercial banks concerning the priorities for its FX allocation, it is entirely up to the banks to decide how to allocate the FX inflows. The shortages and delays in the FX market are in large part caused by the AFEDs’ rationing of FX and provision of other products such as trade finance and forward contracts that divert some of the spot inflows. BPNG’s interventions are either general or targeted, the former being done more often than the latter. In the general interventions, FX dealers decide on the allocation of the FX themselves, while for the limited targeted intervention, FX allocation for strategic imports of food, fuel, communications, medicine, and education, are decided by BPNG and FX dealers implement accordingly. The tax clearance certificate requirement is not a restriction on FX flows but rather is imposed by the IRC and BPNG only checks compliance; the certificate is not required for trade transactions. Inflation outcomes are still considered manageable and therefore BPNG plans to maintain a neutral monetary policy stance in the coming months. BPNG is mindful of the upward trend in inflation and will closely monitor developments and may adjust its monetary policy stance as necessary, although the interest rate channel to curb inflation is weak. Constrained private credit growth reflects demand and commercial banks’ risk perception. The BPNG announced in March its intention to have an alternative policy mechanism to address the weak transmission of the KFR to market interest rates. Persistently high banking system liquidity is contributing to the weak transmission of the KFR to market interest rates. The mechanism is still being considered in consultation with stakeholders, both domestic and external. The aim is to have a mechanism that will be more effective in ensuring that the policy signaling rate transmits to market interest rates. The authorities have agreed to open new trust accounts at the BPNG, with payments to be made using the new payment system (the Kina Automated Transfer System (KATS)), while leaving the existing trust accounts, whose balances have declined over time and are now very low, in place.