Credit growth is in line with nominal GDP 2010-14 average Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Medium-term growth is expected to converge to about 3 percent, supported by agriculture and preparations for the hosting of APEC 2018. The government plans to spend K 3 billion over 2015-18 on the preparations for APEC 2018 (e.g., upgrading the airport). Thus, 2018 will see a winding down of construction activity, with overall growth projected to slow down to 1½ percent in 2018 and stabilize at 3 percent over the longer term. Inflation is expected to stabilize at around 5 percent, which is in line with its ten-year historical average, as imported price inflation remains stable and domestic agricultural supply continues to expand. Risks to the outlook are increasingly skewed to the downside. Fiscal consolidation necessitated by weaker-than-anticipated revenue performance will dampen non-resource growth over the short run, and a weak global economy could further dampen external demand and commodity prices. Over the longer term, LNG developments in Australia and shale gas developments around the world could continue to put downward pressure on LNG prices and government revenue. Global financial market instability could also affect prospects for external commercial financing or foreign direct investment. Upside risks include the potential for a second LNG project, further mineral resource development, and scope for increasing trade with Asia. The mission stressed that the prospect of new mineral and LNG projects should not divert attention from the need to tighten fiscal and monetary policy now and allow for greater exchange rate flexibility. Authorities’ views . The authorities broadly concurred with the outlook. They noted that the longer-lasting drought caused by El Niño could prolong a temporary mine closure and worsen a The historical average for the last 20 years is around 3 percent for total real GDP growth and 4 percent for non- resource real GDP growth. Page 12 poor harvest of crops. They placed somewhat greater emphasis than the staff on an upside to growth from a number of prospective extractive sector projects, including a second LNG project and several major gold-copper projects, over the longer term.