Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vietnam Philippines Samoa Fiji An acceleration of structural reforms is Social Indicators (2013 or latest) needed to improve the environment for business development and job creation. Surveys indicate that inadequate infrastructure, poor security, and lack of skilled workers are among the top impediments to business development in PNG, justifying the priority that the government has given to investment in infrastructure, health, education, and law and order. Potential returns on public investment in these areas are high, but more efficient use of existing resources will be needed to realize such gains, including through capacity development, careful evaluation and planning for investments, and improved expenditure mix to achieve better development outcomes (Appendix 2). Moreover, to create more jobs and diversify the non-resource sector, PNG should aim to attract more foreign know-how and capital by easing investor concerns about restrictions on foreign ownership. While recognizing that the last increase in minimum wages was in 2008, staff Sources: UNDP; and ADB Note: Scale from 0 to 1 with 1 representing highest in development, education, health, and income inequality. Education index Gini coefficient Health index Human development index Page 12 noted that the recent large increases could have a negative impact on employment, and that future increases should take place in a gradual manner in line with productivity improvements. Recent progress in increasing competition in public utilities and telecommunications has resulted in greater service coverage and lower prices, an outcome that will not only help improve service delivery for the poor, but also reduce the cost of doing business. Staff encouraged the authorities to clarify corporate objectives for SOEs, notably those pertaining to their community services obligations. Greater efforts are required to develop the agricultural sector for the benefit of the vast majority of the population. Within the budget envelope, the strong focus on roads will need to be maintained given the importance for agricultural products to have access to markets in urban centers and overseas. Staff also noted the need to protect farm crops and property from theft and welcomed initiatives to expand agricultural extension services. Continued innovations are also being made in PNG’s drive for financial inclusion, such as rural credit unions/cooperatives targeting farmers in remote areas. Staff commended rural women’s groups for their active role in capacity development and social protection at the grassroot levels. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the need to develop the non-resource sector, as set out in their Vision 2050. Infrastructure development to support the agricultural sector and rural areas is also a key part of the Medium-Term Development Plan, but is constrained by limited implementation capacity as well as resource availability. In addition, they viewed the reform of poorly performing SOEs as a key priority for improving service delivery and economic efficiency.