Staff and the BCP agreed that monetary policy was well calibrated . Inflation eased back into the lower part of the target range in mid-2014, while survey expectations were anchored at the 5 percent midpoint, suggesting a credible policy commitment. From a cyclical perspective, the setting of a low, positive real policy rate, along with a somewhat restrictive fiscal impulse, seemed appropriate. Thus, the mission endorsed the BCP’s stance and recommended that monetary policy remain focused on keeping inflation close to the target. In this regard, the BCP announced in mid- December that it was lowering its midpoint target to 4.5 percent—closer to the 4.2 percent average of actual inflation since end-2010. In staff’s view, this slightly lower target should be achievable without a distinct policy effort. Consistent with this notion, BCP survey results from January suggested that inflation expectations had already settled at the new target. The mission recommended several actions to further enhance the effectiveness of Paraguay’s inflation targeting regime . The BCP has made strides since 2011 in establishing an inflation targeting framework backed by very transparent communication. Against that background, the mission focused on discussing steps to further improve the implementation of policies and strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism: Promote a well-functioning interbank market , which would facilitate the distribution of liquidity. To this end, the mission recommended increasing the frequency of central bank paper auctions, improving liquidity forecasting, and introducing an averaging scheme for reserve requirements. Once an active money market is in place, the BCP would also be able to establish its official policy rate as the true anchor and move away from the current floor system, where the market rate is determined by the overnight deposit facility in which banks place their excess liquidity. Page 17 Further refine the conduct of BCP transactions in the foreign exchange (FX) market . The BCP provides timely data on both its pre-announced sales of government dollar receipts and discretionary interventions. The latter became relatively infrequent in 2014 and were focused on mitigating bouts of guaraní depreciation. However, there is scope for further regularizing the pre-announced dollar sales, which were repeatedly adjusted in size (and temporarily suspended) over the past year. A more rules- based approach would clearly delink these transactions from occasional discretionary intervention aimed at curbing short-term volatility. Facilitate gradual de-dollarization . Bank deposits and loans in foreign currency account for nearly half the total and have outpaced domestic-currency aggregates over the past year, in the context of strong export earnings in the agricultural sector. To enhance the transmission of monetary policy and reduce financial risks, the mission encouraged the authorities to consider stronger prudential incentives for de- dollarization, such as a rise in FX reserve requirements (which remain well below comparable rates in other partially dollarized economies). Recapitalize the central bank to forestall any perception that the BCP’s inflation targeting mandate might be compromised by concerns about its financial position. The BCP noted that it was planning to take several concrete steps in line with these recommendations . Specifically, the central bank intended to implement a series of measures advised in a recent TA report, including the adoption of an averaging regime for reserve requirements and a rule-based mechanism for its regular FX sales. In this context, the BCP emphasized that excess liquidity in the banking system, as measured by the use of the overnight deposit facility, had already declined to more reasonable levels. The BCP was not convinced that dollarization posed a significant challenge to the effectiveness of monetary policy in keeping inflation on target. Lastly, the authorities agreed with the case for fully recapitalizing the BCP, but did not plan further steps as a near-term priority. The BCP had negative equity of US$1.3 billion (4½ percent of GDP) at end-2013 and suffers an annual loss of about ½ percent of GDP at current interest rates, reflecting the costly sterilization of its FX reserves. The government initiated the recapitalization process in 2012 by injecting perpetual bonds. However, these bonds currently carry a very low (albeit negotiable) interest rate, significantly limiting their net present value. d ll s f s s Exchange rate (PGY/USD) Transactions within the scope of the preannounced dollar sale program Discretionary intervention Daily Foreign Exchange Market Transactions by the BCP vs. Bilateral Exchange Rate, 2014 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. Paraguay 1/Uruguay 2/PeruBolivia 3/ Marginal rate Average rate Reserve Requirements on FX Deposits, Jan.2015 Sources: National authorities;and IMF staff estimates.1/Corresponds to FX deposits with a maturity up to 360 days. 2/ Refers to FX deposits of residents with up to 180 days maturity and FX deposits of nonresidents.3/ Rate is scheduled to increase to 66.5 percent by 2016. Page 18