The central bank has made significant advances in implementing an inflation-targeting (IT) regime since 2011, and further steps are in train . In line with Fund TA, recent implemented measures include publishing a bi-annual inflation report and the minutes of the monetary policy committee as well as refining liquidity management and monetary policy instruments—daily The Ministry of Industry and Commerce already reduced red tape for all transactions linked to activities in the export processing zones (EPZ) from weeks to just a few days and additional reductions are envisaged in 2014. For instance, approval time to establish a new company in an EPZ went down from 50 days to 20 days and a further reduction to 5 days is expected in 2014. Page 15 liquidity forecasts are now being prepared and actively used as the basis for decisions on liquidity management operations (Annex V). The central bank has recently introduced an overnight standing lending and deposit facility, establishing a corridor of ±100 basis points around the policy rate, to ensure that the overnight interbank rates remain within a predefined corridor and to increase the flexibility of the commercial banks’ internal liquidity management. The central bank is also moving reserve requirements (RR) towards an average system (from a fixed amount) within a reserve maintenance period, which was facilitated by the launching in November of the Real Time Gross Settlements (RTGS) payments system. This average RR will likely contribute to reducing the need for banks to maintain excess reserves. In addition, beginning in 2014, the central bank narrowed the band around the target inflation rate of 5 percent from ± 2.5 to ±2.0 percent. The central bank reaffirmed its commitment to complete the transition towards a full- fledged IT regime in the near term . This regime has been successful in reducing inflation along with a decline in the exchange rate pass-through (the latter, an important development in a highly dollarized economy). To complete this transition, priority will be given to developing an active interbank money market by increasing the predictability of central bank operations and available instruments, further improving communication with market participants and eliminating legal impediments to secondary markets trading. Reversing the perception of high credit risk among banks by strengthening bank risk supervision will be also needed to reduce the intermediary role of the central bank in all interbank transactions. Staff reiterated previous Fund recommendations to fully recapitalize the central bank with marketable and fungible securities, further strengthening the recapitalization process initiated in 2012 when the Ministry of Finance offered the central bank nonmarketable bonds (paying only 0.25 percent a year). Staff endorsed recent steps taken by the central bank to establish a foreign exchange (FX) policy that is more transparent, better communicated and more consistent with a full- fledged IT regime . The central bank indicated that since mid-2013, they have followed Fund TA advice, implementing a more disciplined FX framework by pre-announcing an auction system for the sale of government dollar proceeds from revenue of the two binational hydroelectrical companies, including the nature, frequency and size of these sales. This framework has contributed to improving the predictability about the central bank’s role and participation in the market. FX interventions outside the pre-announced sales have been limited to offsetting excessive volatility as the exchange rate is subject to strong seasonal pressures. The authorities confirmed that they adhere to a flexible exchange rate policy and do not target the level of the exchange rate. Staff indicated that maintaining exchange rate flexibility will create incentives for the deepening of the incipient forwards market in Paraguay as the private sector learns to internalize exchange rate risks and this, in turn, could also contribute to reducing dollarization. According to staff estimates, the exchange rate pass-through declined to 21.5 percent in the period 2000–2013 from 26.7 percent in 2000–2010 (period excluding IT which started in 2011). Page 16 Further entrenching the de-dollarization process would strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy framework . After declining during much of the 2000s, dollarization ratios started to increase in the past few years—at 40 percent for both loans and deposits, they still remain one of the highest in the region. While cementing macroeconomic stability should instill confidence in the guaraní, the use of carefully designed macro-prudential tools could also create incentives to internalize the risks of dollarization, tilt against foreign currency loans and deposits, and enhance the transmission mechanism. Key steps could include increasing provisioning requirements for foreign currency loans and the spread in required reserve ratios between foreign and domestic deposits. The authorities agreed that reversing certain macroprudencial measures taken at the time of the global financial crisis, such as the reduction in banks’ reserve requirements for foreign currency deposits, could help sustain a gradual de-dollarization process. However, they pointed out that for the foreseeable future, dollarization would remain a key feature given Paraguay’s openness and the prominence of the agricultural sector, which trades exclusively in dollars.