Regime Staff and the BCP concurred that accommodative monetary policy remained appropriate given external risks. The policy rate was maintained at 6 percent through March in light of the uncertain international economic context and the view that inflation pressures are contained and inflation expectations anchored (Figure 2). Staff assesses the monetary stance as still accommodative considering that the policy rate remains at the lower end of its historical range and is slightly below the BCP’s estimate of the neutral rate. Staff views this stance as broadly appropriate and expects inflation to decline to the mid-point of the target range over the course of 2016. The system comprises eight defined-benefit funds with independent administrative structures, the largest of which are the Instituto de Prevision Social (IPS) (serving private sector workers through mandatory contributions) and Caja Fiscal (which focuses on civil servants). In addition to pension benefits, IPS also provides health services funded by mandatory contributions. The actuarial study for IPS indicates that it could face operational imbalances as early as 2032. Authorities estimate that the present value of the actuarial deficit of the Caja fiscal fund would amount to between 40 to 50 percent of GDP Among the remaining smaller pension funds, Caja Itaipu and Caja Ande also present actuarial deficits that combined would amount to close to 4 percent of GDP. Page 23 The BCP has improved monetary policy operations in pursuit of its inflation objectives. During the course of 2015, the interest rate corridor around the monetary policy rate (MPR) has been narrowed by lifting the floor to 5.5 percent. At the same time, the central bank increased issuance of monetary regulation instruments (IRMs), used for repos, and reduced the rejection rate of bids in order to steer the overnight rate above the floor of the corridor towards the MPR. The Interest Rate Corridor Liquidity facility rate (%) Jun-14 Policy rate (%) Deposit facility rate (%) Interbank rate (%) Sep-14 Dec-14 Mar-15 Jun-15 Sep-15 Dec-15 Instruments of Monetary Regulation (IRMs) (In trillions of Guarani) Amount offered Amount assigned 2014M5 2014M9 2015M3 2015M9 2016M3 Sources: Central Bank of Paraguay and staff calculations. Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. Nevertheless, the monetary policy framework can be further reinforced. The mission reiterated some earlier recommendations by staff to further develop interbank markets to improve monetary policy operations and strengthen the policy transmission mechanism through the MPR. This includes widening the set of private counterparties (beyond banks) who can trade short-term liquidity instruments; further discouraging the use of the overnight facility where banks allocate their excessive reserves; improving liquidity analysis and forecasting including of the impact of foreign exchange intervention; and gradually promoting de-dollarization. The latter can include considering macro-prudential measures that introduce differential requirements for dollar loans and deposits. Large FX interventions can interact with regular monetary policy operations and objectives. In September 2015, the BCP conducted discretionary interventions to support the guaraní in response to high market volatility, in addition to regular pre-announced sales of dollars associated with the sterilization of government receipts. The amount of dollars sold through the pre-announced sales also exceeded the dollar amounts purchased from the government. Foreign exchange intervention activity is reported transparently by the central bank. With respect to monetary policy, interventions in the FX markets can affect the operation of the interest rate corridor through the functioning of the interbank market, and ultimately the relative price of FX lending. Depending on the macroeconomic circumstances and market conditions, intervention can thus generate movements in interest rates that may create tensions with policy objectives within the inflation-targeting regime. Staff recommended limiting interventions in the foreign exchange markets to exceptional circumstances. Discretionary interventions should be limited to countering possible disorderly market conditions. These are situations in which the exchange rate stops working as a shock absorber and markets stop operating normally. To further reinforce the interest rate as the Page 24 main policy instrument, the BCP should maintain predictable, rules-based dollar sales of government receipts avoiding frequent adjustments to the amounts to be sold and temporary suspensions. Clear communication of the central bank’s approach to discretionary intervention may help reinforce the primacy of the inflation-targeting regime and reassure markets. Finally, developing a liquid FX market is an i m portant requirement for a floating exchange rate regime to allow normal fluctuations in demand and supply without disorderly situations (e.g., liquidity running short and markets becoming suddenly one-sided). Avoiding frequent regulatory changes and tight limits on FX operating positions would be helpful in this regard. Authorities broadly agreed with many of staff’s recommendations which they believed were consistent with their policy approach. The BCP agreed on the objective of further improving the monetary framework, interbank markets and liquidity forecasting. The central bank stressed that it does not target an exchange rate level in its FX interventions, evident in the fact that the exchange rate depreciated by about 25 percent against the U.S. dollar in 2015. The BCP emphasized that foreign exchange market interventions are made only during exceptional situations of excessive market volatility. For example, the central bank commented that its “complementary” operations (i.e., those beyond its pre-announced dollar sales) in foreign exchange markets last year were motivated by risks of disorderly market conditions. As a result of their discretionary nature, the authorities argued that these types of interventions were difficult to constrain to a predetermined set of rules. Spot Exchange Rate Movements and BCP Interventions 2013M1-2016M3 Spot FX Deviation from the 10-day moving average (LHS, in percent) BCP intervention (RHS, in millions of USD) BCP buys USD BCP sells USD Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 Jul-14 Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. Page 25