Activity has decelerated markedly from the record pace of 2013, but remains buoyant In 2013, Paraguay grew a record 14.2 percent, as the agricultural sector rebounded from the previous year’s drought (Figure 2, Table 1). The economy entered a soft spot in early 2014 but has since regained momentum, with GDP expanding 3.9 percent (yoy) over the first three quarters of the year. A weather-related drop in electricity production was the main drag on growth, while The production of two large hydroelectric plants, one operated jointly with Brazil (Itaipu), one with Argentina (Yacyreta), accounts for 10 percent of Paraguay’s GDP, 17 percent of exports, and 12 percent of fiscal revenue. Starting a Business126Dealing with Construction Permits43Getting Electricity51Registering Property60Getting Credit71Protecting Minority Investors166Paying Taxes111Trading Across Borders150Enforcing Contracts90Resolving Insolvency106Perceived Level of Corruption150 Paraguay: Rank in Doing Business and Corruption Perceptions Surveys Note: All indicators are taken from World Bank, Doing Business 2015, which covers 189 economies in total. Perceived level of corruption taken from Transparency International 2014, which covers 174 economies. Comparative Macroeconomic Indicators, 2014 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated) Sources: IMF, ;and Fund staff calculations. 1/ Includes Argentina,Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay.2/ Short-term debt is on a remaing maturitybasis. -6-4-2024General government net lendingCurrent account balance 6070General government gross debtFX reserves to short-term external debt 2/ Regional range 1/ Regional median Paraguay Page 6 agricultural output edged up and the remainder of the economy expanded at a robust 6.4 percent (yoy). Construction, manufacturing (notably the fast-growing maquila industry), and services led the expansion, although retail and re-export activities suffered from the abundance of cheap contraband imports from Argentina and weak growth in Brazil. High-frequency indicators for the fourth quarter suggest continued dynamism, putting full-year growth on course to slightly exceed 4 percent. Inflation spiked in early 2014 on account of higher food and regulated prices, but subsequently declined to end the year at 4.2 percent, well within the +/- 2 percent corridor around the authorities’ 5 percent target. Credit growth has slowed from earlier peaks but remains in double digits. Macroeconomic policies have been tightened somewhat since late 2013 . Following the large 2012 stimulus under the previous government, the new administration started reining in expenditure growth (Figure 3), containing the central government deficit at 2 percent of GDP in 2013. For 2014, tax revenue is estimated to have increased by a brisk 19 percent (yoy), linked to better enforcement and new taxes. Due to a sharply accelerated execution of spending in the latter part of the year and lower revenue from electricity royalties, the headline deficit eventually edged up relative to 2013. Still, staff estimates a mildly contractionary fiscal impulse for the full year of around ½ percent of GDP (Table 2a). Monetary policy has been on hold since the central bank (BCP) raised the official policy rate by 125 basis points, to 6.75 percent, between December 2013 and February 2014 (Figure 4). The guaraní strengthened in the first half of 2014, but later pared all of its gains against the U.S. dollar, although it still appreciated almost 12 percent in real effective terms. The exchange rate appears broadly in line with fundamentals (Annex II). Standard methodologies provide mixed results on exchange rate valuation. EBA-lite points to significant undervaluation although the model fit is poor and only a fraction of the estimated gap can be explained by policies. By contrast, one CGER-type estimate implies significant overvaluation . While ostensibly plausible in light of a real appreciation of 60 percent since 2005, this diagnosis is hard to square with the significant build-up of international reserves and generally positive current account balances over the period, which featured rapid gains in productivity and output. Indeed, the other two CGER-type approaches show the guaraní to be close to equilibrium. Market share data, in As Paraguay’s fiscal accounts are compiled on a cash basis, some of the capital spending recorded in late 2014, notably new lending to state-owned enterprises, is likely to be executed in 2015 only. Growth of Real GDP, 2000–14 Sources:Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Excludes agriculture, livestock and forestry, energy and water. GDP Growth Core GDP Growth 1/ Jan-11Oct-11Jul-12Apr-13Jan-14Oct-14 International reserves (US$ million) USD/PGY exchange rate (right scale) Exchange Rate and International Reserves, 2011–14 Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics. Page 7 turn, suggest robust competitiveness. Overall, it is difficult to argue that Paraguay’s current account signals a significant misalignment of the exchange rate—the small surplus estimated for 2014 is projected to give way to moderate deficits over the period ahead, reflecting weaker terms of trade and consistent with an economy in catch-up mode (Figure 5). Meanwhile, reserve coverage is fully adequate International reserves have risen further— mostly reflecting a US$1 billion government bond issuance intended to finance future infrastructure spending—and now somewhat exceed the IMF’s standard adequacy metric for floating exchange rate regimes. However, reserve coverage does not appear excessive in light of Paraguay’s high openness to trade, especially considering the vulnerability of its still-narrow export base to disease, weather, and price shocks. High dollarization provides another rationale for relatively large buffers. That said, the cost of holding the current level of reserves (estimated at 1.1 percent of GDP p.a.) argues against significant further accumulation—a view that was shared by the authorities.