Staff welcomed significant improvements in the fiscal framework . The fiscal responsibility law provides an effective fiscal anchor, limiting current spending and making fiscal policy more predictable, though the regulation to implement the law could include more explicit guidelines for compliance, accountability, and escape clauses (Box 2). In addition, new taxes will add much needed revenues and contribute to making the tax system more progressive. The implementation of a Treasury Single Account and the issuance of short-term debt beginning in 2014 under the recently approved State Financial Administration Modernization law, will help use limited public resources more efficiently, with the Treasury moving from the present system of cash rationing to a modern cash management system. This, in turn, should eliminate the need for short- term loans from the central bank as was the case in 2013. Fiscal settings will be guided by the FRL over the medium term. Thus, staff projects the central government deficit to be, on average, about 1.0 percent of GDP a year in the period 2016– 18, on account of additional increases in tax collection—though less rapidly than envisaged by the government given weaknesses in tax and customs administration that will take time to overcome— and restrained growth in current primary spending, in particular the wage bill. As a result, the The government estimates the new taxes will likely increase tax collection by 2 percent of GDP over the medium term, while staff estimate is about half that amount. Page 13 fiscal policy stance is expected to become broadly neutral in the period 2016–18, as the economy grows around potential (see table below). Financing of these deficits should be manageable through domestic and/or foreign sources. Solid GDP growth would keep the debt to GDP ratio below 15 percent of GDP (Annex IV). Staff observed that additional efforts are required to strengthen the fiscal policy framework. Stronger budget institutions (design, control and monitoring) are needed to enhance the credibility of fiscal policy and improve the quality of spending. Ongoing efforts to implement results-based budget monitoring are welcome. Despite some progress over the past decade, tax collection remains relatively low (estimated at about 51 percent of its potential vis-à-vis a regional average of 71 percent) as a result of limited human and information system resources. The tax agency is not fully prepared to rapidly absorb an increase in taxpayers by about 15 to 20 percent in the short-run due to the new taxes, hindering the mobilization of additional revenue. Consequently, it might be necessary to revise some current low tax rates. In this context, the authorities clarified they are considering raising the VAT on financial services from its current 5 percent to the 10 percent general rate, on top of the recent increase in rural and urban property taxes. Staff suggested the authorities be cautious on revenue projections and, in line with Fund TA advice, strengthen tax and customs administration by giving priority to new information and risk management systems, improving the quality of taxpayer’s registry and controls via database crosschecks, and enhancing audit and arrears collections systems and procedures. Staff recommended that a civil service and pension reform be part of a medium-term strategy to further strengthening the fiscal framework A civil service reform must seek to attract See Fenochietto, R. and Pessino, C. Understanding Countries’ Tax Effort , IMF Working Paper 13/244. Est.20122013201420152016-18 (avg) Fiscal impulse (- = withdrawal)3.20.1-0.8-0.90.0 Non-royalty non-grant structural revenue (- = more revenue)-0.60.5-0.4-0.9-0.2 of which: tax revenue 2/-0.20.2-0.4-0.9-0.2Primary expenditure (- = less spending)4.0-0.5-0.50.00.1 of which: wages and salaries 3/2.20.4-0.90.3-0.4capital expenditure0.9-0.5-0.10.10.2 Memo items: Public capital expenditure (in percent of GDP)4.84.04.04.14.3Consolidated public debt (in percent of GDP)12.615.114.614.514.4Overall balance (in percent of GDP)-1.8-2.0-1.8-1.0-1.0Primary current expenditure real growth (in percent)20.74.92.94.04.0Sources: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank of Paraguay and Fund staff estimates and projections.1/ Central Government, unless otherwise indicated.2/ For 2015, includes full year impact of recent tax measaures.3/ Public wages are adjusted in line with the FRL whenever accumulated inflation reaches 10 percent. Medium-Term Fiscal Outlook 1/ (p.p. of non-agricultural potential GDP; unless otherwise indicated) Projections Page 14 and maintain qualified personnel at a competitive salary, while at the same time opening the fiscal space to increase essential social spending. Staff welcomed work under way in the domestic tax and customs agencies with Fund TA to overhaul human resource policies, including through the creation of a professional career system. Although the aggregate pension system still generates a small cash surplus (equivalent to 0.2 percent of GDP in 2013), several pension regimes run deficits of about 0.3 percent of GDP that are covered by the central government. A pension reform is required to reduce potentially large fiscal liabilities but also to improve national savings and foster development of domestic capital markets. With the assistance of other multilateral agencies, the authorities are working on drafting new legislation and establishing a pension regulator. While PPPs offer potential efficiency gains, they can also pose significant fiscal risks Although the PPP law seems to provide a sound legal framework to reduce these risks, staff advised the authorities to first of all focus on strengthening public investment management, planning and regulatory capacity before engaging in any large PPP project (Box 3). Moreover, staff recommended including PPP projects in the national public investment system (SNIP) and publishing data on all contingent liabilities along with the budget documentation to increase transparency and accountability. Prioritization of PPP infrastructure projects that are likely to have high economic rates of return, such as roads and energy, will be key to preserving strong growth momentum. The authorities agreed with these recommendations and pointed out that the regulatory decree under discussion that will guide the implementation of the PPP law, will clarify many of these issues. Several initiatives are being put in place to speed up investment . A ministerial group was formed to ease the decision-making process on priority investments while an inter-ministerial group would remove bureaucratic obstacles and enhance monitoring, particularly of PPP projects. The authorities are considering outsourcing management of public investment projects in certain cases, following closely the experience of other countries with this type of initiative. All PPP projects will be done through international open bids. They also expect that the diverse legal framework in place—PPPs, joint ventures, leasing, concessions—will facilitate the private sector’s response to new investment opportunities in infrastructure. Ongoing efforts to improve the business climate by strengthening the legal protection of investment and drastically reducing red tape will likely further encourage private and foreign investment.