The supervisory-regulatory framework of the financial system has undergone major improvements in recent years in line with FSAP recommendations . Staff welcomed ongoing efforts to align bank and central bank legislation with international best practices in risk-based supervision and prudential norms, as well as steps to migrate to international accounting standards (i.e. IFRS) for bank and supervisory reporting (Annex VI). The supervisory approach and soundness of cooperatives (which account for 20 percent of financial system assets) will be strengthened over a period of two years beginning in 2014, as a result of new legal requirements (e.g., increased capital adequacy, provisioning and liquidity requirements and better information reporting). This, in turn, would facilitate introduction of a liquidity assistance facility and a deposit insurance scheme for cooperatives in line with FSAP recommendations. Recommended changes to strengthening cooperatives governance are still pending. Although credit growth has stabilized since end-2012, closer monitoring is warranted if it accelerates further . The authorities indicated that although banks usually request solid collateral from their clients (real estate, land, agricultural output which are usually valued below market prices to reduce risk) or direct salary deductions in the case of consumer loans, a significant improvement in credit information would take place in the near term by providing up-to-date data on corporate and household balance sheets to credit registry agencies. Staff indicated that additional efforts are also needed to strengthen the bank supervisor’s loan classification system by requiring institutions to properly identify transactions’ terms and credit quality, and to increase competition in the banking sector to reduce large interest rate spreads. Staff estimates show that by reducing dollarization ratios in loans by 10 percentage points from currently 40 percent, the long-run pass-through from the policy rate to retail interest rates could increase by 14 percentage points (the current pass-through is 36 percent, well below the regional average of 50 percent). See Chapter 2 in the accompanying Selected Issues Papers. Page 17 Paraguay’s anti-money laundering plan (AML/CFT) launched in June 2013 is being activated . The authorities’ recent agreement with the Central Bank of Brazil on measures to control cross-border cash flows is an important step. However, additional efforts are needed to address legal and operational shortcomings that remain in controlling the cross border physical transportation of cash and bearer negotiable instruments while corruption continues to be a serious obstacle for effective actions.