The mission made the case for complying with the FRL . The law has become effective with the 2015 budget, prescribing new rules for government spending and the deficit. While not perfect , these rules are commendably simple and suited to protect fiscal sustainability. Thus, the mission stressed the importance of respecting the FRL, including the 1.5 percent of GDP deficit targeted in the government’s budget submission. For 2015, this target implies a moderate fiscal tightening—a stance that also appears justifiable from a cyclical perspective, especially given the surge in government spending in late 2014. In the event, Congress passed a 2015 budget with higher spending and deficit numbers . The budget ultimately approved by the legislature authorizes central government spending almost 36 percent above the estimated 2014 outturn. As in previous years, these extravagant spending authorizations are partly matched by inflated revenue projections. Nonetheless, the implied deficit (3.4 percent of GDP) significantly exceeds the FRL ceiling, although the budget law also creates a legal exception whereby any capital spending financed by external bond issuance will be excluded from the deficit calculation. In particular, the FRL lacks a back-up rule for public debt and fails to specify correction mechanisms. Being defined in unadjusted, headline terms, the deficit ceiling might also reinforce procyclicality, unless fiscal policy observes a margin of safety during normal times that obviates the need for discretionary tightening in a downturn. This drawback needs to be weighed, however, against the greater simplicity and transparency of the current rule vis-à-vis hypothetical alternatives defined in cyclically adjusted terms. Fiscal Responsibility Law: Numerical Constraints 1. The deficit of the central government must not exceed 1.5 percent of GDP .2. Congress can approve a deficit of up to 3 percent of GDP in cases of national emergency; international crisis affecting the domestic economy; or negative growth. 3. The budgeted average deficit over three consecutive budget periods must not exceed 1 percent of GDP . This rule only applies to the ex ante medium-term budget plan, not to its execution.Expenditure ceilingThe growth rate of public sector current primary expenditure must not exceed 4 percent plus inflation. Deficit ceiling 200920102011201220132014Est.2015Proj. Budgeted revenue Revenue Budgeted current expenditure Current expenditure Budgeted capital expenditure and net lending Capital expenditure and net lending Budgeted overall balance Overall balance Expenditure execution (percent of approved budget, right scale) Central Government Budget Execution (In billions of Guaranies) Sources: Paraguayan authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 13 The government committed to seek compliance with the original FRL targets but left the door open to a moderately looser fiscal stance . Consistent with staff advice, the Finance Ministry underscored its aim to restrain current expenditure execution and extend efforts to improve tax enforcement. In principle, these efforts could make the original FRL targets achievable ex post However, the budget amendments made in Congress have further increased the burden of rigid current expenditure, notably on wages. Higher public investment, in turn, is a stated priority, and political pressure for swift progress may mount in the run up to the municipal elections. All things considered, the authorities indicated that, while achieving an “unadjusted” deficit of 1.5 percent of GDP was preferable, they were prepared to accept a moderate overrun as long as it was fully accounted for by bond-financed investment. Staff projects a deficit around 2 percent of GDP, slightly below the estimated outturn for 2014. This projection incorporates the full-year effect of recent tax increases and assumes an execution rate of 64 percent on the authorities’ investment budget, in line with historical trends. The mission expressed concern about the likely damage to the credibility of the FRL and stressed the importance of strengthening budget practices . With public debt starting from a moderate level, a deficit slightly above 1.5 percent of GDP would not raise any immediate concerns for fiscal sustainability. Still, the mission noted that the circumvention of the fiscal rules, in the very first year of their application, was unfortunate. The exemption of bond-financed capital spending from the authorities’ deficit calculation could bias spending initiatives against financing sources that impose tighter restrictions (such as loans from IADB and World Bank). More fundamentally, the unresolved weakness of the budget process leaves in place a system where fiscal discipline hinges on the close intra-year control of expenditure by the Finance Ministry. Although this strategy has been effective in the past, it fails to provide the desired strong anchor for medium-term policy. The government shared staff’s concern but, short of constitutional changes, saw little scope for hard- wiring a better budget process, given the prerogative of Congress to write budget laws. Within its own purview, the Finance Ministry signaled its intention to expeditiously transition toward the 2001 GFSM format for its fiscal accounts, using IMF technical assistance (TA). Regarding the medium-term path of policy, staff emphasized the need to maintain prudent debt dynamics, including by ensuring a buffer against adverse shocks . Achieving a sustained improvement in public services will require additional fiscal resources over the medium term. Above and beyond the need to match spending goals with revenue, there is a case for incorporating some safety margin in multi-year fiscal plans. Without such a margin, economic All deficit numbers cited here refer to the authorities’ fiscal template for the central government, which follows the 1986 Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM). A mechanical translation into the 2001 GFSM template points to a somewhat lower deficit, as financial investments and net lending (to state-owned enterprises) are recorded below the line (Tables 2a and 2b). However, a full-fledged move to the 2001 GFSM would imply significant further changes to the fiscal accounts whose net effect on the measured deficit is difficult to foresee. The reclassification of financial investments and net lending also does not affect the fact that such transactions increase gross government debt. These include the tax on personal rents and on rents from the export of grains, as well as the increase in the VAT rate on net interest earned. Page 14 downturns could impose a painful trade-off between letting deficits widen beyond prudent limits, and engineering a procyclical fiscal tightening. The FRL recognizes this point by prescribing that the average projected deficit over a three-year horizon should remain 0.5 percent of GDP below the hard deficit ceiling. Staff research suggests that a safety margin of this magnitude—or even a bit wider—is indeed necessary to let automatic stabilizers operate freely during most downturns and avert an upward trajectory in debt (see Selected Issues Papers). Targeting a central government deficit on the order of 0.5–1 percent of GDP would also help to offset financial weaknesses in the wider public sector (see Annexes III and IV). The authorities acknowledged the argument in principle but saw little scope for keeping medium-term deficits below 1.5 percent of GDP. There was agreement that improved tax collection remains a top priority . Recent increases in revenue partly reflect successful steps to improve taxpayer compliance. Within the tax administration, the creation of a large taxpayer office has underpinned this success, as has the highly publicized detection of an extensive VAT fraud. Nonetheless, tax evasion remains widespread, amid entrenched enforcement gaps. The authorities agreed that further efforts to improve compliance were critical, especially in the customs administration. In staff’s view, such efforts would likely have to be combined, over time, with some widening of the tax base or a rise in rates. Thus, the mission suggested exploring higher taxation of the agricultural sector, whose contribution to revenue remains modest. Overdue tariff increases for water and electricity would also generate resources for upgrading public services, though any adverse impact on poor households would have to be mitigated through targeted support. The authorities agreed in principle but for the time being favored improvements in collecting existing taxes, especially since low nominal tax rates were a strategic factor in sustaining Paraguay’s attractiveness to investors. On the expenditure side, civil service reform is critical to trim Paraguay’s high government wage bill and boost efficiency . The authorities acknowledged significant structural These include financial imbalances in state-owned enterprises as well as the quasi-fiscal deficit at the central bank. The cash surplus currently generated by the public pension fund system seemingly provides an offset, but in reality does not represent net worth as it falls short of covering the system’s future liabilities. Staff projections incorporate all previously announced measures to raise revenue, but assume no further discretionary effort. Consequently, the implementation of staff recommendations represents upside potential. Mean outcome Range of outcomes for all but the most extreme 5 percent of simulations Cyclically adjusted deficit target of 1.9 percent of GDP Probabilistic Simulations for Central Government Debt Under Different Deficit Scenarios 1/ (In percent ofGDP) Cyclically adjusted deficit target of 1 percent of GDP Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.1/ Each set of results is based on 1,000 simulations of a macroeconomic model for Paraguay featuring random shocks as observed in historical data; see Selected Issues Papers. Page 15 weaknesses in public sector employment, where non-competitive hiring practices and opaque pay scales have created a legacy of high wage bills and low efficiency. Efforts to redress this situation have started, with a cap on wage growth enshrined in the FRL , the introduction of a new pay scale effective in 2015, and the roll-out of hiring competitions in a growing number of public institutions. There was agreement that these efforts had to be taken further, with the goal of firmly establishing meritocratic criteria in hiring, pay, and promotion. While this process should generate savings in some areas, by addressing cases of overstaffing and excessive remuneration, it would also be necessary to raise the remuneration for some positions, notably to attract highly skilled technical staff. The mission also discussed fiscal risks related to ailing public companies, private sector participation in infrastructure, and the public pension system Paraguay’s state-owned enterprises (SOEs) generate a small operating surplus but are typically unable to cover their investment needs from regular revenue, reflecting low efficiency and, in some cases, regulated tariffs below cost-recovery levels (Annex III). The result has been a gradual erosion of their physical capital stock, worsening operational performance. The mission recommended a thorough review of each entity, along with a tailored strategy to address financial imbalances. In some cases, notably where SOEs perform functions readily substitutable by private operators, divestment should be considered. The authorities ruled out such far-reaching steps but underscored their commitment to improve the operations of weak SOEs. Infrastructure finance . The authorities have advanced their plans to use Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and expect to launch the first two road expansion projects (US$400 million) in 2015. Although the PPP Law provides a suitable framework, staff reiterated the importance of ensuring transparent contracts and prudent assessments of contingent risks as part of the budget process. In the same vein, the mission cautioned against the risks associated with “deferred financing” schemes for public investment under Law 5074/2013, which could obscure the true state of the public finances. More broadly, sufficient institutional capacity for managing large projects will be crucial to In addition to prescribing an overall limit on the growth of primary current expenditure (4 percent p.a. in real terms), the FRL allows public salary increases only up to the legislated increase in the minimum wage, and subject to the financial capacity of the state. The minimum wage, in turn, can only be adjusted when cumulative inflation since the previous adjustment has reached 10 percent. Moreover, several government-initiated PPP projects were at the stage of pre-feasibility studies, including the upgrade of the Asuncion airport, expansion of two further roads, and the dredging of the Paraguay River, which together account for a prospective project volume of nearly US$1 billion. Staff projections incorporate these projects, albeit on somewhat less ambitious time schedules than envisaged by the authorities. V E Y L E L E H L I G T G I H Y In percent of total expenditure In percent of GDPSource: IMF, WorldEconomic Outlook General Government: Compensation of Employees, 2013 Page 16 secure adequate economic returns. The authorities noted that they were successfully developing such capacity, with assistance from international consultants. They also agreed with the need to carefully manage fiscal risks but wanted to retain a range of financing modalities. Paraguay’s social security system comprises 8 defined-benefit pension funds serving different professional groups. Although the aggregate system still generates an annual cash surplus on the order of 1 percent of GDP, some of the weaker funds already require budget support to cover their obligations. Moreover, the system lacks oversight and exhibits significant actuarial imbalances that would give rise to large deficits over the medium to long term. The mission welcomed the authorities’ resolve to tackle these issues and, as a first step, encouraged swift progress toward creating a pension fund regulator, as foreseen in draft legislation.