The staff and authorities broadly agreed with the economic outlook and risks . Reforms underway together with sustained macroeconomic stability will most likely lead to higher private investment. That said, it is too early to determine precise amounts, as existing institutional and structural weaknesses—difficult to overcome in the short run—constitute the main constrains to faster growth in the near term. The authorities expect that the PPPs and other initiatives will attract a large participation of the private sector and foreign companies in the government’s ambitious infrastructure investment plan. They also consider that Paraguay’s cost advantage over Brazil (lower electricity rates, wages and payroll and other taxes) and access to the European market through the General System of Preferences plus Scheme (GSP+) will continue to draw export-oriented industrial investment projects into the country. Growth is expected to be in line with medium term potential output, accompanied by low inflation . Real GDP would grow by 4.8 percent in 2014, supported by continuing dynamism in See Chapter 1 in the accompanying Selected Issues Paper. The government estimates that Paraguay needs some US$1.2 billion (about 4.0 percent of GDP) in investment per year over the next decade to modernize infrastructure, including transportation and water and energy sectors. The Ministry of Public Works plans to tender in infrastructure projects US$500 million in 2014, and US$1billion in 2015, up significantly from an annual execution level of about US$200 million in the past years. Page 9 the agricultural and livestock sector, and an increase in overall investment (of 0.5 percent of GDP). Rising food prices and public services tariffs will most likely push inflation to the central bank’s target rate of 5 percent toward end-2014. As for the medium term, expected higher investment in export-oriented industries and infrastructure would support real GDP growth of about 4.5 percent a year in the period 2015–18, while inflation would remain in line with the central bank’s target. In this scenario, the current positive output gap would gradually close, as potential output growth would moderate slightly from about 5 percent in 2011–13 to 4.7 percent by 2018 (Annex II). The authorities viewed these growth projections as reasonable for a baseline scenario amid a less benign external environment characterized by lower external demand, higher global interest rates, and a deterioration in the terms of trade. Paraguay Medium-Term Outlook Est. Proj. (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) National accounts and prices Real GDP Growth (in percent) Net private savings Net public savings Gross domestic investment Consumer prices (end of period; in percent) Output gap (in percent of potential GDP) Public finances Central government primary balance Central government overall balance Consolidated public debt External sector Current account Foreign direct investment Net international reserves Sources: Central Bank of Paraguay; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Excludes Letras de Regulacion Monetaria (Central Bank Paper). The external current account will likely post small deficits . In 2014, the current account balance will likely swing to a deficit of about 0.9 percent of GDP, owing to a softening in international soybean prices even as volumes of other exports (e.g. soy derivatives) are likely to expand further. Over the medium term, along with some moderate deterioration in Paraguay’s terms of trade, expected stable private sector net savings would contribute to maintaining the current account deficit low at about 1.0 percent of GDP. In this baseline scenario, foreign direct investment The subsidy on public transportation has been eliminated as of January 2014 which will result in a 20 percent increase in tariffs and about US$20 million in savings to the budget (slightly less than 0.1 percent of GDP). Increases in water and electricity tariffs are under consideration. Page 10 (FDI) would rise to 2.9 percent of GDP by 2018, compared with close to 2.0 percent in recent years, attracted by rising investment opportunities. This, in turn, would allow the central bank to keep the reserve coverage ratio within the recommended levels identified in the IMF’s reserve adequacy metric. Paraguay’s external position appears broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals, though some model based estimates suggest a degree of real exchange rate overvaluation The staff’s assessment that the guaraní is, on average, about 8 percent above its equilibrium level reflects largely the results from CGER’s fundamental equilibrium exchange rate model for Paraguay, complemented by other indicators, such as relative prices and market share analysis (Annex III). However, after a small depreciation in 2012, the average real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciation of some 7 percent in 2013 mainly reflected the sharp bilateral nominal appreciation of the guaraní against the currencies of Argentina and Brazil, since it depreciated against the U.S. dollar and the Euro following the trend of other currencies in the region. The authorities believe that the loss of competitiveness with respect to Argentina from recent peso depreciation would be most likely temporary, as rising inflation has usually eroded these gains in the past in that country. Moreover, Paraguay maintains an important cost advantage vis-à-vis Brazil. Also, tighter fiscal settings should facilitate some rebalancing in the medium term and lower pressure on the real exchange rate. As such, the current account deficit, while widening some, is projected to remain small over the medium term, amid sizeable foreign reserves, and improvements underway in infrastructure, which should support the country’s external competitiveness going forward. The risks to the outlook are broadly balanced On the downside, lower growth in key regional partners, specially Brazil (Box 1), hard landing in China and/or disorderly withdrawal of monetary stimulus in the United States could affect Paraguay through lower external demand and commodity prices and higher sovereign borrowing costs, while weak PPP management and/or execution of public investment could also reduce growth prospects in light of the sizeable projected pick-up in the medium-term baseline projection. On the upside, more employment in the formal sector through improved labor market flexibility, and faster reduction of institutional weaknesses could increase growth potential. Supply constraints coupled with possible additional increases in food and administrated prices pose an upside risk to inflation. Weather-related shocks remain a looming risk in Paraguay. However, low debt, sizeable official reserves, greater exchange rate flexibility, a sound financial system, and a stronger policy framework provide the government with better buffers than in the past to cope with these shocks. Although Paraguay has no capital restrictions, short term portfolio flows are practically nil, reflecting its thin domestic capital markets. Page 11 Paraguay: Risk Assessment Matrix Shock Direction Relative Impact Policy Response 2/ Likelihood Sustained decline in High commodity prices (triggered by deceleration of global demand). could be used to avoid excessive volatility; flexible fiscal stimulus should be treated as last resort. Protracted global financial Medium volatility (triggered by prospective exit from unconventional monetary policy). could be used to avoid excessive volatility. Ease of monetary and macro-prudential policies to ensure the stability of the domestic financial market. Regional shock, including Low/Medium Medium/High sharp slowdowns in key partners. Weather-related shock impact agricultural exports. Strong domestic demand could lead to overheating. ↑ could be used to avoid excessive volatility; accelerate measures to improve productivity and business climate to reduce investment cost; ease monetary and macro-prudential policies to ensure the stability of the domestic financial market; a temporary and flexible fiscal stimulus should be treated as last resort. High could be used to avoid excessive volatility. High Accelerate structural measures to reduce supply constraints; tighten monetary policy, including through macro-prudential measures, if inflationary pressures were to arise. A fiscal withdrawal could be also considered if positive output-gap rises rapidly. Weak PPP management Medium Medium Strengthen public investment monitoring and and/or execution of public investment. selectivity. / The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities in December 2013. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Policy response recommended by staff. Starting in 2015, fiscal response guided by the Fiscal Responsibility law (FRL). Page 12