Options to enhance the credibility and effectiveness of the Fiscal Responsibility Law were discussed . While the FRL has not had the expected traction on the budget process, there are signs of increased effectiveness as evident in the 2016 budget approved by congress. Crucially, ad- hoc provisions for the exclusion of capital expenditures from the deficit ceiling have not been added In addition, programs under each of the three NDP axes can further be divided into: 1) promoting equality of opportunities, 2) efficient and transparent public management, 3) land use planning, and 4) environmental sustainability. The greatest resources are devoted to the first two subcategories. The constitutional requirement (Article 104) that public officials declare their assets was clarified via regulatory Law 5033 in 2013. Page 18 to the Budget law this year. Overall, despite notable progress, questions about the FRL as a credible fiscal anchor remain. Part of the issue concerns legal ambiguity between the obligations under the FRL and constitutional budget authority of congress under the current legal framework. To build credibility of the fiscal framework and establish a track record, staff argued that it was important to fully internalize the constraints of the FRL in the budget process. Compliance with the FRL Approved Est. Staff Proj. Budget (in percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated) Total Revenue Expense Net Acquisition of non-financial Assets Net lending/Borrowing Net lending/Borrowing (excl. bond financed capital expenditures) Real current primary expenditure growth (percent change), Staff Real current primary expenditure growth (percent change), Authorities Memo items: Nominal GDP, G$ bn. Current primary expenditure (Central Government), G$ bn Sources: Authorities and staff calculations. Article 241 of the 2015 budget law (Ley 5.386/15) states that capital expenditure financed by sovereign bonds can be excluded from the calculation of the deficit ceiling in the FRL. Deflated using GDP deflator. Based on outcomes for 2015 and staff projections and approved budget numbers for 2016 for the central government. Deflated using the mid-range of the CPI inflation target band. Follows authorities' methodology and compares current primary expenditure for the entire public sector in the approved budget for year t+1 to current primary expenditures in the prevailing budget as of June of year t. Difference between Budget and Outturns (In percent of GDP) In terms of fiscal outcomes, staff sees challenges this year in meeting the deficit ceiling. While public investment spending is expected to be under-executed relative to the budget (due to ongoing implementation capacity constraints); those savings are likely to be outweighed by weaker-than- budgeted tax revenue. As a result, staff projects that the deficit will increase to around 2 percent of GDP in 2016, implying a broadly neutral fiscal stance. (Table 2 and Figure 3). Given that some fiscal tightening is likely needed, staff suggested that tightening current primary expenditures, while safeguarding needed public investment, would be advisable to avoid exceeding the FRL’s deficit ceiling ex post by a wider margin. Authorities affirmed that they remain committed to restraining the growth of current expenditures, in particular compensation of employees in the public sector. Other expense Net acquisition of nonfinancial assets Compensation of employees Social Benefits Other income Tax revenues Interest Net lending / borrowing Source: Staff estimates and projections based on authorities’ data. A positive number for revenue items means that the budgeted item was larger than the revenue outturn. A negative number for an expenditure item means that the expenditure was larger in the budget than in execution. A negative number for the balance means that the deficit was larger (more negative) in the budget than in the outturn. For 2016 "outturns" are staff projections. Page 19 The mission urged caution when considering any modifications to the fiscal anchor. The government strives to meet its constraints under the FRL in the budget, but is considering amending the law going forward given both design and implementation issues. This may include revisiting the deficit ceiling, moving to a structural balance rule, as well as reviewing the treatment of public investment in the numerical targets. Staff advised following a balanced approach in considering any reforms given important potential credibility and reputational costs to amending the framework. If changes are sought, staff recommended that reforms should balance credibility and flexibility considerations to avoid perceptions of dilution of the current law. Any modifications should be accompanied by concrete measures to strengthen fiscal institutions and preserve sustainability of public finances (See Box 2). For example, correction mechanisms can help cement the FRL as a credible fiscal anchor and ensure greater observance of fiscal targets over time. A transition to a new fiscal anchor though would also need to be carefully managed (see Selected Issues Paper). Comparing the implications of alternative fiscal rules, based on the experience of other countries, was also part of this fiscal policy discussion. A “golden rule”—to exclude, for example, public investment expenditure from the deficit ceiling—is part of fiscal rules in other countries in the region. However, such exclusions typically complicate the implementation of fiscal rules and can weaken fiscal discipline, and in some cases have led to higher public indebtedness (see Selected Issues Paper). If the authorities were to consider adopting a golden rule, staff argued that to mitigate risks to sustainability, a debt ceiling should be added to the existing framework (Box 2). A possible move towards a golden rule should also be accompanied by a number of other safeguards. In particular, authorities need to intensify efforts to enhance public investment management efficiency. If such changes were made, it would also be desirable to retain the current expenditure rule, which would contribute to achieve sustainability and would moderate some of the reputational costs of amending the FRL. Finally, the introduction of a structural balance rule would be a sensible approach to avoid procyclical policies, but staff believed it is likely to face implementation and communication challenges—including the estimation of unobservable variables such as the output gap and structural revenues. Countries that Exclude Capital and Other Priority Expenditure from Rule, 2014 (In percent of countries with rule) Sources: IMF Fiscal Rules Dataset. Western Hemisphere Countries All Countries Emerging Markets The debt sustainability analysis presented in Annex IV shows that public debt is sustainable under current policies over the medium term. Page 20 Box 2. Paraguay: A Balancing Act: Reform Options for Paraguay’s FRL The Fiscal Responsibility Law, which came into force in 2015, was an important achievement toward strengthening Paraguay’s fiscal framework. In addition to numerical targets, the law introduced elements of medium-term budgeting and greater transparency. However, fundamental issues have emerged with respect to the law’s implementation and design. First, there is some legal ambiguity surrounding the FRL given the fact that annual budget laws are on equal legal footing with the FRL. Thus, implementation of the FRL has proven complex with the annual budget law in 2015 affecting how deficit compliance would be assessed last year (the 2015 budget law excluded capital expenditure financed by sovereign bonds from the calculation of the deficit ceiling). Second, there is growing concern that under the current design of the rule, with its comparatively low deficit ceiling, capital expenditure plans may be constrained despite large infrastructure investment needs. Finally, the prevailing deficit ceiling (expressed in headline terms) and limited escape clauses can limit the space for countercyclical policies. Consequently, the authorities are considering amending the FRL depending on the trade-offs involved with moving to an alternative fiscal rule. With improved implementation under the FRL in 2016, staff favored retaining the current deficit rule and establishing a solid track record of compliance, but also provided analysis of alternative fiscal rules to inform this discussion (See Selected Issues Paper). Specific alternatives considered included adopting a “golden rule” which excludes public investment from the deficit ceiling; increasing the headline ceiling; making the deficit rule more flexible by moving to a structural balance rule; and removing the deficit ceiling and effectively changing the FRL to an expenditure rule. Staff analysis highlights that different fiscal rules offer certain advantages, but also various drawbacks The general ranking of different rules with respect to debt trajectories is stable, but the composition of expenditures can vary significantly. For example, if the authorities decide to adopt a “golden rule”, which is associated with the highest debt levels in staff simulations, strictly adhering to the current expenditure rule and adding a debt ceiling would be crucial for preserving fiscal sustainability. Furthermore, as practical experience has shown, a golden rule should be accompanied by efforts to enhance public investment management efficiency and public accounting to ensure correct classification of capital expenditures. If the authorities consider raising the headline deficit ceiling, efforts to strengthen the budgetary process and FRL provisions on sanctions and enforcement would help to cement the authorities’ commitment to fiscal responsibility and alleviate concerns of dilution of the law. Should the authorities consider removing the deficit ceiling and keeping the existing expenditure rule, debt sustainability could be compromised in the absence of a debt ceiling, although international experience suggests that expenditure rules have better compliance. Caution is thus warranted when considering changes to the fiscal anchor and a balanced approach is needed if amendments to the law are sought. To gain credibility, establishing a longer track record of compliance would be preferable to changing the rule at the outset. Potential modifications to make the fiscal rule more flexible should be accompanied by a number of safeguards that enhance credibility of the fiscal anchor. The effectiveness of the FRL will ultimately hinge upon measures to strengthen legal and institutional aspects of the fiscal framework. Paraguay’s public financial management system should be strengthened, particularly in terms of budgetary processes, public investment management framework, credible financial reporting and accounts, and additional fiscal transparency. From a legal perspective, the effectiveness of the FRL is limited, as per Constitutional law, congress appears not to be restrained from actions that modify the FRL. On the operational side, Paraguay’s fiscal framework would benefit from the introduction of explicit correction mechanisms to address deviations from the fiscal rules, as well as the path back to compliance. More precise provisions on sanctions and enforcement would be welcome. Transition to a revised fiscal framework would need to be carefully managed. Given the possibly large costs as well as high political sensitivity, any modification to the FRL needs to be carefully tested and communicated. If a transition to another rule is considered, care should be taken that all relevant stakeholders agree on and “own” the reform. Authorities are also considering introducing an independent fiscal council to provide non-partisan evaluation of fiscal policy. The main objective of the envisaged council would be to assess fiscal policy, but it could also evaluate the fiscal forecasts undertaken by the Ministry of Finance. This would be particularly useful under a structural balance rule. The council would comprise reputable experts that would serve on a voluntary basis. Staff broadly welcomed this potential institutional change but noted that the international experience suggests that the mere Page 21 establishment of a fiscal council does not by itself lead to stronger fiscal performance. Successful fiscal councils possess certain characteristics such as independence, adequate staffing, or high media impact. Recent Revenue Collection Measures and Main Policy Recommendations Policy Recommendations Recent Progress Tax revenue administration Strengthen legal procedures for imposing sanctions on tax evasion. Enhance legal mechanism to address revenue authority’s staff corruption. Streamline procedures for registering taxpayers and policies for authorizing invoices. Improve filing procedures to increase compliance. Regarding the medium-term fiscal framework, staff emphasized further improving revenue collection and raising public investment as a share of spending. The authorities’ three year fiscal plan presented with the 2016 Budget envisages a gradual fiscal consolidation, through modest increases in tax revenues and significant reductions in grants and fixed investment. Staff believes that base broadening measures such as the recent extension of the VAT to cooperatives are a welcome effort to increase tax collection and more can be done to mobilize fiscal revenues. The country’s revenue authority (SET) has made good progress in strengthening institutional frameworks, tax payer registries and administrative capacity, but still faces problems with tax compliance and enforcement. Compensation of employees continues to represent a relatively large share of total fiscal expenditures compared to regional peers, underlying the need for civil service reform (Figure 3), which would help create more fiscal space for public investment. Broadening of the tax base Introduction of PIT (2013) and income tax on the agricultural sector or IRAGRO (2014). Extension of VAT to cooperatives (2016). Strengthening of tax collection: Improvements in taxpayers’ registry. Organizational improvements in the tax revenue authority (SET). Progress on elaboration of new audit and enforcement strategies. Customs administration: Strong information and communications technology (ICT) systems are already in place. Customs revenue administration: Enhance rules-based control procedures and transparency as well as better risk management. Development and implement the single-window system and move towards fully electronic records. Revisit administrative budget of the customs authority (DNA) to ensure that enough resources are available for investment in infrastructure. The mission also encouraged authorities to monitor and mitigate fiscal risks associated with the scale-up of public private partnerships. Projects already in the pipeline under this modality would amount to close to 2.5 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, Paraguay’s PPP framework is relatively recent and the authorities have limited experience with implementation. Staff urged them to accelerate efforts to quantify and mitigate fiscal risks arising from contingent liabilities. Staff also recommended that project selection and implementation should be closely monitored to ensure that investment efforts are efficiently translated into a higher public capital stock. Debrun, X. and Kinda, T. (2014) “Strengthening Post-Crisis Fiscal Credibility—Fiscal Councils on the Rise. A New Dataset” IMF Working Paper WP/14/58, April, Washington, D.C. According to authorities’ estimates this extension is expected to yield additional revenues in the order of 0.2 percentage points of GDP. Staff’s medium-term fiscal forecast incorporates reforms in revenue administration and base broadening measures that could lead to an improvement in the tax revenue to GDP ratio of close to 1 percentage point. Page 22 Paraguay’s fragmented and unregulated pension funds do not effectively mobilize national saving to finance investment or help develop local capital markets. Meanwhile, actuarial and operational deficits pose substantial risks to public finances through contingent liabilities. Given high levels of informality, coverage is estimated to be very low. Currently, most pension fund resources are simply held as deposits in the banking system, in part because of a lack of legal clarity regarding alternative investment options. Enacting the draft law creating a pension regulator and expanding portfolio management options for pension funds will be instrumental in tackling some of these challenges, but additional efforts will also be needed to address long-term financial sustainability concerns, including parametric reform. The authorities broadly shared this assessment and noted entrenched interests in the pension industry impede reforms. Authorities recognize the main fiscal challenges identified by staff and remain committed to moving ahead with initiatives despite political economy constraints. On civil service reform, authorities are working on amending the Civil Service act with support from the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) to build on changes initiated with the introduction of the new salary scale in 2015. The government will also continue to pursue efforts to enhance domestic tax revenue mobilization with technical assistance support from the IMF. Authorities also pointed to recent successes in combating and dismantling large tax evasion schemes. Authorities acknowledged their limited experience in the management of PPPs and are requesting further technical assistance in quantifying and mitigating risks from contingent liabilities associated with these projects. Finally, pension reform is a politically sensitive issue and authorities have opted for a gradual approach, where the approval of legislation creating the pensions regulator through congress would be an important first step. Subsequently, policy measures to address longer term sustainability concerns could then be contemplated.