Paraguay’s economy is expected to remain relatively resilient this year and next, withstanding the adverse impact of sizeable external shocks. Despite a prolonged regional slowdown and weaker commodity prices, staff expects solid growth near 3 percent in 2016 and 3¼ percent in 2017, led by agriculture and construction. Given favorable weather and strong yields, the soy harvest—Paraguay’s main agricultural crop—is likely to see strong growth from last year. This boost in volumes in agriculture in the first quarter should provide Projected Real GDP Growth 1/ 2016 2017 (in percent) BCP Forecast BCP Survey Consensus Forecast IMF Sources: Central Bank of Paraguay; Consensus Forecast; and IMF. 1/ As of March, 2016. Page 13 Factor Decomposition of GDP Growth , 1992–2021 (In percentage points) an offset to negative carryover effects from weakening momentum elsewhere over the course of last year—led by decelerating activity in other trade-related sectors (industry, commerce and livestock). From the demand side, consumption growth is expected to remain solid, but investment in agriculture is likely to weaken further given lower prices and tighter margins, subdued outlook for commodity prices, and slower declines in costs and prices of machinery and equipment. Sound macroeconomic fundamentals, favorable demographics, lower cost of oil imports and a very competitive electricity sector are additional factors sustaining growth in the near-term. Following rapid credit growth in 2015, lower credit demand from subdued investment plans and tighter credit conditions will contribute to slower, but still positive credit growth in 2016, more in line with economic fundamentals. Growth Capital Labor Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and IMF staff estimates and projections. TFP But downside risks to growth have risen mainly from the external side (see Risk Assessment Matrix). These risks are underscored by a noticeable deceleration in the quarterly path of GDP in 2015. A further slowdown in Brazil and deeper decline in agricultural commodity prices represent the major risks to the outlook. Staff analysis suggests that growth spillovers from Brazil can be sizeable but the confidence range around point estimates is large (Box 1, Annex V). Albeit of lesser importance, lower growth in the euro area and Russia—market destinations accounting for about 25 percent of Paraguay’s exports—could dampen domestic growth to some degree. The recent removal of exchange controls and trade taxes in Argentina could be a source of upside risk, but its effects are uncertain (see Box 1). Rapid credit growth in the banking system in the context of slower economic activity represents a potential macrofinancial vulnerability that could interact with external risks, such as the deterioration of external financial conditions. On the domestic front, limited capacity for administering and executing public investments also represents a downside risk to growth . With indicators of its capital stock and infrastructure quality typically in the bottom quartile among emerging markets, Paraguay’s planned infrastructure build-out is a necessity. However, the efficiency of public investment management and experience with large projects is relative l y low—raising risks associated with any ramp-up in infrastructure spending, including private sector participation in infrastructure projects (PPPs). As a potential mitigating factor, lending rates remained quite stable during previous episodes of financial turbulence, including during the taper-tantrum in mid-2013. Page 14 Risk Assessment Matrix Sources of Risk Vulnerabilities/ Channels of transmission Impact if Realized (color = severity) Policy Response Nature of the shock (color = likelihood) DOMESTIC Weak administrative capacity and execution of public investment Real: Low administrative capacity would translate into slower or less effective implementation of crucial infrastructure investment. A weaker-than-expected infrastructure investment would depress growth in the near and medium term. EXTERNAL A further slowdown in Brazil and other trading partners Financial: Banks have large exposure to the exporting sectors. Leverage Real: Exports to Brazil represent around 30 percent of Paraguay's total exports. FDI inflows from Brazil are also large, especially in the maquila industry. Europe and Russia account jointly for 25 percent of total exports. Slower than expected growth in trading partners would impair export sales and spill over to banking sector and other sectors related to export production. A surge in global financial volatility related to asymmetric monetary policies Financial: Banks have large exposure to the exporting commodity sectors. Leverage More persistent lower commodity prices will curtail profits in the exporting sectors with spillover s to the banking and other related sectors. A more persistent decline in agricultural commodity prices Real: Exports of agricultural products represent about 30 percent of GDP. ‐ Accelerate efforts to address institutional weaknesses and improve transparency. - Encourage private sector investment. - The floating exchange rate represents the first line of defense. FX intervention could be used to avoid excessive volatility. - Let monetary conditions ease, consistent with IT framework. - Let automatic stabilizers operate. - The floating exchange rate represents the first line of defense. FX intervention could be used to avoid excessive volatility. - Accelerate measures that promote diversification. - Let monetary conditions ease, consistent with IT framework. - Let automatic stabilizers operate. - The floating exchange rate represents the first line of defense. FX intervention could be used to avoid excessive volatility. - Accelerate measures that promote diversification. - Let monetary conditions ease, consistent with IT framework. - Let automatic stabilizers operate. Disruption in the agricultural sector from weather -related events can have significant impacts on GDP (up to 4 percent, in some cases) Financial: Banks have large exposure to the agricultural sector. Leverage Weather-related shocks to agriculture and energy sectors Real: Agriculture and hydroelectricity are particularly vulnerable to severe natural shocks. A further deterioration of external financial conditions Financial: corporate and non-corporate debt has increased for some time, especially dollar- denominated. A sharp increase in interest rates, related to the end of US monetary policy easing or persistent dollar strength could impact firms' profitability, impeding loan service. There are, however, significant mitigating factors: - About 45 percent of dollar- denominated debt is concentrated in the agricultural sector, which has significant natural hedges. - Domestic interest rates tend to be resilient to developments in the US markets , including during the taper- tantrum episode in 2013. - The floating exchange rate represents the first line of defense. FX intervention could be used to avoid excessive volatility. - The authorities should enact macro-prudential measures, including by imposing different capital requirement on dollar- denominated loans. Note: Colored boxes on left hand side represent shock likelihood and colored boxes on right hand side represent severity of impact. Red = High, Yellow = Medium, and Green = Low. Page 15 Box 1. Paraguay: Global and Regional Spillovers to Paraguay Financial linkages between Paraguay and the rest of the World are limited. Foreign asset holdings by Paraguayan banks are small and banks are largely funded through deposits and capital. Foreign ownership of deposits is also small and foreign equity (mainly from Brazil) represents only 2.5 percent of system assets. Nevertheless, high levels of dollarization in the financial system could render bank balance sheets vulnerable to sharp exchange rate movements, even though currency mismatches are partly offset by natural hedges. Furthermore, foreign investors do not hold domestically-issued government bonds and most portfolio inflows to the country are linked to the issuance of sovereign bonds in international markets. FDI growth in the recent past has been concentrated in the construction and maquila sectors, which benefit from Paraguay’s competitive tax system and energy prices. Foreign Equity Financing (Capital ownership in percent of total system assets) Int. Orgs./ Europe USA Ireland Argentina PRY Colombia Netherlands Spain Brazil Cereal; 8.7 Meat; 14.1 Exports by Main Products, 2015 (In percent of total) Exports by Key Trading Partners, 2015 (In percent of total) Trade channels continue to be the main source of vulnerability to external shocks . Paraguay is a highly open economy, with total exports and imports at around 80 percent of GDP, but trade is concentrated both in terms of products and export destinations. As a consequence, the economy is vulnerable to demand shocks from major trading partners (in particular Brazil) and to volatility in prices of key commodity exports (soybean, beef). Brazil’s deep recession also had a profound impact on the demand for re-exports, affecting economic activity in border cities. The recent decline in oil prices is likely to have a positive impact on the economy, given that the country is a net oil importer. Spillovers through trade also have a significant impact on asset quality in the banking system. In particular, the effect of Brazil’s GDP growth on NPLs is large and significant (see Selected Issues Paper). Sources: BCP; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Date refer to registered exports only. 1. Other includes cotton and woord. Rest of Latin Argentina , World , 10 Brazil , 32 America , Soybeans; Russia , 9 Other 1/; Electricity; EU , 17 Rest of Asia , 11 Registered Exports Growth (In percent, y/y) Brazil Argentina Vector autoregression (VAR) estimates suggest that Paraguay’s growth rates are affected by shocks to Brazil’s growth as well as shocks to global variables (VIX index, commodity prices). Staff analysis suggests that growth spillovers from Brazil can be sizeable—about ½ to ¾ percentage point on domestic growth for a one percentage point shock to Brazil’s growth. However, confidence intervals around the estimated spillover coefficients are wide given the underlying variability of the series, including domestic GDP. The estimated cumulative effect on Paraguay’s growth 4 quarters after the shock in Brazil can be as low as zero or as high as over 1 percentage point. Typically, the greatest cumulative effect on Paraguay’s growth is about 3 quarters after the Brazil shock. Given Paraguay’s relatively resilient growth so far, despite almost 8 quarters of recession in Brazil, further negative impact from Brazil may remain subdued. Shocks to the VIX volatility index, a measure of global risk aversion, are also linked to statistically significant decreases in Paraguay’s GDP growth (variance decompositions show that about 11 percent of the forecast errors can be attributed to VIX shocks at the four quarter horizon and beyond). Responses of GDP growth to soybean prices and commodity terms of trade also go in the expected direction although statistical significance varies depending on the model used. Sources: BCP; and IMF staff calculations. Total Spillovers from Argentina following the normalization of the exchange rate system in that country remain uncertain. Foreign exchange controls in Argentina had previously led to a surge in contraband imports, which appears to have subsided. Businesses involved in the formal distribution and retail chain had been negatively affected by contraband trade. Exports from Paraguay to Argentina have surged since December 2015, albeit from a very low level. The effects of recent developments in Argentina on investments in the real estate sector are difficult to ascertain due to the lack of statistics on the sector Page 16 POLICY DISCUSSIONS: SUPPORTING GROWTH