Paraguay’s social and economic development has lagged behind the region . In the late 1980s, per capita GDP peaked at 75 percent of the region’s average in part due the construction of the two hydroelectrical dams, but declined to about 50 percent over the following two decades amid institutional weaknesses and large deficiencies in basic infrastructure (ports, river transportation, utilities and roads). In the 1990s, a deep financial crisis wiped out about half of the banks and per capita GDP stagnated. This situation was reversed during much of the 2000s, when the export commodity boom and macroeconomic stability brought about higher productivity and economic growth. However, limited implementation capacity and fiscal resources—reflecting a small tax base, low tax rates, and weak tax and customs administration—have continued to constrain investment and the fight against poverty and (rising) income inequality. On the positive side, the past two decades have seen the expansion of agricultural and livestock output and processed food industries—Paraguay has become the 4 th and the 8 th largest exporter of soya bean and meat in the world, respectively. More recently, export processing zones have attracted a rising number of companies, mainly to serve the Brazilian market. The government’s reform strategy would buttress growth and reduce poverty . This strategy rightfully focuses on fostering investment in infrastructure and human capital, improving the business climate, and modernizing the public sector, including by curbing corruption and tax evasion while improving transparency and accountability of public resources. The private sector and foreign companies are expected to play a key role in closing the large infrastructure gap in the country. In support, the authorities will maintain fiscal discipline and stable low inflation while further strengthening bank supervision in line with international best practices. Peru GDP per capita (PPP constant 2005 US dollars) 1980-2012 Source: World Development Indicators ; World Bank 1/ Includes Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Peru, and Uruguay. Page 6