Banks continue to report strong capitalization, profits, and liquidity . The financial strength of Paraguay’s banking system compares favorably to its regional peers (Figure 6). Relatively limited leverage, high returns on assets, and a large deposit funding base characterize essentially the entire cross-section of banks. However, the continued rapid expansion of credit raises concerns Credit outstanding is in line with other countries at a similar income level. Nonetheless, the mission argued that continued high credit growth may increase banks’ exposure to riskier borrowers. Credit gap analysis suggests only moderate overall excesses, though the underlying growth in FX-denominated credit is understated by the appreciation of the guaraní over the past decade. Meanwhile, nonperforming loans have remained stable at 2 percent, but the mission cautioned that additional credit quality problems might be masked by regular sales of NPL portfolios to finance companies, as well as the significant stock of renegotiated loans on bank balance sheets. The mission recommended vigilance especially in the areas of household credit and FX lending The largest exposures of Paraguay’s banks, and a significant share of their U.S. dollar loans and deposits, relate to the agricultural sector. Thanks to its financial buffers, this sector has withstood recent weather-related shocks very well, though it remains vulnerable to more extended periods of weak output or further sharp price declines. Staff’s more immediate concerns, however, focused on other areas: Household debt . Although systematic data on household leverage are not available, the sector has seen a significant rise in indebtedness over the past few years, led by credit card debt and commercial installment A long-standing feature of the banking system, the high stock of such loans was also discussed in the 2011 FSAP Update. Key recommendations included (i) improving the provisioning treatment of refinanced and restructured loans; and (ii) ensuring that the renewed loans category not be used to conceal revolving or long-term loan facilities. More generally, greater transparency on the nature of renegotiated loans is critical for a proper risk assessment. Credit Estimated trend since 2003 Estimated trend since 1994Right scale: Credit gap long series (2014=2.7%) Credit gap short series (2014=1.9%) Credit Gap Estimates, 1994–2014 (Inpercent of GDP) Sources: Central Bank of Paraguay; and IMF staff calculations. Credit Gap Estimates, 1994–2014 (Inpercent of GDP) Sources: Central Bank of Paraguay; and IMF staff calculations. KeyIndicators for the Universe of Paraguayan Banks, 2014 180200Loans to deposits Provisions to gross NPLs Capital to total assets NPL ratio Range MedianSource: Central Bank of Paraguay. Note: Data refer to end-December 2014 and cover all 16 banks present in Paraguay. Primary Sector Industry Commercial Consumption Other Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. Credit Outstanding by Borrower Sector, 2009–14 Page 19 loans. The use of multiple (and expensive) credit products has reportedly led to elevated payroll deductions for many wage earners, raising concerns from a consumer protection perspective. Growing financial pressures in the household sector could also come back to hurt lenders at some point. As a preemptive measure, the mission therefore suggested that lenders be formally required to demonstrate compliance with prudent limits on their customers’ debt servicing capacity. Lending in foreign currency has been another area of strong recent growth. Although the relevant borrowers typically appear to have some FX revenue, the regulator only had access to qualitative information provided by banks, precluding an accurate assessment of FX mismatches. Outside of the export-oriented primary sector, it also appeared that some borrowers recorded FX revenue from activities ultimately driven by domestic demand, such as corporate real estate. The mission recommended stepping up the data collection on related balance sheet risks and considering suitable macroprudential tightening measures, notably higher capital risk weights or provisioning rates for FX loans. By supporting de-dollarization and reinforcing buffers, such measures would help to contain any fallout from rising U.S. interest rates or a stronger dollar over the period ahead. Corporate real estate . Close monitoring seemed warranted, as rapid recent construction and fast-rising prices may have squeezed the profitability of new projects. Direct risks to financial stability were attenuated, however, by reports that funding was typically tilted toward equity provided by foreign investors, rather than domestic credit. The mission also discussed ways to refine the regulator’s stress-testing framework . The BCP’s latest Financial Stability Report presents stress tests analyzing, inter alia, an across-the-board rise in NPLs by 10 percent and sector-specific NPL increases of 30 percent. Even under combined stress scenarios, the regulator judged risks of financial instability to be minimal. The mission welcomed the inclusion of these results in the FSR but suggested that the tests be developed further to consider more severe shocks and anchor simulations in more detailed macro-financial scenarios. The authorities agreed with the need for close monitoring of credit markets but expressed confidence that risks to financial stability were well contained . They argued that consumer credit had already slowed from the very rapid growth of recent years and was unlikely to pose risks to banking sector health, given strong margins and generally sound underwriting practices. They also pointed out that the Credit Bureau Law currently under preparation would facilitate banks’ efforts to achieve a more comprehensive assessment of potential customers, reducing credit risk. On NPL portfolio sales and FX lending, they were open to staff recommendations for improved monitoring, but reiterated that the banking system was Interest rates in the high double digits are common for these lending products. Banks’ consumer loan portfolio alone has quadrupled since 2009 and exceeded 7 percent of GDP at end-2014. Cooperatives’ portfolio of personal and consumer loans stood at an estimated 5 percent of GDP, and finance companies accounted for an additional 1 percent of GDP. Data on the stock of commercial installment credit are unavailable. Page 20 fundamentally sound and resilient, including to spillovers from U.S. monetary policy. Accordingly, they saw no immediate need for mandating stricter lending standards. They noted, however, that the rules for the classification of renegotiated loans had been tightened and were progressively being enforced. A complete review of banks’ compliance was envisaged by early 2015. The BCP also expressed interest in receiving TA on stress-testing. There was agreement that proactive prudential oversight would be greatly facilitated by the approval of the new banking and central bank laws . The BCP’s regulatory powers are tightly circumscribed by an outdated legal framework. The new draft laws aim to expand the regulator’s authority and create a transparent basis for risk-based oversight. Thus, the mission welcomed the government’s intention to submit the laws to Congress in March 2015. To allow an effective use of these powers, the mission also recommended reinforcing the resources of the superintendence. The mission reiterated the case for long-due reforms in the cooperative sector , which accounts for one-fifth of total financial sector assets and serves many small savers, but is subject to a prudential regime with serious shortcomings flagged during the FSAP. Elevated NPL ratios (7.9 percent among the largest institutions at end-September 2014) and the opacity of cooperatives’ accounts underscore the contingent risks that the sector poses to Paraguay’s public finances. The regulator (INCOOP) noted its intention to set up a liquidity support scheme and deposit insurance fund headed by a board with greater independence. Staff welcomed the objective of creating a financial safety net but reaffirmed the view that such steps should be preceded by a substantial upgrading of the current regulatory and supervisory framework. The mission also welcomed INCOOP’s intention to work toward creating a system-wide creditor database with the BCP. CategoryDefinition/RequirementStock at end- November 2014 (Percent of total banking system loans)Renewed loansLoans whose tenor is extended, either while the debtor is still current on all obligations, or when the loan is past due by up to 60 days. C urrent loans are considered renewed if their tenor is extended without a significant amortization (i.e., less than 60(cid:160)percent of principal for bullet loans; and less than 75(cid:160)percent of total installments for installment loans). For loans past due by up to 60(cid:160)days, two modalities exist: extending the due date without any debtor payment, but continuing to count past-due days based on the original loan schedule; or paying accrued interest and other charges (with the debtor’s own resources), and thus interrupting the original past-due period. Refinanced loansLoans that are past due by more than 60 days where the debtor pays, out of her own resources, all past due interest and other charges, as well as a portion of the past due principal. Only when at least 10 percent of the principal and all past due interest and charges are paid, the loan can be moved to a better risk category.0.6Restructured loansLoans whose terms are partially or totally modified (e.g., longer tenor, lower interest rate, lower installments) to provide relief before the debtor falls behind on payments.1.1 Classification of Renegotiated Loans: Updated Regulatory Requirements (April 2014) Source: Central Bank of Paraguay, Superintendence of Banks. Page 21