REGIONAL SLOWDOWN Against the backdrop of a regional slowdown, Paraguay’s economy remains relatively resilient. Staff estimates growth at 3 percent in 2015, among the strongest in Latin America (Table 1). This reflects: (i) a milder adverse terms-of-trade shock relative to comparators; (ii) stable growth in investment and consumption; and (iii) modest fiscal stimulus. The economy experienced some loss of momentum over the past year due to unfavorable external shocks. For three consecutive quarters, Paraguay’s real GDP growth has progressively slowed down, reaching 1.1 percent year-on year (y/y) in the fourth quarter, from 6 percent in the first quarter (Figure 1). Real exports contracted by just below 10 percent (y/y) in the first three quarters of 2015. Prices of its two major exports, soybeans and beef, fell 24 and 10½ percent respectively in 2015, while a deepening recession in Brazil affected re-exports and commercial activity in Paraguay’s border cities. Food Metals Energy Peak to Trough Change of Commodity Terms of Trade (In percent of GDP) Advanced o x M g z B O g d y g p s b m o o p v o B O h o d d Z w N z V s h g Sources: Gruss (2014); and IMF staff calculations. Note: Trough period of current commodity terms of trade cycle in parentheses for each country. Exclude precious metals, except for Bolivia, Colombia and Peru. Effective Exchange Rates (In percent, y/y, +=appreciation) Inflation pressures remain contained despite significant depreciation of the guaraní against the U.S. dollar. Core inflation remained subdued during most of 2015 (Figure 1), despite a 25 percent depreciation against the U.S. dollar (although depreciation of the guaraní in effective terms was more modest). However, core inflation increased towards the end of the year. A limited degree of exchange rate pass-through resulted in higher prices. Services and housing have also contributed to higher core inflation. In the first two months of Terms-of-trade deteriorated as soy and beef export prices dropped in 2015, but import prices of oil products and capital goods also decreased to provide some offset. Capital goods import prices fell in U.S. dollar terms mainly from neighboring countries, Brazil and Argentina, whose currencies have depreciated significantly against the U.S. dollar. BCP’s preferred measure of underlying inflation (“nucleus”) averaged 2.9 percent for 2015 (y/y) and 3.7 percent in December, whereas core inflation (X1) averaged 3.7 percent for 2015 and 4.9 percent in December. Jan-14 Source: IMF INS. Jan-15 Jan-16 Jul-14 Jul-15 NEER REER Page 10 2016, headline inflation remained temporarily elevated, mainly due to volatile food prices. Staff expects inflation to decline to the mid-point of the central bank’s target range (4½ percent) over the course of 2016, as growth below potential helps contain inflation pressures, including from past exchange rate depreciation. Moreover, recent currency appreciation since February, low oil prices, moderating inflation for services and housing, and anchored inflation expectations, further point to more subdued or easing inflationary pressures going forward, also reflected by moderating inflation in March 2016. Macroeconomic policies remain accommodative in light of subdued inflation and slower growth. Notwithstanding the BCP’s unexpected 25 basis point interest rate hike in January 2016 to 6 percent, monetary policy continues to be somewhat accommodative, following an easing cycle over March-July 2015 (Figure 2). Meanwhile, fiscal policy has been more supportive of economic activity. Staff estimates that the fiscal deficit at the central government level reached 1.7 percent of GDP—marginally above the 1.5 percent ceiling set by the fiscal responsibility law (FRL). The estimated deficit would imply a positive fiscal impulse of 1.2 percent of potential non- agriculture non-energy GDP (Figure 3, Table 2, and Table 3). In the first year of implementation, FRL compliance has been challenging. Amid legitimacy questions about the scope of the FRL to limit the legislative power of congress to enact budgets that are not in line with the law’s provisions, the 2015 budget approved by congress exceeded the deficit ceiling by 1.3 percentage points of GDP after modifications were introduced to the executive’s budget proposal. Moreover, the approved budget law, allowed for the exclusion of capital expenditure financed by sovereign bonds from the calculation of the deficit ceiling on a one- off basis. Staff estimates an adjusted fiscal balance of -0.6 percent of GDP for 2015, below the FRL deficit ceiling if such expenditures are excluded. Furthermore, real current primary expenditures are estimated to have grown by 4.7 percent, exceeding the FRL ceiling of 4 percent on an ex-post basis In 2016, however, there have been signs of increased effectiveness of the FRL in the budget process. The draft 2016 budget submitted to congress complied with the numerical targets of the law. While the final approved version still respected the deficit ceiling, modifications introduced by congress altered the composition of spending. Staff still expects real current primary expenditure growth for the central government to be below the FRL ceiling when comparing outcomes for 2015 and 2016, but the growth of these expenditures would exceed the 4 percent limit when comparing the approved budget to the 2015 outturn. The external position deteriorated modestly in 2015, due to a negative terms-of-trade shock and weakness in major trading partners. The current account balance moved further into negative territory and is expected to remain in deficit at –1.8 percent of GDP in 2015 (Figure 4, Table The primary balance is estimated to have deteriorated by 0.4 percent of GDP. Note that authorities do not use fiscal outcomes to assess compliance with the FRL. Instead, compliance is based on a comparison of the implied growth in current primary expenditures for the public sector in the approved budget for year t+1, relative to the prevailing budget in year t, deflated by the mid-point of the BCP inflation target band. Page 11 4), as exports receipts (particularly, from Asia) have fallen due to lower commodity prices, as well as from weaker economic activity in trading partners—notably, Brazil and Russia. Recent indicators also point to weaker exports and, consequently, a smaller trade surplus last year. With respect to the financial account, foreign direct investment has grown more modestly, about 10 percent through Q3 2015, than its average over the last 10 years given generally tighter financial conditions externally. The deterioration of the current account position and reduced capital inflows has reduced international reserve holdings. Staff continues to assess the currency and external positions as being broadly in line with fundamentals given changes in the external environment (Annex II). The assessment is mainly based on external adjustment consistent with weaker terms-of-trade and partner activity, and real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciation, which is more in line with its ten-year average. EBA-lite estimates of current account and REER gaps continue to present mixed results, with poor empirical fit and almost no share of the misalignment explained by policy gaps. Gap REER EBA - REER REER Exchange Rate Assessment - 2015 EBA- Current account Norm Balance EBA CA EBA REER EBA-lite methodology Diagnostics Fitted Residual Policy gap Constant 1/ Percent of GDP 2/ In percent. + indicates overvaluation with respect to implied benchmark. Reserves remain broadly adequate. The BCP’s reserve position at 23 percent of GDP covers 7 months of imports (Table 5). Reserves are expected to increase in 2016, relative to 2015, partly as a result of the issuance of a US$600 million government bond. Reserves are assessed to exceed the IMF’s standard adequacy metric for floating exchange rate economies. However, staff believes that ample reserve coverage is appropriate for Paraguay considering the economy’s openness, significant dollarization, and high vulnerability to weather and commodity price shocks. Recently, credit growth has moderated, but credit quality has deteriorated. Over 2015, financial intermediaries have become increasingly less optimistic about economic conditions and extending credit. In parallel, growth in bank credit to the private sector in local currency terms peaked at 29½ percent last May but stood at about 18 percent by February 2016 (Table 6). This largely reflects stagnant FX lending volumes, which more than offset the valuation effects of exchange rate depreciation. Stagnant FX credit volumes coincided with reduced demand for investment loans in the largely dollarized agriculture sector, owing to the drag on profitability from When FX credit is measured in constant January 2014 exchange rates, growth of total credit to the private sector stood at 7½ percent in February 2016, down from a recent peak of 22½ percent in March 2015. Page 12 lower commodity prices. In contrast, local currency lending growth remained strong, even as changes to credit card regulations appear to have restrained consumer lending. Credit quality has been deteriorating recently, with banks’ non performing loans (NPLs) rising to a still-moderate 2.9 percent in February 2016 (Table 7). Moreover, loan restructuring and refinancing, outside of NPLs, also rose over the year to 2.3 percent of total loans, in some cases benefitting from the BCP’s decision to grant temporary relaxations in loan classification to mitigate the effects of shocks facing the agriculture and livestock sectors. Credit Conditions (percentage of respondents' reactions to a statement that the economic situation is optimal for extending credit to the private sector) Contributions to Bank Private Credit Growth (In percent, year/year) Disagree Indifferent Agree Source: Central Bank of Paraguay, Informe sobre Encuesta de Situación General del Crédito. Valuation of prior FX lending Net new FX lending Domestic currency lending Total credit growth Sources: Central Bank of Paraguay and Fund staff calculations. Key Indicators for Paraguayan Banks, 2016 (In percent) Notwithstanding potential vulnerabilities from rapid credit expansion, the financial system appears sound (Figure 5) . Most banks, including large institutions, posted positive net income in 2015, although profitability measures (returns on assets and equity) were in most cases below 2014 levels. Reduced profitability largely reflected higher provisioning expenses, which continued to provide ample coverage for nonperforming loans. Reported system-wide capital ratios were strong, with the tier 1 capital ratio at 11.3 percent (Table 8). The equity-to-asset ratio dipped slightly, as share capital issuance by many banks offset still-rapid asset growth. Relative to the region, Paraguay’s banking sector compares relatively favorably on profitability, capitalization, liquidity, and loan quality. Provisions to gross NPLs Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. Note: Data refer to end- January 2016 and cover all 17 banks present in Para guay. Capital to total assets Loans to deposits Range Median NPL ratio