Foundations for Durable Growth Structural Reforms: National Development Plan Axis Reform Areas Main Measures Poverty reduction Education Health Paraguay has embarked on an ambitious reform agenda to raise living standards and boost potential growth (Figure 6). The authorities’ national development plan (NDP) for 2014–30 rests on three axes: (i) poverty reduction and human capital development; (ii) infrastructure and inclusive growth; and (iii) insertion of Paraguay into global value chains. The mission discussed implementation progress with respect to the NDP and key strategic reform priorities. Deficiencies in transportation and electricity distribution were seen by staff as key bottlenecks, constraining productive capacity Improved navigability of the Paraguay-Parana Waterway, through dredging, as well as investment in port terminals and key road segments would relieve traffic congestion, reduce logistics costs and facilitate trade. Existing electricity transmission and distribution systems are inadequate to meet the growing demand for energy. Paraguay shares with Brazil the second largest hydroelectric power plant on earth, Itaipu, yet hydro power represents less than 20 percent of domestic energy consumption. Eradicate extreme poverty Improve education quality and enrollment Reduce infant malnutrition Increase life expectancy Universal access to water and sanitation Eradicate unhealthy living conditions Increase registration of urban and rural plots Increase employment among the young and disadvantaged Universal social security coverage Improve financial inclusion Improve road maintenance Improve fluvial transportation through dredging and nocturnal navigation Increase broadband internet coverage Increase agricultural productivity on family- owned farms Eradicate illegal deforestation Increase renewable energy consumption Incentivize return of distinguished Paraguayans Support return of Paraguayan migrant workers Economic integration Increase exports Increase tourism Communications Productivity I II III Social integration Urban planning Employment Financial Transportation Environment Page 17 and quality of public services. Staff and authorities agreed on the need to prioritize infrastructure investment in these areas—including through PPPs. The national development plan places emphasis on inclusive growth and poverty reduction. The authorities highlighted the “Sowing Opportunities” umbrella program aimed at poverty reduction and inclusive growth. It includes Tekopora , the longstanding conditional cash- transfer program, as well as several new programs such as Tenondera , an income-generating program to empower those graduating from Tekopora ; and Tekoha , a program to assist the poor to legally acquire property on which they live. At the same time, authorities noted that efforts have been made to improve targeting and coverage by collecting more information about the economic conditions of potential recipients via the “ Ficha Social ” survey. Recent achievements in fighting corruption: I Methods to ensure free access to public information II Strenthened administrative control Government performance is now more accountable due to the transparency law and via internal scorecards. The general public has online access to the wages of all public officials, as well as assets for many of them. There is also free access to public procurement data. Authorities across institutions expressed their satisfaction with the implementation of the Law of Free Access to Public Information, seeing it as a fundamental change in the country. Thanks to its implementation, there is more involvement of civil society in government affairs. In addition, the government uses internal scorecards (“ Tablero de control ”) to improve accountability and monitor performance in different ministries and agencies. The authorities are improving human resource management, with merit-based selection processes in 96 institutions (up from 24 in 2013). The authorities also noted that there are ongoing efforts to reform the judicial system and improve the AML/CFT legislation. Internal scorecards ("Tablero de control") Biometric control of public employee presence at work Use of magnetic card to charge fuel for public sector vehicles Electronic payment of social services (Tekopora, pensions for poor) Anticorruption portal (to make a denouncement, seek verification) Unified portal to access public information (public sector payroll, asset declarations, or request other public information) National public procurement directorate, with online access