The recent monetary tightening appropriately aimed at re-anchoring inflationary expectations. Under the authorities’ and staff’s baseline scenarios, Peru’s small output gap would be closed around end-2017. Observed and expected inflation outside the target band could be reasons for tightening the monetary stance further. However, the declines in year-on-year inflation since end-2015 and softer medium-term inflation expectations corroborate the BCRP’s current wait-and-see approach. The authorities reaffirmed their view (and staff agreed) that future policy moves should be guided by the drivers of future inflation, such as movements in inflation expectations, and take into account the lags with which changes in the monetary policy stance affect the economy. The authorities and staff exchanged views on the estimates of the exchange rate pass-through to prices (Box 3), which fall into the range of 0.1−0.2 for 1 percent depreciation depending on the methodology. The authorities and staff concurred that the pass through is high for some non-tradable goods that are directly priced in U.S. dollars. Staff stressed the importance of continued BCRP guidance so that temporary inflation shocks do not contaminate inflation expectations. Staff remarked that a possibly steeper path of interest rate hikes in the United States than currently priced in by financial markets could trigger the need for further rate increases in Peru to address the inflationary impact of a weaker sol. And there could be some pressure from the recent 13 percent increase in the national minimum wage; however, as discussed with the BCRP, the Page 15 pass-through of minimum wage increases to consumer price inflation is uncertain. Staff expects inflation to be within the authorities’ target range in the medium term. Staff raised the possibility that the inflation target band in Peru could be demanding. This is viewed in light of the country’s still high exposure to relative price shocks, stage of development, and the average inflation rate of 2¾ percent (close to the top of the targeted range) since the start of the inflation- targeting regime. Clearer indications to the market that the BCRP’s “target” is the whole target range rather than the mid-point of the range or any specific numerical point would better align BCRP’s communication with its actions. The authorities stated that Peru has been subjected to many supply shocks in the past that did not warrant monetary policy action and that inflation excluding food and fuels (around 2¼ percent over the last decade) has been lower than headline inflation. Their choice of targeting a band range (rather than its midpoint) is understood by market participants. The choice was driven by the level of U.S. inflation, as a higher domestic inflation target would lead to a weaker currency and to lower demand for local currency, increasing dollarization. The commendable steady de-dollarization of credit portfolios has helped reduce financial stability risks and improve the transmission of monetary policy to economic activity and inflation. Discussions focused on the next steps for the de-dollarization process, which was accelerated in 2015 owing to the BCRP’s measures. The increase in U.S. dollar deposits in 2015 squeezed local currency funding and the BCRP repos provided a mechanism to avoid a credit crunch in local currency for now. Staff inquired whether these repos would be a long-standing feature of Peru’s financial sector, with their associated distortions on credit growth and exchange rate risks for the BCRP. The BCRP asserted that its long-run repo operations (using dollar deposits as collateral) are of a transitory nature and will be wound down as domestic currency deposits pick up again and de-dollarization continues. Both the BCRP and bank supervisors (SBS) see the increase in U.S. dollar deposits as a temporary response of economic agents to expectations that the sol would depreciate further during the year. Staff suggested that more stringent prudential requirements could further help make FX deposits less attractive, although directly imposing higher costs on holders of FX deposits could be seen as intruding on Peru’s constitutional right to transact in foreign currencies. Staff also reiterated the need to develop other measures that could help de- dollarization, such as creating incentives for diversifying savings and investment instruments (e.g. deepening local-currency bond markets, and allowing retail sales of government bonds), as well as continuing to move in the direction of allowing greater exchange rate flexibility. Substitution repos, which carry some FX exposure for the BCRP, constitute 3 percent of the NIR. Local currency public domestic bonds are likely to become Euro-clearable in 2016, and authorities are working to develop real estate investment trusts (REITs) akin to the Mexican model. Modifications to the Alternative Securities Market scheme could also encourage higher issuances by medium-sized companies. See the accompanying Selected Issues Paper , Chapter 3 Z q ij K ya ay K ay Z K W Band Target/Mid-point Inflation Target Regimes: Cross Country Comparison (In percent)Source: IMF country teams. Page 16 Staff welcomed greater exchange rate flexibility but saw room for further flexibility . While continuing to lean against trend currency depreciation, the BCRP has been letting the sol absorb the decline in commodity prices, without a noticeable impact on firms’ balance sheets. Exchange rate volatility has been higher than in previous non-crisis periods since 2013 even after controlling for external shocks, but most of the exchange rate depreciation in 2015 was limited to the U.S. dollar. Staff reiterated that, while temporary intervention to reduce excess volatility could be helpful, greater exchange rate flexibility would keep the current account balance closer to equilibrium levels, discourage risk taking, and incentivize the development of FX derivatives to support currency risk hedging. That would help de- dollarization and would limit the need for measures to alleviate banks’ balance sheet mismatches. While macro- financial risks from FX lending appear limited—stress test calculations by the SBS suggest that only about 11 percent of FX lending poses risks to banks’ capital, which is much below headline dollarization levels—FX leverage by firms and households still requires close monitoring (Annex III). Staff supported the authorities’ efforts to keep Peru’s current classification in the MSCI Emerging Market index. Peru’s growth rate and macroeconomic stability continue to stand out when compared to other emerging market economies and the country has been the recipient of significant foreign direct investment in the past decade. Reclassifying Peru into the MSCI frontier market index due to the perception of low liquidity (as has been contemplated by MSCI) would lead to a change in the investor base, but, even if regrettable, authorities believe it would not have significant macro- financial consequences. The Supervisor of the Stock Market (SMV) and the management of the Lima stock exchange (BVL) have been taking important steps to increase market liquidity, including a temporary exemption of the capital gains tax, to which the staff does not object, and providing stronger incentives for market makers and stock lending. ee X Page 17