(In percent of GDP) Peru: Fiscal Accounts (NFPS) Staff estimates that the economy continues operating somewhat near potential while inflation remains under control . The main macroeconomic objectives of achieving near full- employment with low inflation have been achieved in Peru in the period after the global financial crisis of 2008–09 thanks to skillful macroeconomic management. The output gap is estimated to have moved from slightly above potential (by 0.5 percent) in 2012 to slightly below potential (-0.2 percent) in 2013 as growth decelerated in 2013. This has been achieved while inflation has been contained within the BCRP band (1–3 percent) and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Current primary Capital Sources: MEF; and Fund staff estimates. Primary expenditures Taxes Non-taxes Interest payments Primary balance Overall balance Revenues Proj. Peru: Inflation and Output Gap The 2014 budget envisages a zero overall fiscal balance, but staff believes there is an upside risk. The 2014 budget was approved by Congress in December 2013. When applying historic rates of budget execution, the overall balance should yield a small surplus of about ⅓ percent of GDP for 2014. This reduction in the fiscal surplus (compared to an overall surplus of about ½ percent of GDP in 2013), when adjusted for the economic cycle and fluctuations in commodity prices, reduces the structural fiscal surplus to 0.4 percent of GDP in 2014 (from 0.7 percent in 2013). This entails a relatively small fiscal impulse of about ⅓ percent of GDP in 2014, which is mildly counter-cyclical (given a very small negative output gap) and broadly appropriate given the current economic conditions. While the authorities recognized that it is possible to achieve a small fiscal surplus in 2014, especially if previous budget execution rates Output Gap Near Potential o f I Overheating Oversupply Stagflation (Percent) Recession Inflation Band Page 16 materialize, they stressed that their objective is to improve budget execution and to fully implement the 2014 budget. If the 2014 budget were to be fully implemented, the fiscal impulse in 2014 would amount to about ⅔ percent of GDP, which could pose a small overheating risk (as the fiscal multiplier is likely to be low given that the economy is somewhat near potential). Over the medium term staff continued to support small fiscal structural surpluses. These could be in the order of ½ percent of GDP a year (measured under the staff’s methodology) to address contingent liabilities and natural disasters risks (i.e., earthquakes, “El Niño” related droughts, tsunamis, etc.) which are high in Peru, and also to maintain the relative size of the fiscal buffers as the economy grows. The new fiscal framework constitutes an important step in reducing pro-cyclicality of the budget process and in achieving an appropriate savings target from the intergenerational and fiscal risks point of view. Staff recommended the structural target taking into account the desired level of financial balances and public investment path. Staff also emphasized that further scaling up of public investment over the medium term, should be in line with enhancements in public financial management capacity, also at the sub-national level, in order to ensure high rates of return for investment projects. The authorities understand the staff’s concerns but they favor a structural deficit of 1 percent of GDP (the highest deficit allowed under the new fiscal framework, measured under a methodology that is still to be decided). The fiscal implications of this policy are difficult to evaluate because the authorities are still in the process of designing the methodology to calculate the structural fiscal balance that will be applied under the new fiscal law. Staff cautioned the authorities against implementing an unduly expansionary policy in 2015. The recent reduction in the policy rate was undertaken against the background of a decelerating economy and weak business and consumer confidence. In staff’s view, the reduction in the policy rate in November 2013 was adequate given that non-food/non-fuel inflation was within the target (albeit on an upward trend partly due to pass-through effects), inflationary expectations remained well-anchored, confidence was still recovering, and the economy had weakened faster than anticipated. The BCRP will need to continue to be vigilant and implement policies flexibly in 2014. Additional monetary policy easing should be avoided unless there is evidence of a renewed economic slowdown since an undue monetary easing may compromise The structural fiscal balance corrects for the business cycle (which affects non-mining revenues) and deviations of metal prices from a long-term “shadow” price (which affects mining-related revenues). The key parameters needed for the calculation of the structural fiscal balance are: (i) the output gap; and (ii) the “shadow” price of metals (to be used in calculating structural mining-related revenues). Staff’s methodology uses a Hodrick-Prescott filter to measure the output gap, and an 8-year moving average of metal prices (centered on 5-years backward and 3-years forward, based on WEO projections) as the “shadow” price of metals. A commission has been appointed to propose the methodology used in the calculation of the structural fiscal balance under the new fiscal framework. The commission is expected to announce their conclusions by February 2014. Without knowing the methodology used by the authorities to measure the fiscal balance, it is difficult to assess the policy of a structural fiscal deficit of 1 percent of GDP, as it could entail a positive or negative fiscal impulse. For instance, if a heavily backward-looking price for metals is used to gauge the relevant structural price, it would entail a relatively low “shadow” price of metals and relatively low structural revenues, which could yield a structural deficit higher than 1 percent of GDP. In such a case, the authorities’ objective (a structural deficit of 1 percent of GDP) would require a fiscal tightening. Needless to say, if the commission were to follow a methodology similar to the one used by staff, it would entail—if fully executed—a fiscal impulse of over 1 percent of GDP in 2015. Page 17 inflation objectives (especially as inflation is already near the top of the inflation band) and induce capital outflows. Once the economy recovers, consideration should be given to unwinding the recent policy rate reduction to prevent a buildup of inflationary pressures, especially since interest rates abroad are likely to rise, creating additional incentives for capital outflows. An additional issue for the BCRP to continue closely monitoring is the real estate market to ensure its proper functioning and to prevent the development of bubbles (Box 3). The authorities have indicated that they would consider additional monetary easing if the economy remained weak and inflation expectations low, but remained committed to their inflation target. The authorities were of the view that monetary conditions could be eased through lower reserve requirements to foster private credit growth or a further lowering of the policy rate if the economy remained weak. The authorities argued that if long-term interest rates in the U.S. were to increase, that would not necessarily lead to a change in monetary policy in Peru as the exchange rate is flexible and would adjust. The authorities felt that higher long-term rates in the U.S. would lead to a re-pricing of long-term Peruvian bonds but that short-term rates in nuevos soles would likely continue to be anchored to the policy rate. The authorities also stressed that they remain committed to the inflation target band (1–3 percent) and that they have been successful in implementing the inflation targeting framework. The BCRP stressed that if they see any risks of inflation going above or below the target band, they would act immediately to contain pressures. Staff acknowledged the effectiveness of the BCRP in keeping inflation under control and within the announced band for most of the period since the implementation of the inflation targeting regime in 2002. Maintaining exchange rate flexibility has been instrumental in cushioning the economy against external shocks. As the current account deficit deteriorated and private capital inflows declined, the BCRP has become a net seller of foreign exchange while allowing the currency to depreciate. In these circumstances, staff welcomed the higher exchange rate flexibility and encouraged the authorities to continue strengthening the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber. Going forward, the exchange rate should continue to be driven by fundamentals, while limited foreign exchange intervention could be necessary to limit volatility and contain excessive risks to the balance sheets in a still highly dollarized economy (Box 4). Such intervention will need to continue to be sterilized to prevent large swings in credit expansion and undue movements in the interbank rate. Increasing exchange rate flexibility will create further incentives for the deepening of the forwards (and other derivatives) market as the private sector internalizes exchange rate risks, which in turn could support further de-dollarization of the economy. The authorities remain committed to maintaining a flexible exchange rate regime . The authorities agreed with the staff’s assessment that the exchange rate is in line with fundamentals, and stressed that they will continue intervening to ensure an orderly functioning of the FX market. The authorities remain concerned about excessive volatility of the exchange rate in the context of a relatively dollarized economy but adhere to a flexible exchange rate policy and do not target any pre-determined level of the exchange rate. Page 18 Macro-prudential policies should remain well targeted to reduce vulnerabilities. In addition to the recent macro-prudential measures to deter the growth of dollar loans, there is a need for measures to discourage un-hedged foreign exchange exposures. The high positive spread between reserve requirements on dollar deposits and those on local currency deposits needs at least to be maintained, if not increased, to discourage dollarization. This would put downward pressure on dollar deposit rates and an upward pressure on dollar loan rates. In the event of reversals of capital inflows, the authorities would unwind previous tightening of reserve requirements (while maintaining the spread between dollar and local currency RR) to provide an adequate level of credit to the economy. Regulatory standards need to continue to be strengthened in line with Basel III recommendations while ensuring the provision of an adequate level of private credit to the economy (Annex V). While the overall financial system remains healthy and strong, the recent deterioration of financial soundness indicators for some non-bank deposit-taking institutions warrants closer monitoring and supervision.