After decelerating sharply in 2014, economic activity recovered somewhat in 2015. Growth reached 3.3 percent in 2015, led by mining and fisheries and a partial recovery in services and commerce, while the unemployment rate increased to 6.5 percent, reflecting lagged effects from the sharp downturn in 2014. From an aggregate demand perspective, private and public consumption supported growth in 2015, together with inventory accumulation. The inventory build-up, which more than explains the growth increase in 2015, is due to the year-end surge in mining output which was exported during the first quarter of 2016. Gross private and public fixed investment was a drag on overall activity. The external current account reached a deficit of 4.4 percent in 2015, mostly owing to large declines in metal prices while non-commodity exports did not pick up despite the sol depreciation. The current account deficit was partially financed by borrowing and foreign direct investment, while other capital flows remained subdued. See the accompanying Selected Issues Paper , Chapter 1, for a comparison of recent adjustment to shocks in Chile, Colombia, and Peru. Page 10 Rising inflation pushed the central bank (BCRP) into tightening the monetary stance in 2015. Despite a widening negative output gap, inflation increased by more than 1 percentage point to 4.4 percent, y-o-y, in December 2015, reflecting food supply shocks, regulatory adjustments to energy prices, and a pass- through from currency depreciation. The BCRP has raised the policy rate since September 2015 by a full percentage point to 4¼ percent aiming at re-anchoring inflation expectations, which has added to tighter external financial conditions (Box 1). Over 2015, the sol depreciated amid the BCRP’s FX intervention. The sol depreciated 14 percent with respect to the U.S. dollar, much more than in 2014 but less than other LA5 currencies, implying a flatter path for the sol in real effective terms. Overall, the external position was assessed as moderately weaker than fundamentals with a positive real effective exchange rate Effective May 1, 2016, the energy regulator announced cuts in electricity prices, which are indexed to the U.S. dollar, for residential and commercial consumers. gg Y ea Y ea Y ea es I ub hange I ub pend ng l po I po es odu ou ona au ho and und ff W gh , f ea ed ha cc f ng ill ea r- end ea oo oo W oo & und nu Page 11 (REER) gap and a current account deficit wider than its norm (Annex II). Net spot market sales were significant, amounting to US$8 billion or about 4 percent of GDP; FX swaps and FX-linked certificates of deposit accounted for US$3.2 billion or about 2 percent of GDP; however, intervention slowed by year-end and more recently has focused on managing appreciation pressures. Net international reserves (NIR) remained high, at US$61.5 billion (308 percent of the Assessing Reserve Adequacy (ARA) metric, or 263 percent after augmenting the ARA for commodity buffers). While a significant part of NIR consists of domestic FX liabilities, these are mostly of maturities of 2 years and longer, and do not constitute a short-term risk to reserves (Annex II). After adjusting for these liabilities, NIR still remained within the adequacy range. Following a string of surpluses since 2009, the non-financial public sector (NFPS) deficit rose to about 2 percent of GDP in 2015. Government revenues fell by about 2 percent of GDP. A loss of income from reduced tax rates accounted for about ⅓ of the total; the rest was explained by a structural drop in commodity prices, one-off extraordinary revenues collected in 2014, and higher tax reimbursements on overestimated pre-payments, especially by commodity producing companies. Under-execution of capital spending, especially at sub-national levels of government, undermined the authorities’ targeted fiscal impulse. Overall, fiscal policy remained broadly neutral in structural terms, and is estimated to have contributed negatively to economic activity in 2015 since multipliers on investment spending (which fell) are greater than tax and current-spending multipliers. Gross public debt increased to about 24 percent of GDP, including pre-financing operations, with net debt (gross debt excluding government deposits at the central bank and in private banks) increasing to 7 percent of GDP. Staff estimates of fiscal multipliers in the accompanying Selected Issues Paper, Chapter 2, while to be interpreted with the usual caution, indicate that capital spending multipliers have a larger effect on growth both during cyclical upturns and downturns (0.5–1.1) and over different horizons than tax measures and current spending increases. Weighting revenue and spending impulses by their respective multipliers, the impact of the fiscal impulse on the economy in 2015 was a negative 0.3 percent. After a decade absence in European markets, Peru issued a 1.1 billion euro bond with 11-year maturity, yielding 2.75 percent, to pre-finance the 2017 needs. In June 2015, the authorities also published for the first time the stock of contingent liabilities (as required by the fiscal rules framework adopted in 2014). oo = = illi illi Page 12 The banking sector reported strong results in 2015 (Annex III). In an effort to reduce dollarization and encourage financial intermediation in local currency, the BCRP reduced the average reserve requirement rate on local currency deposits from 20 percent to 6.5 percent from May 2013 through June 2015. Private sector credit grew robustly at 9½ percent (y(cid:173)o-y, in FX adjusted terms), also reflecting a shift of corporate borrowing towards the domestic market. Net profits increased 32 percent, the highest rate since 2008, while credit risk indicators stabilized. Direct exposure to the commodity sector remains limited, and banks are solid, profitable, and liquid. As a result of amplified de-dollarization measures introduced in late-2014, the share of FX loans in total loans dropped to 27.4 percent in January 2016 from 38.2 percent in December 2014. Expectations of further currency depreciation boosted dollar deposits in commercial banks in 2015 to about 45 percent of total deposits from 40 percent in 2014. The BCRP has been offering FX repos with maturities of 2 to 5 years to close banks’ open balance-sheet positions in U.S. dollars and support the creation of credit in local currency.