Inward and outward spillover risks are limited. Inward spillovers are more relevant . They could manifest via capital flows through financial ties to the U.S. and Canada, and to a lesser extent to Spain and Chile. Foreign banks (mainly from Spain, Canada, and the U.S.) play a big role in the financial system, but are locally funded. Inward spillovers could also take place via trade channels through commercial ties with China and the U.S. Outward spillovers are quite limited . They relate to regional trade with Chile, Colombia, and Mexico (where the integration is increasing under the “Pacific Alliance”) as well as other countries in the region (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, and Ecuador). The authorities and staff agreed that while vulnerabilities have increased, current buffers are sufficient to address a variety of possible shocks. Preserving policy flexibility by continuing with a good track record of appropriate policy responses to adverse circumstances remains instrumental in addressing future challenges. Large buffers have been accumulated, taking advantage of positive terms of trade and income windfalls, but also as a result of adequate policy actions (Box 5). Staff discussed with the authorities the external vulnerabilities and subsequent policy responses. There was broad agreement that there were two important external risks to the Peruvian economy: (i) the uncertainty related to the withdrawal of monetary stimulus in the U.S. in the short- term; and (ii) the deterioration in growth prospects in China over the medium-term. Protracted economic and financial volatility in the short term. Unexpected effects in the withdrawal of monetary stimulus in the U.S. could disrupt global financial flows and lead to sudden stops and reversal of non-FDI capital flows to Peru. As done in previous occasions, this would require the BCRP to deploy resolute actions to maintain confidence and ensure an orderly functioning of markets. As in the case of the Lehman crisis, exchange rate flexibility and the use Page 19 PPeerruu:: RRiisskk AAsssseessssmmeenntt MMaattrriixx m o h S Shock Protracted economic and financial volatility , including capital flow reversal, especially for emerging markets (triggered by prospective exit from unconventional monetary policy, lower than anticipated potential growth). Financial stress in Euro area re- emerges (triggered by stalled or incomplete delivery of national and euro area policy commitments). Direction  Relative Likelihood HHiigghh Impact HHiigghh  MMeeddiiuumm HHiigghh Sharp slowdown in China (build up of excess capacity eventually resulting in large financial losses).  MMeeddiiuumm LLooww m m u d  LLooww HHiigghh Sustained decline in commodity prices (triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming-on-stream of many global excess capacity new projects while global demand remains weak). Reversal in private sector investment (in non-renewable resources, due to continuing weak commodity prices, Peru-specific).  LLooww HHiigghh Policy Response Use the exchange rate as a shock absorber and international reserves to avoid overshooting. Ease monetary and macro-prudential policies to avoid a credit squeeze. A temporary fiscal impulse could be considered if a credit crunch affects economic activity. Use the exchange rate as a shock absorber and international reserves to avoid overshooting. Ease monetary and macro-prudential policies, temporary fiscal stimulus. Allow for higher exchange rate flexibility and use liquidity buffers, repo operations and dollar swap auctions together with an easing of monetary conditions to ensure the stability of the domestic financial sector and avoid a credit squeeze. A temporary fiscal stimulus could be considered if credit affects economic activity. Use exchange rate as a shock absorber, ease fiscal policy temporarily, and undertake structural measures to improve productivity and investment climate to reduce investment costs. A temporary fiscal expansion could ease the adjustment to lower income. The exchange rate could initially absorb some of the shock. Ease fiscal policy temporarily to smooth impact on aggregate demand and income. The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path. The relative likelihood of risks listed in the staff’s subjective assessments of the risks surrounding the baseline. The G-RAM reflects staff views on the source of risk and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities in November 2013. Policy response recommended by staff. Starting in 2015, fiscal response guided by the escape clauses stipulated in the new fiscal law. Page 20 of reserves and liquidity buffers, as well as conducting repo operations and dollar swap auctions would help ensure liquidity in the financial system. Peru is exposed to non-FDI capital flow reversals as non-residents hold a large portion of the public debt (although the amounts are small compared to the reserve buffers). In the event of a sudden capital outflow that put downward pressure on domestic credit and growth, a temporary fiscal stimulus might be appropriate within the limits of the new fiscal framework. As monetary conditions are expected to tighten in the U.S. in the next several months with the “tapering” of asset purchases by the USFR, staff was of the view that this might put upward pressure on domestic interest rates in Peru. In these conditions, staff felt that further monetary policy easing may not be appropriate as it could fuel further capital outflows. The BCRP considered instead that they will continue to manage an independent monetary policy, establishing the policy rate with the aim of achieving domestic objectives, while continuing using macro-prudential measures to manage financial risks, with a floating exchange rate. Deterioration in growth prospects in China over the medium-term could be produced from a re-balancing of demand in China towards consumption, leading to a global stagnation, a reduction in external demand, a sharp deterioration in terms of trade (due to a decline in commodity prices), and a slowdown of the Peruvian economy with deflationary risks. In this case, the exchange rate should work as a shock absorber, although there are risks given the dollarization of the financial system. Monetary and macro-prudential policies could be relaxed to ease the adjustment cost, ensure proper credit flows, and to support economic activity. If there is a more pronounced slowdown in Peru’s growth, a temporary fiscal impulse could be used (possibly under the escape clauses stipulated in the new fiscal law) to smooth the path to a lower growth trajectory.