Fundamentals continue to be strong and buffers are ample to withstand adverse external conditions. Risks are balanced, with upside risks being very conducive to growth, while downside risks are expected to be manageable. The region is cooling off. Growth has been revised downwards for many countries in the region and for some quite steeply, on the back of a less supportive external environment and supply-side constraints. Overall, regional output growth is projected to hover around 2½ percent in 2013, (with most economies now operating broadly at potential), and at about 3 percent in 2014. The outlook for Peru remains favorable in the near term despite challenging external conditions. Based on World Economic Outlook projections, China (one of Peru’s main trading partners) is projected to experience an economic deceleration in 2013 (to 7½ percent) and over the medium-term (to 7 percent). In the United States, the USFR has already announced the unwinding of its monthly purchases of securities starting in January 2014, which will lead to higher long-term interest rates in 2014. All this will result in a lower external demand and terms of trade deterioration of 3¼ and 1 percent in 2013 and 2014, respectively. Against this background, staff projects GDP to be somewhat near potential in 2013, with growth slowing to about 5 percent reflecting lower external demand and a slowdown in domestic demand. Real GDP growth should rebound to 5½ percent in 2014 on the back of a rebound in exports as large mining projects are coming on stream (Annex III). The authorities remain more confident and placed growth slightly above 5 in 2013 and 6 percent in 2014. Inflation will gradually fall to 2.3 percent in 2013 and 2 percent in 2014 (the middle of the inflation band) as supply shocks unwind and the pass-through effects of the recent exchange rate depreciation are absorbed. The external current account deficit will decline in the fourth quarter 2013 on the back of a recovery in mining and fishing exports, but will remain at about 5 percent of GDP in 2014. Short-term external and domestic risks are well balanced. The main external tail risk is significant but should be contained given large FX reserves, ample fiscal space, and a strong policy track record. Domestic upside risks Staff’s baseline projections were made under conservative assumptions, thus the pace of the domestic economic recovery could be stronger than envisaged due to a variety of factors, including: (i) the greater speed of operating at full capacity of large mining projects coming on stream; (ii) the ability to implement faster large infrastructure projects in the pipeline; (iii) the effectiveness of the investor facilitator office in handling a larger volume of cases; and (iv) the faster adoption of the authorities’ reform agenda. Also, it is possible that with relatively softer economic conditions, the recent macroeconomic stimulus could have a faster effect on the economy. The USFR announced on December 18, 2013 that it will begin reducing its purchase of assets by US$10 billion a month to US$75 billion a month starting in January 2014. Page 14 External downside risks. The main external risk comes from problems in unwinding the Proj. (Percent) South America: Selected Macro-Economic Indicators 1/ Real GDP growth Inflation, end-of-period unconventional monetary policy in the U.S. News of a possible gradual USFR “tapering” of its bond purchasing program in May 2013 destabilized many emerging economies. In Peru, capital flows slowed as the corporate sector curtailed bond issuances in international capital markets and long-term sovereign bond yields increased (Annex I). However, there was no noticeable market reaction to the USFR’s announcement in December 2013 of the first round of tapering mostly because this has already been priced in. While the risks to Peru have also been contained in part due to the availability of ample buffers, a disorderly and rapid withdrawal of the USFR’s monetary stimulus could disrupt global financial flows and lead to sudden stops and reversal of some (non-FDI) capital flows to Peru. This could put pressure on the financial system and further decelerate growth. Output gap Domestic Investment Current account balance² Primary fiscal balance Gross public debt 1/ Sub-regional aggregates calculated as PPP-GDP weighted averages averages unless otherwise indicated. Includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Uruguay. 2/ Aggregates weighted by nominal GDP at market exchange rates. (Percent of GDP) Medium-term challenges remain demanding given the uncertain global outlook. Staff revised Peru’s potential growth slightly down in the context of a lower global growth outlook, particularly lower growth in China. The lower growth potential stresses the importance of accelerating structural reforms to gain productivity and enhance the capacity of the economy to grow. Staff projects the economy growing at potential of about 5¾ percent and inflation at 2 percent over the medium term. While the current account will continue to be elevated in the short term, it is expected to diminish over the medium term on the back of projected increases in mining exports and stabilization of global growth. Overall, primary fiscal surpluses are expected to be anchored above 1 percent of GDP, while gross public debt will remain sustainable and declining to well below 20 percent of GDP, with net debt turning negative. Page 15