The recovery is off to a good start in the first quarter of 2016. Led by the jump in exports (which absorbed the excess of mining inventories accumulated in end-2015), a pick-up in private consumption, and a strong rebound in public spending (including investment), GDP grew 4.4 percent, y-o-y, in the first quarter of 2016, with final domestic demand (domestic demand excluding inventory accumulation) accelerating to 3.6 percent, y-o-y, from 3.3 percent, y-o-y, in the fourth quarter of 2015. Inflation has declined since end 2015 (3.9 percent, y-o-y, in April 2016) and inflation expectations have fallen within the BCRP’s target range at the 2017 and 2018 horizons. Credit growth remained stable (8.3 percent in April, y-o-y), investment sentiment is recovering following the first round of the presidential election on April 10, and the sol has appreciated since mid-February 2016. 100Jul-10Jul-11Jul-12Jul-13Jul-14Jul-15 Large corporations FX credit risk exposure of loans to large corporations Medium Sized Companies FX credit risk exposure of medium sized companies Corporate Sector's Dollarization and FX Credit Exposure (Share of total loans) Source: National authorities. Page 13 While short to medium-term growth prospects for many South American countries are weak, higher mining exports and some rebound in public investment should impart a strong impetus to growth in Peru. With marginal costs of producing copper in Peru well below current metal prices, large mining companies are bringing additional mining capacity on stream following the completion of expansion projects and new mines, often at the expense of cutting production elsewhere in the world. After under-executing capital spending in 2015, government investment has picked up in 2016Q1 with prospects of further expansion during the year. As business confidence continues to recover, the incipient recovery seen in several non-commodity producing sectors in 2015Q4 and 2016Q1 is expected to continue and staff projects a 3¾ percent growth in 2016 and 4.1 percent growth in 2017. By 2017, mining production is expected to double from its 2014 level, with smaller increases thereafter owing to stalling new mining investment. The authorities project slightly higher growth than the staff’s forecast for 2016 and 2017 on the assumption of stronger investment. Inflation should converge to the target band by early-2017 as the fallout from El Niño wears off, the pace of currency depreciation slows in 2016, and the full effect of past monetary tightening is felt. Peru’s medium-term fundamentals remain strong but its potential growth has been revised downwards. A one percentage-point downward revision to 3½ percent annual growth from 2018 onwards mostly reflects lower projections for private investment in the metals and hydrocarbon sectors, small increases in copper production after 2017, downward revisions to global growth, and the baseline assumption of a status quo in structural reforms. The authorities envisage the implementation of structural reforms and higher rates of growth in private non- commodity investment and public capital spending execution, resulting in potential growth estimates ranging from 4.0 to 4.5 percent. From a growth decomposition perspective, the staff forecast Cerro Verde Las Bambas and Antamina mines are expected to be the world’s second, fourth and fifth largest copper mines by 2017. Falling copper prices are seen as unlikely to cause production cuts as copper’s marginal production cost for Peru’s large mines is about US$1.2–1.5 per pound, which is still significantly below the international price of about US$2¼. And, to recover mega investments, new or amplified mines will need to produce, even at the currently reduced margins. In contrast, low oil prices are no longer enough to cover production costs in Peru and oil production has decelerated steadily. ou an f Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff calculations.1/ Based on production function approach. Capital Labor Human capital TFP Total Peru:Contributions to Potential Growth 1/ (In percent) Page 14 assumes a continuation of the relatively low total factor productivity (TFP) growth seen on average from 2011 to 2015. This is consistent with the historical relationship between commodity prices and TFP growth. As additional mining capacity feeds into higher exports over the medium term, the current account deficit is projected to approach the norm of 2 percent of GDP by 2021 under current policies (Annex II). The authorities saw the exchange rate to be currently in line with fundamentals, noting that EBA models do not fully account for future copper expansion. The staff’s baseline fiscal scenario is in line with the current authorities’ projections envisaging consolidation driven by their fiscal rule. Despite policy tightening, monetary aggregates should grow more than nominal GDP due to financial deepening. Downside risks are similar to those in last year’s assessment. The authorities and the staff agree that the main external risks to growth are: (i) structurally weak growth and disorderly rebalancing (towards services production) in China, affecting metal prices; (ii) a stronger-than- expected dollar; and (iii) sharp asset price adjustments and decompression of credit spreads (Box 2). The spillovers from the crisis in Brazil have been negligible, with exports to Brazil accounting for only 3 percent of total, and markets seeing the crisis as an idiosyncratic event and not a representation of broader problems in emerging market economies. There is some upside domestic risk to staff’s near-term forecast from further strengthening of non-primary sectors’ growth, already observed in Q1 2016, a possibly stronger pickup in sub-national investment, improvement in TFP, and the widely-perceived investor-friendly outcome of the presidential elections leading to larger-than-projected increases in confidence and investment.