Projected under-execution of public capital spending suggests a broadly neutral fiscal stance in 2016, although staff stressed the importance of delivering the budgeted spending, excluding the provisions for a stronger El Niño Under the escape clause, the 2016 deficit target was increased to 3 percent of GDP to support the economy and to accommodate provisions for a possibly stronger El Niño . As El Niño has now been downgraded, the authorities project the deficit not to exceed 2.5 percent of GDP. Staff estimates an even lower deficit (about 2¼ percent of GDP), making the fiscal stance neutral in structural terms. A projected small loss in income tax collection (following further rate cuts spread over 2015–19) is expected to be more than offset by lower current and capital spending, given lower historical execution of investment than budgeted, and the fact that this is a government transition year. Revenues could surprise on the upside if growth rises by more than projected. Staff advises the incoming government to concentrate on delivering the originally budgeted capital spending and resist surpassing the budgeted current outlays, since the economy is recovering, the external current account deficit is still high, and inflation expectations need to remain well-anchored. There was broad agreement with the current authorities that a significant fiscal impulse is not necessary given the economy’s ongoing recovery. With the output gap estimated to close around end-2017, staff supported fiscal consolidation starting next year in line with Peru’s current fiscal rules. Effective delivery of budgeted capital spending is important to support medium-term growth and social objectives. However, any expansion of the expenditure envelope for infrastructure and social reforms beyond the current framework would require the creation of additional fiscal space through revenue generation, in order to preserve healthy debt dynamics and fiscal buffers. Staff reiterated Fund advice to reach a ½ percent of GDP primary surplus in the medium term. Such a target would ’ ee tt ee “ ill nn ” cc lli q " " nnu Page 18 stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio well below 30 percent, and protect the fiscal buffers necessary to shield Peru against natural disasters, commodity price shocks, and the risk of realization of contingent liabilities totaling 8 percent of GDP (including from public-private partnerships). It would also help ensure the sustainability of pensions and Peru’s preparedness for longer-term demographic shifts. The newly elected Fiscal Council became operational in January 2016. As required by law, the Council provided a non-binding opinion on the three-year macro fiscal framework released in April 2016, which generally forms the basis for the following year’s budget and the medium-term fiscal outlook. In the council’s view, the authorities’ medium-term estimates of growth in Peru are somewhat optimistic, especially given the difficult external environment. They recommended bigger adjustments in expenditures than projected to ensure fiscal sustainability and the credibility of the fiscal rule. Peru’s tax burden is low and policy efforts should focus on improving revenue collection while avoiding tax rate cuts. Peru has come a long way in improving the efficiency of the tax system but further efforts are needed to reap the full benefits from these reforms. Peru’s tax-to-GDP ratio, slightly above 15 percent, remains below the regional average, and is even lower than this average if commodity-related income is stripped out. Staff discussed a number of areas where improvements can be achieved, based on recommendations from the substantial technical assistance provided in this area, and advised against further reductions in tax rates (Annex IV). The See IMF Country Reports No. 14/21 and 22 for analysis. In this connection, it will also be important to follow closely the evolution of private savings as a recent law allows retirees to cash in 90 percent of their private pension funds instead of receiving the equivalent monthly pension for the rest of their lives. A fast depletion of these savings poses a social contingent liability to the public accounts. PS ona ub ona udge an ge t, up pe f …… Le f pend ng ba an ge t f non nan pub pend ng f ubna ona go and f f t non nan pub f age and pen pend ng anno xc eed no na f po eb eb ng pe f … eb t/ age f ea enue < pe … pe anen pend ng equ ne pe anen enue ou na bo ng up bud und pu up ¼ pu W nu cc dd bud ’ nn ee nnu bud du pend … pend ng t t be age enue ou f ou ea Page 19 tax agency (SUNAT) agreed with the proposals, and was receptive to the recommendations in the area of international taxation. SUNAT has its own action plan to raise collections that will need to be supported through the introduction of complementary structural reforms, which would help formalize the economy. While not following through with revenue increases if boosting investment spending further could still keep debt-to-GDP ratios below the fiscal rule’s 30 percent (Figure 8), this strategy would carry reputational risks and, if followed, would have to provide a credible medium-term anchor to stabilize debt dynamics. Higher execution rates and efficiency of budgeted public investment are needed to support stronger economic activity. Despite a steady increase in execution rates over the past five years, reaching a record-high 82 percent in 2015, they still average 75 percent. Thus, it would be crucial to streamline a number of authorizations and permits, while still safeguarding the appropriate use of resources. While the public investment management (PIM) system compares favorably with those in neighbor countries and other peers, further strengthening is needed especially since investment efficiency also needs to be improved (Table 6, Box 4). Implementation capacity needs further improvement, especially at the sub-national level, including for project selection and quality assurance for large projects under the System of National Public Investment to ensure adequate returns from public investment, while assessment of small projects could also be centralized. Efforts should commence to prepare the new investment pipeline, so it is ready once current mega- projects (e.g., metro line, gas pipeline, highway, and airport) come to fruition. While investment could be increased through public private partnerships, as has been done in the past, a system of risk evaluation under the current framework should be enhanced to insure against contingent liabilities to the state. See the accompanying Selected Issues Paper , Chapter 4, and IMF Country Reports No. 15/133 and 134. ub bud Page 20 Summary of Recommendations