The economy continues to be one of the most dynamic in the region and is still operating somewhat near potential. However, economic growth decelerated and the current account deficit widened in 2013 to a large extent as a result of deteriorated external conditions. Concerns about the unwinding of unconventional monetary policy in the U.S. and weaker metal prices contributed to a deterioration of confidence, a weaker domestic demand, and increased uncertainty. Latin America: Real GDP Growth (Percent) Peru has been one of the best macroeconomic performers in Latin America over the past decade . Peru continued to be a leader in high growth and low inflation in the region, which was achieved through a prudent macroeconomic policy implementation, a far-reaching structural reform agenda and taking advantage of the benign external environment. Not least due to these factors, the economy came out virtually unscathed from the ‒ 09 global financial crisis, with growth rebounding to 8¾ percent in 2010 and then being sustained at high levels in 2011–12. Accommodative monetary and fiscal policies played an instrumental role in supporting the recovery, and were smoothly unwound as growth accelerated and the negative output gap was closed. However, the growth momentum slowed in 2013 mostly due to adverse external conditions and a decline in domestic confidence. Following an expansion of 6 ⅓ percent in 2012, economic growth slowed to about 5 percent in the first three quarters of 2013 (yoy) due to a moderation in private investment and a decline in exports. Net exports had a negative impact on growth in Peru as well as in the majority of the other LA6 countries. After the fall in metal prices, uncertainty increased; and domestic confidence levels dropped, reflecting also some concerns about the VEN Upper bound DOM VEN PAN PAN ARG PRY PAN PAN SLV DOM PRY ECU MEX Lower bound PAN MEX SLV VEN PRY VEN Source: WEO. Latin America: Inflation (Percent) DOM DOM Upper bound VEN VEN VEN VEN VEN VEN VEN VEN PAN PAN PER PER ECU DOM Lower bound CHL COL PER SLV Source: WEO. Peru: Output Gap (Percent of potential output) Sources: BCRP; and Fund staff estimates. The average growth rate of the Peruvian economy was 6.2 percent in the period 2002-13, the second highest growth rate in Latin America, whereas the average inflation rate was 2.8 percent in the same period, the lowest in Latin America. The LA6 countries refers to the six Latin American countries that have adopted a formal inflation targeting framework and have relatively more developed domestic capital markets. The list includes: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay. Page 7 direction of domestic policies. The turbulence in capital markets generated by the U.S. Federal Reserve’s (USFR) announcement of a possible “tapering” of asset purchases added to the existing uncertainty (Annex I). On the supply side, the moderation of growth in 2013 reflected a slowdown in the mining, fishing and construction sectors. With domestic confidence indicators slowly improving starting in the third quarter of 2013, the recovery will likely be gradual. Despite the economic deceleration, the economy continues to operate somewhat near potential (although there is a very small negative output gap), and real GDP growth is expected to grow at around 5 percent in 2013, underpinned by a recovery of exports and investment in the last quarter of the year as well as improvements in confidence as temporary supply shocks are being reversed (i.e., increasing fishing quotas and fixing production problems in a large mine). The unemployment rate fell to historical lows. The unemployment rate declined from 9½ in 2004 to 6¾ percent in 2012 as labor participation rose (from 71 to 74 percent) and the growth of working-age population remained stable. The overall unemployment rate declined further to ⅓ percent in November 2013 as employment remained buoyant. The long-term decline in the unemployment rate can be partly explained by the high growth in the economy and the absorption by the formal sector of underemployed workers from the informal sector. While real wages have increased, they have moved in tandem with productivity, and there are no signs of overheating in the labor market. Peru: Unemployment Participation rate (RHS) Unemployment rate Source: INEI. (Percent) Est. Inflation picked up in 2013 mostly due to supply shocks and the pass-through effect of the exchange rate. Inflation was outside the BCRP target band (1 ‒ 3 percent) during the first half of 2012 but declined to 2¾ percent (yoy) by year-end as supply shocks unwound. Inflation increased again to slightly over 3 percent (yoy) in some months in the second half of 2013 (outside the target band) due to increases in food and fuel prices, and some “pass- through" from the exchange rate depreciation. Non- food/non-fuel inflation has remained within the target band but has increased in the last several months. However, inflation is expected to remain close to the upper limit of the target band of 3 percent by end-2013, and move gradually toward the middle range of the band Target band Headline inflation Non-food/non-fuel inflation Source: BCRP, and Fund staff calculations. Peru: Inflation Nov-08 (Percent, yoy) Nov-10 Nov-11 Nov-12 Nov-09 Nov-13 The “pass-through” coefficient is relatively low in Peru. A VAR analysis with commodity prices, output gap, exchange rate, and inflation as endogenous variables shows that a one percent depreciation of the nuevo sol against the U.S. dollar is likely to raise inflation by about 0.1 percentage points over a year (cumulative impact). Thus far, the exchange rate has depreciated by 8½ percent in 2013, which could generate an inflationary pass-through effect of about ⅞ of a percent over a year. Page 8 in 2014 in line with the stabilization of oil prices. Inflation expectations remain well-anchored over the medium term. Monetary policy was relaxed and macro-prudential measures were unwound recently on evidence of a continued slowdown in economic activity. After keeping the policy rate at 4¼ percent for 2½ years, the BCRP cut the rate by ¼ of a point to 4 percent in November 2013, citing slower domestic and global growth, and declining inflationary expectations. The cut was intended to be preventive and to facilitate the recovery of the economy. Over the last few years, the BCRP raised reserve requirements (RR) several times to mitigate the impact of the surge in capital flows on credit expansion and the potential adverse effect on asset quality in the financial system. Consequently, real private credit growth slowed from about 20 percent in early 2011 to about 11 percent in mid-2013. During the first half of 2013, the BCRP established a ceiling on average reserve requirements on domestic liabilities and announced higher reserve requirements on foreign currency liabilities if dollar credit expanded above established limits. More recently, however, the BCRP began unwinding macro-prudential measures to ease liquidity flows following the USFR’s announcement in May 2013 of potential “tapering” of its unconventional monetary policy. Peru: Monetary Aggregates (Percent) Real private credit growth (yoy) Real broad money growth (yoy) Policy rate, RHS Sep-10 Jan-11 May-11 Sep-11 Jan-12 May-12 Sep-12 Jan-13 May-13 Sep-13 Source: BCRP. Peru: Reserve Requirements (In percent) Dollar liabilities, RHS Nuevo sol liabilities Sep-10 Mar-11 Sources: BCRP. Sep-11 Mar-12 Sep-12 Mar-13 Sep-13 Exchange rate policy has been more flexible over the past year, although the BCRP has intervened to limit excessive volatility in the foreign exchange (FX) market. In response to large capital inflows in 2012, the nuevo sol appreciated by 8½ percent in real effective terms, while the BCRP accumulated about US$15 billion FX reserves leading to a build-up of net international reserves (NIR) to US$64 billion (about 32 percent of GDP). Most of last year’s FX purchase The measure was intended to moderate the growth of dollar loans, in particular, mortgage and vehicle loans, the central bank increased the RR on dollar liabilities by 75 and 150 bps if the balance of dollar mortgage loans and car loans expanded by either: (i) more than 10 and 20 percent respectively with respect to February 2013; or (ii) 20 and 25 percent of the regulatory capital at end-2012 respectively, whichever amount is higher; while at the same time establishing a ceiling for RR on liabilities in nuevos soles. In particular, the BCRP took the following measures: (i) reduced marginal RR on nuevo sol deposits from 30 percent in July to 15 percent in December 2013; (ii) reduced marginal RR on dollar deposits from 55 percent in July to 50 percent in August; and (iii) reduced average RR on local currency liabilities from 20 percent in June to 15 percent in December, and established a 45 percent ceiling on foreign currency liabilities in August 2013. Page 9 interventions were sterilized through issuance of the BCRP securities, Treasury deposits, and raising reserve requirements. Staff estimated that the cost of such sterilization was about ½ percent of GDP. The BCRP continued with FX purchases through mid-April of 2013 to avoid undue volatility, but since then sold FX to limit the volatility resulting from financial market turmoil associated with the USFR announcement in May 2013. In these circumstances, the nuevo sol depreciated about 8½ percent, year-to-date, in real terms in the first ten months of 2013. The exchange rate remains in line with fundamentals (Annex II). For 2013, the BCRP is expected to accumulate around US$3 billion in FX reserves, increasing NIR to US$67 billion; most of the intervention is expected to be sterilized through Treasury deposits, reducing the need for other (more costly) forms of sterilization. (In percent of GDP) Peru: Fiscal Indicators GG Real primary spending growth (yoy, percent change) Impulse Overall balance Fiscal policy became more supportive of the economy in 2013 given the challenging external environment. The fiscal position strengthened considerably in 2012. The non-financial public sector (NFPS) overall surplus increased to 2¼ percent of GDP in 2012 (more than double the budgeted amount), mainly due to stronger-than- expected revenues and slower implementation of public investment plans despite efforts to accelerate it. In 2013, the fiscal surplus is estimated to have fallen to ½ percent of GDP due to: (i) budgeted allowances to increase primary spending to achieve social inclusion goals and higher wages following the civil service reform; (ii) efforts to increase capital spending; and (iii) falling mining-related revenues as metal prices weakened. Public debt is sustainable and at below 20 percent of GDP (expected for 2013) remains one of the lowest in the region (see debt sustainability analysis, Tables 10–11). Total financial assets of the NFPS are expected to reach over 15 percent of GDP by end-2013 (of which about 4 percent of GDP belongs in the fiscal stabilization fund). Sources: MEF; and Fund staff estimates. Diminishing surplus The authorities presented their revised multi-year macroeconomic framework in August 2013, lowering the expected surplus in 2013 from the budgeted 1 percent of GDP to around ⅓ percent reflecting mainly higher expenditures due to ongoing public sector reforms and projected full execution of investment spending and to a lesser extent lower tax revenues from natural resources. Staff expects a marginally higher surplus on account of a slightly lower execution rate of capital expenditures. Fiscal impulse Staff estimates a NFPS structural fiscal surplus (i.e., correcting for the business cycle and high metal prices) above ½ percent of GDP in 2013, resulting in a fiscal impulse of about 1 percent of GDP. In the absence of this fiscal easing in 2013, the economic slowdown would have been more pronounced. Acceleration of investment The government announced two initiatives between May and June 2013 to enhance public investment performance and improve the overall investment climate (Box 1). In particular, a special team was appointed within the Ministry of Economy and Finance Page 10 (MEF) to identify and reduce bottlenecks and speed up investment projects. Over 50 projects accounting for around 10 percent of GDP have been identified and are under close monitoring to ensure completion. A committee responsible for launching public private partnerships (PPP) was also appointed; and a new PPP law will broaden the scope and modalities under which these partnerships could be established. Support for sub-national governments In September 2013, support measures were approved for local and regional governments to prevent interruptions in the ongoing projects affected by the reduction in income from lower mining taxation earmarked to the regions. The assistance is to be delivered in the form of transfers within the current budgeted expenditure envelope; and by offering a credit line. The latter mechanism is available to all local governments that are able to repay debt with future resource income. New legislation strengthening the fiscal framework was recently approved. The law was approved by Congress in October 2013 and will be applied to the 2015 budget. The previous framework (in place since 1999) served Peru well in reducing the public debt to GDP ratio but did not prevent fiscal policy from being pro-cyclical, nor steer efficiently the management of nonrenewable resources in the context of capacity constraints, nor provide for a balancing of savings of these revenues against significant social needs and infrastructure gaps. The new framework: (i) aims at introducing a counter-cyclical component to budget formulation; (ii) strengthens accountability by introducing a fiscal council; and (iii) delineates better the relationship and fiscal practices between the national and sub-national levels. The design of the new fiscal framework followed the recommendations of the commission of experts appointed in 2012 (Box 2), and involved the participation of the BCRP, technical assistance from the Fund, and independent experts to provide more transparency and commitment to the process. Peru: Balance of Payments (In percent of GDP) The external position has deteriorated mostly due to weak export performance and higher interest rates abroad. During the first nine months of 2013, the terms of trade deteriorated by 3½ percent (yoy) and export volumes fell 3¾ percent (yoy) while import volume growth remained strong at about 6¾ percent (yoy), leading to a current account deficit of 5½ percent of GDP. However, thus far, the current account deficit has been easily financed by private capital inflows amounting to some 8 percent of GDP (mainly FDI). While demand for external financing fell following the USFR announcements in May 2013, international bond issuance by Peruvian firms already had reached historic highs at about US$6½ billion (3 percent of GDP) in the first half of 2013, compared to US$3½ billion during 2012. Non-residents have also maintained their holding of sovereign bonds at around 57 percent of the total. At the same time, there were large net short- Financial Account Public sector (net) Private sector (net) Foreign direct investment Other private (net) Overall Balance Sources: BCRP; and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Includes errors and omissions. Proj. Current Account Exports Imports Other Page 11 term capital outflows of about 3½ percent of GDP registered in the second and third quarters as Peruvian banks used their liquidity position to reduce short-term external liabilities (Annex I). Despite the deterioration of the external position, the risks to the stability of the external sector remained contained. Both the External Balance Approach (EBA) and the traditional Consultative Group on Exchange Rate (CGER) methodologies indicate that the real effective exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals, although some methodologies indicate a slight overvaluation (Annex II). The level and composition of Peru’s international investment position (IIP) has improved over the last decade as the negative IIP halved since the early 2000s and the composition of foreign liabilities shifted significantly into non-debt items. Also, net international reserves remain comfortable with respect to various metrics. Peru does not maintain exchange restrictions or multiple currency practices subject to Fund jurisdiction (under Article VIII, Section 2 (a) or 3), and their macro-prudential measures aim at enhancing financial stability, and do not constitute capital flow management measures as the Peru has an open capital account. The financial sector remains solid and healthy. Banks remain in a better financial position than their non-bank counterparts. Banks They account for almost 90 percent of the assets of the financial system. With capital to risk-weighted asset ratios (CAR) of 14 percent, non-performing loan ratios (NPL) of 2 percent, and return-on-equity (ROE) of 21½ percent as of September 2013, the banking system remains well-capitalized, sound, and profitable. But with high dollarization of over 45 percent, the banking system remains vulnerable to exchange rate fluctuations. To moderate risks, the BCRP and the superintendency of banks (SBS) actively employed macro-prudential policies. To limit the expansion of loans in U.S. dollars and encourage their substitution by credits in nuevos soles, BCRP increased the RR on dollar liabilities during the first four months of 2013. Non-banks They represent over 10 percent of the assets of the financial system. While non- banks’ exposure to FX risk is limited due to their low level of dollarization of about 10 percent, their financial health has worsened recently, reflecting softer economic conditions (and despite continued strengthening of lending standards) as their portfolios are highly concentrated in consumer and small- and micro-enterprise loans. NPLs and profitability and provisioning indicators have all been deteriorating lately. Nonetheless, they remained well-capitalized with CARs ranging from 13½ for Cajas Rurales to about 18 for Empresas Financieras Main non-bank deposit-taking financial institutions include Empresas Financieras Cajas Municipales de Ahorro y Credito , and Cajas Rurales de Ahorro y Credito , with financial assets of about S/. 29 billion (about 11 percent of total financial assets of deposit-taking institutions or about 5 percent of GDP) as of mid-2013. Page 12 Peru: Financial Soundness Indicators (In percent, end of period) NPL to Deposit Ratio Provisioning to NPL Return on Equity Capital Asset Ratio Total Banks Empresas Financiera Cajas Municipales Cajas Rurales Source: SBS. NPL stands for non-performing loans. Peru’s sovereign credit rating was recently upgraded by two credit rating agencies. Peru has had an investment grade rating since 2008/09. Standard & Poor’s (S&P) raised the country’s long-term sovereign foreign currency rating to BBB+ (from BBB), and long-term sovereign local currency rating to A- (from BBB+) in August 2013, whereas Fitch did the same in October 2013 (the best rating in Latin America after Chile). Both credit rating agencies said the outlook for the rating was now stable. The reasons for an upgrade included continued robust growth, establishment of a fiscal stabilization fund and buildup of international reserves, as well as improved fundamentals. In the meantime, Moody’s maintained the Baa2 rating (with a positive outlook). The next electoral cycle is approaching against the background of social tensions Regional and municipal elections are set for October 2014, and presidential and legislative elections are scheduled for April 2016. In the meantime, social conflicts have increased over the years, with about 150 disputes earlier in the year involving extractive industries on the grounds of environmental destruction and inadequate compensation to local communities. While many large private mining projects are implemented as scheduled, the US$5 billion Minas Conga copper and gold project in northern Peru, has been stalled due to social discontent, and is expected to be reconsidered by the company in 2015. Previous Article IV consultations. There has been broad agreement between the authorities and staff on policy issues in previous Article IV consultations. More recently, the authorities increased exchange rate flexibility when confronted with external shocks, and approved a new fiscal framework (to become effective in 2015), which eliminates pro-cyclicality and is based on the structural fiscal position. These two policy actions were in line with staff recommendations in recent Article IV consultations. Moreover, the authorities have embraced transparency in the discussions by publishing the concluding statement immediately at the end of the mission so that all stake holders are aware of the discussions, including staff’s views and policy recommendations. Page 13