From a macroeconomic perspective, fiscal policy has focused in recent years on strengthening resilience and building a fiscal buffer . Sustained primary surpluses and rapid GDP growth caused general government debt to continue to moderate, reaching 39 percent of GDP at end(cid:173)2013. In addition, the quality of public debt in terms of maturity, repricing risk, and currency composition has improved (Appendix 4). In 2013, the consolidated general government account was close to balance—with a deficit of less than 1½ percent of GDP at the national government (NG) level, well below the 2 percent target—on higher revenue collection coupled with slow budget execution. The authorities are targeting a NG deficit of 2 percent of GDP through 2016 (consistent with a general government deficit of about 1 percent of GDP). For 2014, this includes 1 percentage point of GDP in post-disaster reconstruction spending, of which one(cid:173)fifth is financed by reallocating other expenditure. Conditioned on adopting appropriately restrictive monetary and financial policies, raising the fiscal deficit from 2014 is warranted to accommodate reconstruction and other priority spending . Spending bottlenecks kept fiscal policy countercyclical in 2013, partly mitigating the accommodative monetary conditions. Scope to make room for reconstruction spending solely by reallocating other expenditure is constrained by the low fiscal spending ratio Banks are expected to maintain a capital adequacy ratio of 10 percent after adjusting for the stress test results, with universal and commercial banks required to also maintain a common equity Tier 1 ratio of at least 6 percent. Page 15 that, in turn, reflects low tax collections and previous spending bottlenecks, and the need to protect priority social spending. Raising the NG deficit from below 1½ percent of GDP in 2013 to 2 percent of GDP in 2014, as budgeted, would, however, imply a stimulus on the order of 1 percent of potential GDP at a time when the output gap is already positive, and should therefore be countered with tighter monetary and credit conditions. Keeping the NG deficit unchanged thereafter is seen as broadly neutral and would continue to moderate the public debt ratio to below 30 percent of GDP by 2019. Significant additional revenue is required to finance large recurrent priority spending needs To achieve the authorities’ ambitious—though appropriate—planned increase in infrastructure and social spending (see below) and offset revenue loss from possible future reductions in statutory tax rates, adjustments in tax brackets, and dissipation of cyclical revenue, a significant increase in structural revenue is needed. Mobilizing the needed revenue should rely primarily on broadening the tax base by reducing corporate income tax holidays, narrowing the VAT gap, and adopting a new mining strategy, supported by further improvements in tax administration. If adopted, the identified tax policy measures could yield 2‒3 percentage points of GDP, sufficient to finance the envisaged doubling in infrastructure spending. The trend decline in public debt demonstrates the government’s commitment to fiscal prudence as it continues to generate fiscal space in support of policy priorities . Favorable domestic funding conditions and achieving investment grade lowered government-borrowing costs, allowing fiscal resources to be redirected to projects supportive of inclusive growth. Slow absorption of funds by some government agencies has held back spending in recent years. However, the increased fiscal space this generated provides the government flexibility to increase spending in 2014. The government is also pursuing various expenditure management reforms to sustain the higher momentum in government spending. Revenues have been boosted by enhanced tax administration, which will ensure that positive developments in government finances will continue . To promote and sustain macroeconomic stability, spending must be supported by adequate revenue. Hence, continuing to improve tax administration through various revenue enhancement measures and programs, Spending on conditional cash transfers is expected to increase by 0.1 percentage points of GDP in 2014. Of the 1¾ percentage point increase in the revenue ratio during 2010−13, ⅓ percentage points reflects higher “sin tax” excise rates on alcohol and tobacco, with about ¾ percentage points attributed to improved tax administration and compliance. Although the Philippines is estimated to possess the 5 largest mineral deposits in the world, valued around US$1.4 trillion, mining accounts for only 1 percent of GDP. This reflects a moratorium on new projects during 2011 to mid(cid:173)2013 and lingering uncertainty regarding the new mining tax regime. To realize mining’s potential contribution to GDP and public finances, a new mining strategy is needed, based on good stewardship of resources and more equitable tax arrangements. Page 16 while moving forward with rationalizing fiscal incentives, developing the fiscal regime for the mining industry and fully implementing the 2012 sin tax law are priorities.