Economic growth is expected to pick up slightly in 2015, with credit growth and inflation remaining moderate and the current account surplus rising . Real GDP is projected to grow by 6.2 percent in 2015 as lower commodity prices lift household consumption and improved budget execution raises public spending. Consistent with projected investment growth, credit is expected to grow at about 15 percent (or about 2 percentage points of GDP) in 2015, in line with what appears to be a sustainable pace of financial deepening, although this warrants close monitoring on an ongoing basis. Lower oil prices, partly offset by somewhat higher food prices deriving from El Niño conditions, should keep inflation near the bottom of the BSP’s target band. The current account surplus is expected to widen to 5.0 percent of GDP in 2015 due to lower oil prices and continued inflows from Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) and remittances. Over the medium term, economic growth is projected at 6.5 percent, in line with potential growth (Box 1). Public and private investments are projected to lead the growth, as increased public infrastructure spending and implementation of PPP projects should crowd in private investment. Inflation is expected to increase as oil prices rise but is projected to remain within the BSP’s target range. The pickup of public and private investments, together with a trend real effective appreciation of the peso, is expected to narrow the current account surplus and relieve Page 12 pressure on domestic capacity constraints going forward, with higher U.S. interest rates tending to tighten lending conditions consistent with moderate credit growth going forward. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside (Appendix 1). An upside risk is a stronger lift to demand from lower oil prices. On the downside, tighter global financial conditions and a surge in financial volatility, amplified by low market liquidity, could lead to sharp capital outflows and tightening of domestic financing conditions, with significant macrofinancial spillovers on the economy, but the Philippines’ strong macroeconomic fundamentals should provide a cushion (Box 2). Continued weak budget execution could slow down needed improvements in public infrastructure, while the risk of a larger than budgeted deficit due to election spending is limited given the government’s strong commitment. Finally, there is a downside risk associated with severe El Niño conditions, leading to a poor harvest regionally and a rapid run-up in food prices. This could induce inflation to rise sharply and breach the target band, affecting the poor quite severely. The Philippine authorities are well equipped to respond as needed with suitable policies should any of these risk scenarios materialize, particularly given the strong fundamentals, ample policy space, and strong foreign reserve position.