(As of July 31, 2016) Membership Status : Joined December 27, 1945; Article VIII General Resources Account Quota IMF holdings of currency (holdings rate) Reserve tranche position Lending to the Fund New Arrangements to Borrow SDR Department Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans Latest Financial Arrangements Percent of Quota Percent of Allocation Type EFF Approval Expiration Approved Drawn Projected Payments to Fund Exchange Arrangement The de jure exchange rate arrangement is classified as free floating , while the de facto exchange arrangement is classified as floating . The value of the Philippine peso is determined in the interbank foreign exchange market; the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) intervenes in the spot and forward markets in order to smooth undue short-term volatility in the exchange rate and to strategically build forex reserves. The Philippines maintains an exchange system that is free of multiple currency Page 63 practices and restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions except for exchange restrictions maintained for security reasons and notified to the Fund pursuant to Executive Board Decision 144-(52/51). Article IV Consultation Philippines is on the standard 12˗month cycle. The 2015 Article IV consultation was held on August 26, 2015 (IMF Country Report No. 15/246). Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and Report on Standards and Codes (ROSC) Participation MCM : A FSAP was conducted during the fourth quarter of 2001; FSAP missions visited Manila in October and November–December 2001. The final version of the report was discussed with the authorities in June 2002. The associated FSSA was discussed by the Executive Board together with the Article IV staff report in September 2002. The FSAP report was published in March 2004. The FSAP update mission took place in November 2009, and the report was published in April 2010. FAD : Discussions on fiscal transparency were held in Manila in September 2001. The ROSC report was discussed by the Executive Board in September 2002 together with the Article IV staff report, and published in October 2002. The update to the ROSC report was published in June 2004. In addition, a pilot Fiscal Transparency Evaluation mission took place in February 2014 and the report was published in June 2015 (IMF Country Report No. 15/156). STA : A ROSC Data Module mission was conducted in September 2003, and the report was published in August 2004. Technical Assistance The Philippines is an intensive user of IMF technical assistance (TA), particularly in fiscal and financial areas. Improvements have been made in all areas, but the translation of recommendations into law has lagged. FAD has concluded a five-year TA project financed by the Millennium Challenge Corporation to improve the basic functions of tax administration by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) (2011−16), in line with recommendations made by FAD TA missions in 2005, 2008, and 2009. The project provides for a resident tax administration advisor and an extensive program of short-term expert visits. In the extended project (2013–16) the main priorities were intended to “institutionalize” the new procedures implemented in the arrears management and VAT audit pilots, enhance the compliance improvement strategy (CIS), integrate redesigned business process with eTIS, and introduce further institutional, governance and management strengthening to help ensure sustainability of the reforms. Particular progress has been made in VAT audit, arrears management and compliance improvement strategy. In addition, TADAT assessment took place in December 2015 to provide a picture of the current state of operations within the BIR against international good practice in tax administration. A tax policy TA in April 2016 made a comprehensive proposal of tax reform in the ASEAN environment. FAD’s past TA missions on tax policy provided advice that Page 64 constituted the basis for the reform of excises on tobacco and alcoholic beverages implemented in early 2013 and publication of tax expenditures to improve transparency and accountability of tax incentives supported by the Tax Investment and Management Act (TIMTA). TA on public financial management (PFM) seeks to establish effective and efficient budget and treasury management. In addition to the Fiscal Transparency Evaluation, TA on medium-term budget framework, government cash management, formulation and drafting of the PFM bill, and contingent liabilities management took place in 2014−2016. In line with past PFM advice, the government introduced a Treasury Single Account and is reviewing its cash management and planning. It now produces a midyear report on the macroeconomic and fiscal outlook and midyear budget execution. In addition, the revenue and expenditure from off budget accounts are now presented in budget documents. Moreover, the PFM bill has been submitted to the Congress. On the legal area, LEG provided TA to the Philippines on Central Banking Legislation in 2012, and provided advice on the amendment to the Philippines’ Central Banking Law in November 2013. In April 2013, LEG also provided TA on Implementation of Targeted Financial Sanctions Obligations under UN Security Council Resolutions Relation to Terrorism Financing. MCM provided a series of TA in 2010−15 on developing and implementing a risk-focused supervisory approach in keeping with the Basel Core Principles and other key international supervisory practices and on timely identification and resolution of problem institutions. Among the long list achievements are: improved quality and timeliness of supervisory actions and related supervisory reports; issuance of new regulations covering securities investments and stress testing; and selected areas of Basel III implementation including liquidity coverage ratio and leverage ratios. MCM TA efforts were also devoted to the implementation of the supervisory core training initiative. The in-house training initiative is now self-sustaining, with 21 courses rolled out, and the quality of the supervisory reports has shown considerable improvement. Finally, two missions in 2015 and 2016 assessed the institutional needs for strengthening the framework for financial stability analysis and provided a road map for a comprehensive financial stability framework, focusing on the institutional setup, monitoring and tools, and crisis management. In addition, three MCM TA missions on liquidity management and forecasting and on the implementation of an interest rate corridor took place 2013−2015 to strengthen monetary policy operational framework. The BSP has made progress on developing its liquidity forecast capacity, and the new interest rate corridor system was introduced in June 2016. Other areas of MCM TA included advice on financial market development. A workshop on the deepening of government securities market was held in 2014, and TA on exchange consolidation and securities regulation was delivered in 2015. A series of STA TA missions on Government Finance Statistics took place in 2012 and 2013 to assist the authorities in compiling and disseminating government finance statistics in accordance with Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001. Additionally, during 2012 STA provided TA to the Philippines in the areas of Balance of Payments Statistics, Data Dissemination Standards, National Accounts, and producer and consumer price indices. In late 2014, a TA mission worked with the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) on source data and compilation procedures of quarterly accounts, and the implementation of the new System of National Accounts 2008 (2008 SNA). Page 65 Two MFS missions were fielded in August 2014 and September 2015 to advance the work on the introduction of the standardized report form (SRF) for other financial corporations (OFCs). The authorities have submitted test SRF-data for several types of OFCs, which have been reviewed by STA. It is expected that the SRF will be introduced by end-2016. Resident Representative A Resident Representative has been stationed in Manila since January 1984. Mr. Shanaka Jayanath Peiris has been the Resident Representative for the Philippines since September 2012. Page 66