Against unsettled global capital markets, the Philippines delivered another impressive macroeconomic performance in 2013 . Despite volatile capital flows, slowing activity in the region and a series of calamitous natural disasters, growth accelerated last year, supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and growing remittances. Potential growth has also risen, led by improved productivity and faster capital accumulation. Recognizing the progress made in strengthening external and fiscal positions and adopting sound policy frameworks, the three major rating agencies elevated the Philippines to investment grade in 2013, with a further upgrade by one agency in early 2014. Nonetheless, persistent weaknesses in the business climate remain a risk to sustained growth and kept unemployment elevated . Structural rigidities may now be imposing speed limits on non-inflationary GDP growth despite progress in improving competitiveness rankings and public sector transparency. In addition, job creation has not kept pace with the rapidly growing labor force, and structural under- and unemployment rates remain relatively high. As a result, poverty remains widespread and a large share of the population is vulnerable to falling into poverty as a result of natural disasters and other shocks (Box 1). Weak labor market and welfare prospects are continuing to sustain outward migration and inward remittances. In addition, foreign ownership restrictions and a weak investment climate combined with ample liquidity is supporting demand for financial assets and real estate and construction activities. Strong popular support provides space for the government to accelerate its economic and social reform agenda . More than half way into his single six-year term, President Aquino continues to enjoy high approval ratings in part reflecting his administration’s pledge to improve governance and make growth more inclusive. The historic peace agreement between the government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), signed in March 2014 and the corresponding legislation is awaiting ratification by Congress, offers the prospect of significantly improving the welfare of the people of Mindanao, one of the poorest regions of the country. In response to typhoon Yolanda, the government has committed to “build back better” to strengthen resilience to natural disasters. Nonetheless, the government has acknowledged that more needs to be done in the critical areas of poverty reduction, implementing vital infrastructure, reducing business costs and executing agrarian reform, and has pledged to deliver rapid and palpable results. The next presidential election is scheduled for mid(cid:173)2016. In concluding the 2013 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors commended the authorities’ prudent policies that delivered strong macroeconomic outcomes and set the stage for favorable growth prospects . However, they also noted potential risks from global uncertainties, volatile capital inflows, bank’s increasing exposure to some sectors, and the possibility Philippine Development Plan 2011−16: Midterm Update Page 6 of stretched asset prices. They therefore stressed the importance of continued prudent macroeconomic policies while stepping up reforms to bolster resilience, sustain high growth, and reduce poverty. Over the past year, the authorities have continued to make progress on several of these fronts, tailored to reflect the change in global capital flows.