Fiscal policy should focus on supporting infrastructure investment and inclusive growth . Returning to the authorities’ medium-term deficit target of 2 percent of GDP by increasing public infrastructure spending and implementing much-needed post-typhoon reconstruction and social spending in the 2015 budget is appropriate given the needs in these priority areas and on the back of expenditure under-execution in 2014. It is also consistent with debt sustainability as the 2 percent of GDP deficit target would steadily reduce the general government debt-to-GDP ratio over the medium term to below 30 percent (from 36.4 percent of GDP in 2014). Staff’s fiscal projections are in line with this, but less ambitious than the authorities’ in 2015 in light of limitations in current execution capacity. Going forward, the authorities plan to increase infrastructure spending from 3 percent of GDP in 2014 to 5 percent by 2016, including by facilitating PPP projects. Staff projects public capital expenditure at 3.8 percent of GDP in 2016, while PPP projects could amount to 1 percent of GDP, bringing overall infrastructure investment to 4.8 percent of GDP in that year. An increase in public investment, combined with improvement in efficiency, would contribute to higher economic growth in the medium term (Box 3). Public expenditure management needs to be strengthened further . Sustained efforts to improve the investment selection and implementation processes will be required. Moreover, a better Page 14 system for projecting and tracking spending is needed to strengthen budgeting and cash management. Staff urges the passage of the Public Financial Management (PFM) bill to further strengthen the overall PFM governance framework and supports the authorities’ continuing effort to improve PFM, as acknowledged in the Fund’s Fiscal Transparency Evaluation (FTE). Regarding the PPPs, amendments to the Build Operate Transfer (BOT) law and Right of Way Bill will institutionalize the progress that has been made so far and further strengthen the legal framework, which will in turn help ensure robust implementation of projects. There is limited scope to cut other expenditure to support budgetary spending on infrastructure and social needs . At less than 20 percent of GDP for the general government, total expenditure is lower than the average for the ASEAN 5 and much lower than the emerging and developing countries average. Moreover, the Philippines does not have energy subsidies, the public wage bill is small, and key public services like tax collections and customs enforcement are facing large manpower shortages. The authorities’ initiative to strengthen revenue collections is welcome . Additional revenue will be needed to support higher spending on infrastructure and social needs. Congress has already passed the Tax Incentives Management and Transparency Act (TIMTA), which would provide for regular reviews of tax incentives and make them more transparent. Staff supports ongoing tax administration reform that has improved arrears collection, VAT compliance including through targeted audits, and filing rates for large taxpayers. These gains should more than offset the negative effects from the lower oil prices and slightly increase the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio in 2015. Staff strongly encourages a tax reform package that is net revenue enhancing . This would entail, for instance, rationalization of tax incentives, reducing certain VAT exemptions, and increases in fuel excises, that more than compensate for any revenue-losing measures in the corporate and personal income tax reform. The authorities are crafting a tax reform package that appears to be net revenue enhancing and have requested Fund TA on some aspects. Even in the current pre election context, staff strongly urges the authorities to avoid any tax package that would entail a net revenue loss. In this regard, it is encouraging that Congressional leaders have vowed not to reduce taxes before compensatory measures are enacted. Staff also supports the Department of Finance’s efforts to amend the bank secrecy law to allow the tax authorities' access to individual bank deposit information and make tax evasion a predicate crime for money laundering in order to improve the efficiency and equity of revenue collection. Staff simulations indicate that a tax-financed public investment increase would result in a more favorable public debt trajectory, which would translate into superior output growth over the medium term (Box 3). The authorities acknowledged the sizeable challenges involved in getting the spending agencies to accelerate infrastructure project implementation . Their own investigation shows that Staff has estimated that revenue mobilization of 2–3 percentage points of GDP is attainable, as stated in last year’s staff report. Page 15 capacity constraints had played a major role in implementation delays in 2014. The authorities are addressing the procurement issues by requiring strengthening of procurement units at spending agencies and revising operational regulations. A Presidential order has been issued to create a Delivery Unit in major departments to monitor closely, trouble shoot, and report on implementation delays. The authorities noted their commitment to improving infrastructure, including by increasing the share of infrastructure in the budget and the implementation of several PPP projects. Revenue targets are challenging but they provide incentives for increased collections and administrative reforms as shown by the steady increase in revenue under the current administration. There is a need for comprehensive tax reform to widen the tax base. Allowing tax collectors access to bank deposits and making tax evasion a predicate crime are needed to improve compliance. The authorities value IMF TA highly and hope to benefit from additional TA going forward.