The Philippines’ external position strengthened significantly since 2010 . The current account has moved to a structural surplus and gross international reserves increased to US$80 billion (28 percent of GDP) or 217 percent of the IMF’s metric of reserve adequacy at end 2014, well in excess of the 100 150 percent suggested range. The external sector is moderately stronger than warranted by fundamentals and desired policies, consistent with moderate currency undervaluation, reflecting mainly the low level of investment. Current account: The IMF External Balance Assessment (EBA) model places the predicted current account at 7.8 percent of GDP below the actual current account in 2014, although Philippines specific factors such as natural disaster risk and remittances could explain up to 4 percentage points of GDP of the residual (see Appendix 2). The recent appreciation of the peso could help narrow the current account gap over time, but lower oil prices are likely to more than offset this effect in 2015. Addressing imbalances: The Philippines’ current account gap is attributable to its low level of investment compared with other EMEs. Raising the investment rate and thus boosting potential growth, by improving the business environment and infrastructure, would help reduce external imbalances. The current account gap would also decrease as budget execution improves. Page 13 International reserves. Reserve accumulation since 2010 has reflected current and financial account surpluses. The BSP accumulated sizable reserves in 2010–12 when ultra accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies (AEs) stimulated large capital flows into the Philippines and other EMEs. Since the taper tantrum in mid 2013, there have been large capital outflows triggered in part by a tightening of eligibility for the Special Deposit Account (SDA) facility, which led to an exodus of foreign funds; however, foreign reserves have remained broadly stable supported by current account surpluses. Staff continues to recommend that the exchange rate be allowed to move freely in line with market forces with intervention limited to The authorities emphasized the structural causes of the current account surplus and unique role of worker remittances, which are not well captured in the EBA model . They observed that the peso has been broadly unchanged vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar since early 2014 while the gross international reserves have been broadly stable. The problem of low investment is likely to be addressed going forward given the large pipeline of infrastructure projects. The exchange rate continues to be market determined, with foreign exchange intervention limited to smoothing excessive volatility.