Short-term market interest rates remain at exceptionally low levels . Domestic interest rates have been compressed by loose monetary policies abroad and ample domestic liquidity partly reflecting the BSP’s decision to restrict nonbanks’ direct access to its Special Deposit Account (SDA)—one of its main sterilization instruments. This released some 5 percent of GDP in liquidity in late 2013, although two recent increases in reserve requirements (RRs) (by 1 percentage point each in April and May) absorbed part of the net injection. The 3(cid:173)month T- bill rate is currently 1.1 percent, well below the policy (reverse repo) interest rate (3.5 percent) and the SDA rate (2 percent), and considerably negative in real terms. Credit growth by universal and commercial banks accelerated to an annual rate of almost 21 percent in April. Policymakers adeptly steered the Philippine economy through turbulent financial conditions brought by unconventional monetary policies in advanced countries, but domestic monetary and financial conditions are now too accommodative . The BSP’s policies since the GFC have generally delivered low inflation, helped moderate capital inflows, and offset This section reflects policy actions and public statements that occurred after the mission. The restriction on SDA access affected some 11 percent of GDP in assets, although the net liquidity released—after flow back through deposits placed with banks (which are subject to RR) and trusts—was less than half that amount. The increase in RR in March and May absorbed about 1 percentage point of GDP in liquidity. RRs are now 20 percent for universal and commercial banks, and 8 percent and 5 percent, respectively, for thrift or rural banks (which comprise 10 percent of banking sector assets). RRs for rural banks were adjusted in March only. Page 10 the restrictive fiscal stance in 2013 (Box 5). However, the liquidity overhang from past forex accumulation has been exacerbated by the recent restriction on direct access to the SDA, reducing the intensity of sterilization. As a result, the domestic impact of the tighter U.S. financial conditions since mid(cid:173)2013 has been muted, especially for short(cid:173)term interest rates. The drawdown of official reserves in response cyclical outflows and the increase in RRs earlier this year were therefore welcome. Nonetheless, liquidity remains excessive, with real market interest rates remaining very low or negative (Figure 6). The economy is well positioned to absorb a gradual tightening of monetary policy Upfront measures to withdraw liquidity and raise real interest rates would help prevent second round inflation effects and address potential overheating and financial stability risks. Doing so would also create policy space to accommodate fiscal spending for post typhoon reconstruction and infrastructure upgrading (see below). Sterilization and official interest rates . Absorbing excess liquidity by further increasing RRs— which are levied only on banks, and are already high—could have the unintended effect of encouraging financial intermediation to shift to nonbanks, while also lowering the effective return on SDA placements for those funds channeled through banks, which are subject to RRs. Instead, the BSP should raise the SDA and policy rates in order to attract additional funds to BSP facilities and hence pull up market interest rates. In addition, the BSP could resume forex swaps, while the Treasury could overfund the fiscal deficit in the local debt market with proceeds kept at the BSP in the Treasury Single Account or make government securities available to the BSP for repo operations. Moreover, approving the draft revisions to the BSP Charter that allows the BSP to issue its own bills and ensures a minimum level of capital would increase the BSP’s policy space. Exchange rate and reserves . With official reserves more than adequate to respond to shocks, the exchange rate should appreciate more fully in response to sustained structural balance of payments inflows (including remittances and FDI) (Figure 7). On the other hand, smoothing the exchange rate effect—and sterilizing the liquidity impact—of cyclical capital flows (including portfolio and currency and deposit flows) is appropriate because the domestic investor base remains small relative to the potential scale of volatile capital flows. While RRs on rural and thrift banks are much lower, these institutions are likely close substitutes to informal, unregulated intermediation. The effectiveness of the policy rate is however limited by the small amount of repo-able securities held by the BSP. On the other hand, if outflow pressures resume, unsterilized sales of official reserves would help reduce liquidity, while preventing an outflow-depreciation feedback loop. This implies dampening exchange rate variability at intermediate frequencies corresponding to capital flow cycles. However, retaining variability at higher frequencies is useful to discourage carry trade inflows. Page 11 In recent years, large and volatile capital inflows have augmented current account(cid:173)related inflows, complicating the task of liquidity management . The BSP adopted a series of measures to moderate inflows, while also relying on a range of sterilization instruments. Restricting nonbanks’ direct access to the SDA since late 2013 was intended to encourage some funds placed therein to migrate toward productive investment and align ability to access the standing facility to international norms. However, liquidity expanded strongly due to both the operational adjustment in the SDA facility and sustained credit growth. In early 2014, the BSP siphoned off some liquidity by raising reserve requirements by 2 percentage points and allowing official reserves to decline. Buoyant domestic growth prospects provide some scope for measured adjustments in the BSP’s policy instruments in order to safeguard price and financial stability . Further normalization of U.S. monetary and financial conditions would help drain domestic liquidity, but changing market expectations on Fed actions could trigger some volatility. With inflation expected to be within the target range and inflation expectations remaining well-anchored, the BSP has continued to rely on an enhanced policy toolkit rather than the policy rate alone. Recently, the BSP raised reserve requirements as a preemptive macroprudential measure to guard against potential financial stability risks brought by strong growth in liquidity and credit. Any further adjustments in policy settings will be data dependent and based on the evolving outlook for inflation and output. Allowing the BSP to issue its own securities and ensuring a minimum level of capital will help increase flexibility over the amount, timing, and duration of sterilization operations.