Amid buoyant GDP, credit and real estate activity, financial soundness indicators signal continued strong performance . During 2013, Philippine banks achieved robust profits, low NPLs, and maintained capital adequacy ratios well above newly introduced Basel III requirements (Figure 8). Banks are not dependent on external financing, relying mainly on domestic deposit funding. Bank lending has accelerated since end 2013, reaching almost 21 percent in April. At around 35 percent of GDP, credit penetration of the private sector through banks is low from a regional perspective (but in line with EMs in other regions), although nonbank financing is also significant (Box 7). Large corporates are issuing debt Minimum capital requirements in the Philippines are higher than BIS recommendations. From January 1, 2014, Philippine banks must maintain a minimum common equity tier 1 (CET1) ratio of 6.0 percent (BIS recommends 4.0 percent by January 1, 2014 and 4.5 percent by January 1, 2015). Including the 2.5 percent capital-conservation buffer, the minimum required CET1 ratio is 8.5 percent (BIS recommends 7 percent). The minimum total capital adequacy ratio (CAR) is 10.0 percent (BIS recommends 8.0 percent). Page 12 securities, enabling them to lock in fixed rate funding, lengthen maturities, and bypass bank exposure limits on individual borrowers. Issuance has risen sharply, with the amount issued during January(cid:173)May 2014 exceeding the 2013 annual total. The pace of property price increases quickened to 13 percent year(cid:173)on(cid:173)year for condominiums and 5¾ percent for office space in Q4:2013, although construction activity has recently slowed (Appendix 3). Banks’ real estate exposure amounted 21¾ percent of total loan portfolios at end 2013, and has been growing faster than other segments. Sixty percent of real estate loans are to commercial entities (developers and construction companies) with the rest to households. Real estate developers and their affiliated conglomerates are also active in debt and equity markets, and developers— as well as several public agencies—provide credit directly to home buyers (thought to total around 7½ percent of GDP, including mortgage lending by banks). Nonbank real estate lenders tend to apply weaker credit standards than banks. Pockets of risk have emerged against the backdrop of prolonged loose credit conditions . Abundant liquidity and very low short-term market rates are exacerbating the risk that prices of property and financial assets could move ahead of fundamentals. With the aggregate leverage ratio for listed companies at 100 percent in 2012, the rise in corporate indebtedness needs to be watched. Moreover, the distribution of debt is skewed toward more leveraged firms, increasing vulnerability to interest rate and refinancing risks. Targeted measures adopted in recent years by the BSP, in its role as banking supervisor, to enhance the monitoring and regulation of banks were appropriate. The Financial Stability Coordination Council, established in early 2014, will help to bridge the gaps in financial oversight mandates across the different member agencies. Nonetheless, financial deepening and search for yield in the context of low interest rates and migration of credit provision to less regulated and less closely supervised lenders raises repricing and credit quality risks and reduces transparency. Further preemptive action is warranted: Real estate . Compliance with existing loan-to-value (LtV) ceilings on bank mortgages (the standard cap is 60 percent, but banks routinely offer 80 percent, including in situations where a lower cap is applicable) should be strictly enforced. Requiring standardized contracts for nonbank (including real estate developer) financing of property purchases, overseen by the SEC—as regulator of nonbank financial institutions—and the BSP—as consumer finance advocate—would strengthen credit underwriting and consumer protection standards and improve data collection. Applying higher risk weights than the standard 50 percent for individual and corporate borrowers with multiple mortgages should be This reflects prices in high-end areas of metro Manila, which is the only available series. In addition to requiring higher minimum capital standards than Basel recommendations and limiting NDF positions, the BSP broadened the coverage of banks’ real estate activities that it monitors (although there is no explicit ceiling on broad exposure), and banks are permitted to purchase developers’ previously issued loans to buyers (“contract- to-sell” (CTS) securitization agreements) only if the loans meet minimum standards. Actual CTS purchases account for only 1 percent of banks’ loan portfolios. Page 13 considered to discourage speculative activity. In addition, tax advantages for real estate in the current corporate tax system—preferential treatment of real estate capital gains for firms whose primary business activity is not related to real estate, and tax holidays for constructing low(cid:173)mid price housing—should be eliminated to discourage speculative demand and oversupply and also help avoid overburdening macroprudential policy. Replacing tax holidays with well(cid:173)targeted subsidies for low-income buyers would improve efficiency. Loan concentration . In view of the conglomerate structure of the economy, large bank exposures to single borrowers can create systemic risks. Recent measures to roll back exemptions to single borrower limits (SBLs) and tighten related conditions are welcome. To better manage risks from concentrated exposures, interdependent companies within a conglomerate group should be classified as a single borrower, consistent with the new Basel Committee guidelines for measuring and controlling large exposures. In addition, amending the BSP Charter to allow the BSP to request and receive information on all members of conglomerate groups affiliated with banks would strengthen the effectiveness of supervision. Financial stability architecture . Migration of credit outside the banking sector offers diversification benefits, but assessment and oversight of the sector are likely complicated by resulting data and regulatory gaps. With no entity having a legal mandate for financial stability, tightening micro and macroprudential regulations on banks—including RRs and real estate exposure caps—may have the unintended effect of pushing activity into segments with less(cid:173)stringent regulatory requirements, including shadow financing of real estate. Expanding the BSP’s remit to include broad financial stability (as a secondary objective to the main goal of price stability) would help counteract migration of risk beyond the current regulatory perimeter. This and other needed amendments to the BSP Charter related to supervision—limited scope to access data on all banks’ related entities, weak legal protection for supervisors in the conduct of their duties, and the ”extraordinary due diligence” requirement on supervisors—should be rapidly approved. The recent approval of the law allowing additional foreign bank entry into the domestic market through subsidiaries or branches (to a maximum of 40 percent of sector assets)—in preparation for the start of the ASEAN Economic Community—will bring a more competitive environment and could reduce concentration exposures at individual banks. However, managing the associated risks requires vigilant oversight and strong coordination with home country supervisors. The authorities remain watchful for financial stability risks that may arise from strong credit growth, and stand ready to adopt new macroprudential measures as necessary Specifically, the temporary exemption to the single borrower limit (the standard limit is 25 percent of bank capital) for purchases of oil (an additional 15 percentage points) lapsed in March 2014, and while the temporary exemption to finance PPPs (an additional 25 percent) was kept until 2016, new provisions were added excluding affiliates of the lending bank from the SBL exemption. Page 14 Fundamental support to real estate is provided by large unmet housing needs, sustained growth of remittances and the business process outsourcing sector (with the latter fuelling demand for both office and residential space), and prudent business practices of major real estate developers. Standard indicators—price to rent ratios, occupancy rates, and bank exposures—do not signal quantity imbalances or price bubbles in the property sector. Nonetheless, there has been a notable increase in purchasing and renting of residences by young professionals, of luxury condominiums by high(cid:173)income expatriates, and of properties for the use of—or investment by—Overseas Filipinos. The BSP closely monitors lending to real estate and has required banks to carry out stress tests twice a year on the effect of a 20 percent and 50 percent write off of various credit exposures, including real estate, on banks’ balance sheets. existing 20 percent cap on banks’ real estate exposures may be modified or new macroprudential measures introduced based on the results of the stress tests and enhanced monitoring by the BSP. Regarding the temporary SBL exemptions, banks’ PPP exposures are currently very small. On foreign bank entry, scope exists to increase the number of market participants, and this is consistent with preparations for ASEAN economic integration by 2020. Amending the BSP Charter is one of the government’s legislative priorities.