Given the Philippines’ bank-centric financial system and high concentration of conglomerates, macrofinancial linkages have largely taken the form of corporate leverage cycles financed by banks . In the boom phase of the global financial cycle, this led to leveraged investment in the construction and real estate sectors, with rising capital market issuances, although banks were constrained by their 25 percent single borrower limits in some cases. As the BSP tightened monetary policy and used its macroprudential tools to target risky activities, credit has moderated and the sectoral composition has become more balanced. Wholesale bank funding from abroad is minimal and subject to strict limits. At 7 percent of GDP, household debt does not appear to pose systemic risks. Credit growth since 2010 has been rapid but has been below typical metrics of credit booms . In 2014, credit growth came close to exceeding some of these metrics but prompt BSP action brought it back down (Box 1). Going forward, credit is expected to increase by about 2 percentage points of GDP per year, a rate of financial deepening that appears to be sustainable based on cross-country studies. However, its sustainability will need to be assessed carefully on an ongoing basis in view of concentration and other risks identified below. Credit growth to real estate and construction has moderated. As noted above, projected credit growth is consistent with investment and economic growth. Nonfinancial corporates appear broadly resilient to shocks but a definitive assessment requires finer data . Staff encourages the authorities to work further on filling these data gaps, particularly concerning intra-group linkages. Nonfinancial corporate debt is low but rising and leverage is unevenly distributed, making some firms vulnerable to a rise in interest rates (Box 2). Page 17 Foreign exchange exposure appears low given moderate foreign exchange debt and existing natural hedges. Bank and nonfinancial corporate exposure to real estate has risen but risks are still moderate . Nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) remain small but are growing rapidly. Existing data on the exposure of NBFIs to real estate are scarce but a plan has been developed to fill data gaps with IMF TA. An official residential price index is currently under construction by the BSP and Philippines Statistical Agency, while the few commercially available measures show modest price growth in most segments. Macroprudential policies should continue to play an important role by limiting any buildup of systemic vulnerabilities, including due to excessive credit growth in specific sectors In light of the acceleration in credit growth in 2014 and risks of domestic asset price booms, the BSP conducted stress tests on banks’ real estate loan exposures and required corrective actions, enhanced monitoring of banks’ exposures to all types of real estate, and provided guidance on real estate mortgage loans, setting their maximum loan value at 60 percent of the appraised value. These measures have helped to restrain credit growth to the real estate sector. Single borrower limits (set at 25 percent of core capital) should be strictly enforced with the additional 25 percent allowance for exposures to PPPs allowed to lapse. Staff encourages ongoing efforts to strengthen the financial stability supervisory framework, including by capacity building and enhanced coordination among the stakeholders of the Financial Stability Coordinating Council. In particular, staff supports the draft bill broadening the BSP’s financial stability mandate and providing it with greater access to nonbank financial information that is currently being discussed in Congress. The SEC has taken steps to enhance its corporate data collection efforts and promote capital market development, and staff encourages further efforts in this direction. The BSP views credit expansion by banks, in concert with other forms of financial deepening and inclusion, as needed to support growth over the medium term . They welcomed the recent shift in credit growth away from real estate into productive areas like manufacturing. The Philippines cannot rely solely on banking to finance its ambitious infrastructure investment. Financial market development is needed to help finance large forthcoming PPP projects. The BSP had already liberalized entry for foreign banks and five foreign banks have been approved for entry, which is a major step because it increases competition, reduces concentration risks, and eases the constraints that single borrower limits impose on aggregate financing of infrastructure investment. Banks account for nearly 80 percent of financial system assets. The BSP also supervises NBFIs accounting for a further 4 percent of the system. The insurance industry, which accounts for 7 percent of assets, is supervised by the Insurance Commission, while the remainder largely fall under the supervisory purview of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Important supervisory gaps in the financial system relate to: (i) real estate financing provided by developers and conglomerates; (ii) bank secrecy laws; (iii) legal restrictions on interagency information sharing; and (iv) mapping conglomerate exposures. Minimum capital requirements in the Philippines are higher than the Basel III requirements. Page 18