Addressing the large infrastructure gap is needed to raise potential growth and reduce poverty and external imbalances, supported by financial deepening while safeguarding financial stability . This necessitates revenue mobilization and capital market development. The latter is important to provide an alternative source of financing for Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects, and private investments including small- to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Monetary and macroprudential policies should aim at avoiding excessive credit growth and balance sheet mismatches. All this comes at a time of heightened global financial uncertainty that could spill over to emerging market economies (EMEs) like the Philippines. The remarkable improvement in the Philippine economy since 2010 reflects prudent macroeconomic policies, as well as the favorable global financial cycle . Achieving the authorities’ growth target of 7 8 percent per annum will require tackling long-standing barriers to investment and broad-based growth. The current administration, whose term ends in June 2016, should continue to institutionalize governance reforms and fiscal transparency and initiate economic reforms that the next government can take forward to lift the country’s growth potential . In particular, economic policy should focus on scaling up infrastructure and human capital investment and spending for social needs to reduce poverty. This would help ensure that the Philippines’ young and growing population has adequate job opportunities at home, reducing labor migration, especially of skilled labor. Page 10 At the conclusion of the 2014 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors commended the authorities’ prudent policies that had delivered strong macroeconomic outcomes and set the stage for favorable growth prospects . However, they noted potential risks from tighter global financial conditions, and therefore stressed the importance of continued prudent macroeconomic policies while stepping up reforms to sustain strong growth and reduce poverty.