Current monetary settings are appropriate judging from: inflation projections within the target band; estimates of the output gap near zero even with financial variables (Box 1) ; and credit growth within normal metrics . Credit growth was strong in 2014, including in the construction and real estate sectors, spurring concerns about rising macrofinancial imbalances. The BSP’s tightening measures last year (the banks’ required reserve ratio was increased by 200 basis points, to 20 percent, and policy rates were increased by 50 basis points), and autonomous tightening since then due to rising real interest rates and an appreciating REER, has succeeded in moderating credit growth, making it more balanced, and bringing inflation down, by the first half of 2015. One-off effects of lower oil prices are expected to dissipate by late 2015, following which inflation is still expected to remain comfortably within the target band. Moreover, significant slack remains in the labor market. Nevertheless, the BSP should remain vigilant and be ready to tighten policy if signs of rising inflation pressure and accelerating broad-based credit growth were to emerge going forward . However, rapid food price increases due to El Niño related drought should be addressed by allowing food imports in a timely manner and would not justify monetary tightening unless second round effects were to appear. Monetary transmission has improved as the structural liquidity overhang has been reduced but more work is needed given that the pass-through from policy rates to retail rates remains weak . A liquidity overhang persists, although this has declined significantly from last year, reflecting the BSP’s preemptive tightening in 2014 and capital outflows. Staff supports the BSP’s efforts to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission through the implementation of Page 16 an interest rate corridor, following up on Fund TA, and supported by implementing deposit auctions and reforming the reverse repo auction mechanism, and passage of the BSP charter that authorizes the issuance of central bank bills and a minimum capital level. With the greater use of open market operations to manage liquidity, the required reserve ratio can be lowered over the medium term to reduce intermediation cost and improve efficiency. The BSP views the current monetary policy stance as appropriate . The authorities see no need to adjust monetary policy at the moment as inflation is in the lower end of the target band, credit growth is moderating, and economic growth is still robust, but agree that they will remain vigilant. The BSP shared the staff’s assessment that El Niño effects could pose a major risk to food prices in 2015 . The National Food Authority council has authorized an additional 500 thousand metric tons of rice imports in 2015, which should mitigate the effects of El Niño conditions on rice prices and inflation.