GDP expanded by a rapid 7¼ percent in 2013, bringing average growth for the past four years to 6⅓ percent (Figures 1 and 2). Consumption and investment were the primary growth drivers, supported by remittances and accommodative monetary and financial conditions, while the external sector remained a drag on growth owing to subdued goods exports (Box 2). On the supply side, services, manufacturing and—through mid 2013— construction propelled output, with agriculture remaining broadly flat. In view of its occurrence late in the year, typhoon Yolanda is thought to have shaved only ¼ percentage point off annual 2013 growth, but with a somewhat greater impact likely this year. Growth eased in Q1:2014 (q/q) partly on other temporary factors (weak export demand by several advanced countries and a slowdown in residential construction as a large number of condominium units are coming on stream), and increasingly binding capacity constraints (in electricity generation due to maintenance shutdowns and adverse weather, and in road infrastructure from the main port). Inflation has picked up since late 2013 and the current account surplus increased Inflation lay below the bottom of the target band (4±1 percent) for much of last year despite high capacity utilization and a modest positive output gap. This reflected benign global price developments, reinforced by peso appreciation during H1:2013. However, inflation rose to 4 percent late in the year on pass through of the weaker peso, typhoon-related disruptions to food production, increases in rice prices and higher electricity prices due to maintenance shutdowns, and reached 4½ percent in May. These supply-side pressures are likely to be larger and more persistent in the context of accommodative policies and a regionally centralized wage bargaining framework. The current account surplus increased to 3½ percent of GDP in 2013 (from below 3 percent the previous year) on a narrowing trade deficit. Philippine financial markets were moderately impacted by the announcement and subsequent implementation of tapering by the U.S. Federal Reserve . During May 2013(cid:173)January 2014, portfolio rebalancing resulted in capital outflows and caused the peso to depreciate by a cumulative 9 percent, equity prices to decline by 17 percent, and long term interest rates to rise by 50‒150 basis points (Figures 3‒5 and Box 3). In addition, official reserves declined moderately, but remain high relative to the Fund’s reserve adequacy benchmark. While more restrained than in several other emerging markets, these financial market movements Global common factors—strongly associated with world commodity prices, the U.S. dollar nominal effective exchange rate, and the “great moderation” of inflation—are found to account for about 60 percent of inflation variability in the Philippines (see Chapter 1 of the accompanying selected issues). Page 7 helped unwind some of the previous sharp increases in equity prices and the exchange rate that occurred in recent years partly in response to accommodative financial policies. More recently, the resumption of financial inflows has caused prices to recover some of their previous losses. Growth is forecast to remain strong, albeit easing on the assumption of tighter domestic financial conditions Under the baseline scenario of tighter funding conditions and lending standards, growth is expected to moderate in 2014 to 6¼ percent—although rising on a sequential quarterly basis in response to strengthening activity in advanced economies and stepped up reconstruction spending. With potential growth having edged up to around 6¼ percent (Box 4), staff expects the small positive output gap will stabilize this year. Second-round effects from recent supply shocks and exchange rate depreciation are expected to offset subdued external prices, bringing end(cid:173)2014 inflation to 4 percent. The current account surplus is forecast to narrow marginally this year on a pickup in imports for reconstruction. Thereafter, and without further structural reforms, growth is projected to converge to 6 percent to unwind the positive output gap. Persistent structural inflows from abroad—though more subdued than in recent years—are expected to gradually return the real exchange rate to its strengthening trend. The resulting increase in imports—supported also by larger infrastructure investments—will narrow the current account surplus and relieve pressure on domestic capacity constraints. This would help temper inflation, but likely keep it above the midpoint of the new lower target band (3±1 percent) to be adopted from January 2015. Risks to this baseline growth outlook stem from both external and domestic sources, and are tilted to the downside (Appendix 1). While a faster pick up in advanced economies would support Philippine growth, exiting rapidly from exceptionally loose monetary policies abroad—possibly in response to growing financial market distortions—could heighten volatility in global financial markets, impacting domestic credit conditions and those corporates and households that are over leveraged. A sharp slowdown in China or emerging markets more broadly, or a major geopolitical incident that disrupts regional or global trade, as well as commodity and financial flows, would also adversely impact the Philippines. On the domestic front, excessive flow of real and financial resources to the property sector could boost near term growth but lead to increased volatility of asset prices and GDP growth over longer horizons. Natural disasters also pose a risk to economic activity. The Consensus Forecast in June has GDP growth averaging 6.3 percent for 2014, with a range of 5.9‒7.3 percent. Page 8 Despite a buffeting by global and domestic stresses, growth in 2013 remained resilient owing to strong policy frameworks and payoff from earlier reforms . Diversified growth drivers, a strong external position, a sound financial system, and prudent fiscal and debt management allowed the economy to ride out the turbulence in global financial markets. Looking ahead, ongoing improvements in production efficiency are expected to support a higher path for potential and actual growth while also bringing about lower inflation. GDP growth is projected to increase from 6.5−7.5 percent in 2014 to 7.5−8.5 percent in 2016 while inflation is expected to ease to 3±1percent, and the current account to remain in surplus. Although the economy is expected to continue to perform strongly, the authorities were cognizant of risks — particularly on the global front—that could heighten volatility Uncertainty about future policy steps in advanced economies could trigger renewed financial market turbulence. Slower growth in Asia could reduce intra-Asian trade that, until now, has compensated for previous weakness in exports to advanced economies. Political risks could affect international commodity prices and capital markets, and weaken growth prospects. On the domestic side, the threat of natural disasters is ever present, and the authorities remain alert to potential risks to financial stability, including in real estate, and will continue to respond proactively, as needed.