Real GDP grew by 6.1 percent in 2014 but slowed to 5.2 percent in the first quarter of 2015 The main growth drivers in 2014 were household consumption, private construction, and exports of goods and services. The first quarter 2015 slowdown was due mainly to temporary factors, including the effects of dry weather on agricultural production, weak global demand, and slow budget execution. Inflation fell below the bottom of the BSP’s target band (3±1 percent) in May 2015, led by lower fuel and food prices . After reaching 4.9 percent (y/y) in August 2014, inflation fell to 1.2 percent in June 2015. As the economy is growing broadly at potential, there is no evidence of price or wage pressures, and considerable slack in the labor market remains. The current dry weather associated with El Niño has not yet resulted in higher inflation. The fiscal deficit was smaller than the 2 percent of GDP target in 2014 due to slow budget execution . Revenue increased as a share of GDP due to improvements in tax administration. Expenditures, especially capital spending, fell short of the budget largely due to weak implementation capacity and slow adjustment to reforms in some line ministries, and delayed post-typhoon reconstruction. A Supreme Court ruling that made aspects of the administration’s Disbursement Acceleration Program unconstitutional further Page 11 slowed budget execution in 2014. Budget execution remained slow in the first quarter of 2015, particularly for capital spending. However, momentum is building on the implementation of PPP projects. Credit growth was strong in 2014 but slowed and became more balanced in the first five months of this year . While broad based, the slowdown was sharper for those sectors that saw faster credit growth in the recent past, including construction and real estate. Banks remain well capitalized, with low levels of nonperforming loans and abundant liquidity. The current account surplus rose in 2014 against the backdrop of lower oil prices, subdued import volumes, and robust export growth . Gross foreign reserves were US$81 billion in June 2015. While the peso has remained stable vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar since early 2014, it has appreciated significantly in effective terms along with the U.S. dollar.