Notwithstanding volatility in financial flows, the external sector strengthened during 2013 . Responding to a shift in interest rate differentials, some previously accumulated capital flows reversed during mid 2013(cid:173)early 2014. This selling pressure was accommodated by a combination of peso depreciation and drawdown of reserves. However, the overall balance of payments remained positive for the year on the rising current account surplus. In recent years, the Philippines’ external sector facilitated reserve accumulation by the official sector . Tending to lean against the wind of inflows has helped build a large reserve buffer against future external shocks and smoothed adjustment to a stronger equilibrium real exchange rate resulting from sustained remittances and other structural current account inflows. In the process, the nominal exchange rate has tended to move broadly in line with those of regional trade partners, and the reserve position is now stronger than warranted for precautionary purposes. While the EBA methodology places the gap between the current account and its norm at near 7 percent of GDP for 2013, extensions to these methods to account Page 9 for exposure to natural disasters and remittance income reduce the gap to around 3 percent of GDP (of which 0.5 percent and 0.2 percent, respectively, reflect policy gaps in the rest of the world and in the Philippines) (Appendix 2). From a multilateral perspective, this suggests the external sector was moderately stronger than warranted by medium(cid:173)term fundamentals in 2013, consistent with moderate currency undervaluation. The exchange rate regime continues to be market-determined and the change in reserves level remains consistent with the objective of smoothing excessive volatility in the foreign exchange market . Policies allowed the peso to appreciate over the past decade consistent with sustained structural inflows, which enabled reserves to reach a comfortable level. In late 2013 to early 2014, reserves showed a moderate drop as a result of foreign exchange operations and government debt servicing. Going forward, the REER is expected to move in line with structural flows and reserves may accumulate at a slower pace than in previous years as higher global interest rates moderate capital inflows.