The Polish economy experienced a substantial growth slowdown in 2012–13, but is now recovering. Growth dropped in the second half of 2012 and into 2013 as uncertain prospects for euro area growth weighed on confidence, adding to a contraction in public investment. As a result of the slowdown and external factors (such as subdued energy prices), inflation fell sharply below the target range. A recovery is now underway as the economy expanded by a higher-than- expected 3.4 percent (yoy) in the first quarter of 2014. Poland weathered bouts of emerging market volatility in 2013 and early 2014 relatively well. Strong fundamentals, combined with very strong policies and the insurance provided by the Flexible Credit Line (FCL) arrangement, helped support favorable financial market perceptions amidst Fed tapering and geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine. Poland is highly interconnected with global markets through trade and financial links. Poland’s integration with Europe—including through participation in the German supply chain—has served it well, supporting income convergence and higher living standards. However, its high interconnectedness also makes it susceptible to external shocks, including those emanating from Europe, Russia/Ukraine, and global capital markets. Trade. Europe remains Poland’s main export destination (in 2011, about ⅔ of the domestic value added content of Poland’s exports was consumed in Europe). Efforts to enter new markets in Eastern Europe (as a result of recent weak demand in Western Europe) led to an increase in the share of gross exports finally consumed in this region to around 15 percent in 2011, of which Russia accounted for 6 percentage points. Foreign direct investment. In 2012, close to 90 percent of the stock of inward foreign direct investment (representing around 40 percent of GDP) originated from the European Union, while exposure to Russian and Ukrainian FDI is small. Though corporate external debt is high relative to peers, vulnerabilities are mitigated by intercompany loans, which account for more than 50 percent of total corporate external debt. Financial. Poland’s banking system is largely foreign-owned with foreign claims of BIS reporting banks amounting to close to 60 percent of GDP, of which more than 80 percent is accounted for by euro area banks. However, reliance on parent funding has declined in recent years and is moderate. Capital markets. Poland’s open capital account makes it susceptible to spillovers arising from shifts in investor sentiment, including possibly from a sharp increase in geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine or global volatility arising from the normalization Page 6 of U.S. monetary policy. The increase in the share of foreign investors in the domestic bond market, induced by recent pension changes, could exacerbate these risks. Sources: Direction of Trade Statistics, National Bank of Poland, and IMF staff calculations. With elections approaching next year, momentum for reforms is waning. Presidential elections are scheduled to take place in summer 2015, followed by parliamentary elections in the autumn. The appetite for significant reforms is very limited, given the election cycle and the ruling coalition’s slim parliamentary majority.