Amid continued external risks, Poland’s main policy challenge is to continue adjustment while protecting the recovery. To support the recovery while continuing to rebuild buffers, gradual fiscal consolidation is appropriate (Box 4). Monetary policy is at a challenging juncture, with low inflation and a steady growth rebound. While keeping policy interest rates on hold has been appropriate, further monetary easing may be needed if the recovery falters or inflation fails to pick up. Considering the resilience of the financial sector, addressing obstacles and disincentives to dealing with NPLs, completing the macroprudential framework, and revamping the bank resolution framework are key priorities. Over the medium term, boosting potential growth will require pressing ahead with reforms of the labor market and the business environment. Page 13 Policy implementation has been broadly in line with past Fund advice: Box 4. Implementation of Past Fund Advice Monetary policy. The Monetary Policy Council (MPC) continued the easing cycle to help counter the downturn, followed by forward guidance to indicate that the key policy rate would remain unchanged for an extended period. The legal framework is in the process of being strengthened, with consideration of staggered terms of MPC members. Fiscal policy. In response to the economic downturn, the pace of fiscal consolidation slowed in structural terms, avoiding unwarranted drag on the economy. Meanwhile, the authorities have remained committed to their medium-term objective (MTO), which is deemed adequate to rebuild fiscal buffers. The permanent expenditure rule was approved and would be operational starting in 2015. Recent increases in the retirement age were consistent with Fund advice, but reform of the special pension schemes still needs to be advanced. Financial sector. The authorities have stepped up oversight of the small but vulnerable credit union segment, initiating rehabilitation of a number of institutions. Work to establish a systemic risk board (SRB) and new bank resolution framework has continued, though final legislation has been delayed. Structural reforms. The authorities continued to reduce the number of regulated professions, initiated legislation to lessen duality in the labor market, and adopted a law to improve the functioning of public employment services. Ongoing work on the new insolvency regime is welcome and should be concluded without delay. Progress to improve the business climate is commendable and should be pursued further.