The economy has recovered from the 2012–13 slowdown. Growth strengthened to 3.4 percent in 2014 on the back of buoyant domestic demand. Private consumption and investment continue to benefit from higher disposable income, eased financial conditions, and robust credit growth. Nonetheless, inflation has been negative since July 2014. Poland’s integration with global markets has facilitated growth and income convergence. Poland has developed strong trade and financial linkages with the euro area and has become an integral part of the German supply chain (Figure 1). This has led to substantial technological transfers and increased sophistication of domestic value added, with positive implications for productivity, competitiveness, and growth. Foreign investment in the manufacturing sector, stable inflows of intercompany lending, and EU structural funds helped expand the capital stock, further supporting growth. As a result, during the past two decades, Poland gradually closed a quarter of its per capita income gap with the EU average, while income inequality has declined to the EU average (see Appendix I). However, the high degree of trade and financial integration also exposes Poland to external shocks. Demand shocks in the euro area can propagate through substantial trade linkages. Exports to the EU represent 75 percent of Poland’s exports and 65 percent of Poland’s domestic value added embodied in exports is finally consumed in Europe. Global financial shocks can affect Poland through the substantial foreign investor presence in the government bond market (40 percent of domestic treasury securities are held by nonresidents) and in the banking system (about 60 percent of banking sector assets are held by foreign banks). European Union (27 countries) Income Inequality, 2005–13 (Gini coefficient of equivalized disposable income) Source: Eurostat. Latvia Lithuania Estonia Czech Rep. Convergence Toward EU Average Income (Purchasing power parity (PPP) income per capita as a percent of EU-28 average)Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Page 10 A large share of trade is with Europe… …and the banking system is largely foreign owned. Poland: Trade and Financial Linkages Nonresidents hold a large share of domestic treasuries,… …increasing the comovement of Polish yields with global markets. So far, the economy has weathered well several bouts of market turbulence. Poland’s very strong fundamentals and policies helped preserve investor confidence in the face of continuing geopolitical tensions in the region and episodes of emerging market volatility (Figure 2). The large share of the relatively stable intercompany loans in corporate debt, reduced reliance on parent bank funding, and a stable and diversified investor base in the domestic government bond market have helped mitigate the risks of capital flow reversals and dampened financial volatility. The Flexible Credit Line (FCL) arrangement with the IMF has provided additional insurance against external shocks. Going forward, it will be important to continue building policy buffers to enhance resilience to shocks and implement structural reforms to complete convergence. Owned by domestic banks (incl. MoF) Owned by foreign investors Poland: Ownership of Local Currency Government Bonds (Percent of treasury securities outstanding) Sources: Haver Analytics, National Authorities, and IMF staff calculations. DEU 27%CIS8%CEE7%GBR7%CZE7% FRA RUS 5%ITA NDL SWE UKR3%SVK3%HUN ESP3% BEL 2%Others Export Shares (2014) Source: IMF Direction of Trade and Statistics. DEUU.S.ITAESPPRTGRC Conditional Correlations with Poland Yields, 2009 – (Regression-based correlations )Correlations are based on estimates from regressions of weekly changes in Polish yields on changes in other countries' yields. For ITA, ESP, PRT, and GRC, the regression controls for DEU yields. Sources: Haver analytics and IMF staff calculations. Italy13.1Germany Netherlands8.9Spain8.5USA5.7France4.7Portugal4.1Other8Domestic36.8 Bank Ownership Structure (Percent of assets, 2013)Sources: Polish Financial Supervision Authority(KNF) and IMFstaff calculations. Page 11 Policy buffers. Much has been achieved in strengthening policy buffers. However, further effort is needed to create additional policy space to better cope with shocks. The fiscal deficit and public debt have declined, and Poland has exited the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) one year earlier than expected. Nonetheless, public debt is still elevated. Continued gradual fiscal consolidation is needed to put it on a robust downward path. International reserves have increased and are broadly adequate on the IMF’s modified metric for assessing reserve adequacy (ARA). Nonetheless, reserves continue to fall short on some metrics, including as a share of short-term debt. Effective financial sector oversight promoted strong capitalization in banks but work to adopt the bank resolution and macroprudential frameworks needs to be finalized. Completing convergence. Accelerating economic convergence will require structural reforms to close productivity gaps, move up the value-added chain, and complete structural transformation of the economy. The near-term reform momentum is being dampened by political uncertainty. The presidential elections in May were closely contested and ended with a decisive victory of the opposition, Law and Justice (PiS) party candidate. Parliamentary elections are scheduled to take place in the fall. In the meantime, and given the uncertainty and the ruling coalition’s slim parliamentary majority, a slowdown of reform momentum is a risk.