The fiscal deficit widened in 2013 as a result of weak economic growth. The economic slowdown took a toll on tax collections (including VAT, which has seen an unfavorable trend in collection efficiency in the last five years (Chapter III of Selected Issues)). As a result, the deficit widened from 3.9 percent of GDP in 2012 to 4.3 percent of GDP in 2013 (Tables 6 and 7). In late- 2013, the fiscal framework was overhauled with the approval of a permanent expenditure rule, which will begin to take effect in 2015. The gradual resumption of fiscal consolidation this year is appropriate given the economic recovery underway. The 2014 budget includes about ½ percent of GDP in consolidation measures, while the downsizing of the pension system’s second pillar and a cyclical recovery of tax revenue (based on staff’s analysis in Chapter III of Selected Issues) would provide an additional ½ percent of GDP in deficit reduction. On current policies, the headline deficit is therefore projected to fall by 1 percentage point of GDP to 3.3 percent of GDP in 2014. Public debt (ESA95) should drop by 8 percentage points to 49½ percent of GDP by end-2014, largely on account of a one-off transfer of public debt from the pension fund’s second pillar to the general government. As in previous years, financing is comfortable: more than three-fourths of government 2014 financing needs have already been covered. The recent changes to the pension system will improve the fiscal aggregates, but staff underscored that maintaining fiscal prudence remains essential to further reduce public debt. The changes to the pension system—which entail a downsizing of the second pillar—were motivated by concerns about the performance and fiscal costs of the second pillar and have led to criticism by some observers on property rights and policy continuity grounds (Box 5).The changes are estimated to deliver an improvement in the fiscal accounts of around 30 percent of GDP in net present value terms during 2014–60, matched by an increase in gross implicit pension liabilities (Chapter IV of Selected Issues). The structural fiscal deficit should drop to 2 percent of GDP by 2016, and public debt (ESA 95) is expected to fall to around 45 percent of GDP by 2019, helped by gradual asset transfers from the pension system’s second pillar. However, staff noted that additional A permanent expenditure rule was passed by parliament in late 2013 and will become operational in 2015. The new rule links public expenditure growth to average GDP growth and requires additional expenditure consolidation when the debt-to-GDP ratio surpasses pre-established thresholds. Staff’s assessment of the rule can be found at http:/www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13220.pdf. This is similar to the fiscal impact computed for the Hungarian pension changes in IMF, 2011, The Challenge of Public Pension Reform in Advanced and Emerging Economies. Current policy With additional measures 1/ Implicit Pension Debt Poland: Public Debt (Percent of GDP, ESA95)Sources: MoF and IMF staff calculations 1/ Assumes additional consolidation measures of 0.5 percent of GDP per year in 2015–16. Projections Page 16 consolidation measures of around ½ percent of GDP per year during 2015–16 would be needed to reach the authorities’ medium-term objective (MTO) of a 1 percent of GDP structural fiscal deficit and put the debt ratio on a stronger downward path. Strict enforcement of the new permanent fiscal rule should help ensure that fiscal policy remains prudent. In this regard, the recent lowering of the public debt thresholds contained in the fiscal rule is welcome. Staff also noted that conducting an expenditure review (including tax expenditures) may also help identify areas where savings can be made, while protecting priority spending. Staff underscored the importance of addressing legacy flaws in the pension system to help reduce long-term fiscal risks. A sizable drop in projected replacement rates increases fiscal risks stemming from old-age poverty. Hence, staff encouraged the authorities to consider ways to boost savings in the voluntary third pillar to help ensure socially sustainable pensions in the future. Other fiscal risks stemming from pre-existing flaws in the pension system could be ameliorated by revising the indexation of notional accounts in the first pillar, seeking better alignment of the disability formula with the core pension system, and implementing pending reforms in special pension schemes. Fiscal policy should continue to flexibly respond to the state of the economy. In the event of a better-than-expected recovery, there is scope for a more frontloaded fiscal adjustment in 2015. However, should growth fall significantly below the baseline path, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully, while room for discretionary countercyclical fiscal policy would be limited by the relatively high debt-to-GDP ratio (Annex II). The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment of fiscal policy, but questioned some of the implications of the pension changes set out by staff. They agreed that the fiscal deficit was set to be substantially reduced in 2014, partly on account of the pension changes. However, the authorities’ projections entailed a somewhat more conservative rebound in tax revenues than staff, coupled with slightly lower expenditure projections. The authorities also agreed with staff that additional measures would be needed to reach the MTO. On pension changes, they shared staff’s assessment that the changes would yield a long-term improvement in the fiscal accounts and their figures were similar to staff’s. However, they felt that staff was overstating some of the potential drawbacks of the pension changes—notably with respect to liquidity in the domestic government bond and equity markets (where they noted that there was no perceptible drop in liquidity) and policy continuity (where they felt that they had clearly explained their rationale to the markets and the public, thus mitigating risks in this area). Page 17 Box 5. Implications of Changes to the Polish Pension System The Polish pension system underwent significant changes in 2014: (i) pension funds’ holdings of Treasury and Treasury-guaranteed bonds were transferred to the social security administration then Treasury securities were acquired by the Ministry of Finance and cancelled (corresponding liabilities were transferred to individual notional accounts in the first pillar and thereafter indexed by the five-year average nominal GDP growth); (ii) new pension contributions will be channeled to the social security administration, unless contributors “opt-in” to the second pillar; (iii) pension funds were banned from investing in government bonds, and current benchmarking and penalty systems were removed to encourage more active portfolio management; (iv) limits on holdings of foreign securities will be lifted over time, from the current 5 percent of pension funds’ portfolios to 30 percent by 2016; and (v) pension payouts will be centralized in the public system, with a gradual transfer of assets to the first pillar starting ten years before retirement. The changes to the pension system would lead to a long-term improvement in fiscal accounts. The changes imply a substantial downsizing of the funded second pillar, while maintaining the defined contribution nature of the pension system (since the first pillar is a notional defined contribution system). Thus, the economic implications are less fundamental than in some other countries that have undertaken similar changes to their pension system. Staff analysis indicates that, under baseline population and macroeconomic projections over 2014‒60 and assuming that half of the contributors switch completely to the first pillar, the 2014 pension changes would lead to an improvement in the fiscal accounts of about 30 percent of GDP in net present value terms, matched by an equivalent increase in gross pension liabilities. The increased reliance on the unfunded first pillar had a number of parallel implications: Explicit versus implicit liabilities Since the system operates as defined contribution, the improvement in the fiscal accounts will be matched by an increase in gross implicit pension liabilities. Given demographic trends, these liabilities may not be fully covered by the stream of pension contributions beyond 2060, until the system reaches equilibrium. Intergenerational equity The 1999 pension reform (which established Poland’s three pillar pension system) entailed significant fiscal costs associated with the funding of the second pillar. These costs would have had to be borne mainly by the current generation, as legal debt limits prevented sharing them fully with future generations via new debt issuance. Downsizing the second pillar reduces the costs of the transition and the associated burden on the current generation. Adequacy of pensions The 2014 pension changes preserved the actuarial balance of the system by keeping the defined contribution nature of the benefits. Given demographic trends, this would imply a sharp drop in replacement rates over time, increasing risks of old-age poverty and associated fiscal risks. These risks could be alleviated by promoting voluntary pension savings. Constitutional aspects and policy continuity The 2014 pension changes have been controversial, particularly with respect to their constitutionality and property rights of second pillar assets. These issues are under consideration by Poland’s Constitutional Tribunal. The pension changes could also raise concerns about policy continuity and credibility. To date, however, such concerns do not seem to have materialized—financial markets have been stable, as both market participants and ratings agencies do not appear to have been rattled by the changes. Domestic capital market impact The downsizing of the second pillar would reduce inflows to the domestic capital market, possibly affecting its speed of development. In the short run, it could also adversely affect liquidity and increase volatility. Risk diversification. Concentrating pensions in the first pillar, where they are primarily indexed to the wage bill, reduces the diversification of sources of future pension income. To the extent that greater diversification helps mitigate risks arising from idiosyncratic shocks (such as to the wage bill), it will be important to seek additional forms of pension savings (including through increases in private savings). See also Chapter V of Selected Issues for an analysis of saving accelerations. _______________________________________ See Chapter IV of Selected Issues for details. Page 18