The near-term economic outlook is for a continuing recovery. GDP growth is projected to reach 3.3 percent in 2014, underpinned by a rebound in domestic demand. A strengthening labor market and increasing real wages should boost private consumption, while rising credit growth and improving financial conditions should support investment. External demand is expected to recover, supported by stronger growth in Poland’s main trading partners. However, inflation is expected to remain low, reaching only around 1 percent in 2014. Over the medium term, growth is expected to gradually reach its potential. GDP growth is projected to accelerate to around 3.5 percent in 2015‒16. The absorption of Poland’s new allotment of EU structural funds for 2014‒20 (euro 82 billion in current prices; the largest in the EU) should provide an impulse to public and private investment, and job creation should further reduce unemployment over the medium term. Hence, rising domestic demand is projected to continue to gradually erode the net export contribution to growth, and the current account balance is expected to widen to around 3 percent by 2016. Given the recent and projected strengthening of domestic demand growth (which is highly correlated with inflation 2–3 quarters forward) and the narrowing output gap, the baseline inflation path envisages a gradual rise toward the target. However, given low imported inflation and a stable exchange rate vis-à-vis the euro—despite substantial policy interest rate cuts last year—there are downside risks to the inflation forecast. Risks to the growth outlook have become more balanced but with external factors still firmly on the downside (see also Table 4 with the Risk Assessment Matrix). Net foreign assets Net claim on government Deposit growth Others Claims on private sector Contribution to Private Sector Credit Growth (Percentage points)Sources: International Financial Statistics and IMF staff calculations. Equity capital and issue premium Subordinated debt Retained earnings Changes of Selected Items of Regulatory Capital of Domestic Banks (Year-on-year change, billion zloty) Sources: NBP, Financial Stability Report, Dec. 2013. Note: Data for 2013 include only the first three quarters. Page 10 Global financial conditions. A renewed worsening of global financial conditions could lead to capital outflows and an increase in interest rates, not least amidst a normalization of U.S. monetary policy (Box 2 and Chapter I of Selected Issues). An increase in the share of foreign investors in the domestic bond market, induced by the recent pension changes (see Policy Discussions, Section B), has heightened the risks stemming from a sudden reversal of capital flows—either because of renewed bouts of emerging market volatility or because of rising geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine. In addition, depending on the reliance on variable rate debt, interest rate shocks could raise the share of corporate sector debt at risk (Chapter II of Selected Issues). Geopolitical tensions. Poland is exposed to Russia and Ukraine through energy and trade links, while direct financial links are small (Box 3). Considering the significant gas and oil imports from Russia, spillovers from geopolitical turmoil, reflected in disruption of gas and oil supply to Poland, would severely affect gas-intensive industries. In addition, confidence effects could result in renewed financial market volatility and capital outflows. Slower trading partner growth. Poland remains vulnerable to a protracted period of slower growth in the euro area due to its strong trade and financial linkages with core euro area countries. Such a scenario would weaken growth in Poland through lower exports and adverse confidence effects. Domestic risks. On the upside, the absorption of EU funds could be more frontloaded than projected, leading to an earlier pickup in investment. Risks to the inflation outlook are on the downside. Inflation could fail to pick up as envisaged in the baseline—either on account of external factors (low imported inflation) or domestic factors (entrenched low inflation expectations)—and remain low for a protracted period. In particular, should prolonged low inflation among European trading partners (which could result in continued low imported inflation if exchange rate adjustments do not offset it) materialize, domestic demand may not be sufficient to pull inflation back toward the target as envisaged in the baseline. The authorities shared staff’s views on the outlook, and underscored that risks were mainly external. They agreed that a broad-based recovery is underway and broadly concurred with staff’s forecasts for growth and inflation. They nonetheless felt that Poland’s recovery hinged importantly on a continued recovery in the euro area. On risks, the authorities agreed that a protracted period of slow growth in Europe or a reversal in foreign investor sentiment—either because of global financial conditions or geopolitical issues—posed the main risks. They nonetheless felt that Poland was well-positioned to manage risks associated with reversals of investor sentiment given its well-diversified investor base, strong fundamentals, sound policies, and insurance provided by the FCL arrangement. On the potential for a sharp increase in geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine, the authorities emphasized that the impact on Poland would depend critically on the precise nature of the increase in tensions. They also noted that, even Page 11 if Poland avoided a significant adverse macroeconomic impact, particular sectors of the economy (such as agriculture) could be affected. Box 2. Global Financial Spillovers and the Role of the Investor Base Ample global liquidity in recent years has increased foreign participation in many EM government bond markets. During the past decade, the foreign investor share in the Polish domestic government bond market rose by about 11 percentage points to 32 percent at end-2013, while yields on long-term zloty- denominated government bonds declined by close to 230 basis points between 2004‒13. Foreign financing could quickly reverse on account of external shocks. Poland weathered the bouts of emerging market volatility in 2013 and early 2014 well. Nonetheless, cumulative capital outflows of about $7.2 billion took place between June 2013 and March 2014 and yields increased by about 30 basis points. Staff analysis suggests that high foreign participation and high investor base concentration in local- currency government bond markets increase the sensitivity of yields to global financial shocks. Specifically, when foreign participation increases beyond 30 percent and investor base concentration increases above the median (0.2, based on a Herfindahl-Hirschman index), the transmission to yields of global financial shocks is significantly amplified in EMs. For Poland, foreign participation at 32 percent is above the foreign participation threshold, suggesting potentially significant spillovers in case of tightening of financial conditions. However, the concentration of Poland’s investor (measuring 0.1 on the Herfindahl- Hirschman index) is more diversified than the median EM, suggesting greater resilience to shocks. As in previous bouts of volatility, Poland’s strong fundamentals should also help dampen adverse financial spillovers. These results should be interpreted with caution. First, the absence of data on the profile of foreign investors (i.e. whether these are retail or institutional investors) holding EM local-currency bonds, makes it difficult to generalize this threshold. Second, most countries reached this threshold after the global financial crisis (when global liquidity increased), which makes threshold results heavily dependent on the post-crisis period. The results point to some policy implications. Preserving strong fundamentals can help insulate countries against external shocks. Similarly, ensuring prudent debt management and promoting the diversification of the investor base—including through domestic financial deepening and improved institutional quality—can also help mitigate shocks. ______________________________________ See Chapter I of Selected Issues for details. InternationalFinancial Spillovers into EMs Additional increase in the yields (in bps) at various thresholds of conditional variables Source: IMF Staff calculations. Point estimate Transmission of U.S. 10y Yield Shock into EM LC Yields: Non-linear Estimates (Coefficient of the interaction term; in basis points)Foreign participation ratios at least as great as values above Point estimate Transmission of U.S. 10y Yield Shock into EM Benchmark Yields: Non-linear Estimates (Coefficient of the interaction term; in basis points) Investor base concentrationat least as great as values above Point estimate Transmission of U.S. Short Term rate (3-month) Shock into LC Yields: Non-linear Estimates ( Coefficient associated with the interaction term; in basis points)Foreign participation ratios at least as great as values above Point estimate Transmission of VIX Shock into LC Yields: Non-linear Estimates (Coefficient associated with the interaction term; in basis points)Foreign participation ratios at least as great as values above Page 12 Box 3. Poland’s Links to Russia and Ukraine Poland imports significant natural gas and crude oil from Russia, but some factors mitigate the potential impact of energy supply disruptions. Russia supplies 57 percent of Poland’s gas consumption and 94 percent of its crude oil consumption. However, relative to other countries in the region, Poland’s reliance on gas in its primary energy supply is limited: only around 13 percent of energy supply comes from natural gas, with most provided by coal (56 percent) and crude oil (23 percent). In Poland, natural gas is used most heavily by industry (60 percent), with households (25 percent) and the electricity sector (11 percent) less reliant. In case of disruptions, gas-intensive industries, such as chemical and metallurgy (which comprise about 3 percent of GDP), would be severely affected. There are some mitigating factors that could reduce the adverse impact of energy supply disruptions on Poland. These include: (i) the end of the winter-heating season; (ii) gas inventories (estimated at around 30 days of imports); (iii) the long-term gas contract with Gazprom (which helps shield Poland from price hikes); and (iv) scope to import gas from Germany (rather than Eastern European neighbors, although this would not help in the case of pan-European gas disruptions). Looking ahead, Poland is in the process of building a liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal, which is expected to be operational in 2015. Trade links with Russia and Ukraine are moderate. Russia. About 5 percent of Poland's exports are to Russia (while imports from Russia represent slightly over 10 percent of the total), and about 6 percent of Poland’s exports are finally consumed in Russia. 7 percent of Polish food exports go to Russia and bans on these exports (such as the recently imposed one on pork) could have adverse effects on Polish food processing and agricultural sectors. Ukraine. Trade links with Ukraine are modest: less than 3 percent of Polish exports go to Ukraine, while Polish imports from Ukraine represent 1.3 percent of the total. FDI links are weak. Polish FDI in Russia stands at 2.5 percent of total FDI abroad (0.3 percent of GDP), while in Ukraine it is 1.9 percent (0.2 percent of GDP). Russia and Ukraine also have limited FDI positions in Poland. Direct financial linkages are limited, but indirect effects could be substantial. There are risks of contagion through confidence effects and common investor linkages.