The economy is recovering from the 2012–13 slowdown. It grew by 1.6 percent in 2013—the same as in 2009—as the slowdown in core euro area countries and adverse confidence effects weighed on private investment and consumption, alongside a contraction in public investment. A gradual, but balanced and steady recovery started in the second quarter of last year, led by improving conditions in main trading partners (especially the euro area) and a recovery in domestic demand. More recently, household consumption has continued to strengthen along with a pick-up in retail sales growth, rising confidence, low borrowing costs, and increasing real wages. The manufacturing PMI has been in expansionary territory since July 2013, and capacity utilization is at a post-crisis peak (Figure 1 and Table 1). Labor market conditions have improved, but unemployment remains high. After reaching a six-year peak of 10.6 percent in early 2013, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate started to decline. A pick-up in job creation in the export-oriented manufacturing sector helped Recent changes to the pension system caused a large one-off drop in pension fund holdings of public debt, leading to a mechanical increase in the share of foreign investors in the domestic bond market. AUT4% BEL 3%CHE3%CYP4% CE3 1%DEU16%DNK2% ESP 7%FRA13%GBR5%ITA6% LUX 11%NLD SWE4%USA5% Inward FDI Position (end of 2013:Q3) DEU 26%CIS CEE 9%GBR6%CZE FRA6%RUS5% ITA 6%NLD4%SWE3%UKR3%SVK2%HUN3% ESP 3%BEL3%others Export Shares (2013) Page 7 overall employment growth turn positive at the end of the year (Figure 2). However, at close to 10 percent (sa), the unemployment rate remains high and dominated by structural factors. Inflation remains subdued and well below the target. Despite the strengthening recovery, inflation has remained muted. At 0.3 percent (yoy) in April, it is significantly below the lower band of the target range (2.5 percent ± 1 percentage point) and core inflation (excluding food and energy) is also weak (0.8 percent in April) (Figure 3). The low inflation readings appear to reflect a combination of low imported inflation, including from energy prices, and domestic factors (weak demand in 2013, favorable weather conditions for crops in 2014, and one-offs, including reductions in electricity tariffs, may still be weighing on prices). While consumer inflation expectations are highly adaptive, consensus forecasts of professional forecasters remain well anchored. The current account balance continued to improve and the external position remained consistent with medium-term fundamentals. At 1.3 percent of GDP in 2013, the current account deficit narrowed to its lowest level in more than 15 years as the trade balance turned positive for the first time in two decades (and remained positive in the first quarter of 2014), partly on account of higher export market shares outside the euro area (Figure 4 and Table 2). External debt is high and gross external financing needs substantial, but this is in large part related to intercompany debt and parent bank funding (Annex I). While they have increased recently, net errors and omissions remain below the EU average of around 2 percent of GDP. Poland’s external position is consistent with medium-term fundamentals (Box 1). Financial markets have been resilient to Fed tapering jitters and geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine, despite capital outflows. Net portfolio and, for the first time in more than two decades, FDI flows were modestly negative in 2013 amid bouts of volatility in financial markets. Yet, on the back of strong fundamentals, sound policies, and the insurance provided by the FCL arrangement with the IMF, sovereign bond yields have remained low by historical standards and the zloty has been relatively stable (Figure 5). More recently, escalating geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine contributed to additional, moderate, financial market volatility. Although FDI was weak in 2013, this appears to reflect global trends as Poland’s share in global FDI actually increased. Domestic demand contribution GDP Real GDP growth (Percent, year-on-year)Sources: Statistics Poland and IMF staff calculations. 1.0with Euro areawith Germany Poland: Synchronization of growth rates (Correlation coefficients of quarterly GDP growth rates)Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Page 8 Box 1. External Sector Assessment The external position is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals and appropriate policies, though potential vulnerabilities exist. Current account. The current account deficit has narrowed substantially from 3.7 percent in 2012 to 1.3 percent at end-2013. The cyclically adjusted current account balance is broadly consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies. Real exchange rate. The real exchange rate is assessed to be broadly consistent with fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Alternative approaches suggest a modest undervaluation of between 0 and 8 percent (there is no estimated undervaluation using the current account norm; the estimated undervaluation using the ES estimate of the real effective exchange rate (REER) gap is 8 percent; and the estimated undervaluation using the REER regression approach is 5 percent). Nonetheless, some further reduction in the structural fiscal deficit and current account deficit would be appropriate. The zloty has fluctuated along relatively narrow margins. Capital and financial account. Financial flows have weakened, particularly in the domestic bond market, following Fed tapering-related announcements in May 2013. FDI flows have also weakened as a result of income repatriation, while EU funds—which finance the bulk of the current account—have remained stable. Although part of the decline in net FDI inflows was associated with one-off factors, going forward, financing of the widening current account could prove challenging should net FDI inflows fall significantly below current projections. Foreign asset and liability position. Substantial net IIP liabilities have stabilized and stood at 69 percent of GDP in 2013. Associated vulnerabilities are mitigated by the large and diversified share of FDI liabilities and related intercompany lending (over 40 percent of foreign liabilities are FDI investments). Reserve adequacy. Reserves are broadly adequate at about 126 percent of the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric and 100 percent of short-term debt at remaining maturities (90 percent of short-term debt at remaining maturities plus the current account deficit). However, in light of downside external risks stemming from the normalization of U.S. monetary policy and geopolitical tensions surrounding Ukraine, and in preparation for an eventual exit from the FCL arrangement with the IMF, moderate reserve accumulation would be prudent.