Growth has remained strong. Real GDP growth rate reached 3.6 percent in 2015, up from 3.3 percent in 2014, driven by strong domestic demand (Figure 13). Private consumption has been supported by declining prices, a low and declining unemployment rate, and continued robust wage growth, which boosted disposable income. Healthy credit expansion and still-accommodative financial conditions—in part on the back of quantitative easing (QE) in the euro area—helped support private investment. However, following strong real GDP growth of 4 percent (year-on-year) in the fourth quarter, the first quarter of this year recorded a growth slowdown to 2.6 percent. Nonetheless, the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) has remained in expansionary territory into 2016, retail sales grew at 5½ percent year-on-year in April, and manufacturing sentiment has remained positive (Figure 4). Wages have outpaced productivity,… …credit expanded, though with some recent weakening,… Figure 4. Poland: Recent Economic Developments …financial conditions remained accommodative,… …and PMI has continued in expansionary territory. Growth numbers refer to constant 2010 prices. Poland Euro areaSources: Haver Analytics and HSBC/Markit. Purchasing Managers' Index: Manufacturing (Diffusion index: 50+ = expansion, seasonally adjusted) WIBOR Lending standards REER Loan spread Govt bond yield EURIBOR VIX FCI Contributions to Financial Conditions Index (Percentage points of annualized q-on-q growth) Sources: Datastream, Haver Analytics, JP Morgan, NBP, Reuters, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Increase:easing of financial conditions Total Corporates Household mortgages Consumer credit Private Sector Credit Growth (Year-on-year percent change)Sources: Haver Analytics, NBP,and IMF staff calculations. Real labor productivity Real gross wages and salaries Real Labor Productivity and Wages (Year-on-year growth; percent)Sources: Eurostat, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Page 13 Financial conditions have remained supportive. A historically low policy interest rate since March 2015, low yields on local-currency government bonds, and QE by the European Central Bank (ECB) have continued to support financial conditions (Figure 5). While credit expansion has moderated recently, it has generally held up well alongside broadly unchanged credit standards in recent quarters—with the exception of housing loans, where tighter standards were associated with new prudential recommendations and reduced appetite among some banks to expand their housing loan portfolios. However, despite some gains during the first months of the year, Polish equities as of mid-May remained more than 15 percent below the level one year earlier, following sustained stock market losses starting in May last year. While long-term bond yields have remained close to recent lows, spreads to German bunds have widened by some 70 basis points between end- September 2015 and end-May 2016 (Figure 12). Figure 5. Poland: Positive Spillovers from ECB Quantitative Easing ECB quantitative easing has affected most indicators,… …resulting in a marked easing of financial conditions,... In turn, financial conditions have supported growth. …particularly owing to lower EURIBOR rates. Based on the Cross-Country Selected Issues on “Adapting to Spillovers from Unconventional Monetary Policies.” With respect to the two right-hand charts, the counterfactual FCI was constructed using projections from VARs on domestic and external financial indicators, respectively, with a sample ending in 2014Q3, before the quantitative easing (QE) announcement. QE is assumed not to impact lending standards. W EE X 2014 q4 2015 q1 Impact of QE on Financial Indicators (Percent change relative to counterfactual scenario of no QE)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. FCI (QE, actual) FCI (no QE) Impact of QE on Financial Conditions Index (Percentage points of annualized q-on-q growth)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. 2014Q42015Q1 WIBOR REER Corp loans spread Govt bond yields EURIBOR VIX Breakdown of QE impact on FCI by financial indicators (Share of change in financial indicator to total change in FCI)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Real GDP growth Real GDP growth (no QE) Impact of QE on Real GDP Growth (Percent, year-on-year real GDP growth) Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 14 Labor market conditions have continued to improve but inflation remains very low. The seasonally-adjusted harmonized unemployment rate has been on a declining trajectory for about three years, reaching 6.3 percent in April, a historical low, as employment strengthened. Alongside, year-on-year nominal wage growth has remained robust at above 3 percent in the first quarter, boosting real wages and outperforming labor productivity growth. Yet, inflation remains subdued at -0.9 percent in May, amid weak imported inflation, in particular related to low commodity prices and euro area inflation, which have had both direct and indirect spillovers on Poland (Figure 14). Core inflation has also turned negative, most recently at -0.4 percent in May. Nonetheless, while longer-term inflation expectations at the monetary policy horizon have declined somewhat, they remain anchored within the inflation tolerance band (1.5 to 3.5 percent). The external position has improved. Poland’s current account deficit declined from 2 percent of GDP in 2014 to 0.2 percent of GDP in 2015, reflecting improved terms of trade—in light of a close to 50 percent drop in oil prices—and moderately weaker non-oil imports. However, financial flows weakened as a result of reinvestment of earnings by special purpose vehicles and portfolio outflows. The overall external position in 2015 was consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies (Figure 15, Box 1, Annex I), and reserves are broadly adequate, standing at about 107 percent of the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric at the end of last year.