The outlook is for continued robust growth and subdued inflation. Healthy domestic demand is expected to maintain growth at around 3½ percent in 2015. Private consumption and investment will continue driving growth over the medium term, supported by falling unemployment, robust wage growth, and a moderate pick-up in credit growth. On the supply side, given adverse demographic trends, increasing labor participation (including of women), and boosting investment and productivity will be key to sustaining strong growth (see also Section D). Poland should continue to benefit from improved economic conditions in the euro area and higher EU structural funds. The output gap is projected to close in 2016. Nonetheless, continued low commodity prices and still-low imported inflation, combined with subdued inflation expectations, will contain inflation below the target band (1.5 to 3.5 percent) until late-2016 (Chapter I of Selected Issues). Page 15 Republic of Poland: Economic Outlook and Macro-Financial Linkages Improved financial conditions… …and continued moderate credit growth... Nonetheless, inflation would pick up only gradually. …should support domestic demand going forward. Risks have somewhat receded but remain tilted to the downside (Table 3 with the Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM)). External downside risks Volatile global financial conditions. Asynchronous monetary policies among major central banks could increase financial market volatility. Both push and pull factors could affect capital flows. On the one hand, ample liquidity in the context of the ongoing ECB QE, combined with strong economic fundamentals in Poland, could attract large capital inflows, potentially fueling asset price bubbles and sharp zloty appreciation, which could weigh on Real GDP growth (one quarter forward) Financial conditions index (VAR) Financial conditions index (factor) (RHS) Financial Conditions Index (FCI) and GDP Growth (Real GDP growth: yoy, percent)Sources: Datastream, Haver Analytics, JP Morgan, NBP, Reuters, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations based on Ho and Lu (2013), IMF Working Paper WP/13/252. Nominal GDP growth Credit growth Broad money Macro-Financial Linkages in the Medium Term Sources: IFS, NBP, and IMF staff calculations. 6Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14Jan-15Jan-16 Fuel Electricity, gas, other fuels Food Core inflation Headline inflation BaselineProjections: Contributions to CPI Inflation (Percentage points; headline inflation in percent) ProjectionsTargetSources: Haver Analytics, NBP, and IMF staff calculations. Private C Public C Investment Net exports GDP Contribution to Annual Real GDP Growth (Percentage points; real GDP growth in percent)Sources: Statistics Poland and IMF staff calculations. Page 16 inflation. On the other hand, monetary policy tightening in the United States (U.S.) could result in capital outflows, zloty depreciation, and liquidity shortages. Staff analysis (text chart) suggests that the co-movement between Polish and U.S. yields increases sharply during episodes of market stress. However, risks of outflows are mitigated by a stable and diversified investor base, Poland’s strong economic fundamentals, flexible exchange rate, and foreign exchange (FX) reserve buffers. Sovereign stress (particularly in Greece) or a protracted slowdown in the euro area. While direct linkages with Greece are limited, market pressure on the euro area from a protracted turmoil in Greece could spillover into Poland. Nonetheless, contagion to the rest of Europe and Poland could be reduced by strong policy action at the euro area level, including through liquidity support and deployment of existing firewalls. Moreover, correlation of Polish government bond yields with Greece during periods of stress has historically been limited. A protracted growth slowdown in the euro area could adversely affect Poland via strong trade and financial linkages. Conflict in Russia and Ukraine. An intensification of tensions could disrupt imported gas supplies to Poland’s heavy industry. While direct financial links are limited, spillovers could materialize through confidence channels, precipitating capital outflows. External upside risks Stronger trading partner growth. A faster-than- expected recovery in the euro area on the back of ECB QE and low oil prices would help lift growth in Poland, given high synchronization of Poland’s business cycle with Germany and the euro area. 00.20.40.60.8DEUU.S.DEUU.S.Normal timesDEU shockU.S.shock Poland's Yield Correlations with Germany and U.S. (Correlations of changes in 10-year gov. yields; Daily data 2013–15)Note: Normal times defined as absolute values of daily changes in yields below 2 standard deviations in DEU and U.S. Shock represents observations greater than 2 standard deviations in each of these countries.Sources: IMF staff calculations. 0.60.8ESPITAPRTGRC Global financial shock Country-specific financial shock Correlations with Poland Yields during Stress Times, 2013 – (Regression-based correlations )Correlations are based on estimates from regressions of daily changes in Polish yields on changes in other countries' yieldswhile controlling for DEU yields. Global and country-specific financial shocks represent periods of changes in yields greater than 2 standard deviations in the U.S. and each respective country.Sources: Haver analytics and IMF staff calculations. Euro areaGermany Poland: Synchronization of Growth Rates (Correlation coefficients of quarterly growth rates)Sources: Haver analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 17 Republic of Poland: The Transmission of Global Shocks to Growth Nonresidents hold a large share of treasury securities… …which can amplify the transmission of global financial shocks,.. …increase interest rates, and tighten financial conditions. In turn, this would hamper growth. Domestic risks Prolonged low inflation in Poland. Inflation could fail to pick up owing to external factors or if low inflation expectations become entrenched. Prolonged low inflation could ultimately have adverse balance sheet implications by reducing household debt tolerance, putting a dent in corporate and bank profits, and increasing government deficit and debt. In a tail risk scenario, this could result in an adverse loop of lower demand, higher nonperforming loans (NPLs), lower bank lending, and lower growth (Box 2 and Chapter II of Selected Issues). Weaker impetus for structural reform. Elections this year could delay some structural and financial sector reforms. Protracted reform delays could undermine potential output growth going forward. Owned by domestic banks (incl. MoF) Owned by foreign investors Poland: Ownership of Local Currency Government Bonds (Percent of treasury securities outstanding) Sources: Haver Analytics, National Authorities, and IMF staff calculations. Impact of 100 bps increase in US10Y yield Effect of U.S. 10-Year Yield on EM Yields (Panel Smooth Transition Regression Results; basis points)Source: Ebeke and Kyobe,forthcoming, IMF working paper, "Global Financial Spillovers to EM Sovereign Bond Markets; The Role of Foreign Participation and the Investor Base" Horizontalaxis: Foreign investor share in government local currency bond market (percent) WIBOR Lending standards REER Loan spread Govt bond yield EURIBOR VIX FCI Contributions to Financial Conditions Index (Percentage points of annualized q-on-q growth)Sources: Datastream, Haver Analytics, JP Morgan, NBP, Reuters, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Increase:easing of financial conditions Real GDP growth (one quarter forward) Financial conditions index (VAR) Financial Conditions Index and GDP Growth (Real GDP growth: yoy, percent)Sources: Datastream, Haver Analytics, JP Morgan, NBP, Reuters, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations based on Ho and Lu (2013), IMF Working Paper WP/13/252. Page 18 Box 2. Republic of Poland: Balance Sheet Effects from Lowflation Low inflation has so far had only limited economic impact in Poland. Strong economic activity on the back of healthy domestic demand and robust credit growth suggests that lowflation has so far not fed into the real economy. Private and public sector balance sheets are generally healthy and have weathered well two years of below-target inflation. Household debt has increased, but remains below debt tolerance thresholds. Public sector debt is on a declining path. Nonfinancial corporations and banks remain profitable. However, prolonged low inflation could have negative economic repercussions. It could exacerbate existing pockets of vulnerability, including the rising household debt burden. In a tail risk adverse scenario, protracted lowflation could reduce household debt tolerance, put a dent in corporate and bank profits, and increase government deficit and debt. Such a scenario could result in an adverse loop of lower household consumption, weaker bank and corporate profits, declining investment, and lower domestic demand pulling inflation down further (Box Figure). Households. In the near term, low inflation combined with continued healthy wage growth increases disposable income, supporting private consumption. However, protracted lowflation could eventually feed into wages and reduce households’ debt servicing capacity, ultimately resulting in lower consumption and higher NPLs. Nonfinancial corporations. In the short run, low inflation alongside still-sticky wages could reduce corporate profits. In an adverse scenario of prolonged inflation and sluggish disposable income, lower profits would induce firms to postpone investment, further reducing domestic demand. Banks. In the near term, lower interest rates could squeeze bank interest-rate margins. In an adverse scenario, lower demand for credit and rising NPLs would prompt banks to reduce credit supply. Public sector. While so far deflation has had limited impact on fiscal revenue, prolonged lowflation could reduce fiscal space and make it more difficult to achieve fiscal targets, potentially triggering procyclical fiscal consolidation. In turn, this could further harm growth. Page 19 Box 2. Republic of Poland: Balance Sheet Effects from Lowflation (concluded) Republic of Poland: Low Inflation and Risks to Balance Sheets While household balance sheets are generally healthy,… …risks from protracted lowflation include lower debt tolerance. Corporations could also face reduced profits… …as could also banks. Alongside, there are risks to the public sector deficit… …which could result in an increase in debt. Sources: Eurostat, Haver Analytics, KNF, NBP, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. See Chapter II of Selected Issues. Low inflation scenario Public Debt Debt threshold (Based on the nationaldefinition of debt) HungaryCzech Rep.PolandSlovakia Assets Liabilities Net Household Balance Sheets, 2013 (Stock of financial assets and liabilities, percent of GDP) 1.52.5Real income growthDebt limit ratioInflation rate Household debt limits (Percent of disposable income) Profits (12-month moving average) Return on assets 1/ (RHS) Banking Sector Profits (LHS: billion zloty; RHS: percent of assets)1/ 12-month profits in percent of 12-month assets. Actual Scenario A Scenario B Scenario Analysis: Corporate Profit Share 1/ (Gross operating surplus in percent of value added) 1/ Scenario A: low inflation and robust growth. Scenario B: low inflation and growth. Baseline Low inflation scenario Fiscal Balance Page 20 Appropriate policy response will depend on the nature of the risks: In the event of severe external pressure, policies should focus on preserving financial stability. The exchange rate should be allowed to play its cushioning role, while being mindful of the impact on FX denominated debt. Fiscal policy should allow automatic stabilizers to fully operate around the consolidation measures. In the event of significant capital outflows, Narodowy Bank Polski (NBP) should stand ready to provide liquidity, including in FX, to the banking sector as needed. In the event of excessive capital inflows and zloty appreciation, monetary policy should be eased and macroprudential policy should be tightened to manage risks to the financial system, arising from asset price bubbles and excessive credit growth. While prolonged lowflation is still a relatively low risk, its potential impact nonetheless underscores the importance of closely monitoring developments. If inflation fails to pick up, the NBP has ample policy space to cut rates further to avoid low inflation becoming entrenched in expectations. That said, the potential impact of lowflation on bank profits should be internalized in the authorities’ routine stress tests. Fiscal risks from lowflation should be addressed by using conservative inflation projections in budget forecasts and identifying contingency measures to respond to potential inflation surprises. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared staff’s views on economic outlook and risks. They agreed that domestic demand will remain the primary driver of growth and that inflation will gradually converge to target over the medium term, although the Ministry of Finance (MoF) thought that inflation would pick up somewhat faster than in staff’s baseline forecast. On risks, the authorities noted that Poland is well-positioned to manage excessive capital inflows or outflows given its flexible exchange rate, stable and diversified investor base, and strong fundamentals. Risks are further mitigated by a prudent debt management strategy, proactive pre-financing of this year’s government external financing needs, and broadly adequate reserves. Contingency plans are in place to ensure timely response to external shocks, including through the use of reserves to curb excessive exchange-rate volatility and via emergency liquidity provision in zloty and FX to the banking system as needed. Page 21 POLICY DISCUSSIONS: ADVANCING REFORMS TO