The banking system continues to be resilient. Stress tests conducted by the NBP indicate that the banking system can withstand adverse macroeconomic shocks with the majority of banks able to absorb potential losses. While risks to the banking sector are mitigated by low household indebtedness (Figure 9) and a narrowing funding gap, NBP stress tests show that some banks, which are largely financed with foreign funds or hold substantial foreign currency loan portfolios, may have insufficient buffers in the event of a severe liquidity shock associated also with capital outflows and zloty depreciation. Increasing buffers in these banks would further strengthen the sector’s resilience. The development of additional sources for long-term funding would also help banks prepare for Basel III liquidity requirements concerning the net stable funding ratio. Supervisory measures are further strengthening the financial system. The recommendation (to take effect from July 2014) that foreign currency mortgages be issued only to borrowers with adequate foreign currency income, alongside past supervisory measures in this area, has led to a halt in foreign currency mortgage lending. However, the share of legacy foreign currency mortgages—while declining—remains sizeable, with many exhibiting high loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. In this respect, the gradual lowering of LTV ratios on new housing loans to 80 percent in 2017 is a step in the right direction. Continued careful oversight of lending practices and credit risk management is also essential in light of recent changes replacing general caps on debt-service-to- income ratios with those derived from banks’ internal models. Greater budgetary flexibility would help the financial supervisory authority (KNF) ensure that its resources are deployed in the most effective manner. Staff urged the authorities to continue to restructure credit unions. While the credit union segment is small, with assets accounting for around 1½ percent of banking sector assets, its capital position is inadequate. Hence, in line with the 2013 FSAP recommendation, KNF has stepped up oversight of this vulnerable segment, initiating rehabilitation of a number of institutions (Table 8). A more proactive approach to address the outstanding stock of NPLs would be beneficial. The stock of NPLs in the nonfinancial sector has appeared sticky at only ½ percentage point below the 9 percent peak in January 2011. To prevent NPLs from potentially constraining credit expansion, and ultimately economic growth, tax disincentives (in the form of constraints on the deductibility of loan losses and debt relief) and legal obstacles (related to insolvency procedures) to address impaired loans should be removed. Staff strongly encouraged the authorities to complete the macroprudential and bank resolution frameworks. Legislation to create the Systemic Risk Board (SRB) involving an independent body with responsibility for systemic risk identification and analysis and with powers to issue directives and recommendations regarding the use of tools continue to be delayed. Staff urged the authorities to move ahead with the legislation as establishment of the SRB is essential for macroprudential supervision. Separately, staff welcomed continued work to overhaul the bank Page 19 resolution framework but noted that a concerted effort is needed to overcome the protracted delays in final legislation. The authorities broadly agreed with the missions recommendations. They highlighted the continued resilience of the financial system as one of Poland’s key strengths. Work to restructure the credit union segment was ongoing. The legislation to create the SRB was advancing, but the legislation to overhaul the bank resolution framework was being modified to make it consistent with the recently issued EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. On NPLs, the authorities were less concerned than staff, citing the recent pick-up in credit growth and strong bank profitability. They also noted that, in practice, the tax authorities allowed for more significant deductions of loan losses and debt relief than that which would appear based on a strict reading of the statutes.