Growth continues to strengthen. Real GDP growth reached 3.4 percent in 2014, up from 1.7 percent in 2013, supported by strong domestic demand. Higher disposable income— boosted by accelerating wages, falling unemployment, and declining prices—has buoyed private consumption. Investment has benefited from robust credit growth on the back of eased financial conditions. These trends have continued into the first quarter of 2015, with growth accelerating to 3.6 percent. High frequency indicators, including strong Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) readings, point to continued healthy economic expansion (Figure 3, Table 1). Financial conditions have eased. A cumulative 100 basis points (bps) cut in the main policy interest rate between October and March and low yields on local-currency government bonds reduced borrowing costs. In April, Poland became the first emerging market to issue foreign- currency denominated bonds at a negative yield helped by ample market liquidity following the Real growth rate of private consumptionNominal wage growth Unemployment rate (SA)Real investment growthPrivate credit growth Inflation rate 2012Q4 2013Q4 2015Q1 Poland: Changes in Economic Indicators,2012–15 Sources:Polish authorities, Eurostat, and IMF staff calculations. Page 12 launch of the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing (ECB QE) program. Credit expansion has been supported by recent easing of lending standards (except for housing loans, which saw tightening credit terms as loan-to-value (LTV) ratios were lowered), though these remain stricter than in the run-up to the global financial crisis. Equity prices have risen, benefiting from improved economic outlook and stronger equity fund flows. Volatility in international financial markets has recently increased, partly reflecting a correction of stretched bond valuations. Spreads of Polish and CE3 (Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia) long-term government bond yields to German bunds have increased slightly while equity valuations have mainly followed the improved economic conditions. Labor market conditions have improved markedly. The seasonally-adjusted harmonized unemployment rate has fallen by about 3 percentage points from its early-2013 peak to 7.9 percent in April on the back of rising employment. Nominal wages accelerated to 4.1 percent in the first quarter along with rising job vacancies. Wage growth outpaced labor productivity growth, pushing up real unit labor costs. Republic of Poland: Labor Market Developments High vacancies amid declining unemployment point to continuing economic expansion… …putting upward pressure on labor costs. Labor shortage (percent balance) Unemployment rate Poland: Beveridge Curve (in percent; seasonally adjusted) Source: Eurostat. Real labor productivity Real gross wages and salaries Poland: Labor Productivity and Wages (year-on-year growth; percent)Sources: Eurostat and Haver analytics. Large enterprises, ST Large enterprises, LT SMEs, ST SMEs, LT Housing Other consumer Credit Standards on Loans (Cumulative change in percent balance in quarterly lending survey; 2011Q1 = 0) Sources: Haver Analytics, NBP, and IMF staff calculations. WIBOR Lending standards REER Loan spread Govt bond yield EURIBOR VIX FCI Contributions to Financial Conditions Index (Percentage points of annualized q-on-q growth)Sources: Datastream, Haver Analytics, JP Morgan, NBP, Reuters, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Page 13 Inflation remains subdued. Low commodity prices and weak imported inflation, including from the euro area, have kept headline inflation in negative territory. Nonetheless, the rate of deflation slowed from a historic low of -1.6 percent in February to -1.1 percent in April. Core inflation has remained weak and stood at 0.4 percent in April year-on-year, suggesting that negative external price shocks have fed into core inflation despite the rapidly closing output gap (text chart and Cross-Country Selected Issues Paper on Low Inflation in European Inflation Targeters). Republic of Poland: Inflation Decomposition Poland’s external position is consistent with medium-term fundamentals and appropriate policies. The current account deficit declined from 3.5 percent in 2012 to 1.4 percent in 2014, benefiting from strong exports to the euro area and increasing export shares outside Europe (Box 1). While lower oil prices provided a boost to the current account, this was more than offset by higher non-oil imports (Figure 4, Table 2). External debt and gross financing needs are high but vulnerabilities are mitigated by the high share of the relatively stable intercompany debt (Annex I). 2007Q12008Q12009Q12010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q1 Administered prices Other external Other domestic EA Inflation NEER Oil Output gap HICP (adjusted) Poland: Inflation Decomposition (Percentage points) Source:Cross-Country Selected Issues Paper on Low Inflation in European Inflation Targeters. 2.02.53.02007Q12008Q12009Q12010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q1 Direct first-round Indirect first-round Second-round Poland: Contributions from Oil, NEER, and Euro Area Inflationto Headline Inflation (Percentage points) Source:Cross-Country Selected Issues Paper on Low Inflation in European Inflation Targeters. Page 14 Box 1. External Sector Assessment The external position in 2014 is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals and appropriate policies, though vulnerabilities exist As of March 2015, it appears that the positive impact of lower oil prices on the trade balance is being more than offset by strong domestic demand growth and rising import demand, leaving the overall assessment of the external position unaffected. Current account. The current account deficit declined from around 5 percent of GDP in 2010–11 to 1.4 percent of GDP in 2014. In 2015, the current account is projected to improve only marginally, despite the improvement in the oil trade deficit (3.4 percent of GDP in 2013) which is more than offset by higher non-oil imports due to strong domestic demand. The cyclically-adjusted current account balance is consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies. Real exchange rate. The real exchange rate is assessed to be broadly in line with fundamentals and desirable policy settings. Alternative approaches suggest a modest undervaluation of between 2 and 11 percent (2 percent using the current account norm; the estimated undervaluation using the external sustainability estimate of the real effective exchange rate (REER) gap is 6 percent; and the estimated undervaluation using the REER index regression approach is 2 percent and 11 percent using the levels approach). Capital inflows following ECB QE action could result in appreciation of the zloty, though the 50 bps policy interest rate cut in March could mitigate the impact. Capital and financial account. Portfolio inflows into domestic bond and equity markets have weakened in 2014. There has also been a decrease in foreign direct investment (FDI) flows, primarily reflecting high income repatriation, while EU funds—which finance the bulk of the current account—are stable. Although part of the decline in net FDI inflows was associated with one-off factors, going forward, financing of the widening current account could prove challenging should FDI inflows fall significantly below current projections. Foreign assets and liabilities. Substantial net international investment position (IIP) liabilities have stabilized and stood at 60 percent of GDP in 2014. Associated vulnerabilities are mitigated by the large and diversified share of FDI liabilities and related intercompany lending (over 40 percent of foreign liabilities are FDI investments). Reserve adequacy. Reserves are broadly adequate at about 114 percent of the IMF’s modified composite reserve adequacy metric at end-2014.