Target Monetary policy was eased in March. Monetary policy has been complicated by Poland’s tight integration with European and global markets. Inflation has been below the lower bound of the target band for more than two years and in deflation for ten months, largely reflecting declining commodity prices and low imported inflation. This has gradually pushed up real interest rates. The robust domestic demand has yet to lift core inflation and inflation expectations have declined (Figure 5). Against this backdrop, the MPC cut the policy interest rate in March by 50 bps to a historic low of 1.5 percent, bringing the cumulative reduction in the main policy interest rate since October to 100 bps (Figure 6). A draft law on changes to the NBP law, including staggered terms for MPC members, is progressing. The policy interest rate cut is welcome, but the announcement of the end of the easing cycle was premature. The October and March policy interest rate cuts, alongside continued strong domestic demand and wage growth and ECB QE, should help boost domestic and imported inflation. Taking into account monetary transmission lags (6 to 8 quarters), staff projects inflation to gradually return to the target band by end-2016. Nonetheless, weak inflation expectations point to downside risks to this forecast (Chapter I of Selected Issues). Jan-10Jan-12Jan-14Jan-16 Actual Desk baseline NBP March projection Consensus forecast, May Inflation Projections (Year-on-year inflation in percent) Sources: Concensus Economics, Haver Analytics, NBP, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Target±1ppt tolerance bands Page 22 Republic of Poland: Inflation Forecast and Second-Round Effects Inflation is projected to remain low… …amid sizeable potential indirect and second-round effects. An easing bias should be maintained. The need for further monetary easing should be guided by a data-driven approach, including by monitoring inflation expectations, wage growth, exchange-rate developments, and the outlook for economic activity. Additional policy action would be necessary to return inflation to target if inflation expectations were to disappoint, or if widening interest-rate differentials result in unwarranted upward pressure on the exchange rate, undermining the inflation objective and ultimately competitiveness and growth. Risks related to monetary policy easing appear limited, with no indication of asset price bubbles or excessive credit growth. Nonetheless, close monitoring of bank risk-taking should continue in light of potential search for yield in the low-interest-rate environment. Republic of Poland: Credit and Asset Price Indicators Credit growth remains moderate… …and there is no sign of asset price bubbles 4Jan-14Jul-14Jan-15Jul-15Jan-16Jul-16 Actual Desk baseline Min to max Consumer Price Inflation: Forecast Variation (Percent, year-on-year)Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. See Chapter I of Selected Issues for details.Target ±1 percentagepoint tolerance bands Indirect and second-round effects (percent of the shock, RHS) Effect (with indirect and second-round effects) Effect (without indirect and second-round effects) Effect on CPI Inflation of Protracted 9 Percentage Point Decline in Oil and Coal Price Inflation (Percentage points) Source: IMF staff calculations. See Chapter I of Selected Issues for details. Effect on CPI inflation relative to the baseline The shock occurs at t=1 and lasts seven months Change in credit-to-GDP (percentage points) Growth of credit-to-GDP (percent, annual) Credit-to-GDP gap (regression-based, st. dev) 1/ High alert On alert Credit Cycle Indicators (Data as of 2015Q1, growth and changes are year-on-year) Sources: Polish authorities and IMF staff calculations. 1/ 2014Q2. High alert:change in credit/GDP >5 percentage points or gap  standard devision and growth of credit/GDP  10 percent. Change in credit-to-GDP (percentage points)House price growth (percent)Equity price returnEquity premium Latest quarter Thresholds Sources: Country authorities,Datastream, Haver analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Asset Price Indicators (Data as of2015Q1, unless otherwise noted)Threshold:EM return Threshold: Avg. 2007Q1 to 2010Q3Latest: 2014Q4 Threshold: Historical average Page 23 Moderate reserve accumulation would be prudent. Reserves increased by 7 percent in euro terms in 2014 and are broadly adequate at about 114 percent of the IMF’s modified ARA metric. In light of downside external risks, continued moderate reserve accumulation would help safeguard against external shocks. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment. The authorities recognized the downside risks to the inflation forecast. However, they stressed that, so far, low inflation had supported domestic demand and growth and did not appear to have had negative effects on the real economy. Some members of the MPC noted that the March announcement of the end to the easing cycle would not preclude further adjustment should growth significantly underperform. At the same time, the announcement would help maintain financial market stability by limiting uncertainty about monetary policy.