Substantial cuts in policy interest rates last year helped ease financial conditions. The key policy rate was lowered 225 basis points to a historical low of 2.5 percent between November 2012 and July 2013. This improved financial conditions and transmitted into lower lending rates, suggesting that the monetary transmission mechanism is working (Figure 8 and Table 5). While ending the easing cycle, the Monetary Policy Council (MPC) initiated forward guidance to maintain rates at their current levels for an extended period (currently until at least the end of the third quarter of 2014). While acknowledging the importance of the past monetary easing, staff noted that further cuts may be needed if the recovery falters or inflation fails to pick up. Staff emphasized that monetary policy is at a challenging juncture: inflation remains well below the target range, but economic activity is strengthening and credit growth is rising. Though inflation is very low, this appears to partly reflect external factors as imported inflation and energy price inflation are extremely weak. At the same time, the economy is steadily improving. CPI Core CPI (excl. food and energy) Inflation (Year-on-year inflation in percent) Sources: Haver Analytics, NBP, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Target with +/-1pp tolerance bands Page 14 Monetary conditions remain supportive—lending rates have continued to decline and credit growth is rising (and now stands at around 5 percent). Given staff’s projection of strengthening domestic demand growth (which is highly correlated with inflation 2–3 quarters forward) and the closing of the output gap in 2016, inflation is projected to rise toward the target under current policies. While the Monetary Policy Council has appropriately kept rates on hold, it should stand ready to further reduce rates if the recovery falters or if revised projections indicate that inflation would remain well below target for a protracted period (taking into account monetary policy transmission lags). On the latter, second round effects from low energy prices could weigh on core inflation, entrenching expectations of low inflation going forward. To the extent that inflation remains low due to subdued imported inflation, further rate cuts may also be associated with moderate zloty depreciation, which should help lift imported inflation. Staff suggested that moderate reserve accumulation would be prudent. International reserves at about 126 percent of the IMF’s composite reserve adequacy metric are broadly adequate. However, in light of downside external risks—including from U.S. Fed tapering and geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine—and in preparation for an eventual exit from the FCL arrangement, moderate reserve accumulation would be prudent. In the event of severe external pressures, the exchange rate should be allowed to play its appropriate cushioning role , taking into account its impact on the stock of foreign currency mortgages. Intervention, including verbal, could be used to curb excess volatility. Meanwhile, the NBP should continue to stand ready to ensure adequate zloty and FX liquidity in the banking sector. To the extent that inflation fails to pick up, severe external pressures may limit the scope for policy rate cuts. The authorities agreed that monetary policy faced challenges, but were more cautious than staff regarding the potential for further lowering the policy rate. In particular, the authorities felt that low inflation would primarily pose concerns if the recovery faltered. While they agreed that part of the low inflation in Poland was imported or affected by one-off factors, they viewed this as generally favorable as low food and energy prices could be having virtuous second- round effects (by lowering other prices) and thus boosting household purchasing power. Nonetheless, the authorities were of the view that inflation would pick up along with growing private consumption. On reserves, they agreed that moderate reserve accumulation would be prudent. Page 15