The banking sector is well capitalized and resilient to external shocks. Capital buffers are high and the banking system is liquid, with capital adequacy at 14.7 percent in the fourth quarter, a declining loan-to-deposit ratio, and liquidity above the regulatory minimum (Figure 7, Table 5). The reliance on foreign funding has declined (Figure 8) and the recent Asset Quality Review (AQR) and stress tests by the Financial Supervision Authority (KNF), performed alongside the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment, confirmed the sector’s resilience to shocks, including substantial exchange-rate depreciation. The authorities target a gradual increase in reserves in euro terms (rather than in U.S. dollars (US$)), given close integration with the euro area and a large share of external debt denominated in euros. CET1 after AQRBaseline scenario adjustment CET1 after AQR and baseline scenarioAdverse scenario adjustment CET1 after AQR and adverse scenario CET1 Adjustment AQR and Stress Tests: Impact on CET1 Changes in Polish Banks (Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) in percent)Sources: NBP Financial Stability Report and IMF staff calculations. +0.2-1.8713.3111.64 Page 24 However, some legacy vulnerabilities remain: Foreign-currency mortgages. While tighter prudential regulation has halted new FX lending, a substantial legacy stock of these loans remains. Close to half of mortgages are denominated in FX (mostly Swiss franc), exposing households and banks to sudden zloty depreciation—as was the case in January when the zloty depreciated around 20 percent against the Swiss franc. As such, the January episode had little macroeconomic impact and high capital buffers in banks mitigated financial stability risks. In addition, the availability of emergency liquidity assistance from the NBP, supported by the swap line with the Swiss National Bank, further mitigated risks (Appendix II). Nonperforming loans. While NPLs have gradually declined during the past two years, they remain elevated at above 8 percent of total loans and are particularly high in the consumer loans and small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME) segments. Credit unions. Credit unions account for a small segment of the financial sector, with assets corresponding to about 1 percent of banking sector assets. However, the segment is weak and KNF is actively working on its restructuring, including through takeovers and bankruptcy. The restructuring cost the budget about 0.1 percent of GDP in 2014, putting a dent in Bank Guarantee Fund (BFG) resources. Nonetheless, doubled financial sector contributions in 2015 should help replenish BFG funds. Nonfinancial Sector Loans to Deposits ( Percent) Sources: KNF and IMF staff calculations. 3.0Sep-11Mar-12Sep-12Mar-13Sep-13Mar-14Sep-14 Interquartile range Median Mean Supervisory M2 Liquidity Standard at Commercial Banks (Ratio) Source: NBP Financial Stability Report, January 2015. Regulatory minimum Page 25 Republic of Poland: Credit Union Capital and Deposits Credit unions are heavily under-capitalized… …with the potential for eroding BFG resources. Work to strengthen the financial safety net and supervision has continued, albeit with delays. Progress has been made in implementing the 2013 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) recommendations (Table 6). A draft law empowering the Financial Stability Committee to carry out macroprudential oversight—allowing early detection and prevention of systemic risk—is moving forward. However, preparation of legislation on the bank resolution framework that would also cover credit unions has been delayed by legal challenges related to the role of the judiciary in the resolution process. Elections this year risk delaying the adoption of final legislation. Addressing legacy vulnerabilities will buttress financial stability and promote continued healthy credit expansion. Foreign-currency mortgages. Given limited macroeconomic or financial stability concerns, staff supported the authorities’ approach of case-by-case restructuring of distressed Swiss franc denominated mortgages following the recent Swiss franc appreciation. Implementing the Financial Stability Committee’s recommendation for banks to pass on the negative Swiss franc LIBOR rates to customers and not require additional collateral would allow burden sharing between banks and mortgage holders. Nonperforming loans. Changes in the consumer bankruptcy law have shortened the maximum period to repay debt. A new bankruptcy and insolvency law, which eases restructuring and insolvency procedures to encourage restructuring (instead of liquidation) of viable firms has been finalized and is expected to take effect on January 1, 2016. These measures should help lower the level of NPLs. Credit unions. Staff supported the authorities’ ongoing work to restructure the credit union segment. Without rehabilitation program Under rehabilitation program BFG funds Source:s KNF, BFG, and IMF staff calculations.1/ Ex-ante guarantee funds in BFG; 2015 includes new contributions but excludesvaluation changes. CreditUnion Deposits and BFG Funds 1/ (PLN billion, beginning of period)(estimate) 60.00.51.01.52.02.53.02013Q32013Q42014Q12014Q22014Q32014Q4 Funding gap reported by SKOKs (LHS) KNF corrections (LHS) CAR reported by SKOKs (RHS) CAR adjusted for KNF corrections (RHS) Sources: NBP,KNF, and IMF staff calculations.1/ Required capital adequacy for credit unions (SKOKs): 5 percent; Funding gap: capital needed to reach this ratio. Credit Union (SKOK) Funding Gap and Capital Adequcy 1/ (LHS:PLN billion; RHS: percent) Page 26 Implementation of key financial sector reforms should be expedited. Finalizing the macroprudential framework would help manage systemic risks to the financial system, for example related to asset price bubbles or excessive credit expansion, not least associated with accommodative monetary policy. In addition, continued strengthening of macroprudential policies to reduce risks of rapid household debt accumulation would reduce macro-financial risks (Chapter II of Selected Issues). Implementing the bank resolution framework would enhance the effectiveness of crisis response. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed on the importance of finalizing key financial sector reforms. They noted that vulnerabilities associated with Swiss franc mortgages and credit unions do not pose financial stability risks. In the context of ongoing healthy credit expansion, the authorities were not especially concerned about the level of NPLs, which they highlighted were already on a downward trajectory. They concurred that swift completion of the bank resolution framework and implementation of the macroprudential framework would be important to ensure a strong financial safety net and help prevent systemic risks.