The banking sector remains well-capitalized amid weakening profitability. Profitability has declined markedly during the past year amid narrowing interest margins (Figure 10) and other costs on banks, including additional contributions to the Bank Guarantee Fund (BFG). Nonetheless, capital adequacy remained robust (above 15 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015), liquidity sufficient (liquid assets to total assets of more than 22 percent in the first quarter of this year, declining loans-to-deposits ratio, and almost all banks complying with the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) requirement) (Figure 11), and reliance on foreign funding manageable. NPLs are gradually coming down, though are still high in some segments (Figures 17 and 18) despite strong growth and falling unemployment. Credit standards on loans have remained broadly unchanged in recent quarters, with the exception of housing loans, where standards tightened on the back of new prudential recommendations and reduced appetite among some banks for expanding the housing loan portfolio. However, new policies could significantly worsen financial sector conditions. While the NBP has recently noted the banking sector’s continued stability, it has stressed that the sector’s resilience to shocks has weakened substantially on the back of new fiscal measures imposed on banks. Bank tax. According to the NBP, the bank tax, combined with regulatory costs, could increase the share of banks with negative net earnings from 2 to 22 percent of banking sector assets and reduce net earnings of the commercial banking sector by 60 percent. This in turn could slow credit expansion and have adverse macro-financial implications (Box 4). See NBP, Financial Stability Report, February, 2016. 4045201120122013201420152016Q1 2/ Net interest income Non-interest expense 1/ Net operating income Net Interst Income and Non-Interest Expense (PLN billion)Sources: KNF and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Administrative costs and depreciation. 2/ 2016Q1 is annualized. < -1%< -1% ; -0,5%)< -0,5% ; 0%)< 0% ; +0,5%)< +0,5% ; +1%)>= 1% September 2015 Simulation Estimated Impact of the Bank Asset Tax on Commercial Banks' Return on Assets (Share in banking sector's assets, percent)Sources: NBP, Financial Stability Report, February, 2016.Note: The analysis includes costs associated with the asset tax, payments to BFG andthe Borrowers Support Fund, and a decline in interest rates as per FRA contracts.Return on Assets Negative return on assets Positive return on assets Page 31 Figure 10. Poland: Contribution of Narrowing Margins to Declining Profitability Profitability has declined…. …across all sizes of banks,… The narrow margins have limited profitability. …as interest margins have narrowed. Figure 11. Poland: Liquidity and Credit Indicators Loans-to-deposits are trending down. Credit standards are broadly unchanged, except for tightening on housing. Nonfinancial Sector Loans to Deposits (Percent)Sources: KNF and IMF staff calculations. Up to 5 billion 6-20 billion 20-60 billion > 61 billion Bank Profitability (Net income relative to average assets, percent)Sources: Bankscope and IMF staff calculations. Actual Net interest margin at 2014 level (40 basis points higher) Bank Profitability: Impact of Narrowing Net Interest Margin (Net income relative to average total assets, percent) 1/Sources: Bankscope and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Based on system GMM regression on data for 39 commercial banks and 16 financial institutions in Poland, controlling for bank characteristics such as level of capitalization, equity, bank size, and cost-to-income ratio. Net interest margin is defined as interest revenue less interest expenditure in percent of assets. Profits (12-month moving average) Return on assets 1/ (RHS) Banking Sector Profits (LHS: billion zloty; RHS: percent of assets)Sources: KNF and IMF staff calculations.1/ 12-month profits in percent of 12-month assets. Income 1/ Expenses 1/ Margin (RHS) 2/ Interest Income, Expenses, and Margin (LHS: billion zloty; RHS: percent of assets)Sources: KNF and IMF staff calculations.1/ Monthly income and expenses.2/ Interest income less expense; 12-month sum in percent of average assets. Large enterprises, ST Large enterprises, LT SMEs, ST SMEs, LT Housing Other consumer Credit Standards on Loans (Cumulative change in percent balance in quarterly lending survey; 2011Q1 = 0)Sources: Haver Analytics, NBP, and IMF staff calculations. Page 32 Box 4. Poland: Macro-Financial Implications of the Bank Tax In February 2016, Poland introduced a new tax on bank assets. Staff analysis suggests that the tax will likely significantly reduce bank profits with negative implications for credit and economic growth. However, the negative economic effects of the tax can be mitigated through better design. The bank tax can significantly reduce bank profits, slowing down credit and economic growth. The tax is levied on total assets (less PLN 4 billion, own funds, and purchased sovereign debt) at a monthly rate of 0.0366 percent. In turn, 2016 tax outlays paid by banks could double relative to 2015. Empirical analysis suggests that the tax, combined with recent regulatory costs on banks (including increased contributions to the BFG and contributions to finance the Borrower Support Fund, could reduce bank profitability by 30 percent relative to 2015. In turn, this would reduce credit growth by 3 to 4 percentage points relative to a no-tax scenario. Lower credit growth would reduce consumption and investment and ultimately lower GDP growth by up to 0.4 percentage points by end-2016. There are additional potential economic implications of the tax. The tax creates an incentive for banks to increase their holdings of government bonds, which could potentially crowd out private sector credit and intensify adverse feedback loops between the sovereign and banks, should public finances come under pressure. To mitigate the impact of the tax on profitability, banks could also shift away from corporate to more risky consumer lending, where spreads are higher, or shift lending activities to less-regulated non-banks. In turn, corporates may be able to obtain loans from other segments such as leasing companies. Also, incentives to limit the size of assets at the end of the month when the tax is levied could unduly constrain short-term liquidity in the interbank market. The negative economic effects of the bank asset tax could be mitigated through better design. To the extent that a tax on banks is desired to raise revenue, a Financial Activities Tax (FAT) would be less distortionary for the private sector and the economy in general than a tax on assets (IMF, 2010). Denmark, Iceland, and Israel, for example, have imposed a FAT. A FAT, levied on the sum of profits and remuneration of financial institutions, is similar to a value added tax (VAT) from which the financial sector is currently exempt. Unlike the current bank asset tax, a FAT does not distort the structure of the activities undertaken by financial institutions themselves, as the tax depends on the level of profit, and not on how profits are generated. For example, a 10–13 percent levy on bank profits and remunerations could generate the same revenue of PLN 4 billion expected from the current bank asset tax. _______________________________________ Based on Chapter III of Selected Issues. Israel levies a 17 percent (standard VAT rate) FAT. Iceland levies a 5.5 percent tax on financial institutions’ wages and a 6 percent tax on profits above ISK 1 billion. Denmark levies a 10.5 percent tax on wages. With tax outlays as of 2015 After bank tax (Approach 1) After bank tax (Approach 2) Private Credit Growth: Impact Analysis (Percent, year-on-year)Sources: Haver Analytics and Bankscope. Note: Based on VAR model of log of credit and log of deposits with GDP growth rate and lagged net interest margin and lagged tax to pretax income ratio. Data on credit growth does not cover "claims on other sectors", and is different from the series used in the IMF staff tables where source for data is IFS. -35-30-25-20-15-10-50Taxes at 2015 levelBank asset taxBank asset and increased holdings of government securities Bank Profitability: Impact Analysis (Change in net income relative to average assets, percent)Sources: Bankscope and IMF staff calculations. Note: Based on results of System GMM regression. Impact is assessed on the annual levels of returns on average assets. With tax outlays as of 2015 After bank tax (Approach 1) After bank tax (Approach 2) Real GDP Growth: Impact Analysis (Percent, year-on-year) Sources: Haver Analytics and Bankscope.Note: Based on OLS regression of real GDP growth rate on lagged real GDP growth rates and lagged credit growth rates. Page 33 Foreign-currency (FX) mortgages. Although virtually no new FX lending is taking place following stronger prudential measures by the KNF, the outstanding stock of FX mortgages accounted for about 9¼ percent of 2015 GDP at end-March 2016. Against concerns that some of these loans were extended without adequate consumer information, a framework was proposed in January for the blanket conversion of these mortgages into zloty, irrespective of borrowers’ income conditions and payment capacity. Following KNF’s assessment that it could cost the banking sector PLN 67 billion (3.7 percent of 2015 GDP)— close to six times the value of 2015 banking sector profits—and result in several bank bankruptcies and associated fiscal costs from deposit guarantees, a new proposal is being developed by the President’s office. At this point, several alternative options for addressing FX mortgages are being discussed, and their total cost remains unclear. Credit unions and cooperative banks. The restructuring of the non-systemic credit union sector (with assets corresponding to less than 1 percent of banking sector assets) has continued. Bankruptcy of a cooperative bank in the fall of 2015 added costs to banks of PLN 2 billion. Staff stressed the importance of safeguarding financial sector stability. As banks are operating in an environment of reduced interest margins, lower profits, and a distortionary tax on bank assets, lending activity could shift toward lending segments with higher profit margins, such as consumer loans, or shift into the less-regulated non-bank sector. In that respect, recent regulation on non-bank lending companies, which should help prevent the buildup of new vulnerabilities, is welcome (see ¶28). Nonetheless, newly introduced financial sector measures, as well as other costs on banks, could significantly lower profits and weaken credit expansion and economic growth, with repercussions for fiscal consolidation. Potential bank failures could also feed back into the public sector balance sheet. In this regard, the impact of any new measures— particularly FX conversion and its interaction with other financial measures—on the health of the financial sector and the economy more broadly should be carefully thought through and the introduction of any destabilizing measures should be avoided. Bank tax. As currently designed, the tax could negatively affect lending and financial intermediation. Instead, a financial activities tax on profits and remuneration (proxying VAT from which the financial sector is exempt), would be less distortionary. Foreign-currency mortgages. Since foreign-currency mortgages are not of systemic macroeconomic or financial stability concern, blanket conversion schemes should be avoided. Instead, the focus should be on case-by-case restructuring, taking into account the level of debtor distress and payment ability. Furthermore, the new temporary payment relief scheme for zloty and FX mortgages should be allowed time to work before considering any In addition to low interest margins and the bank tax, higher contributions to the BFG are also expected to reduce bank profits. Page 34 other measures to assist FX mortgage holders. Recent amendments to the consumer protection law, which took effect as of April 2016, should also help prevent misselling of financial products by banks going forward. Prudential measures related to new FX loans should continue restricting FX loans to individuals with adequate earnings in the corresponding currency. Credit unions and cooperative banks. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue restructuring of the credit union segment. In light of costs associated with the recent bankruptcy of a cooperative bank, the new bank resolution framework should be implemented expeditiously to ensure the availability of state-of-the-art resolution tools. A strengthened financial sector framework now in place should mitigate risks going forward. The authorities have completed a macroprudential framework, which allows for early detection and prevention of systemic risk, and a law on covered bonds, which over time should help support stable funding. The new bank resolution framework, in accordance with the European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), is progressing. Finally, recent regulation on non-banks limited non-interest costs of loans and constrained the practice of rolling over credit to prevent escalating debts, in particular related to consumer lending. Authorities’ views While the NBP shared many of staff’s concerns, the MoF was more optimistic concerning foreign-currency mortgage conversion and the effects of the bank tax. The authorities generally agreed that the bank tax has squeezed liquidity in some parts of the banking sector toward the end of the month and has incentivized banks to hold more government bonds. However, they noted that a notable shift toward more risky lending had so far not been observed. In addition, the MoF highlighted their intentions to evaluate the performance of the bank tax and adjust it if deemed necessary. While the NBP acknowledged that a costly blanket foreign-currency mortgage conversion scheme could be potentially destabilizing, the President’s office assured staff that it is aware of these risks and that any solution would thus aim to preserve financial stability. At the same time, it noted its commitment to help foreign-currency mortgage holders in difficult situations. The MoF highlighted the recent consultative process with multiple agencies and stakeholders that contributed to the decision to revisit the design of the proposed conversion scheme to ensure that any future proposal safeguards financial stability.