On the basis of current policies, the outlook is for continued strong growth and rising but low inflation. Real growth is expected to remain at 3½ percent in 2016 and accelerate to 3.7 percent in 2017 on the back of strong private consumption, boosted by a new child benefits program, opening a positive output gap. This, together with dissipating effects from external price shocks, should help gradually nudge inflation toward the lower bound of the target band (1.5–3.5 percent) by the end of 2017 (Figure 6). See Cross-Country Report on Inflation, Selected Issues, IMF Country Report No. 15/184, 2015. According to CenEA think tank estimates, the 500+ child benefits program would reduce poverty and inequality. Specifically, disposable income of the poorest households with at least one child (lower decile) will increase by 30 percent, while the richest households (top decile) will gain only 2 percent. The median household with children will receive an additional PLN400 per month, yielding 9 percent higher disposable income. PLN per month (left scale) Percent change (right scale) Impact on Household Disposable Income of 500+ Child Benefit Program (Increase in Disposable Income by Decile)Income decileSources: CenEA and Citi. Page 15 Box 1. Poland: External Sector Assessment The external position in 2015 was broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. However, vulnerabilities exist. Current account. Poland’s current account deficit declined from 2 percent of GDP in 2014 to 0.2 percent of GDP in 2015, largely reflecting improved terms of trade and somewhat weaker non-oil import volume. The oil deficit declined from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2014 to 2 percent in 2015 as oil prices fell by close to 50 percent. In 2016, the current account deficit is projected to widen on the back of stronger domestic demand. The current account is broadly consistent with fundamentals and desirable policies. Real exchange rate. The average real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciated by 3 percent in 2015 relative to 2014, largely reflecting nominal depreciation vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and the Swiss franc. The REER has depreciated about 2 percent as of April 2016 relative to its end 2015 level. Various approaches suggest a modest undervaluation between 2 and 14 percent. The REER gap implied by the current account approach is -2 percent; the external sustainability approach suggests a REER gap of -6 percent; -5 percent using the REER index regression approach; and -14 percent using the levels approach. Owing to large residuals in the REER-level regressions, staff puts more weight on the other approaches. Hence, staff assesses Poland’s real exchange rate in 2015 to be close to a level consistent with fundamentals and desirable policy settings with the REER gap centered around -5 percent within a range of -10 to 0 percent. Capital and financial account. Bond and equity markets have experienced portfolio investment outflows since the second quarter of 2015. The larger outflows in the first two months of 2016, which were in part driven by maturing external debt, also reflect a more general EM asset sell-off on the back of heightened global risks. Foreign direct investment (FDI) also declined, mainly reflecting reinvestment of earnings by special purpose vehicles. EU funds—which finance the bulk of the current account and experienced a temporary decline in 2015 at the end of the EU budget cycle—are expected to increase in 2016. Although some of the decline in net FDI inflows was temporary, financing a widening current account in the event of oil price reversal could prove challenging if FDI inflows fall significantly below current projections. Foreign assets and liabilities. A large negative net international investment position (NIIP) remained broadly stable at around -60 percent of GDP in 2014 and 2015 as the valuation effects resulting from the depreciation of the zloty against the U.S. dollar and the Swiss Franc were offset by an improved current account balance. Associated vulnerabilities are mitigated by diversified FDI liabilities (accounting for over 40 percent of foreign liabilities) and related intercompany lending. Reserve adequacy. Reserves are broadly adequate at about 107 percent of the IMF’s modified composite reserve adequacy metric at end-2015. Risks to the outlook are increasingly on the downside (Text-Table 1). External. Downside external risks have increased moderately since the 2016 Flexible Credit Line (FCL) review. Downside risk. Unanticipated changes in growth and financial fundamentals in large economies could heighten financial volatility, which could be further exacerbated should British voters decide to leave the European Union. Persistently low inflation and debt overhang in the euro area could result in a protracted growth slowdown, spilling over to Poland through both trade and financial channels. A significant slowdown in large emerging markets (EMs) could raise risk aversion and trigger an EM asset sell-off, propagating to Poland through high foreign investor participation in the bond market. Page 16 Upside risk. Stronger-than-expected growth in the euro area on the back of ECB QE could further lift growth and inflation in Poland. A faster pick-up in oil prices could speed up convergence of inflation to target. The output gap is turning positive,… …and wages are growing steadily. Figure 6. Poland: Economic Outlook Domestic services inflation remains stable and positive,… …and headline inflation should gradually strengthen. Domestic. While some new policy measures may boost near-term growth, domestic policies have increased uncertainty. Downside risk. The medium-term outlook is increasingly uncertain in light of new policies and potential weakening of key institutions. Distortionary sectoral taxes could further weigh on investor sentiment. Lending activity could shift to less regulated non-banks, increasing vulnerabilities. Conversion of foreign-currency mortgages into zloty, depending on its design and implementation, could wipe out bank profits and significantly dent capital adequacy, putting financial stability at risk. Fiscal slippages could also occur given uncertain HICP Assumed high domestic content 1/ Assumed high import content 2/ Energy Harmonized Consumer Price Inflation (Percent, year-on-year)Sources: Eurostat, Haver Analytics, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Servicesinflation. 2/ Non-energy durable industrial goods inflation. -1012345Jan-11Jan-13Jan-15Jan-17 Actual Desk baseline NBP projection, March Consensus forecast, May CPI Inflation: Projections (Percent, year-on-year)Sources: Concensus Economics, Haver Analytics, NBP, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Target ±1 percentage point tolerance bands Inflation Nominal wage growth Credit growth Wage and Credit Growth (Percent, year-on-year) Sources: NBP, Haver Analytics, Statistics Poland, and IMF staff calculations. Output gap (Percent of potential GDP) Unemployment rate (RHS) Output Gap and the Unemployment Rate (Percent)Sources: GUS, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Page 17 yield of announced measures, legal risks, and in light of additional measures under consideration (e.g., a potential reduction in the pension age). A higher perceived risk of political and social instability and policy unpredictability could make Poland less attractive to foreign investors. All these risks could trigger additional rating downgrades and increase debt servicing costs (Figure 7). External factors could continue to depress inflation and weigh on interest margins, bank profitability, and growth. In a tail-risk scenario, inflation expectations could become dislodged and have negative implications for the real economy. Upside risk. Near-term expansionary measures could provide a larger-than-expected boost to growth. Inflation could also pick up sooner than expected. Figure 7. Poland: Macro-Financial Implications of Financial Measures See “Balance Sheet Effects from Lowflation,” Chapter II of IMF Country Report No. 15/183. Bankprofitability/capital adequacy decline Private sector activity declines Pressure on public finances Revenue Bank tax and potentialFX conversion Expenditure Page 18 Risk 1. Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions 2. Sharper-than- expected global growth slowdown Y Text-Table 1. Poland: Risk Assessment Matrix Relative Likelihood and Transmission Channels Expected Impact of Risk Policy Recommendations Sharp asset price adjustment could occur as Investors could reallocate assets away The exchange rate should be allowed to Medium Medium investors reassess underlying risk and respond to unanticipated changes in growth and financial fundamentals in large economies, the Fed policy rate path, and increases in U.S. term premia. This could trigger capital outflows, with high participation of foreign investors in the domestic bond market entailing a potential transmission channel. Ample liquidity in the context of the ongoing quantitative easing by the European Central Bank (ECB QE), combined with strong economic fundamentals in Poland, could mitigate the impact of tighter and more volatile global financial conditions. from Poland, resulting in capital flow reversals and zloty depreciation. float freely, but intervention could be used to dampen excessive volatility. Liquidity in the FX derivatives market Fiscal policy should allow automatic could be adversely affected, increasing banks’ hedging costs. Risks are mitigated by strong liquidity positions in the banking sector and prudent public debt management. stabilizers to work as needed. Interest rate hikes could be used to stem capital outflow pressure. The Narodowy Bank Polski (NBP) should provide liquidity support (including in FX) if needed. The FCL arrangement could be used if it becomes necessary. Low/Medium Medium Significant slowdown in China could result in Indirect trade linkages to China through Monetary policy should be further eased. weak domestic demand, which further suppresses commodity prices, roils global financial markets, and reduces global growth. the German supply chain would lower Polish exports to Germany and other CEE countries. Fiscal automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate. High /Medium Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies, especially the euro area, could undermine medium-term growth in emerging markets as easy global financial conditions come to an end alongside insufficient reform progress. Financial volatility raises risk aversion, causing capital outflows from emerging markets, including Poland. Medium Significant trade linkages with Europe would weaken growth in Poland through lower exports and adverse confidence effects. NPLs would increase as growth slows. Risks are mitigated by relatively stable investor base and the banking sector’s strong capital position. B C B C Page 19 B C Y Text-Table 1. Poland: Risk Assessment Matrix (continued) Risk Relative Likelihood and Transmission Channels Expected Impact of Risk Policy Recommendations Medium Medium 3. Protracted period of Inflation could fail to pick up as envisaged in the low inflation baseline—either on account of external factors (low imported inflation) or domestic factors (entrenched low inflation expectations)—and remain low for a protracted period. Very low inflation would increase (ex- post) real interest rates and weigh on balance sheets, deterring investment and growth. Monetary policy should be eased further. Forward guidance could help anchor inflation expectations. The exchange rate should be allowed to To the extent that household inflation float freely. expectations in Poland are adaptive, breaking out of a protracted low inflation environment could be more difficult than in countries where inflation expectations are well anchored. Risks are mitigated by still-strong domestic demand. Medium High Weakening of key institutions could result in further ratings downgrades and increase the perceived risk of political and social instability and policy unpredictability. The new bank tax could reduce profits, deter credit expansion, and shift lending activity to shadow banks. A retail sales tax could discourage retail activity and result in cascading taxation. Costly conversion of foreign currency mortgages could put financial stability at risk. Lowering the retirement age would reduce pension replacement rates and labor force participation. Ratings downgrades could push up Maintain strong policies and institutions, financing costs. Increased policy uncertainty would make Poland less attractive to foreign investors. Interaction of fiscal and financial sector including a credible fiscal policy and central bank independence, as these are prerequisites for durable and sustainable growth. measures could result in a vicious cycle of weaker public finances and financial sector health and lower growth. Refrain from introducing destabilizing policies, including blanket conversion of foreign currency mortgages. Reduced pension replacement rates Reconsider reducing pension age. would increase the risk of old-age poverty, with associated higher reliance on social benefits, and significantly weaken public finances. Lower labor force participation would reduce potential growth. 4. Domestic policy uncertainty and policy missteps Page 20 Text-Table 1. Poland: Risk Assessment Matrix (concluded) Risk Relative Likelihood and Transmission Channels Expected Impact of Risk Policy Recommendations High Medium 5. British voters elect to leave the EU Y Heightened global financial volatility with potential for knock-on risks from financial market dislocations, causing liquidity and funding freeze in parts of global financial markets. Slowdown of direct trade with the U.K. and indirect trade via other EU trading partners. Lower EU fund transfers, assuming no compensation for lost contribution from the U.K. Restrictions on migration to U.K. Direct financial links to the U.K. are Near term: limited, but indirect links through financial spillovers to the euro area could affect Polish banks and corporates that rely on foreign funding. The impact would depend on the nature of the possible new relationship between the U.K. and the EU. The U.K. is Poland’s second largest trading partner, accounting for 7 percent of exports, with added indirect trade via other EU economies, implying economically important negative impact on Poland’s exports and growth. The exchange rate should continue to play a cushioning role. Fiscal policy should allow automatic stabilizers to work as needed. The NBP should provide liquidity support (including in FX) if needed. The FCL arrangement could be used if it becomes necessary. Active labor market policies could help mitigate adverse implications of changing migration flows. Reduction of EU fund inflows could weigh Medium term: on medium-term growth. Restricted migration to the U.K. and higher return migration could increase the domestic labor supply and unemployment (in the short term). Lower remittances would worsen the current account. At the same time, return migration could increase skill transfer, and migration to the U.K. could be replaced by other destinations. Continue fiscal consolidation with growth- friendly measures to support growth. Maintain financial stability to weather external financial shocks. The RAM shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. B C Page 21 Appropriate policy responses to risks, if they materialize, would depend on circumstances. External. Poland’s strong fundamentals, reserve buffers, and a stable and diversified foreign investor base serve to mitigate adverse financial spillovers. In the most recent episode of capital outflows from EMs, Poland fared well relative to peers (Figure 8). Poland’s FCL arrangement with the IMF also provides an added insurance against adverse external shocks. Nonetheless, to the extent that external shocks spill over to Poland, the flexible exchange rate should be the main line of defense, while taking into consideration the impact on household balance sheets with exposure to foreign-currency denominated debt. Fiscal automatic stabilizers should be allowed to fully operate along the medium-term consolidation path. In the event of significant capital outflows, Narodowy Bank Polski (NBP) should stand ready to provide both zloty and FX liquidity to the banking sector as needed. Poland’s growth is strongly linked to euro area growth,… …and foreign bond market participation is significant. Figure 8. Poland: External Spillovers Strong fundamentals have served Poland well. Direct links to China are limited. 1.0Euro areaGermany Correlation with Polish Growth (Correlation coefficient based on year-on-year real GDP growth)Sources: Eurostat, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. CroatiaLithuania RomaniaTurkey Poland LatviaSloveniaEstonia Bulgaria Czech RepublicHungary Russia Slovak RepublicSource: Regional Economic Issues, Europe (forthcoming), OECD-WTO Trade in Value Added (TIVA) dataset, and WEO. Domestic ValueAdded Embodied in Chinese Final Demand, (Percent of GDP of exporting country)Euro area 012345Czech RepublicBrazilTurkey Indonesia HungaryMexicoMalaysiaRussiaSouth AfricaPoland South Korea Cumulative Bond Fund Outflows, January 4 to February 22 (Percent of starting allocations) Sources: EPFR Global, Haver Analytics, and IMF staff calculations. Owned by domestic banks (incl. MoF) Owned by foreign investors Ownership of Local Government Bonds (Percent of treasury securities outstanding)Sources: Haver Analytics, Polish Ministry of Finance,and IMF staff calculations. Page 22 Domestic. Focus should remain on maintaining economic and financial stability, including by refraining from introducing destabilizing policies. Identifying growth-friendly measures to support a credible medium-term fiscal consolidation plan would help support market confidence. The authorities should stand ready to cut policy interest rates if inflation expectations disappoint on the downside. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of external risks, with the Ministry of Finance (MoF) being more optimistic on the domestic outlook. The authorities concurred that growth would be primarily domestic-demand driven, with an impulse to private consumption from the child benefits program in the short run. However, the MoF was more optimistic on the growth outlook, forecasting growth to remain at around 4 percent over the medium term. On domestic risks, the MoF stressed the government’s commitment to keep the deficit below 3 percent this year and next and resume fiscal consolidation from 2018. On financial sector risks, the NBP and the Polish Financial Supervision Authority (KNF) agreed with staff that blanket conversion of foreign currency mortgages as proposed by the President’s office in January could pose risks to financial stability. With respect to external risks, the authorities recognized the importance of continued efforts to maintain sound policies and institutions together with strong fundamentals to mitigate adverse impact from external shocks. They noted that Poland is well equipped to manage capital flows by maintaining adequate reserves, a stable investor base, and a flexible exchange rate, supported by the FCL arrangement with the IMF.