The policy interest rate has been kept unchanged during the past year. Since the March 2015 policy interest rate cut (to 1.5 percent—a historical low for Poland), and until the oil price decline in late 2015, inflation had developed broadly in line with staff’s projections. While weak headline inflation has kept real policy rates above those in some peer countries (Figure 16), Monetary Policy Council (MPC) members have resisted further rate cuts, arguing that low inflation is driven by external factors and pointing to the continued steady expansion in domestic demand. Alongside, nominal wages and credit growth have generally held up well (at 4½ percent and 6½ percent in April, respectively). Eight of the ten MPC members, whose terms expired, were Page 23 replaced in January and February and the term of the NBP’s governor expires in mid-June. Based on recent public statements, expectations are for policy continuity. Monetary policy should remain accommodative. Inflation is very low but should start trending upwards as credit and wages continue to expand, fiscal policy turns expansionary, and the output gap turns positive. Encouragingly, longer-term headline inflation expectations remain within the tolerance band. Monetary policy should thus remain data-dependent, maintaining policy rates on hold for now, but the authorities should be prepared to cut rates if inflation expectations were to fall or if growth slows down sharply. In the meantime, sectoral balance sheets appear relatively robust to a prolonged spell of externally-driven low inflation (Figure 9). Box 2. Poland: Implementation of Past Fund Advice Policy implementation has generally been in line with past Fund recommendations, though some new policies are inconsistent with staff advice. Monetary policy. In line with staff recommendations, the Monetary Policy Council has kept the policy interest rate at its historic low of 1.5 percent since March 2015 to counter risks of a prolonged period of low inflation. Moderate buildup of international reserves has continued. Fiscal policy. Fiscal consolidation has advanced further, supported by a sustained economic recovery, savings in government consumption and recent changes to the pension system. The authorities have stated their commitment to a Medium-Term Objective (MTO) of 1 percent of GDP structural deficit, which is deemed adequate to rebuild fiscal buffers and preserve fiscal sustainability. However, some recent policy measures are of poor quality: the 2016 budget will be financed partly with one-off fiscal measures and the expenditure rule was modified to accommodate this. Additionally, a distortionary bank tax has been implemented. In addition, a reversal of the 2013 retirement age increases is being considered against Fund advice. Finally, the authorities’ fiscal plans risk turning the 2017 fiscal stance procyclical, against staff advice. Financial sector policy. The macroprudential framework has been finalized and restructuring of the small non-systemic credit union segment has continued through takeovers and bankruptcy. Despite staff recommendation of case-by-case restructuring of distressed foreign-currency mortgages, work has continued to design a conversion scheme for these mortgages into zloty. The bank resolution framework is nearing completion but is still awaiting the president’s signature. Structural reforms. The authorities continued to strengthen labor and product markets, in line with Fund advice. Measures have been taken to reduce labor market segmentation by better aligning social security contributions on civil law employment contracts with those on regular contracts and limiting the duration of consecutive short-term contracts. The business climate has been improved by easing regulations for business start-ups and amending the tax code to interpret legal doubts in favor of taxpayers. A new corporate insolvency regime to encourage restructuring (instead of liquidation) of viable firms took effect from January 1, 2016. See IMF Country Report No. 15/183. Page 24 There is no indication of overheating… …or asset price bubbles,… Figure 9. Poland: Credit and Asset Price Indicators …including in the housing market. Household balance sheets remain healthy… …and corporate vulnerabilities manageable,… …with continued deposit growth. -8-40481216Change incredit-to-GDP(percentagepoints)House pricegrowth(percent)Equity pricereturnEquity premium Latest quarter ThresholdsSources: Country authorities,Datastream, Haver analytics,and IMF staff calculations. Asset Price Indicators (Data as of2015Q4)Threshold: EM returnThreshold:Avg. 2007Q1 to 2010Q3 (stock return less bond yield)Threshold: Historical average Change in credit- to-GDP (percentage points)Growth of credit- to-GDP (percent, annual)Credit-to-GDP gap (regression-based, st. dev) 1/ Poland High alert On alert Credit Cycle Indicators (Data as of 2015Q4, growth and changes are year-on-year) Sources: Polish authorities and IMF staff calculations.1/ 2015Q2. High alert:(i) change in credit/GDP >5 percentage points or(ii) gap  standard devision andgrowth of credit/GDP  10 percent. z Nonfinancial Corporate Debt, 2014 1/ (Percent of GDP) Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations.1/ Defined as the sum of debt securities, loans, and other accounts payable/receivable. HungaryCzech Republic PolandSlovakia Assets Liabilities Net Household Balance Sheets, 2014 (Stock of financial assets and liabilities, percent of GDP)Source: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Deposit growth PMI (sa, RHS) Nonfinancial Corporate Balance Sheet Health (LHS: Percent; RHS: percent balance) Sources: HSBC/Markit, KNF, and IMF staff calculations. House Prices (Average price per 1 sq.m usable floor space, PLN 1000s )Sources: Statistics Poland and IMF staff calculations. Page 25 Authorities’ views The authorities shared staff’s view of continued accommodative monetary policy. While inflation remains very low, the authorities noted that imported deflation had supported consumers’ purchasing power and so far has not had negative implications for the real economy, while balance sheets remained healthy. In turn, they argued for maintaining policy interest rates on hold in the absence of any sharp changes to growth or inflation expectations, in line with staff’s view.