Fiscal adjustment, with an emphasis on expenditure rationalization, should continue. Background In 2014, fiscal adjustment continued, but the stock of public debt increased. The fiscal deficit narrowed to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2014, below the authorities’ target of 4.8 percent, primarily reflecting an under-execution of investment spending. Excluding several large one-off transactions related to SOE and banking support operations the deficit fell to 3.5 percent of GDP, amounting to a structural fiscal adjustment of 1 percent of GDP. The debt-to-GDP ratio, at 130.2 percent, was slightly higher than originally projected—despite the better-than-expected outturn—due to the adverse valuation effects of euro depreciation, additional debt issuance to maintain the government’s cash buffer, and a downward revision to nominal GDP. The authorities have not yet defined a structural primary adjustment path beyond The 2014 Fiscal Strategy Document envisages a minimum structural adjustment effort of ½ percent of GDP per year, in line with the European Treaty on Stability, Coordination, and Governance framework. The authorities, however, have not yet specified concrete measures to support their medium-term fiscal strategy; a new Stability Program is expected to be issued at the end of April. Arrears remain a challenge, although significant progress has been made. In 2014, arrears were reduced by €367 million (20 percent), mainly through the implementation of the government clearance strategy. In particular, the strategy provided additional funding to public hospitals (€151 million), leading to the settlement of €59 million of arrears in the health sector. Arrears had initially accumulated in early 2014, before being cleared at the end of the year. In early 2015, the stock of arrears began to rise again (an increase of €47 million in January), pointing to a recurrent pattern of accumulation in the first months of the year. In January, the parliament approved an amendment of the commitment law, which requires line ministries create contingency reserves to forestall accumulation of new arrears. Documento de Estratégia Orçamental 2014–2018 (in Portuguese), available at http://www.parlamento.pt/ActividadeParlamentar/Paginas/DetalheActividadeParlamentar.aspx?BID=97647&AC T_TP=PEC. Jun-11Dec-11Jun-12Dec-12Jun-13Dec-13Jun-14Dec-14 Total after settlement Underlying excl. settlement Health sector after settlement Underlying health excl. settlement Stock of Arrears Sources: Portuguese Ministry of Finance; and Ministry of Health. Jan-15 Page 15 Fiscal policy should be guided foremost by sustainability considerations. Despite the notable consolidation achieved to date, Portugal remains vulnerable to shifts in market sentiment due to its high stock of public debt (the third-highest in the euro area following Greece and Italy), large refinancing needs, small size of the economy, and weak growth prospects. Even though the debt-to-GDP ratio is to see decline in 2015, the projected decline over the medium term is modest, reaching 121 percent in 2020. As noted in Annex IV, debt dynamics remain highly vulnerable to adverse yet plausible macro-fiscal and contingent liabilities shocks. A more pronounced decline in the debt ratio, consistent with a return to debt sustainability, would hinge on greater fiscal adjustment than under the baseline in addition to structural reforms to boost growth. There will be a slight relaxation of the fiscal stance in 2015. Staff projects a fiscal deficit of 3.2 percent of GDP for 2015—marginally above the excessive deficit procedure target of 3 percent of GDP—and higher than the budgeted 2.7 percent of GDP. The difference relative to the budget target primarily reflects more pessimistic revenue assumptions, as the budget incorporates large revenue gains from a range of measures to improve tax compliance and recover outstanding tax debt. As a result, the structural primary balance is projected to deteriorate. Going forward, fiscal policy should be anchored around an annual structural primary adjustment of 0.5 percent of GDP (Box 3). The current level of public debt and large borrowing needs allow little space for counter-cyclical fiscal policy, and leaves Portugal vulnerable to a significant worsening of debt dynamics should downside risks materialize. A primary adjustment target would ensure that savings from the current low sovereign yields do not dilute the adjustment effort and that the windfall gains from lower yields are fully devoted to reducing public debt and restoring appropriate fiscal buffers. The adjustment should be achieved mainly through expenditure rationalization in the context of introducing expenditure targets for each level of government. Under this adjustment scenario, debt would decline to around 110 percent of GDP by 2020. Sources: Portuguese authorities and IMF staff estimates. Sources: Portuguese authorities and IMF staff estimates. Fourth Review Current projections Recommended path Structural Balance (Percent of potential GDP) Fourth Review Current projections Recommended path Public Debt Page 16 The authorities should introduce multi-year expenditure targets to underpin a fiscal adjustment based on spending rationalization. These targets would be consistent with the structural primary balance targets discussed above, and in line with the expenditure benchmark of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). This would help ensure that future adjustment focuses on spending reform rather than on further revenue measures, given Portugal’s already-high tax burden. To ensure effectiveness, such expenditure objectives should cover all general government expenditure, and be sufficiently binding to anchor fiscal policy at all levels of government. This would require enhancing the medium-term fiscal strategy and the central government medium- term budget framework. Aggregate spending targets should also be set for local governments and social security funds, with the recently created intergovernmental coordination council being responsible for monitoring outturns and identifying in-year corrective measures. Specific policy measures to contain spending should be identified to enforce the expenditure targets, with a focus on public sector wages and pensions, which together account for nearly 25 percent of GDP and more than half of non-interest government spending. Under the program, public wages were contained through temporary measures, while increases in pensions have moderated. Still, the public wage cuts will be cancelled by 2016, and pension spending is expected to rise, particularly in the public sector scheme (CGA). Additional offsetting measures are therefore needed to alleviate spending pressures in these areas: Measures on the wage bill have yielded smaller savings than expected due to successive CC rulings and insufficiently robust reform design, and have not sufficiently addressed structural weaknesses. While public employment was significantly reduced under the program (by almost 10 percent), cuts in public sector wages have failed to reduce the public-private sector compensation gap. Schemes to increase efficiency and reduce costs in the public service— special requalification pool and voluntary separations—have underperformed. In addition, the modalities and phasing of the new single wage and supplement scales should be carefully designed to avoid additional cost and excessive back-loading. Going forward, the CC has ruled out additional nominal cuts in public wages, and required reforms be of a structural nature rather than across-the-board cuts. Hence, priority should be given to further reducing the number of employees through higher natural attrition and targeted cuts in overstaffed areas. Mechanisms for departure should also be enhanced. Structural measures should aim at limiting automatic wage increases and career progression in order to generate permanent savings of about 0.1 percent of GDP per year. The recent CC rulings cancelling the targeted pension measures call for a more comprehensive approach to pension reform. The authorities should make progress in adopting a new indexation rule based on economic factors that would automatically adjust benefits to ensure sustainability of the pension system. In addition, the suspension of early retirements that was introduced in 2012, and lifted in 2015, should be reinstated, to contain the increase in the number of retirees Savings from a reduction of the workforce by additional 10 percent are estimated at around 0.5 percent of GDP. See “Rethinking the State – Selected Expenditure Reform Options,” IMF Country Report 13/6. Page 17 over the coming years. In the short and medium term, public sector employees’ contribution to CGA could increase to improve its financial sustainability. Further structural fiscal reforms are needed to reduce fiscal risks enforce fiscal adjustment, and support growth. While reforms of tax administration and health care have already yielded tangible pay-offs, fiscal risks persist in the following areas: SOEs and hospitals. The financial situation of SOEs and hospitals has generally improved with the additional financing provided by the government in 2014, but restructuring should proceed resolutely to address structural challenges and reduce high levels of debt. PPPs. While annual gross payments related to PPPs are expected to be reduced by about 20- 25 percent following successful contract renegotiations, they will remain a drag on the budget, stabilizing at about €1.5 billion (0.8 percent of 2015 GDP) until 2022, before slowly declining to about €0.6 billion in 2030. Re-negotiations of concessions and PPPs should therefore be pursued forcefully. Budgeting and public administration. Priority should be given to the finalization and adoption of a new Budget Framework Law. Envisaged reforms are in line with staff advice, with a more strategic and medium-term perspective to budgeting, a consolidation of all government revenues in the Treasury single account, and a gradual move to accrual accounting. In addition, staff recommends that more responsibility be devolved to line ministries for managing their budget, with their financial accountability should be strengthened accordingly. The authorities should also reduce public administration fragmentation, particularly at the central government level, to limit duplication and to better monitor fiscal risks. Within the sustainability constraint, fiscal policy should promote growth and alleviate bottlenecks to employment. Spending reforms should create space for targeted tax measures to support private sector deleveraging through the introduction of a deduction for corporate equity, and increase labor force participation through social security cuts to address localized labor market malfunctions. Scaling up public investment to support growth may not be needed, given the high level and quality of public capital stock compared to other euro area countries. BELDNKGERGRCFRAITALUXNLDAUTPRTFINSWE GBR ESTBGRHRVCZELTU Q u li y ( ) Public capital stock (percent of GDP) Public Capital Stock and Quality, 2012 Source: Eurostat. Median qualityscore Median capital stock Page 18 The authorities’ 2015 deficit target of 2.7 percent of GDP is well within reach. The authorities were encouraged by the initial results from their efforts to improve tax compliance. They believe that the revenue from their efforts to (i) reduce fraudulent VAT refund claims, (ii) curb tax evasion related to income from rental properties, and (iii) recover outstanding tax debt will exceed staff’s expectations. In addition, the authorities were confident that any spending pressures could be accommodated within their budgeted contingency reserve. The cash revenue outturn for January- February was in line with the authorities’ projections. Further fiscal adjustment—properly measured—is needed. The authorities agreed in principle that further fiscal adjustment is needed to safeguard debt sustainability, with a medium- term focus on expenditure rationalization. However, they noted complications in defining the adjustment in structural terms in order to provide a useful operational target. In particular, they cited significant uncertainly about calculations of potential output in Portugal, and the related difficulties in differentiating between structural and cyclical developments in assessing fiscal performance.