Successful deleveraging is a precondition for strong growth. Background The authorities’ deleveraging framework has stopped short of a systemic solution, and the level of corporate debt—albeit declining—remains high. The deleveraging framework has been largely put in place. It includes significant changes to the institutional and legal framework for corporate debt restructuring (such as lowering the threshold required for creditor approval of restructuring plans and changing the tax code to favor equity over debt) and timely monitoring of corporate borrowing. However, a systemic solution—entailing an accelerated pace of SME restructuring and large-scale write-offs for the banks—has not been introduced. Corporate debt began to decline slowly in 2013 and now stands at 119 percent of GDP, close to its level at the beginning of the EFF program and still one of the highest in the EU. 24682009Q12010Q32012Q12013Q3 Q-on-Q Debt securities Q-on-Q Loans Q-on-Q Trade credits NFC Consolidated Debt Stock (percent of GDP) Portugal: Change in NFC Debt (Billions of euros)2014Q3Source: Banco de Portugal. Page 19 Eliminating the corporate debt overhang is essential for Portugal’s recovery (Box 4). With the banking system still facing high operating costs, overcapacity, and weakening asset quality, waiting for economic growth to improve bank profitability would likely be disappointing. Therefore, credit misallocation would persist, as bank assets remain to a large extent tied up in less productive sectors and investment would remain constrained, further weakening the economic recovery. Successful deleveraging would reverse this dynamic by allowing banks to reallocate resources toward viable firms that will in turn increase their investment, supporting economic growth. Banks should take advantage of the current supportive economic and financial environment to tackle the corporate debt overhang more ambitiously. They should raise more capital, increase provisioning and accelerate the pace of write-offs. This would open up space for new growth-enhancing lending and lower the risks to financial stability. Corporations, with the authorities’ help, should do their part as well. The authorities must encourage corporate governance reform to encourage firm owners to retain more earnings and inject new equity into their companies. To reduce the tax debt bias, the authorities could complement their on-going efforts to reduce the deductibility of debt interest by introducing a deduction of equity for corporate income tax. The deleveraging strategy in place appears to be working. The recent decline in corporate debt—across all sectors and firms’ sizes—has been facilitated in part by equity injections from foreign investors and by the equity-favoring tax incentives. The authorities felt that a gradual pace of deleveraging would better safeguard financial stability and that banks may not be able to raise sufficient capital should the process be accelerated. Constrained-credit recoveries tend to be slow, with lower productivity and investment growth, compared with recoveries where credit to the private sector is increasing. See Abiad, A., Dell'Ariccia, G., and B. Li. 2011. “Creditless recoveries”. IMF Working Paper 11/58. X Y M AA H H CC M EU Members: NFC Debt, 2013 Consolidated data. Luxembourg: 323%, Cyprus: 230%, Ireland: 201%. Source: Eurostat. 801001201401601802002007Q12008Q32010Q12011Q32013Q12014Q3 Italy Nonfinancial Corporation Debt Outstanding Non-consolidated data. Debt includes loans, securities other than shares, and other accounts payable.Source: Haver analytics. Page 20