With fiscal adjustment set to remain a drag on domestic demand and corporate deleveraging taking time, structural reforms offer the main tool to increase external competitiveness and potential growth. Background Even though the number of newly implemented structural measures has fallen with the expiration of the program, there were several notable developments. The number of new collective bargaining contracts in 2014 approached levels last seen in 2011, and more contracts were reached at the firm level. GPEARI—the planning unit of the Ministry of Finance—has been given a formal mandate by the Council of Ministers to coordinate the process of evaluating structural reforms There is now a proposal to impose a one-time levy on GALP, the largest natural gas provider. If the levy becomes effective, it would be applied to reduce gas prices by 3 to 5 percent for end users for each of the next three years. Renegotiation of one port concession contract has been completed, with the remaining four expected to follow suit soon. New bylaws for 18 services and regulated professions were approved by the Council of Ministers and are currently under discussion in Parliament. The judicial reforms are starting to pay off. For instance, the simplified, centralized, and electronic system of garnishments of bank accounts under the new Code of Civil Procedure enabled the seizure and recovery of €0.3 billion in enforced claims in a little over a year. The recovery projected in the baseline is too mild to return the economy to full employment over the medium term. Portugal faces adverse capital and labor trends, i.e. negative net investment in the short term, and a falling working-age population in the short- and medium term. Therefore, the baseline rate of growth is insufficient to absorb the slack in the labor market through job creation, and job prospects for the lower-skilled in particular would remain dire (Box 5). To raise growth and absorb the large internal slack, further structural reforms should zero in on alleviating impediments to external competitiveness (Box 6) and potential growth. The adjustment program already initiated and implemented a large number of structural reforms, sometimes against the opposition of well-entrenched lobbies and interests. The challenge for policymakers will be to build on this achievement. And this should involve revisiting those reforms that have not yielded the hoped-for-results, fully implementing already initiated reforms, and addressing remaining bottlenecks through fresh reforms. Page 21 Upgrading the quality of public services and policies remains critical for the competitiveness of firms and the well-being of citizens. Staff’s firm survey suggests that some of the public sector reforms are in urgent need of being revisited or stepped up, with firms that export particularly concerned about the lack of reform pay-offs so far (Box 1). In this context, reform areas that deserve special attention include raising the effectiveness of public administrations at the central and local levels, reviewing the functioning of the courts, and increasing the payment discipline of public sector entities. Only a deep-rooted reform of the state may be able to yield tangible results in these reform areas. Improving the functioning of product markets requires fully implementing initiated reforms. Measures aimed at reducing the cost of energy, the use of transport infrastructure, and the costs of professional and other services still need to be implemented and then evaluated whether they achieved their objectives. The competition authority needs to have the resources and political support to move more aggressively against anti-competitive practices in sheltered sectors. Moreover, more market integration at the European level would benefit Portugal. While the legacy costs of past policy mistakes are now difficult to fully undo in areas such as energy or road transport infrastructure, it will be important to avoid sliding back to previous policy habits in these areas. Fresh reform ideas and initiatives are especially needed in the labor market area, while avoiding policies that undermine job creation. A significant effort has already been made to use active labor market policies to improve skills and labor market attachment of workers. But the productivity of workers, especially of the low skilled, also depends critically on the skills of managers, where Portugal ranks relatively low in cross-country comparisons. The effectiveness and scope of programs to promote managerial skills in Portugal should therefore be reviewed. Keeping workers without jobs attached to the labor market will require a more inclusive unemployment support system, for example by reducing the minimum contribution period for eligibility and reducing inactivity traps, especially for older workers. With an increasing share of workers paid at the minimum wage, further premature increases would lower the chances of lower-skilled workers to make the transition from inactive or unemployed status to jobs. While minimum wages can be useful to prevent worker abuse and provide a floor for income, excessive increases can hurt the very people they are intended to help. Experiences in other countries suggest there are more effective tools available to fight poverty than the minimum wage. 1998Q12000Q42003Q32006Q22009Q12011Q42014Q3 Unskilled Skilled Unskilled: long-term average Skilled: long-term average Portugal: Employment Rates of Skilled and Unskilled Workers (Percent of population with a given level of education) Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. 2005Q12008Q22011Q32014Q4 Portugal Italy (RHS) Source: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Employment Rate Gap: High-Skilled versus Low- Skilled Workers (Percentage points) Page 22 Structural reforms are never easy, but the current environment is the most conducive for undertaking them from an economic and financial stability point of view. (Box 7). Natural inertia and substantial vested interests will work to neutralize challenges to the status quo . The current post-crisis recovery, however, is a good time to push for institutional change, as the pitfalls of the existing system have just been vividly demonstrated. The nascent recovery and the benign financing conditions—helped by the cyclical tailwinds—can mitigate the costs of transition. For the long term, the key would be to create a natural domestic constituency for such a change. In this context, social partners have a special responsibility to promote job creation by supporting policies that increase the country’s competitiveness. A more inclusive and transparent social partner dialogue would facilitate reaching cooperative solutions that benefit all stakeholders. The wide range of structural reforms implemented under the program is already paying off . While the authorities agree that more needs to be done, they stress that (i) the yet- unseen benefits of many reforms, such as the corporate deleveraging strategy, will become more visible in the near future and (ii) the already-observed improvements, such as gains in external competitiveness, can be easily sustained in the medium term. The authorities also argued that implementation of product market reforms remains on track, as illustrated by recent steps in the areas of energy and transport infrastructure. On labor market, the authorities noted the challenges inherent in further reducing employment protection and argued that lowering duration of unemployment benefits for older workers while widening the coverage would go against their contributive nature.