GDP Growth and Output per Capita (PPP dollars; unless otherwise specified) As the world’s largest exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG), Qatar plays a systemic role in the global natural gas market. Qatar accounts for about 1/3 of global LNG trade and has become the key supplier for Japan, South Korea, India, and the United Kingdom. In addition to attaining the world’s highest per capita income (around $100,000), Qatar has emerged as an important global financial investor through its sovereign wealth fund (Qatar Investment Authority, QIA), as well as a major labor importer and donor. Qatar has pledged some $20 billion to support Bahrain, Oman, and Arab countries in transition. Remittances by Qatar’s 1.75 million expatriate workers (total population is 2 million) reached 6 percent of GDP, among the highest shares in the world. Emerging market and developing economies Real Growth, 2003-13 (in percent, rhs) Source: World Economic Outlook, IMF. Advanced economies Qatar GCC GDP per capita, 2013 Having successfully completed a strategy to develop natural gas resources, the authorities have embarked on a large public investment program to advance economic diversification and prepare for the FIFA 2022 World Cup. Under the new Emir, the authorities continue pursuing development and diversification strategy guided by the Qatar National Vision 2030 and National Development Strategy, 2011–16. While a further expansion of LNG production is possible, Qatar will maintain a moratorium on development of new hydrocarbon projects until at least 2015 to give itself time to assess its production performance and carry out a comprehensive study of its North Field. Meanwhile, diversification is supported through budget-financed investment projects worth an estimated $160 billion (80 percent of last year’s GDP) over 2014–21, supplemented by some $50 billion from public enterprises. Alongside, the macroeconomic policy framework is being strengthened by a number of ambitious reforms in the area of fiscal policy and institutions, financial regulation, macroprudential policies, liquidity management, and development of the local debt market, consistent with IMF staff advice. http://www.gsdp.gov.qa/portal/page/portal/gsdp_en/knowledge_center Page 5 Status of Staff Recommendations Made during the 2012 Article IV Consultation Recommendation Maintain policy mix to avoid overheating Continue building fiscal buffers; strengthen medium-term budgeting Introduce integrated public investment management Strenthen financial regulation to maintain financial stability Avoild a buildup of foreign borrowing Further improve liquidity management, support financial deepening Current status Inflation remains subdued; high-level price and logistics committees monitor price developments and congestion stresses; the authorities are preparing a short list of critical infrastructure projects. The authorities are saving their large budget surpluses; ministries and agencies prepare 3-year spending and revenue projections and started reporting basic performance indicators; the Ministry of Finance is setting up macro fiscal unit and Government Financial Management Information System. Central Planning Office coordinates infrastructure investments; the Ministry of Finance plans to set up a Public Investment Management unit. The 2012 Central Bank law established the Financial Stability and Risk Committee consisting of the three key regulators; the authorities unveiled a three-year Strategic Plan for Financial Regulation in December 2013; the Basel III circular was issued in Januar y 2014. The reliance on foreign borrowing has declined substantially, partly owing to rising public sector deposits in the domestic banking system. The QCB has started auctioning 3- and 5- year bonds; the Strategic Plan for Financial Regulation contains a variety of measures to support financial deepening. Source: IMF Staff