The short- and medium-term macroeconomic outlook is positive under the baseline. GDP growth could stay around 6 percent in 2014 as the pickup in public investments is offset by a modest decline in hydrocarbon output. The new gas-to-liquids Barzan plant could help push growth above 7 percent in 2015. Public investments are expected to keep growth at roughly 6-7 percent over the medium term, with nonhydrocarbon growth remaining about 10 percent. Medium Term Outlook, 2011-19 GDP growth Contribution from hydrocarbon growth Contribution from non-hydrocarbon growth Inflation (rhs) Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF staff calculations and projections. Inflation is projected to stay benign at 3 to 4 percent going forward—a modest increase from recent years due to accelerating capital expenditures. The anticipated gradual decline in commodity prices, including for food, should reduce price pressures from strong economic activity in the context of the exchange rate peg. Fiscal and external balances are projected to taper down significantly over time due to flat LNG production, falling crude oil output from mature fields, expected lower hydrocarbon prices (the World Economic Outlook assumptions see the Brent oil price falling from $110 a barrel at present to about $90 a barrel by 2019), and growing nominal expenditures. The public debt ratio is The foreign wholesale exposure has dropped to about 10 percent of total liabilities, of which roughly ¾ is accounted for by European banks. Page 8 expected to fall, but the headline budget balance could—according to IMF staff projections— turn into deficit by 2019, while the current account surplus could drop to 6½ percent of GDP. Domestic risks to the above baseline are mostly related to the ongoing public investment program (see Risk Assessment Matrix). The investment projects are essential to propel nonhydrocarbon sector growth and facilitate economic diversification. However, the program entails the possibility of overheating in the near term, and low return and overcapacity in the medium term. In particular, the extent to which public investment will durably boost private sector productivity remains uncertain. An unsuccessful design and implementation of the investment program would also increase the level of nonperforming loans in the banking system. That said, productivity could as well surprise on the upside, if major investments such as the forthcoming opening of a new airport boost broader economic activity. Meanwhile, Qatar remains exposed to several global risks (Risk Assessment Matrix) In the short-term, a global slowdown or financial turbulence could yet have adverse repercussions for Qatar . Generally, revenue losses from lower oil and natural gas exports would likely be the most significant spillover channel for Qatar given the high share of hydrocarbons in budget revenues and exports. This would particularly apply to a scenario with the protracted emerging market slowdown. However, the financial channel could become important given Qatari banks’ remaining wholesale funding exposures abroad, their MENA linkages, and external financing needs for the infrastructure program. For example, global financial market volatility due to the exit from unconventional monetary policies in advanced economies or a renewed crisis in the Euro area could raise borrowing rates, while reducing credit availability. A global financial shock would also reduce the value of Qatar’s sizeable foreign assets. The recent experience with financial market spillovers is discussed in Box 1. Outlook for Brent Crude Oil Price, 2013-15 1/ (US$ per barrel) The main medium-term risk remains the possibility of a sharp decline in oil and gas prices in light of growing unconventional oil and natural gas supplies, sluggish global growth, and rising energy efficiency. Indeed, there is anecdotal evidence that while the U.S. shale gas boom has not meaningfully affected revenues so far, it is starting to put downward pressure on prices negotiated for future LNG supplies. According to staff calculations, a plausible drop in oil prices relative to the baseline (by $26.5 a barrel which is the historical standard deviation of oil prices) could place the public debt ratio on an upward path. The increase in the debt ratio would be more pronounced in a downside risk scenario which also assumes smaller-than-expected returns from the public investment program and cost over- Jan-15 Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations and projections. 1/ Derived from prices of futures options on March 4, 2014. Jan-14 Jul-14 Jul-13 Jul-15 Page 9 runs (Appendix 1). That said, the more favorable scenario in which supply disruptions among other oil producers keep hydrocarbon prices high is also possible. Nature/source of main risks Likelihood of realization Implementation risks related to infrastructure investments Medium Protracted period of slower growth in advanced economies and emerging markets A surge in global financial market volatility related to monetary policy exit in adv. econ. Financial stress in the euro area re- emerges due to stalled or incomplete delivery of commitments. Sustained decline in oil and gas prices due to excess capacity. Alternatively, supply disruptions could keep prices high. Medium to High High Medium Medium Qatar: Risk Assessment Matrix Expected impact on the economy if risk is realized Low to Medium High infrastructure spending could raise inflation, lead to delays and cost overruns, while delivering lower-than-expected growth dividend and raising nonperforming loans in the banking system. Enhancements to the QCB's early warning system and a comprehensive public investment management system with rigorous procedures for project selection and appraisal would help manage these risks. Low to Medium Slow global growth could undermine hydrocarbon prices and demand for Qatar’s hydrocarbon exports, in turn reducing fiscal and external surpluses, slowing QIA asset accumulation, and deteriorating financing conditions for Qatar’s large investment program. As a result, policymakers might choose to trim public expenditures with negative consequences for non-hydrocarbon growth. However, large financial cushions would be expected to mitigate the impact. Policymakers could further intensify diversification efforts to partially offset the negative spillovers over the medium term. Low to Medium Financing costs in domestic and international markets could rise, slowing implementation of the Qatar’s investment program. Banks’ profit margins would shrink and some individual banks reliant on wholesale funding could face liquidity pressures. Large financial cushions and a policy framework are in place to mitigate the impact. Medium The funding costs of corporations and banks would increase, and foreign credit availability would deteriorate amid high uncertainty, QIA asset value and hydrocarbon prices would fall, and some banks may face liquidity pressures. These pressures could be counteracted by QCB liquidity injections and reallocation of QIA and public enterprises’ foreign assets into the domestic banking system. Medium In case of lower hydrocarbon prices, fiscal and external surpluses and private sector confidence would fall, resulting in lower QIA asset accumulation, reduced public expenditures, less financing available for the investment program, and lower non-hydrocarbon growth. Qatar could draw on its large financial cushions while accelerating economic diversification. Low-cost LNG production, long-term gas contracts, and built-in diversion clauses in gas contracts could partially reduce risks. In case of higher hydrocarbon prices, effects would be the opposite. Low to Medium Low Transport disruptions due to materialization of geopolitical and regional risks Note: The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent). A temporary land border closure would raise prices of certain items, including some foodstuffs and building materials. A temporary blockage of the Strait of Hormuz would also adversely affect hydrocarbon exports. The supply-chain disruptions could be partly mitigated by releasing the strategic stockpiles of food and building materials, and using the Qatar's large financial cushions. Page 10 Given its geographic location, Qatar is susceptible to the tail risk of transport disruptions . For instance, should the recent foreign policy dispute with its three GCC neighbors (Saudi Arabia, U.A.E., Bahrain) lead to temporary sanctions on Qatar—a tail risk scenario—Qatar would face logistical challenges as certain food items and construction materials are imported from these immediate neighbors and some imports from other countries are also channeled through the Dubai port or over the Saudi Arabia land border. The direct trade and financial exposures are, however, limited. Qatar has ample policy space to deal with unexpected circumstances in the short term. Fiscal buffers and remaining natural resources are sizeable and spending is unlikely to be affected by a drop in hydrocarbon prices or market volatility in the near term. The QCB can inject liquidity into the financial system through its lending window and repo operations, and the government could achieve the same goal by managing portfolio allocations of the QIA and public sector enterprises. The government also aided the banking system with equity injections and purchases of impaired assets during the global financial crisis. The tail risk of transport disruptions is managed by building strategic stocks of food and construction materials. POLICY DISCUSSIONS