pressures contained despite the tight real estate market Staff expects growth to remain robust in the near term, with inflationary GDP growth. Despite the fall in oil prices—which will pass through to Qatar’s LNG prices with a lag of up to a year—real growth could accelerate to about 7 percent this year as the Barzan field begins natural gas production. Non-hydrocarbon growth is expected to remain in double digits in 2015 as the path of public expenditures is unlikely to be affected by oil market Page 8 developments in the near term. That said, expectations of permanently lower oil prices, higher uncertainty and, with a delay, likely U.S. monetary tightening will pose headwinds to growth going forward. Growth could slow to about 4 percent over the medium term as public investment growth tapers off and the private sector offsets only some of the decline. Real GDP Growth, 2011–20 (Percent) Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Hydrocarbon sector Building and Construction Services Other sectors GDP growth Inflation and real estate prices. In the near term, inflation could decelerate to 2 percent given the large drop in international commodity prices, including for food, and an appreciating U.S. dollar, although the rental market is likely to continue putting upward pressure on inflation given strong expatriate labor inflows. Over the medium term, the disinflationary pressures from abroad will dissipate and headline inflation is projected to increase modestly. Future real estate price developments are uncertain—real estate prices may remain supported by the public investment program but will also face headwinds from the large loss of hydrocarbon wealth and related uncertainties and could thus correct from current levels. Consumer Price Inflation, 2011–20 (Percent) Tradable Non-tradable Total Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The authorities have not yet updated their quantitative macroeconomic framework but have similar qualitative views as staff. The official forecast prepared by the Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics last year was based on the crude oil price of $97 a barrel. This assumption reflected market prices at the time, but is now considerably higher than current oil prices. Back then, growth was projected at 7.7 percent and 7.5 percent during 2015-16, while consumer price inflation was forecast at about 3.5-3.7 percent. In February, the Minister of Finance indicated he expected growth at 7 percent and inflation at 3 percent in 2015, closer to the IMF forecasts. As for the medium-term outlook, the authorities agreed with staff that growth will likely slow from current levels. The authorities will unveil their updated Methodological changes in CPI calculations, including rebasing, planned for early 2015 could reduce reported inflation. This possible downward revision to inflation data is not incorporated in staff analysis. Page 9 macroeconomic forecast in the next Qatar Economic Outlook , which is typically published around mid-year. In staff’s view, the large drop in oil prices will lead to a substantial deterioration in fiscal and external balances. The delayed impact of the recent oil price decline on hydrocarbon receipts will be increasingly felt over the course of this year. Despite the IMF staff’s assumption of a gradual recovery in the Brent oil price to about $74 a barrel by the end of the decade—reflecting indications from the futures markets at the time of the consultation—the fiscal and external sectors will remain under pressure. The reasons are twofold: hydrocarbon exports will stagnate, reflecting a voluntary investment moratorium and maturing oil fields, and budget expenditures and imports will grow, albeit at a moderate pace. In sharp contrast to recent years, the government budget is projected to fall into a deficit from 2016 onwards. However, the authorities are projected to reduce public debt while accumulating net financial assets in the medium run, thanks partly to capital gains from the QIA’s substantial investments. The current account surplus will drop from over 30 percent of GDP in 2013 to 2 percent of GDP in 2020. The authorities acknowledged that the sizeable budget and external surpluses recorded in recent years will shrink given the lower hydrocarbon prices. The authorities are currently assessing the implications of the oil price drop for Qatar Petroleum revenues. Staff noted that the main risks are related to the possibility of lower-than-expected oil and natural gas prices and the public investment program External risks. The main external risk remains the possibility of lower-than-expected oil and natural gas prices given slow global growth, rising unconventional oil supplies and, over the long term, growing competition in the LNG market. Oil prices could also surprise on the upside if geopolitical risks escalate or if the effect of the recent oil price decline on unconventional producers exceeds expectations. Revenue losses from lower oil and natural gas exports would be the most significant spillover channel for Qatar. The non-hydrocarbon sector would be cushioned by the government’s spending commitments. However, spillovers could be amplified by falling liquidity in the banking system if the government and hydrocarbon-exporting companies slow deposit growth, especially if this coincides with tighter U.S. monetary policy, mobilization of resources by participants in the infrastructure program, and the recently-introduced loan-to- deposit ratio. Qatar’s external borrowing costs could increase if low oil prices persist, and there is scope for adverse regional spillovers if investors fail to differentiate between Qatar and less resilient oil-exporting countries. The financial channel could also become important in other circumstances, given Qatar’s sizeable foreign assets and the increasing interconnectedness of local banks and financial markets with the global economy. Page 10 Sensitivity of External Balances to Oil Prices, 2011–20 (External balance, percent of GDP) Sensitivity of Fiscal Balances to Oil Prices, FY2011–20 (General government fiscal balance, percent of GDP) Baseline scenario Upside scenario Downside scenario Baseline scenario Upside scenario Downside scenario Sources: IMF staff estimates. Note: Upside/downside scenarios correspond to oil prices higher/lower by US$25 a barrel (one standard deviation in oil prices) from 2015 onwards. Domestic risks. The ongoing public investment program—while essential for further economic development and meeting FIFA-related commitments—entails the possibility of over- heating the economy in the near term and low return and overcapacity in some sectors over the medium term. The authorities agreed that hydrocarbon prices were the key channel for spillovers from the global economy, while taking note of Qatar’s increasing interconnectedness with global financial markets. Both futures prices and analysis of the oil industry’s cost structure suggest that medium-term oil prices should be above today’s levels, but may not return to the previous highs. Despite the adverse impact on the budget and external balances, the authorities saw limited scope for spillovers from low oil prices to local non- hydrocarbon activity given the unchanged path of fiscal expenditures. The U.S. interest rate hike, if it materializes this year, would have minimal immediate effects, partly because Qatar’s main policy rate remains almost ¾ percentage point above the prevailing Fed Funds Rate. The cross- border activities of Qatar banks have increased substantially in recent years—albeit from a fairly low level—and are closely monitored. The authorities and staff agreed that Qatar has policy space to deal with unexpected circumstances in the short term. Fiscal buffers and Qatar’s available natural resources are sizeable, and spending is unlikely to be affected by falling hydrocarbon prices or market volatility in the near term. The QCB can inject liquidity into the financial system through discount window and repo operations, and the government can provide additional liquidity, including in foreign currency, by managing portfolios of the QIA and public sector enterprises. The administration continually monitors risks from the public investment program. Page 11 Nature/source of main risks Lower-than- expected oil and natural gas prices, triggered by protracted slow growth in advanced economies and emerging markets and higher supply Geopolitical fragmentation leading to a sharp rise in oil prices Qatar: Risk Assessment Matrix Likelihood Expected impact on the economy if risk is realized Medium to High Medium to High For illustrative purposes, an oil price drop of $10 a barrel would reduce fiscal and external balances by 2¼ and 4 percentage points of GDP, respectively, assuming no policy response. A permanent $10 drop in oil prices could reduce Qatar’s GDP level by 2½ percentage points after 5 years assuming that the government fully offsets the revenue losses with expenditure cuts. The actual impact would likely be smaller since public expenditures would not be adjusted fully given fiscal buffers and FIFA- related commitments. That said, adverse confidence effects in the private sector and drying up of liquidity in the banking system as the government and oil-exporting companies slow deposit growth could amplify negative spillovers. Policymakers should further intensify diversification efforts to partially offset potential negative spillovers from lower oil prices. The authorities should ensure adequate banking system liquidity. Medium This is an inverse of the above scenario with lower hydrocarbon prices, caused by sustained tensions in Russia/Ukraine or fragmentation/state failure elsewhere in the Middle East. Oil prices could also rise unexpectedly if, in response to the recent fall in prices, unconventional and other high cost producers sharply reduce supply growth. Qatar would likely accumulate fiscal and external surpluses. Medium Risks related to large infrastructure investments Medium Side-effects from global financial conditions: A surge in financial volatility Persistent dollar strength High Medium Low to Medium Large infrastructure spending could lead to cost overruns and inflation in the short term, while delivering disappointing productivity gains over the medium term. In particular, if labor productivity growth does not pick up, non-hydrocarbon growth could be only 2.5 percent in 2020. Reputational risks associated with reports of poor labor standards of some expatriate workers could lead to difficulties with hiring. Enhancements to the early warning system and a comprehensive public investment management framework would help manage macroeconomic risks. Macroprudential measures and liquidity withdrawal could address excessive credit growth while smoother public spending would help contain generalized inflation. Consideration should be given to increasing real estate transaction fees to deter speculators Continued efforts to enhance labor protection and mobility would mitigate reputational risks and make growth more inclusive. Low to Medium If the U.S. Fed tightens monetary policy sooner or by more than expected, the net global growth and oil price impact would be moderate and depend on whether tightening is in response to unexpectedly-fast growth or lower-than-expected spare capacity. Oil prices could fall by less than 5 percent (see the first scenario to infer implications for Qatar growth). The normalization of U.S. monetary policy would also tighten financial conditions in Qatar, although with a delay. If reassessments of sovereign risk or geopolitical tensions stoke capital flow volatility, the risks would be more significant. Tighter U.S. monetary policy could also prompt a surge in the value of the dollar and hence the riyal in effective terms. The price of imports would fall, leading to an improvement in the trade balance and lower inflation in the short term, while the trade balance would deteriorate marginally once volumes adjust. The U.S. dollar strength would have a minimal impact on growth given small non-hydrocarbon exports and limited substitutability between domestic production and imports. Portfolios holdings abroad in non-USD currencies would suffer moderate valuation losses. Banks should prove resilient as any open foreign exchange positions (subject to prudential limits) are largely in U.S. dollars. Continued strong fundamentals would likely prevent excessive volatility in the Qatar financial markets, but banks’ profit margins would shrink and some individual banks reliant on wholesale funding could face liquidity pressures. Large financial cushions and a policy framework are in place to mitigate the impact. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 12