Revenue Over-Performance and Expenditure Over-Runs, 2001-13 (In QR billion) The authorities have started introducing a medium-term focus into the budget process. The FY2014/15 budget circular requires ministries and agencies to provide indicative budget estimates until FY2016/17 and to share performance information about their programs. Once fully effective, the medium-term budget framework (MTBF) will help ensure that government spending is shielded from revenue volatility and expenditure targets are not exceeded, while providing a platform for assessing the quality of spending. The authorities are confident that the tradition of spending overruns can be largely eliminated already from the current budget cycle. In addition, the MoF plans to reduce the growth in current expenditures, prioritizing spending on health, education, and public investment. The authorities are also setting up a Government Finance Management Information System (GFMIS), which will, among others, facilitate compilation of the GFSM2001 budget data. The team welcomed these structural budget reforms and stressed that the MTBF should be accompanied by credible annual budgets based on realistic hydrocarbon price assumptions (now $65 a barrel) and a more detailed multi-year expenditure framework backed up by a fully-consistent macroeconomic forecast. Planned revenues Revenue over-performance Planned expenditures Expenditure over-run 01/02 02/03 03/04 04/05 05/06 07/08 08/09 09/10 10/11 11/12 12/13 Source: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff calculations. The authorities plan to make the recently established macro-fiscal unit operational as soon as possible, in line with IMF advice. The unit would prepare macroeconomic forecasts, revenue and expenditure projections (including compilation of detailed forward-looking information Page 12 about investment projects), and public debt forecasts. The IMF is ready to field a diagnostic mission and help find a resident advisor for the unit. The mission noted that the fiscal policy stance remains consistent with intergenerational equity. Both the existing and projected fiscal deficits (measured by the nonhydrocarbon deficit excluding investment income in percent of nonhydrocarbon GDP) appear on current policies somewhat lower than, but close to, the deficits consistent with a constant real per capita annuity. This means that the government saves sufficiently for future generations, but does not over-save. Should hydrocarbon prices surprise on the downside, additional measures to contain current expenditures and prioritize capital spending would need to be considered. The underlying non-hydrocarbon fiscal balance as a share of non-hydrocarbon GDP is expected by staff to continue improving going forward despite the projected increases in capital expenditures—from -46 percent of non- hydrocarbon GDP at present to -26 percent of non-hydrocarbon GDP in 2019. The authorities’ longer-term aspiration of fully financing the budget from nonhydrocarbon revenues underscores their commitment to diversify the economy and maintain the health of public finances. However, if implemented literally, the objective would lead to over- saving since the QIA asset accumulation would continue indefinitely. Non-hydrocarbon Primary Deficits and PIH-Based Benchmarks, 2010-19 (In percent of non-hydrocarbon GDP) Projected non-hydrocarbon primary deficit Baseline benchmark (constant real per capita annuity) Benchmark with lower population growth Benchmark with lower real return on assets Source: IMF staff calculations. Notes: Benchmark non-hydrocarbon primary deficit is calculated using the Permanent Income Hypothesis (PIH) under the assumption of constant real per capita annuity. Alternative scenarios assume lower population growth and real return on assets, respectively, by 0.5 percentage point. Any net-present-value calculation is subject to caveats about sensitivity to assumptions such as interest rates and the assumed rate of return. The budget breakeven price estimated by staff is roughly $70 a barrel at present, but the effective State-level breakeven price including all State hydrocarbon profits could be substantially lower, in the ballpark of $50 a barrel (Figure 2). Page 13 C. Strengthening Financial Regulation and Monetary Operations to Maintain Financial Stability The team welcomed the considerable progress made on the financial sector regulatory agenda.