SPILLOVERS Qatar has maintained a strong growth momentum so far, with the recent oil price slump driving a stock market correction. Real GDP growth has been stable at about 6 percent over the past three years, mostly driven by a double-digit expansion of the non-hydrocarbon sector. This rapid growth rate has in turn reflected large public investments to diversify the economy and prepare for the FIFA 2022 World Cup (Figure 1). The strong growth performance notwithstanding, Qatar’s financial markets have continued to be affected by spillovers from geopolitical events and, in particular, oil price volatility (Figure 2). The sharp drop in oil prices has triggered a stock market correction and a modest re-pricing in the Credit Default Swap (CDS) Qatar’s investments by its sovereign wealth fund are estimated at about $250 billion by the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute. About 90 percent of Qatar’s population are expatriate workers. Remittances by these workers amounted to an estimated $13 billion in 2014, about 6 percent of GDP. Qatar has also committed substantial financial aid, especially to countries in the Middle East and North Africa. Page 6 market. However, the yield on the long-term U.S. dollar-denominated Qatar sovereign bond has stayed broadly stable at around 3 percent. Rapid growth has been accompanied by substantial changes in relative prices. With rents constituting over 30 percent of the CPI basket, a strong inflow of expatriate workers amid a diminishing housing market slack pushed up inflation to 3¾ percent in summer 2014. Headline inflation has eased to 2¾ percent in December 2014, assisted by falling global food and other commodity prices and a stronger U.S. dollar to which the Qatar Riyal is pegged. Meanwhile, growth in real estate prices accelerated to 35 percent year-on-year in December as new housing supply is slow to accommodate demand from expatriates and the government continues purchases of land for infrastructure projects. Anecdotal evidence also points to some speculative activity in the real estate market in anticipation of public investments. Real estate valuations appear on the upper end of a range consistent with fundamentals (Figure 1, Box 1). Current expenditure 1/ Central Government Expenditure, FY2008–14 (Annual percentage change) The budget continues to post large surpluses (Figure 3). The central government budget surplus increased to 14 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2013/14 (the fiscal year ends March) due to strong revenues and expenditure restraint, especially on non-wage discretionary spending. The revenue strength partly reflected the transfer of all hydrocarbon profits from Qatar Petroleum—the key hydrocarbon company—to the budget, a welcome step toward greater transparency of fiscal accounts. Budget data for the first nine months of the current fiscal year point to continued restraint in current expenditures. Capital spending has slowed somewhat so far this year, but is expected to pick up again. Gross government debt fell to about 30 percent of GDP, with T-bills and T-bonds issued for financial market development and liquidity management purposes. A rough estimate of the net financial worth of the government incorporating Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund (Qatar Investment Authority, QIA) is 100 percent of GDP. Source: Country authorities. 1/ Excluding recapitalization transfer to the General Retirement and Social Insurance Authority in 2011 and 2012. 2/ First nine months of the fiscal year, year-on-year percent change. Capital expenditure 2013/14 2014/15 2/ Monetary and credit conditions remain accommodative in the context of the exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar. Following volatility driven by external events during 2013, the Qatar Central Bank (QCB) has managed to keep banking system liquidity and T-bill rates generally stable (Figure 2). Domestic credit grew by 10 percent year-on-year in December 2014, with private sector credit growth accelerating to 20 percent, supported by robust demand from Gross government debt including contingent liabilities from the state-owned enterprises amounted to 50 percent of GDP in FY2013/14. Page 7 construction contractors, services, traders, and consumers (Figure 4). Real estate credit has generally grown in line with the non-hydrocarbon economy. In contrast, public sector credit has recently been contracting, owing partly to the close monitoring of public sector borrowing by the Ministry of Finance. Macroprudential policy setting has stayed broadly neutral, with the key levers such as the loan-to-value ratio in line with international norms. Banks are well capitalized and liquid. As of September 2014, Tier 1 capital exceeds 15 percent of risk-weighted assets and non-performing loans (NPLs) remain below 2 percent. The banking system is highly profitable, with a return on assets at 2 percent. Liquidity buffers are strong. The aggregate loan-to-deposit ratio has remained at about 1 over the past year, with the foreign funding of commercial banks continuing to fall modestly as a share of total liabilities. Cross-border assets have grown to about 20 percent of banks’ assets (Figure 4). The authorities have made significant progress on financial regulation. Most Basel III regulations were introduced last year. The QCB issued instructions for the loan-to- deposit ratio in mid-2014. The authorities are implementing their December 2013 Strategic Plan for Financial Regulation, which laid out a broad agenda for moving to risk-based regulation, expanding macro-prudential oversight, strengthening market infrastructure, and enhancing consumer and investor protection. The QCB Governor chairs the Financial Stability and Risk Committee, providing a framework for common oversight by regulatory agencies. The fixed exchange rate regime remains appropriate for Qatar. The peg to the U.S. dollar has served Qatar well in periods of both high and low oil prices by anchoring prices of tradables and providing stability to income flows and financial wealth. Qatar also hosts a large number of expatriate workers whose wages are set internationally. The potential disadvantages of the fixed exchange rate regime in terms of the limited scope for independent monetary policy can be addressed through fiscal and macroprudential policies, while the peg’s stability is underpinned by Qatar’s large positive net foreign investment position. An assessment of the exchange rate level is complicated by the undiversified structure of Qatar’s exports largely depended on hydrocarbons. That said, staff estimates do not find evidence of a current account gap using two alternative techniques (Annex II). In addition, staff analysis suggests that the global share of Qatar’s non-hydrocarbon exports and the share of Qatar’s imports in GDP have remained broadly stable in recent years. The composition of financial flows appears to have been relatively stable as well.