Remaining Investment Project Expenditures, 2014-21 (Percent of total) Airport/seaport Residential/commercial real estate Education Industry Roads/railroad/sewege Stadiums Other The authorities and staff agreed on the importance of managing risks from the Qatar’s large public investment program. The projects include basic infrastructure (e.g., airport, port, metro, railway, and roads), real estate (including the new Lusail City), schools, hospitals, and stadiums for the 2022 FIFA Championship. The mission stressed that although inflationary pressures appear contained at the moment, policymakers need to remain vigilant . The authorities—mindful of Qatar’s 2006-08 experience with double-digit inflation—intend to phase in the investment projects gradually and various high-level committees are tasked with identification and removal of supply-chain bottlenecks. However, the mission recommended smoothing capital spending if signs of overheating emerge, and deploying liquidity withdrawal operations and further macroprudential measures in case of excessive credit growth or risk-taking. Sources: MEED; and Zawya. Qatar can continue hydrocarbon production at current rates for at least another 100 years. Page 11 The mission also saw scope for improving the investment management process to achieve optimal allocation of resources and high return on investment (Box 2 and Selected Issues Paper). The authorities have made some progress in developing the relevant institutional structures, such as establishing the Central Planning Office overseeing infrastructure investments. Certain big-ticket projects such as the metro, port, and airport have been scaled down or divided into phases to reduce the risk of overcapacity. However, the large-scale nature of the program has led to implementation delays and cost overruns. The authorities noted that additional re-profiling and cuts may be necessary to make the planned investments logistically feasible, and are preparing a short list of critical projects. The staff reiterated its call for an integrated approach to public investment management, including rigorous procedures for selection and appraisal of projects, and encouraged comprehensive and transparent treatment of public programs in the budget, requiring substantial capacity building and deeper cooperation among various stakeholders. The MoF is planning to set up a public investment management unit, and have expressed interest in technical assistance regarding the draft Public Financial Management law.