The 2016 Budget outlined a significant scaling up of public investment in 2017-19, which will strain fiscal sustainability. The multi-year budget plan proposed large front-loaded infrastructure investment in roads, bridges, ports, and airports, deemed essential to lay the foundation for private sector-led development and achieving the 2011-30 SDP goals. This includes the multi-year development of the Tasi Mane project on the south coast requiring government investment of $0.8 billion, close to a quarter of total capital spending in 2017–20. While frontloading of this investment may be desirable from the point of view of development needs, the total capital budget amounts to US$3.4 billion (130 percent of GDP) and would entail an overall fiscal For the three scenarios presented in this section, the Budget scenario is based on the authorities ‘ oil prices assumption which on average is 60 percent higher than the WEO assumption on oil prices used for the baseline and adjustment scenarios for 2016-21. Assumptions on economic growth, inflation and current account under these scenarios are shown in Box 1. The Tasi Mane project on the southern coast, consisting of the Suai Supply Base, Betano Refinery and Petrochemical Complex and Beaco LNG complex, is designed to form the backbone of the country’s petroleum industry. Page 13 deficit averaging 30 percent of GDP. The proposed capital spending of $0.8-1.3 billion per annum risks stretching administrative capacities, and creating bottlenecks and imbalances in the economy. On average, the execution rate of capital projects in 2008–14 was 73 percent of planned expenditures (about US$375 million per annum), and past performance suggests an inverse correlation between the size of capital spending and the execution rate. Under the budget scenario, financing will be mainly met through excess withdrawals from the PF, amounting to US$4.6 billion during 2017-20, or 28 percent of the balance of the PF at end-2015. This would be in addition to the ESI withdrawals, which would amount to about $2 billion. In staff’s view, these excess withdrawals will jeopardize the PF’s role as a sovereign wealth fund. Staff’s baseline fiscal scenario reflects a lower infrastructure spending due to weak implementation capacity. As staff consider that the budget entails an overly optimistic rate of project implementation, it used as its baseline a fiscal scenario with infrastructure spending in line with historical project implementation rates. Under this baseline scenario, staff assumes the following: More realistic rate of project execution . Key capital expenditures—about two-thirds of the planned capital expenditure for 2017–20—are assumed to be spread over a longer period of five years (compared to the budget assumption of three years). More stable macroeconomic performance. The baseline scenario is expected to have a smoother non-oil GDP growth and inflation trajectory and a healthier current account balance than the budget scenario, reflecting less severe supply bottlenecks and a smaller increase in imports. Lower excess withdrawal from the PF, though still at levels above the ESI, meaning a Capital and Development Expenditure: Budget and Execution Rate continued decline of PF. As a result of lower expenditures, excess withdrawal is reduced to about $3.0 billion or one-third lower than that planned for 2017-20. However, the PF balance is projected to decline to about two-thirds of its current value by 2030 (see Box 1 for the comparison). The dynamic of the PF is also such that a lower PF balance will reduce the level of ESI, resulting in higher excess withdrawal to close a given financing gap, highlighting the need to curb the rapid loss in PF wealth. Capital & Development Budget Capital & Development Outturn Execution rate (RHS) (In millions of US dollar and percent (RHS)) Source: Timor-Leste Budget Transparency Portal. Page 14 Bold fiscal consolidation measures are needed to safeguard long-term fiscal and debt sustainability . Given the risks outlined above under the baseline scenario, staff advised a set of measures under an adjustment scenario. Box 1 provides a comparison of the principal macroeconomic and fiscal outcomes under the budget, baseline, and adjustment scenarios. Under staff’s proposed adjustment scenario, total spending (excluding grants) should be capped at around US$1.4 billion per annum between 2017 and 2026 (representing a total expenditure reduction from 65 percent of GDP in 2017 to 29 percent in 2026), and remain broadly constant at 26 percent of GDP thereafter. The expenditure ceiling up to 2026 is broadly in line with the fiscal envelope of $1.3 billion that was estimated to maintain fiscal sustainability in the Yellow Road Workshop discussion in May 2013.The proposed lower capital expenditure (which would amount to one-half of the budgeted amount) would support growth by focusing on high-priority, high-return infrastructure projects. PF drawdown should be minimized by greater use of concessional borrowing to finance high-quality infrastructure projects while maintaining debt sustainability. The government should cease making PF withdrawals in excess of the ESI at the latest by 2026. This scenario recognizes that an immediate reduction of excess withdrawal would imply limited financing for essential capital spending (assumed at $325 million per year or 10 percent of GDP) to close the infrastructure gap. This scenario also reflects the authorities’ reform target to increase domestic tax mobilization through the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) over the medium term (as discussed below). Staff projects a tax revenue increase equivalent to about 5 percentage point of non-oil GDP is needed for tax revenue to reach 13 percent in 2021, and this should be achieved largely through revenue mobilization by the VAT. The level of fiscal spending in the long term should depend on the strength of domestic tax mobilization. Staff’s preliminary analysis suggests that a more gradual per capita income trajectory under the adjustment scenario with higher investment efficiency gain and lower cost overrun, is projected to lead to upper- middle income status while maintaining macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability (text chart). Non-oil GDP per capita (In US dollar) 2016 Budget Adjustment Non-oil GNI per capita (baseline) upper-middle income status Threshold for Page 15 Box 1. Timor-Leste: Macroeconomic Impact under Different Fiscal Policy Scenarios Scenario Impact Spikes in non-oil growth and inflation in the earlier part of the budget horizon; considerably weaker current account balance in the medium term Faster decline in the PF balance and per capita net public assets relative to the baseline Relatively smooth non-oil growth and inflation trajectory, and broadly healthy current account balance relative to the Budget scenario Gradual decline in the PF balance and per capita net public assets Smoother non-oil growth and inflation trajectory, and healthier current account balance relative to the baseline Slow decline in per capita net public assets relative to the baseline. PF balance stabilizes in the medium term and increases in the long term Capital Expenditure 2016 Budget Adjustment 2016 Budget Framework Full implementation of 2017–20 frontloaded infrastructure spending No limit on PF withdrawal in the medium term Long-run convergence to baseline scenario (including PF withdrawal limit) Use concessional financing 2017–20 capital outlay reduced by a third and spread over 5 years PF withdrawal capped at US$1.3 billion per annum Use concessional financing Adjustment Scenario 2017–20 capital outlay reduced by half and spread over 5 years Total spending (excl. grants) kept at under US$1.4 billion after 2021; spending is kept constant as a percent of non-oil GDP after 2027 PF withdrawal capped at US$1.3 billion up to 2025, and limited to ESI thereafter. Fiscal reforms to mobilize domestic revenues (including VAT), which reduces need for concessional financing Total Government Expenditure (In millions of US dollars ) 2016 Budget Adjustment Non-Oil Growth (In percent) Inflation (In percent) 2016 Budget Adjustment 2016 Budget Adjustment Page 16 Box 1. Timor-Leste: Macroeconomic Impact under Different Fiscal Policy Scenarios (concluded) Current Account Balance Net Public Sector Assets Per Capita (In US dollars) 2016 Budget Adjustment 2016 Budget Adjustment PF Dynamics: 2016 Budget Scenario (flow) 1/ PF Dynamics: 2016 Budget Scenario(stock) 1/ Revenues Excess withdrawal Investment return External financing ESI Net inflows 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 1/ Staff extrapolation from 2021. PF Dynamics: Baseline Scenario (flow) Revenues Excess withdrawal Investment return External Financing ESI Net inflows 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 Source: IMF staff calculations PF Dynamics: Adjustment Scenario (flow) Revenues Excess withdrawal Investment return External Financing ESI Net inflows Source: IMF staff calculations 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 PF Balance Debt Net balance 1/ Staff extrapolation from 2021. PF Dynamics: Baseline Scenario (stock) PF Balance Debt Net balance PF Dynamics: Adjustment Scenario (stock) PF Balance Debt Net balance Page 17 More could be done to improve spending efficiency. Although the overall allocation to health and education expenditures has been increasing up to 2015, health expenditure appears low in comparison to peers, and there is a need to increase the returns on higher education spending. More detailed analysis at the sector level on these social spending components and outcomes would contribute to better resource allocation. The government should also take the lead in exercising strong wage restraint to avoid losing cost competitiveness. Further, the extension of fiscal autonomy to Oecusse ZEESM needs to be carefully managed to minimize risks of off-budget expenditures and the accumulation of contingent liabilities. Domestic non-oil revenues need to be mobilized urgently . Ongoing work by the Fiscal Reform Commission to introduce a value-added tax (VAT) regime together with the review of income tax and other taxes is a step in the right direction to achieve the government’s goal of raising domestic non-oil revenues from an average of 11 percent of non-oil GDP in 2011–15 to 15 percent of non-oil GDP by 2020. In the near term, focus needs to be given to broadening the tax base and enhancing tax compliance. While more details in the design and implementation of the VAT and other taxes still need to be fleshed out, staff recommended the following: VAT. A single-rate VAT, with exemptions restricted to a minimum and a sufficiently high registration threshold at the start to exclude most small businesses in consideration of the limited tax administration capacity, should be implemented as soon as feasible. The choice of the tax rate should be primarily driven by revenue mobilization needs, and go beyond replacing current service tax, sales tax, and customs duties. Other taxes. Staff also recommended raising other taxes to bolster revenue. IMF technical assistance has recommended that higher excise duties on tobacco and petroleum products and raising the income tax rate from 10 to 15 percent could yield additional tax revenue of close to 2 percent of GDP. Staff also welcomed the authorities’ plans to review and streamline existing tax holidays on investment. The PF is a source of confidence for the economy and should be preserved as an endowment fund. The authorities remain committed to a transparent and accountable fiscal framework that has allowed oil revenues to be saved through the PF—an internationally well- regarded institution. The ESI, which functions as a fiscal rule, was intended by the Timor-Leste government to act as an annual withdrawal limit from the PF, so that the PF assets could be preserved in real terms and generate a permanent level of investment income to support government expenditures. While some drawdown of the assets of the PF is justified for infrastructure investment in order to diversify the economy and boost growth potential, the assets also need to be preserved at a level that is sufficient to provide adequate investment income for future generations. The experience of other well-managed natural resource funds suggests that strong fiscal discipline and binding fiscal rules are needed. In this context, the adoption of the policies under the See World Bank Group (2013), FY2013 – 2017 Country Partnership Strategy: The Democratic Republic of Timor- Leste” February 19, 2013. Page 18 adjustment scenario will facilitate a return to strict compliance of the fiscal rule under the ESI within a feasible timeframe. At the same time, consideration could be given to revising certain aspects of the PF legal framework to strengthen the withdrawal rule and reduce room for discretion. Greater use of concessional loans could help preserve the PF. Staff welcomes the government’s plans to tap more concessional borrowing to finance large infrastructure projects instead of just drawing down the PF. The financing gap could be met by external loans, if the borrowing cost is lower than the opportunity cost of tapping into the PF as measured by the PF’s expected investment return, and guided by the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA). The discipline of debt sustainability monitoring by creditors may also come with the transfer of knowledge by these multilateral or bilateral institutions. So far, the government has been very conservative in its borrowing. The debt sustainability assessment has deteriorated, and the risk of external debt distress has increased to moderate. Even though the baseline fiscal scenario does not entail breaches of any DSA threshold, stress tests resulted in breaches for all but one indicator. The increased risk of debt distress reflects the authorities’ plan to increase concessional borrowing to finance higher frontloaded capital expenditures, compared to their plans when the last DSA was undertaken in 2014. Higher concessional borrowing would however help preserve the assets of the PF by reducing the need for excess withdrawals. In this context, maintaining a sustainable fiscal framework (as outlined under staff’s adjustment scenario) is crucial to long-term debt sustainability. Further strengthening of public financial management (PFM) capacity is needed to cement progress. The economic and social impact of public investment depends critically on its efficiency. Recent analytical work by the IMF shows that economic dividends from closing the efficiency gap can be substantial. Improvements in public investment management (related to planning, allocation and implementation) could increase the efficiency and productivity of capital spending. The Public Investment Management Assessment (PIMA) tool developed by the IMF would help identify reform priorities and develop capacity building strategies. The recently adopted PPP policy for the Tibar Port could provide a strong template for future PPPs. Authorities’ Views The authorities consider total annual expenditure of US$1.4 billion in the medium term to be insufficient, given the urgency to develop infrastructure . The government remains committed to its medium-term infrastructure spending plans as outlined in the SDP as they consider the infrastructure investments to be essential to economic diversification and raising the potential growth of the economy. Lower spending would constrain the authorities’ ability to pursue any new opportunities to boost potential growth. They highlighted the need to improve infrastructure to attract FDI for achieving economic diversification. IMF(2015), Making Public Investment More Efficient, June 11, 2015. Page 19 The authorities concur on the need to ensure the quality of investment spending through robust feasibility assessments and appraisal of public investment projects . They seek the Fund’s support to determine the desirable level of infrastructure investment. The authorities also pointed out that while the Tasi Mane project focuses on facilitating the development of oil and gas industries, it will also boost general development along the south coast. Further, a significant share of the government’s total capital spending is channeled towards improving overall infrastructure in the south coast. They recognized the risk of moving the Tasi Mane project ahead and broadly shared the staff’s recommendation (see paragraph 31) to remain flexible in the timing and scope of the project’s implementation, to better manage risks by taking into account changing economic conditions and opportunities. The authorities shared staff’s view on the need for timely efforts to mobilize domestic revenue . Fiscal reform plans in the pipeline include the introduction of the VAT, which will boost domestic revenues and further bolster fiscal sustainability. The authorities consider the risk of debt distress to be contained despite higher borrowing, but see value in further strengthening debt management capacity . The authorities reiterated their commitment to preserve the assets of the PF and the government’s plan to utilize more concessional financing for large infrastructure projects. Although the projected external borrowing to finance the government’s infrastructure spending over the next few years is considerable, the authorities view the borrowing projections under the baseline scenario as close to the upper limit of the financing needed. Actual borrowing will be determined by the pace of project implementation. The accumulated savings in the PF also provide ample buffer against debt distress. Furthermore, higher growth resulting from infrastructure development is expected to contribute towards ensuring debt sustainability. The authorities have also expressed interest in Fund TA to strengthen capacity in debt management.