Bank supervision will be further strengthened to ensure the soundness of the system. Consolidated supervision will be introduced and the legal powers of the CBY strengthened to enable cross-border supervision. The CBY will also improve the enforcement of prudential regulations as well as the recently issued banking corporate governance guidelines. Furthermore, CBY will develop, in collaboration with METAC, prudential regulations that address the risks specific to Islamic banking. In addition, the banking and central bank laws will be strengthened to address gaps in the CBY’s power to resolve banks (MEFP, Table 2). To this end, the CBY requested TA from the IMF Legal Department in drafting the necessary changes to the banking law, and will aim to complete the drafting of the amendments and submit them to parliament in 2015. Further reforms will aim at strengthening the Prompt Corrective Action, which specifies rule-based penalties against banks that exhibit progressively deteriorating capital ratios, in collaboration with METAC. The program aims at improving access to financial services in order to support inclusive growth . Reforms in this area include strengthening the public credit registry and payments system. In 2009 the CBY issued a law on microfinance banks and licenses have been issued to two deposit-taking institutions to provide microfinance; a third, preliminary license has been issued. The authorities will build on this progress by promoting mobile and branchless banking, and will issue the required regulation in collaboration with CGAP and USAID. Furthermore, the insolvency regime and functioning of commercial courts will be improved to enhance the banking system’s capacity to enforce foreclosure on collateral. The authorities have made significant improvements to the AML/CFT legal framework They brought into force amendments to the AML/CFT Law aimed at more comprehensive criminalization of money laundering and terrorist financing, and issued regulations on the freezing of terrorist assets, with a view to addressing the strategic deficiencies that were identified by FATF. Going forward additional resources should be allocated to bolster the effective implementation of the regime. Page 24