Context . Without substantial consolidation, Palau’s fiscal position will become unsustainable after the Compact grants expire in FY2024. Revenue collection relies heavily on tourism, contributing to volatility and vulnerability, and the disbursement of infrastructure loans in the next few years would raise the debt burden. Developments and near-term outlook. Fiscal consolidation slowed in FY2013 partly due to natural disasters, but the authorities intend to put the fiscal adjustment back on track this year. The current fiscal deficit excluding grants (fiscal anchor) is estimated to have remained unchanged at 12¼ percent of GDP in FY2013 (Figure 3, Table 4). Despite the slowdown in tourism, tax revenue continued rising thanks to increases in tourism-related taxes, higher prices in the tourism industry, as well as improvements in tax compliance. However, current spending was also larger than budgeted due to typhoon Bopha in December 2012. The cash buffers, excluding The U.S. dollar has provided an important nominal anchor. Palau maintains close financial and trade linkages with the United States and, as a small state, has limited capacity to conduct its own monetary and exchange rate policy. The 2010 agreement following the Compact of Free Association with the United States that will provide US$229 million in grants during 2011-24 is pending ratification by the U.S. congress, but Palau has continued to receive advances and to withdraw from the Compact Trust Fund (CTF). Page 6 the CTF, increased to 5 percent of GDP and the domestic accounts payables declined to 11 percent of GDP. The FY2014 budget reflects the authorities’ commitment to fiscal consolidation by maintaining prudent spending and creating a reserve fund to build fiscal buffers. After typhoon Haiyan hit the country in November 2013, the authorities reallocated the planned savings of about ½ percent of GDP for reconstruction expenses. Staff supported the authorities’ intention to replenish the reserve fund by containing spending and saving additional revenue gains that are expected with the adoption of a new IT system in customs, the recent increase in the tobacco tax, and the recovery of tourism. In view of these, the current fiscal deficit (excluding grants) is projected to narrow by 1½ percent of GDP, putting the fiscal consolidation back on track. FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18 FY19 FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 Immediate adjustment Gradual adjustment Minimum adjustment Baseline Palau: Options for Fiscal Adjustment (Current fiscal balance excluding grants, percent of GDP) Medium-term fiscal framework. Moving ahead, continued fiscal consolidation is needed to build non-CTF deposits and ensure fiscal self-sufficiency, as otherwise domestic revenue and withdrawals from the CTF will not be sufficient to maintain a steady level of spending after the Compact grants expire. Staff’s assessment shows that a gradual reduction in the current fiscal deficit excluding grants by about 8 ppt of GDP during FY2014–19 would raise the government’s net worth to a level that will provide a sustainable source of financing going forward, and offer an adequate fiscal buffer to address future shocks (Annex II). If there are any fiscal slippages over this period, the authorities would have additional five years, before the Compact grants expire in FY2024, to put the fiscal consolidation back on track. In view of this, a slower fiscal consolidation that spreads the adjustment until FY2023 is not recommended because it would be more sensitive to risks of slippages and adverse shocks. In addition, a longer adjustment period would lead to a lower level of sustainable government’s net worth and, thus, a lower fiscal deficit that can be financed. The recommended gradual fiscal adjustment would require efforts to reduce spending in terms of GDP, in addition to the revenue measures envisaged in the baseline scenario. The stock of domestic account payables—mostly trade credits and late payment to contractors and suppliers—has been reduced from its peak of 15 percent of GDP in FY2010 but remains above the average of 7 percent of GDP observed before the global financial crisis. The prospective disbursement of US$10 million under the Compact’s fiscal consolidation fund is expected to be used to further reduce these liabilities Since withdrawals from the CTF will be capped at US$15 million annually during FY2024-44, Palau will have to rely on other revenue sources and/or expenditure reduction to prevent any financing gap. By reducing the current deficit excluding grants to 4¼ percent of GDP by FY2019 and keeping it constant into the long run, the overall balance will continue in surplus until FY2025, allowing the government to build up deposits during this period. Beyond FY2025, as the Compact grants expire, the overall balance will switch into a deficit, which will gradually reach a sustainable level of 2¼ percent of GDP in FY2043 and will be financed by the deposits (and their returns) accumulated during the surplus years. Source: Fund staff estimates. Page 7 Comprehensive tax reform . The authorities are committed to a comprehensive tax reform aimed at simplifying the tax framework, increasing its fairness, and raising revenue capacity over the medium term. They have conducted intensive public consultations in all states, and expect to pass the tax reform bill in congress by April/May 2014 and have it implemented over the subsequent year. Implementing all components as recommended by IMF/PFTAC technical assistance (TA) is critical: (1) move to c.i.f. (cost, insurance and freight) valuation for imports for tax purposes; (2) replace the gross revenue tax (GRT) with a single rate VAT with no exemptions except for exports; (3) reduce the wage and salary tax rates for low income household to offset any price increases from VAT adoption; and (4) raise the net income tax (NIT) for financial institutions, and expand it to all VAT-registered business. If the passage of tax reform bill is delayed, staff recommended adopting c.i.f. valuation, removing import tax exemptions, broadening excise taxes, and raising the NIT for financial institutions as intermediate actions. Staff also noted the importance of communicating all aspects of the reform package to engage stakeholders and improving revenue administration capacity to support this major reform. In view of the authorities’ strong commitment to implement the comprehensive tax reform, domestic revenue is projected to increase by about 4 ppt of GDP during FY2014–19 under the baseline scenario Expenditure reform. Medium-term fiscal adjustment also requires containing current spending while ensuring adequate public services. Since the wage bill represents about half of current spending, controlling its growth continues to be the top priority. Staff estimated that containing the increase in wage bill below the inflation rate, complemented by civil service reforms, could reduce current spending by 4 ppt of GDP during FY2014–19. By implementing both expenditure and revenue reforms under the gradual adjustment scenario , Palau would be able secure long-term fiscal sustainability. Public finance management. Given the disbursement of new infrastructure loans, sound management of public debt and strong governance of loan-funded infrastructure projects would help ensure debt sustainability and minimize fiscal risks. The debt sustainability analysis indicates that Palau’s public debt risk remains low after the disbursement of Asian Development Bank (AsDB) water and sanitation loans. However, continued fiscal consolidation is needed to place the debt on a downward path (Annex III). Staff advised the authorities to continue directing external loans and Tax reforms, including Value Added Tax and Net Income Tax Improvement in nontax administration Source: Fund staff estimates. The Impact of Fiscal Reforms, FY2014–19 (ppt. of GDP) (Revenue and Expenditure) Scenario (Measures) Baseline (Revenue) Revenue Expense Civil service reforms Gradual Adjustment These potential revenue gains are achievable compared to the impact of VAT implementation in other countries and considering the fact that Palau’s income tax and goods and services tax in terms of GDP are currently among the lowest in the region The impact of current spending reduction on growth is estimated to be small, at -¼ percent annually during the adjustment period (Table 2). Page 8 grants to infrastructure projects that will promote tourism and growth. Staff also encouraged the authorities to implement the medium-term budget framework, supported by AsDB TA, and continue improving budget execution and planning and strengthening cash management. Prudent management of the newly established reserve fund would also help safeguard fiscal buffers. Reforming public entities . Staff welcomed recent reforms to make the Civil Service Pension Fund (CSPF) and Social Security Fund (SSF) more sustainable, including by replacing the 30-year service mandatory retirement with a mandatory retirement age for civil servants, increasing the social security entitlement age, and adjusting benefit structures. The authorities made further progress in clearing government arrears to these funds and improving contribution compliance. The upcoming actuarial valuations should assess the impact of the recent measures on the funds’ financial positions. The merger of Palau Public Utilities Company and Palau Water and Sewer Corporation was completed in June 2013. The new public utility company is mandated to improve water and sewer services and raise tariffs accordingly in order to reach full cost recovery of water and sewer operations in 2016. Nonetheless, electricity operation will continue to rely on subsidies, grants, and/or loans to finance capital spending. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue reforming the utility company to achieve full cost recovery in all operations. The authorities’ views. The authorities reiterated their commitment to fiscal consolidation and prudent debt management, and confirmed that staff’s recommendations are broadly in line with their medium-term budget framework. They appreciated the IMF/PFTAC TA in designing the tax reform, and remained cautiously optimistic that the tax reform bill, including a value added tax, would be passed. The reform is also expected to raise the NIT for financial institutions and expand its coverage to all-VAT registered business, but the authorities indicated that this would be done in stages given capacity consideration and the need to build ownership among stakeholders to support the reform. The authorities agreed with staff’s advice to contain the wage bill growth but noted that the priority at this stage is to pass the tax reform bill. Looking forward, potential measures for civil service reforms could include enforcing mandatory retirement, upgrading the work ladder to attract better qualified candidates, aligning salaries with performance, reducing temporary workers, and retraining of public servant to prevent new hiring. The authorities plan to further strengthen the CSPF by switching it from a defined-benefit to a defined-contribution framework and expanding it to include the private sector. They also shared staff’s assessment that the risk of debt distress remains low, but it is sensitive to fiscal slippages and a growth slowdown.