The immediate challenge is to reduce the fiscal deficit for 2014 within the limits of the available financing, in a manner that will be consistent with preserving macroeconomic stability . In the absence of immediate corrective measures, the fiscal deficit could have widened to as much as 9 percent of GDP, from 6.9 percent a year earlier. This deficit would have been impossible to fill from available external financing and from own resources without jeopardizing the macroeconomic stability that has been in place since 2012. The authorities therefore decided to act promptly to reduce the 2014 deficit to 5.4 percent of GDP (and the underlying nonhydrocarbon primary fiscal deficit excluding grants to 12.7 percent of GDP from 15.2 percent in 2013). Even after this exceptional effort, there will still be a need for a sizable domestic financing effort, through new net issuance of government securities, greater external donor support, and recourse to Fund financing under the requested ECF arrangement. Disbursements under the ECF arrangement will go 2014201520162017Billions YrlsMillions USDBillions YrlsMillions USDBillions YrlsMillions USDBillions YrlsMillions USD A. Overall balance excluding grants B. Domestic financing C. Net external resource requirements: -(A+B) D. Projected/expected budget grants 135.8632.0114.1513.196.8408.6107.6428.2Projected grants86.4402.0103.0463.196.8408.6107.6428.2Additional budget support contingent on the ECF arrangement49.4230.011.150.0 Saudi Arabia World Bank 1/ United States E. Projected net external borrowing (excluding IMF) 2/ F. Repayments to IMF G. Residual financing gap (C-D-E+F) H. ECF Disbursements I. Remaining financing gap (G-H) Sources: Yemeni authorities; and IMF staff estimates.2/ Includes US$100 million loan from the Arab Monetary Fund for 2014. Text Table 1. Republic of Yemen: Projected Financing Requirements and Sources, 2014–17 1/ The amount is part of allocation of IDA-17 to Yemen. Page 17 directly to finance the Budget and help close the financing gap (Text Table 1). The CBY and Ministry of Finance will sign a Memorandum of Understanding on the use of Fund resources, which specifies responsibilities for timely servicing financial obligations to the Fund and for maintenance of a specific government account at the CBY to receive the Fund financing (prior action; MEFP, Table 2). The program also aims at improving the structure of expenditure and revenue, and at further reducing the fiscal deficit over the medium term. The authorities agreed that the structure of expenditure is currently inconsistent with supporting growth, job creation, and social protection, and that fiscal consolidation needs to continue in the years ahead. The program therefore aims at steadily reducing the overall deficit to 4.2 percent of GDP over the medium term, by increasing nonhydrocarbon revenue and reducing lower-quality expenditures. At the same time, higher-quality public expenditure (such as direct social transfers and infrastructure investment) will be increased. The underlying fiscal position (nonhydrocarbon primary balance excluding grants), which is the fiscal anchor of the reform program, will thus improve during the program period by about 6 percent of GDP. This fiscal adjustment path is laid out in Text Table 2, and its supporting measures are detailed below. Public debt will be kept below 50 percent of GDP, and the need for domestic financing will decline by half to more than 3.5 percent of GDP, thus reducing fiscal dominance. The improvement in the fiscal deficit will also reduce the pressure on the external position and would therefore help protect gross reserves. A. Saving measures Increase in tax revenue0.01.20.60.30.50.4Reduction in wage bill0.90.40.30.30.20.3Reduction in subsidies 2.10.83.30.10.00.1 B. Transfers and capital expenditures Increase in targeted transfers0.60.2-0.9-0.3-0.10.0Increase in capital expenditures1.30.0-1.50.00.0-0.1 A+B 4.92.61.80.40.70.6Changes in other budget lines net:savings (+)0.94-0.040.26-0.080.180.05Decline in nonhydrocarbon primary balance excluding grants5.92.62.10.30.80.7 Memorandum items: Overall fiscal deficit-6.9-5.4-5.0-4.7-4.3-4.2Nonhydrocarbon primary balance-14.3-11.3-9.6-9.5-8.7-7.9 Excluding grants-15.2-12.7-10.6-10.3-9.4-8.8 Sources: Yemen authorities; and IMF staff etimates. Text Table 2. Republic of Yemen: Summary of Fiscal Adjustment, 2014–18 Page 18 A centerpiece of the reform package is designed to respond to the recent decline in oil revenue and fuel shortages by reforming energy subsidies. Official fuel prices are currently at about half of international levels. The large subsidy has been benefiting the rich disproportionately and creating an incentive for smuggling, corruption, and inefficient use of fuel, including by the small electricity producers. At the same time, fuel is largely unavailable to the population at subsidized prices, and black market prices are reported to have reached international levels. As a first step toward eliminating these subsidies, the authorities agreed to allow the private sector to directly import fuel or buy it from the Aden refinery, for their own use at international prices. A decision to this effect was issued shortly after the mission and was implemented starting in June 2014. This measure will create savings of close to 0.3 percent of GDP, or $130 million in the remainder of 2014 (prior action; MEFP, ¶ 23). Second, the official fuel prices will be adjusted in October by about 50 percent on average (MEFP, ¶20). These price adjustments would reduce the subsidy bill by about 3.5 percent of GDP on an annual basis, although the saving in 2014 will be limited to 0.2 percent due to the two-month lag in settling the subsidy bill (Box 2; and MEFP, ¶23). Lastly, an asymmetric price adjustment mechanism will be introduced in mid-2015; this mechanism will allow domestic prices to increase in response to increases in international prices and gradually eliminate the residual subsidy over time. Staff initially suggested that the automatic price mechanism be put in place before end-2014. It was, however, agreed to first assess the impact of the October reforms, and then conduct a study to design the proposed system. The authorities requested TA from FAD to ensure proper design and implementation. The authorities will also postpone implementation of a 2012 decision to increase wage allowances . This will generate about 0.4 percent of savings in 2014. The program entails a civil service reform that will be phased in over the medium term. The authorities believe that reforms on this front will require more time for preparations that include identifying ghost workers and double- dippers. Thus, immediate measures will aim to steadily move from cash payment of wages and salaries to payments using bank account and postal services (MEFP, ¶24, Table 2). Implementation of the biometric identification system will be gradually generalized throughout the civil service and the military, and a census of personnel will be implemented (MEFP, ¶24, Table 2). The need to immediately improve social protection was also agreed. Yemen’s Social Welfare Fund (SWF) already covers about 40 percent of the population and is considered one of the best-operating funds in the region. However, other large inefficient public expenditures have left little resources for the fund’s transfers to the poor. The implementation of subsidy reform would free substantial resources for the SWF and other high-quality expenditures. The program, therefore, entails a 50 percent increase in SWF transfers to the poor, concurrent with the fuel price adjustments in October (MEFP, ¶23). This would allow for raising the average monthly transfer per family from about $18 to about $27. Coverage of the SWF will continue to be improved, with the help of the World Bank and other partners. Another part of the savings from fuel subsidies reform will be used to increase infrastructure investment over the medium term. This would help spread the social impact of reforms beyond the SWF, and would boost job-creation and potential growth. Capital spending has Page 19 been crowded out by fuel subsidies and the large wage bill. Since 2010, its level in relation to GDP was halved to reach a low of 2.4 percent. This contributed to the sharp decline in gross domestic investment, which fell to well below 10 percent of GDP. At the same time, Yemen’s need for infrastructure investment, including roads, utilities, and irrigation, is large and increasing. The program will therefore aim at protecting capital spending in relation to GDP in the remainder of 2014, and then steadily increasing it to about 4 percent of GDP over the medium term. Priority will be given to infrastructure expenditures and efficient public works that are labor intensive. These will be geographically spread and transparently tendered, to improve inclusiveness and governance. Part of these investments will be implemented through the Social Development Fund (SDF) which has a good track record in supporting SMEs. Furthermore, the domestic component of foreign-financed projects will be secured and timely implemented in coordination with the Executive Bureau so as to maximize the catalytic effect of public investment. On the revenue side, reforms will target enhancing tax revenue collection by about 1.2 percent of GDP in 2014 . The authorities believed that passing new tax legislation would be very difficult before the writing of the constitution and the elections planned for next year. Therefore, for 2014, discussions focused on tax and customs administration measures to simplify procedures, enhance compliance, and fight fraud and smuggling (MEFP, ¶25). Tax compliance in Yemen is very low by regional and international standards (Figure 3). Yemen has shown a strong track record in this area in recent years and there remains substantial scope for continued improvement, building on the progress made thus far. The authorities are determined to continue to improve filing and payment compliance to 65 percent by end-2014. Furthermore, the authorities will produce an inventory of all existing exemptions and reduced tax rates, and refrain from introducing any measures that would expand the scope of tax and customs exemptions, including any amendments to the 2010 investment law. Reforms in 2015 will include a review of the GST law and the assessment of the revenue impact of existing tax exemptions, with a view to streamlining them. The authorities have prepared a contingency plan to offset the impact of downside risks, should these materialize. The government will closely monitor developments in budget financing resources and expenditure implementation, and will adjust programmed spending plans as needed, should there be shortfalls in the financing. At the same time, the government will resist any new spending beyond the allocated spending envelopes in the revised framework, except for security and the requirements of political transition (MEFP, ¶21). Should there be need for emergency spending, authorization for such expenditure will be accompanied by simultaneous instructions for compensatory cuts on lower-priority spending. The government will also avoid accumulation of arrears. It will put in place a system to monitor and report expenditure arrears on a quarterly basis, and will adopt a gradual program to clear all outstanding arrears over the medium term (MEFP, ¶29). Public finance management reforms will aim at strengthening budget execution and reporting . The authorities will complete the deployment of the Accounting-based Financial Management Information System (AFMIS) into 55 spending units by the end of 2014. In the following years, they will implement a strategy to transfer the treasury functions from the CBY to the Page 20 Ministry of Finance in line with past TA recommendations. In addition, ongoing reforms should take into account future plans to introduce fiscal federalism and ensure that appropriate expenditures and debt-contracting procedures and controls are introduced to safeguard fiscal discipline under the prospective federal system. The authorities will strengthen infrastructure implementation capacity as well as donor aid coordination . To improve the quality of public sector investment and help catalyze donors’ disbursements, the government has been undertaking reforms to strengthen project selection, procurement, implementation, and monitoring, in close coordination with the World Bank and other donors (MEFP, ¶27). To this end, it established the Executive Bureau in 2013, to help speed up disbursement of donor support and strengthen project management. Furthermore, the government, with the assistance of the World Bank, has set up the Mutual Accountability Framework to monitor progress in donors’ assistance. The risk of debt distress is currently assessed to be moderate (Supplement for Joint Debt Sustainability Analysis). Nevertheless, the government is committed to neither contract nor guarantee nonconcessional external debt, except from international and regional development institutions, from which it will only borrow at the most concessional terms these institutions provide. The government will also seek to speed up the promised support from donors. The focus will be on mobilizing budgetary grants in order to minimize the impact on the debt burden. Page 21 Box 2. Yemen: Reform of Fuel Subsidies The government intends to raise domestic prices of several petroleum products in October Prices will increase by 50 Yemeni rials per liter for gasoline, kerosene, and diesel; and by 800 Yemeni rials per gas cylinder. This represents an average price increase of about 50 percent, which will halve the current gap with international prices. Although well-off households disproportionately benefit from fuel subsidies, the impact of their reduction cannot be ignored. According to past FAD TA, increasing fuel prices to full pass-through levels will lead to a reduction of about 10 percent in real household income for households in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution. In addition, decision was made, and implemented, in June to allow the private sector to import part of its diesel requirements at international prices. The decision is expected to cover about 20 percent of total diesel consumption. To mitigate the impact of higher prices on the poor, the authorities will increase allocations for the Social Welfare Fund (SWF) by 50 percent . Currently, the SWF provides cash transfers to more than 1.5 million households or roughly 40 percent of the total population. The government intends to use part of the savings from the subsidy reform to increase monthly cash transfers from about $18 to about $27 per household. At the same time, it will work in close collaboration with the World Bank to improve the coverage of the SWF, phasing out transfers to noneligible beneficiaries and include additional eligible beneficiaries. Savings from the reform will also be used to finance growth-enhancing and poverty-reducing capital spending. The expected savings from the reform amount to 3.5 percent of GDP over the program period . In 2014, savings from fuel price increases will be limited to about 0.2 percent of GDP because government payments for subsidies generally take place with a delay of one to two months. Additional savings of $130 million in the remainder of 2014 will be generated from allowing private sector to import diesel at international prices. In 2015, the full impact of the reform is expected to reduce the subsidy bill by about 3.5 percent of GDP. Beyond 2015, additional savings would continue to be reaped from improvements in efficiency and reduced smuggling. With TA from the Fund, the government is also planning to introduce an asymmetric fuel price adjustment mechanism to reflect movements in international fuel prices . This will help depoliticize pricing of energy and increase the expected savings from the subsidy reform over the medium term. In this context, the authorities will consider adopting a smoothing rule to avoid sharp increases in domestic prices and unsettle inflationary expectations.