Medium-term growth depends critically on economic diversification. Similar to other small states, the Timorese economy faces impediments to development including low human capital, poor infrastructure and connectivity, a small domestic market, limited financial sector development, and high business cost structure. The diversification imperative has gained added urgency in light of the near depletion of oil production in existing oil fields. The associated reduction of fiscal resources also implies that the public sector would increasingly have less capacity to boost growth through government spending and procurements generated from public investment projects. Continuing efforts to improve health, education, and quality of life, including under the rubric of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), would also help to lift potential growth (Appendix 4). Some degree of government involvement in industrial development is warranted in cases of missing and incomplete markets. However, this should be well-targeted and implemented under appropriate risk-sharing arrangements to minimize contingent liabilities. Efforts aimed at economic diversification present an opportunity to reorient the economy away from the oil sector. There is concern about the economic viability of the state-initiated development of key petroleum projects without an agreed commitment with the oil companies to develop new oil fields. In this context, staff urged the authorities to be flexible in the timing and speed of implementation, taking into account changing economic conditions and opportunities. Catalyzing private sector development will need an enabling business environment and measures to boost competitiveness. Timor-Leste, with its young labor force, is well placed to take advantage of global and regional integration trends and has applied for ASEAN membership. To maximize benefits from these opportunities, the private sector should leverage Timor-Leste’s comparative advantage in labor-intensive sectors such as agriculture and tourism through better branding and marketing, product innovation, and explore niche markets. A recent ADB study also emphasizes the need to build agricultural markets and develop tourism which would require improving crop quality, productivity (low relative to peers), and supply consistency, while ensuring price incentives and land tenure arrangements support farm investment and production. Improving tourism data collection, including market perceptions of Timor-Leste as a tourism destination, is also key. In this regard, the priority of the government in creating a business and investment climate to develop a diversified private sector is commendable and the role of the government as a facilitator could be enforced through increased dialogue and partnership with the private sector. At the same ADB (2015), “A Private Sector Assessment for Timor-Leste: Growing the Non-oil Economy.” Page 22 time, efforts to increase cost effectiveness are important in order to restore external competitiveness (Box 2). The mission highlighted the following priority areas. Specifically: Business climate. Strengthening the enforcement of contracts, resolving insolvency, registering property, and improving the ease of getting credit, would help to bolster the ease of doing business (Figure 5). In particular, accelerating the ongoing work on the reform of land law to clarify land ownership would help to improve the availability of collateral for lending and facilitate investments. Wage competitiveness . Relatively high wages in Timor-Leste, in part reflecting the public service’s minimum wage level, could discourage FDI in labor-intensive sectors (Box 2). Public sector wages should grow in line with productivity gains. This would also have an important impact on private sector wages, given that the public sector wage has an important role in private sector wage determination. Labor market . Continued emphasis on quality of spending and outcomes in health and education, including strengthening vocational and technical education, are needed to strengthen human capital formation (Figure 6 and Appendix 5). Authorities’ Views The authorities reiterated their commitment to further implementing structural reforms, as set out in the SDP. Currently, the government is reviewing the investment law, and land and property law to attract more FDI and promote the commercial use of land as collateral in borrowing/lending. They emphasized that development of essential infrastructure is a priority to lay the ground for economic diversification.