Growth. The economy grew strongly in FY2015 at 9.4 percent, significantly faster than other Pacific island countries, with tourist arrivals and construction activity expanding by 35 percent. But the boom in tourism strained infrastructure (water, sanitation, and waste disposal), was tilted to low budget tourists, led to a rise in low quality hotels, and put the environment at risk (Appendix IV). As a result, the authorities have limited the number of charter flights and tourist arrivals have slowed in FY2016. Construction was buoyant in FY2015 due to the development of infrastructure and new hotels. Page 9 The recent drought had a limited impact on growth due to its short duration and the small size of the agricultural sector. Growth is projected at zero in FY2016 due to lower tourist arrivals and a modest impact from the drought, but to rise to 5 percent in FY2017 as tourism recovers with the entry of new hotels and construction picks up. In the medium term, growth would gradually moderate to 2 percent as hotel developments are restricted until infrastructure has been upgraded. Inflation and credit. In line with global trends, inflation fell to 2.2 percent in FY2015 as food and fuel prices declined and it is expected at 2 percent in FY2016–17 as commodity prices stabilize. Banks continue to lend little domestically despite the rapid rise in deposits, investing most of their assets abroad. Domestic loans fell by 2.5 percent in FY2015, with the loan-to-deposit ratio declining to 13 percent. The ceiling on lending rates for commercial loans and the lack of business plans and financial statements for small and medium size enterprises (SMEs) are likely at the root of this issue. External Stability. The external position has improved. The current account deficit shrank from 12 percent of GDP in FY2014 to 0.5 percent in FY2015, mostly due to a fall in fuel imports by 10 percent of GDP, but lower food imports and higher tourism receipts also helped. Capital grants and FDI inflows exceeded the current account deficit by a wide margin. The current account deficit is expected to rise to 7 percent of GDP in FY2016-18 due to higher imports relating to fiber optic cable and sanitation projects financed with AsDB loans; and it is projected to stabilize at 5.5 percent of GDP in the medium term due to higher commodity prices and infrastructure related imports financed with Compact grants. These deficits would remain fully financed with capital grants and FDI inflows. Risks . Palau’s positive outlook is subject to substantial downside risks due to its high reliance on tourism, grants, and commodity imports (Appendix V). U.S. dollar appreciation, a slowdown in key trading partners, and natural disasters could hurt tourism. Higher commodity prices could make food and fuel imports costlier. Further delays in ratifying the Compact agreement with the United States could complicate financing of fiscal and external balances. A continued strong influx of low budget tourists and further increase in low quality hotels could position Palau as a mass tourism destination and thus hurt the environment. Failure to implement a tourism strategy and diversify the economy could reduce growth in the medium term. Given the lack of monetary and exchange rate policies, Palau’s policy tools would be limited to fiscal and structural policies should risks materialize. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment of the economic outlook and risks. They noted that their objective is to achieve a level of growth that is sustainable and consistent with their goals of maintaining a pristine environment and positioning Palau as a high-end tourism destination. In this regard, the surge in tourist arrivals in FY2015 was excessive as it strained infrastructure, was tilted towards package tour low budget tourists, and led to an increase in low quality hotels. These trends go against their goals, and justified the introduction of limits on charter flights and restrictions in hotel developments until infrastructure has been upgraded. The authorities also noted that although the increase in the airport departure tax from US$50 to US$100 per tourist from April 1, 2017 seeks to replace lost revenue from fishing licenses due to the creation of the marine sanctuary, it may also help discourage tourist arrivals, particularly for low budget tourists. However, they expect the impact of this measure on tourist arrivals to be limited. Page 10