Growth. After two years of strong expansion, growth is estimated at around zero in FY2013, lower than other Pacific Island Countries (PICs), owing to declines in construction and tourism (Figures 1 and 4, Table 1). Construction activities slowed down due to delayed capital grants and lower capital spending during the change in administration in early FY2013. Contributing factors to the decline in tourism include the cessation of some flights from Asia, the increase in tourism-related fees, and the U.S. dollar appreciation. Typhoon Haiyan last November had minimal impact on growth, which is projected to increase to 1¾ percent in FY2014 and to 2¼–2½ percent over the medium term. The sources of growth include the recovery in tourism driven by new hotel developments and resumption of direct flights, and infrastructure developments financed by foreign loans and grants (Table 2). thanks to stable international food and fuel prices, and it is expected to stay around 3 percent in FY2014 and increase slightly during FY2015–16 due to the expected implementation of a value- added tax (VAT). Bank credit increased 11½ percent in 2013, while the nonperforming loan ratio remained broadly flat at 3¾ percent. External stability. The current account deficit deteriorated slightly last fiscal year due to lower tourist arrivals and large reconstruction imports associated with typhoon Bopha, but tourism recovery and moderating food and fuel prices are expected to reduce the deficit in FY2014–15 (Figure 2, Table 3). After worsening slightly in FY2016–18 due to imports related to infrastructure projects, the deficit would narrow to 5½ percent of GDP over the medium term and remain fully funded by grants, loans, and FDI. Palau’s food and fuel imports partly depend on tourism receipts, and this serves as an automatic stabilizer to the current account. The real effective exchange rate increased 4½ percent (y/y average) in FY2013 owing to the U.S. dollar appreciation, but it is in line with the PIC average, and the exchange rate assessment provides little evidence of fundamental misalignment. However, heavy reliance on tourists from a few economies would remain a vulnerability, and weaknesses in infrastructure and investment climate could hinder development of tourism-related businesses. Therefore, strengthening fiscal consolidation and improving competitiveness by improving infrastructure and the business climate are essential for maintaining Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ These assessments are subject to large measurement errors given data limitation and Palau's specific circumstances such as heavy reliance on tourism and grants. Macroeconomic balance Equilibrium real exchange rate External sustainability Current account (percent Exchange rate overvaluation Palau: Real Exchange Rate Assessments 1/ Consultative Group on Exchange Rate (CGER) Methodology (-3.8, 14.4) (1.7, 7.0) Norm of GDP) (percent) Projection Average Range A new Asian Development Bank loan of US$29 million (12 percent of FY2013 GDP) to finance water and sanitation projects would be mostly disbursed during FY2015–19. Page 5 external stability going forward. The use of the U.S. dollar as Palau’s legal tender remains appropriate. Risks, spillovers, and policy responses . Palau’s modest outlook is subject to downside risks. Financial market volatility and growth slowdown in Asia, U.S. dollar appreciation, and natural disasters, including those related to climate change, could hurt tourism and growth, weakening external and fiscal positions (Annex I). Palau’s heavy reliance on food and fuel imports also makes it susceptible to commodity price volatility. Given the absence of monetary and exchange rate policies, Palau will continue to rely on fiscal measures and structural reforms to address these risks. Successful fiscal consolidation is needed to build adequate fiscal buffers and ensure long-term fiscal sustainability and external stability. Improving investment and business climate would help diversify the economy, reduce economic vulnerability, and support growth. The authorities’ views. The authorities shared the staff’s views on the economic outlook, risks, and policy responses. They indicated that the decline in construction played a more important role than tourism in explaining last year’s growth slowdown. They noted that the priority is not increasing the quantity but the quality of tourists in order to preserve Palau’s pristine environment, while at the same time raise tourist spending. The authorities considered that natural disasters constitute the main risk, pointing to the recent typhoons.