The macroeconomic situation continued to be relatively stable in 2013, and growth remained moderate . Nonhydrocarbon growth was steady at about 4 percent, while hydrocarbon growth picked up strongly, reversing part of the oil output decline in preceding two years. As a result, real GDP growth is estimated to have doubled to almost 5 percent. At the same time, average inflation edged up slightly to reach 11 percent (up from about 10 percent a year earlier), and the exchange rate remained stable. The overall fiscal deficit worsened only moderately in 2013 despite a large decline in grants . Although grants declined by about 5 percent of GDP, the overall fiscal deficit deteriorated by only 0.6 percent of GDP, to reach 6.9 percent. This was achieved through a combination of expenditure restraint and an increase in nonhydrocarbon revenue. Subsidies and transfers were reduced by about 2.7 percent of GDP, mostly through limiting the supply of fuel products and shifting the schedule for payment of the subsidy bill by one month. Capital spending was also reduced by 1.3 percent of GDP. A 2012 decision to generalize an increase in civil servants’ allowances was also not implemented, leading to a 0.9 percent reduction in the wage bill. As a result, the underlying fiscal deficit (defined as the nonhydrocarbon primary deficit, excluding grants) narrowed by about 6 percent of GDP. This adjustment was forced by the lack of financing and the authorities’ determination to refrain from central bank borrowing. Page 9 The widening of the external current account deficit was also moderate in 2013. The large decline in grants was mitigated by healthy growth in exports and remittances. At the same time, capital outflows increased, reflecting large scheduled amortization of oil companies’ past FDI and the nonrecurrence of the large Saudi deposit of 2012. As a result, gross reserves declined by about $740 million to reach $4,854 million, or 4.5 months of imports, despite the sale to the central bank of pension funds’ holdings of about $250 million. On the other hand, the real effective exchange rate appreciated by 6.5 percent due to the relatively high domestic inflation and the nominal depreciation against the dollar of the currencies of Yemen’s key trading partners. Monetary policy continued to be generally prudent, but fiscal dominance remained high . Broad money growth was slightly slower than the growth of nominal GDP, mostly reflecting the decline in net foreign assets. However, net claims on central government continued to grow rapidly at about 28 percent. Private sector credit growth was also high, at 39 percent, from a very low base and after declining in the preceding two years. On February 7, 2013, the CBY reduced the benchmark deposit interest rate from 18 percent to 15 percent. The banking system remained stable, but some vulnerabilities remain . Banks are profitable and liquid, and capital adequacy ratios are high, albeit in large part reflecting the large zero-risk-weighted government securities on banks’ balance sheets. Nonperforming loans remain high, as does assets concentration in government securities. Islamic banks have high exposure to real estate markets abroad. The banking sector remains small, and financial markets and the payment system are underdeveloped, limiting financial intermediation and monetary policy transmission. The recent wave of sabotage to oil pipelines has had strong adverse effects on macroeconomic developments in the first half of 2014 . The frequent sabotage resulted in a significant decline in oil production and exports. This has led to pressures on the fiscal and external positions. In the absence of reforms, the fiscal deficit would reach 9 percent of GDP and reserves would decline to well-below three months of imports. In addition, severe fuel and electricity shortages have negatively affected economic activity, with real GDP growth expected to decelerate to less than 2 percent.