The medium-term growth outlook depends critically on economic diversification. Prioritization of government expenditures to facilitate high-return infrastructure investments is key in tandem with structural reforms that catalyze non-oil private sector growth. Under the baseline scenario, average non-oil real GDP growth in the medium term is projected to moderate to 5.5 percent, supported by increasing public spending and foreign direct investment. FDI projects in the pipeline, including a beer and beverage factory, a cement plant, the development of the Tibar Bay Port and a high-end resort hotel, which are expected to spur private sector development and create employment opportunities. The impact of persistently low oil prices on fiscal spending is limited in the short run due to the buffer provided by the PF, but persistently low oil prices would delay potential investment in new oil fields and hurt the prospects for developing the petroleum sector. Given that Timor-Leste is fully dollarized and has no independent monetary policy, adjustments to shocks will need to fall on fiscal policy but fiscal space is constrained by limited domestic revenue mobilization and the depleting PF balance in the medium to long term (Table 5). Higher fiscal spending and inadequate mobilization of domestic revenues are the main sources of risk over the medium-long term (Table 6). Failure to properly conduct feasibility studies to ensure that public investment is efficient, yields adequate returns, and sufficiently enhanced growth could amplify risks to fiscal sustainability. Steady depletion of the PF over the medium-long term due to excess withdrawals to fund existing expenditure plans implies a heightened risk of fiscal distress unless new non-oil revenues are generated or existing expenditure Page 12 plans are revised downwards. Moreover, given the increased share of global equities in the PF’s portfolio, its investment returns are exposed to the volatility of global financial markets. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly agree with the staff’s outlook and risk assessment. However, they stressed that frontloaded infrastructure spending is expected to diversify the economy, boost potential growth, and alleviate capacity constraints. They were also of the view that the current low inflationary environment provides more space for increasing government spending with little risk of overheating.