The structural reform agenda aims to improve the business environment and promote inclusive growth. In addition to the macro-critical structural reforms in the fiscal and financial sector areas, the program focuses on other structural reforms that are also macro-critical from the growth and job-creation perspective. In particular, Yemen’s rank in the World Bank’s report for doing business environment further deteriorated to 133 in 2013, from 129 a year earlier. The authorities will implement reforms to address the deficiencies identified in the underlying survey; these reforms include streamlining the procedures for starting new businesses, simplifying tax and customs processes, and strengthening property rights and contract enforcement. Structural benchmarks include specific measures to simplify the operations of customs and tax assessment and dispute processes (MEFP, Table 2) in order to address one of the lowest rated categories in the doing business survey. A Public-Private-Partnership law has been drafted and will be reviewed by the IFC to ensure that is in line with its earlier TA recommendations. The above structural reforms, as well as the reorientation of public expenditure to social transfers and infrastructure expenditure, will be instrumental in creating jobs and reducing poverty. The Parliament recently ratified Yemen’s accession to the WTO . In addition, Yemen has become fully compliant with the EITI requirements; its suspended membership has been restored. Yemen has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. The exchange rate regime is classified as a “stabilized arrangement.” Yemen participates in the GDDS and data are broadly adequate for surveillance. However, there is a need to improve statistics in the areas of national accounts and CPI, BOP and IIP, and financial soundness indicators. The authorities have recently strengthened their outreach effort. The need for and benefits from the nationally-owned reforms have been highlighted by the President in high-profile statements and speeches. An interagency outreach coordination committee has been formed, and is being facilitated by the Executive Bureau. A societal dialogue has been launched, with seminars and public communication focusing on the necessity and benefits of subsidy reforms.