Limited progress in financial intermediation is a key constraint on inclusive growth There are four banks, of which three are branches of foreign banks (incorporated in Australia, Indonesia, and Portugal) and one is a locally incorporated, wholly government-owned bank, Banco Nacional de Comércio de Timor-Leste (BNCTL). BNCTL is the smallest bank but has a predominantly Timorese customer base, in part because it was a micro-finance institution from 2001 until it was transformed into a bank in 2011 with an initial capital of $2 million. The banking system is highly liquid and well capitalized with BNCTL reporting a capital adequacy ratio of 45 percent as of September 2015, bolstered by a $10 million capital injection by the government in 2014. However, a very large portion of the economy is cash-based, making payments inefficient and insecure. While the soundness of banks’ lending remains fundamental, the strong deposit growth and continued decline in loans-to-deposits ratio suggest that banks are falling short in their role of financial intermediation. Challenges remain in expanding bank credit to SMEs and rural businesses. Private sector development is also perceived to be constrained by limited access to long-term credit at affordable rates. Page 20 The progress in promoting financial inclusion is commendable. Banco Central de Timor- Leste (BCTL)’s Financial Sector Master Plan, launched in August 2014, set out a roadmap for financial sector development to 2025 (Appendix 3). The installation of the Automatic Payment System and passage of the Law on National Payments System are major milestones towards achieving a more efficient and secure interbank payments system. Timor-Leste has also adopted a bank-based model for mobile banking and all four banks are currently in the process of introducing branchless banking facilities. The recent publication of the Financial System Review by the central bank is a further step in reviewing the stability of the financial system and monitoring progress towards the sound development of the financial sector. Enhancing financial inclusion needs to strike a balance with safeguarding financial stability. It is commendable that the BCTL is strengthening its capacity in banking supervision, supported by TA from development partners. A strategy for resolving legacy NPLs (concentrated in one commercial bank) should be put in place as soon as practical. The BCTL’s aim to enhance its role as lender of last resort with clear protocols and an appropriate legal framework is commendable. Although the conceptualization of a development bank is still at an early stage, the authorities should be vigilant to the risk of contingent fiscal liabilities. International experiences also suggest that a development bank should have a clear mandate and strong governance structure. Staff and the BCTL agreed that financial sector entities in the Oecusse ZEESM should remain under the supervision of the central bank. Efforts to strengthen the Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework should continue. Timor-Leste has completed the national risk assessment and the final report is expected to be released in 2016. The BCTL is in the process of issuing revised instructions for banks and other financial institutions on enhanced due diligence requirements for high-risk customers in line with the FATF standard. The use of the U.S. dollar as legal tender remains appropriate in light of institutional capacity constraints and limited financial development. The current U.S. dollar regime has served Timor-Leste well, given the country’s high dependence on oil exports. A review of the exchange rate regime, to study the merits of adopting its own currency as set out in the SDP, will be conducted by the central bank this year. Staff underscored that financial sector and institutional developments would be needed to pave the way for any potential exchange rate regime change to enhance external competitiveness as the economy diversifies away from oil and gas. Authorities’ Views The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s assessment of the financial sector. They noted that banks’ balance sheets are sound, but lending growth has been lagging behind deposit growth. They shared the staff’s recommendation to resolve legacy NPLs as soon as feasible. Following the Financial Sector Master Plan, the central bank is working closely with banks to increase their presence in all the municipalities. The central bank also launched the National Strategic Plan on financial literacy to provide a framework to raise awareness at the national level. The authorities recognized that not all international experiences of development banks have been positive, and that Page 21 a development bank should be run in a way that supports market competition and limits contingent liabilities to the government. They seek the support of development partners in conducting a review of the exchange rate regime as a longer-term policy option.