Yemen’s geopolitical situation is critical from a regional and global perspective . It shares long borders with Saudi Arabia and overlooks al-Mandeb Strait across the Horn of Africa. High levels of poverty and unemployment are contributing to political tensions, with negative security spillovers. Security is also affected by the conflict with the Houthis and the Southern separatists, and by the strong presence of Al-Qaeda. The political transition is advancing, though the outlook remains challenging . After some delay, the National Dialogue was concluded in January 2014 with an agreement to establish a six-region federal state. The parliamentary and presidential elections have been postponed to 2015 to allow time to complete the transition process. A new constitution is being drafted and will determine the degree of autonomy that will be granted to the regional governments. Open confrontation with the different factions, and with Al-Qaeda, remains frequent. Recent increases in sabotage of oil pipelines and the electricity grid have led to severe shortages of fuel and electricity. These prompted large demonstrations and a limited reshuffle in the coalition cabinet in June 2014. Economic growth has been insufficient to meaningfully reduce the widespread poverty and unemployment . The average growth rate in real per capita GDP was less than 1.5 percent a year in the decade preceding the 2011 crisis, and has declined since. Yemen ranks poorly in social indicators. Poverty and youth unemployment which are estimated at 54 percent and 35 percent, respectively, are among the highest in the world. About 60 percent of children under the age of five have chronic malnutrition, 35 percent are underweight, and 13 percent have acute malnutrition. In addition, maternal mortality, at 290 per 100,000 live births, is among the highest in the world. Infrastructure investment has continued to decline since the crisis, and foreign direct investment remains concentrated in the hydrocarbon sector, which employs a very small percentage of the labor force. Yemen also faces severe environmental challenges, especially a rapid depletion of its scarce water resources (Table 10). Faced with rapidly deteriorating fiscal and external positions in the first half of 2014, the authorities requested a three-year ECF arrangement in support of a bold reform program This program builds on reform plans that were discussed with staff over the past year. The reform package aims at reversing the recent deterioration in the macroeconomic situation and promoting inclusive growth and job creation. These objectives will be achieved through (i) reducing generalized subsidies and eliminating ghost workers and double-dippers from the public wage payroll; (ii) increasing infrastructure spending and social transfers; (iii) strengthening public financial In 2011, political and social unrest caused a crisis which led to a political agreement supported by the Gulf Cooperation Council. A National Unity Government was formed in December 2011 and President Hadi was elected in early 2012 to manage an initial two-year transition period. The transition period was extended in 2014 until the drafting of the constitution and the holding of Presidential and legislative elections. Page 7 management and governance; and (iv) improving financial intermediation and the business environment. The authorities are fully committed to the reform agenda, and requested an ECF arrangement to support their strong program and help close the BOP and fiscal financing gap Ad referendum agreement on an ECF arrangement was reached twice in 2013, but the program was not endorsed by the government at that time due to concerns about the impact of fuel price adjustments. However, following the sharp decline in oil production and domestic supply of fuel products in the first half of 2014, black market prices reached international prices and lack of financing reduced the availability of fuel at the subsidized prices. To resolve this situation, the political leadership made strong public commitments to implement the necessary reforms. A centerpiece of these reforms is a substantial adjustment in prices in October 2014, aiming at a reduction of about 50 percent of the subsidy. As a first step, the private sector has been allowed to import part of its diesel requirements at international prices starting in June 2014. In view of the strength of the program and the large financing need, the authorities requested access of 150 percent of quota. Yemen has a strong track record of implementing reforms supported by the April 2012 RCF. These reforms were successful in restoring macroeconomic stability, and included a substantial increase in diesel prices. The authorities also implemented important reforms that were recommended in the context of the 2013 Article IV consultation (Box 1), and which had underpinned initially two staff-level ad referendum agreements that had been reached in 2013 but not concluded. In particular, the authorities unified the domestic price of diesel, improved tax compliance, did not approve requests to extend tax exemptions, contained the wage bill, refrained from central bank borrowing, and introduced corporate governance reforms in the banking sector, including publishing the full audited accounts of the central bank. A Fund-supported program would help unlock disbursements of substantial donor pledges. Total pledges by the Friends of Yemen to support Yemen’s Transitional Program for Stability and Development (TPSD) totaled about $8 billion for the period 2012–15. Only one-third of these pledges have been disbursed thus far, including a $1 billion Saudi deposit at the Central Bank of Yemen (CBY). Donor support is largely earmarked for capital spending and humanitarian needs, mostly outside the budget. The authorities established an Executive Bureau in February 2013 to speed up the implementation and funding of projects. More recently, with the urgent need for donor support to fill the financing gap, and in consideration of the strength of the reforms agreed by the authorities to address the macroeconomic situation, donors have agreed to shift and/or increase their disbursements, which are expected to fully finance the program supported by the proposed ECF arrangement. The access norm for ECF arrangement is 120 percent of quota per ECF arrangement for countries with total outstanding concessional IMF credit under all facilities of less than 100 percent of quota. In addition to its Friends of Yemen pledges, Saudi Arabia provided about $2 billion to Yemen in the form of an oil grant in late 2011 and in 2012. Page 8 Box 1. Implementation of Key Recommendations of the 2013 Article IV Consultation In concluding the 2013 Article IV consultation on July 19, 2013, Directors encouraged the authorities to contain the fiscal deficit, improve the structure of revenue and expenditure, and enhance capacity to coordinate and execute donor-financed projects. They also called on the authorities to continue to improve bank supervision, financial intermediation, and the business environment. Notwithstanding the substantial decline in hydrocarbon revenue in 2014, the authorities have thus far exercised expenditure restraint and thus contained the fiscal deficit. Good progress has also been made in improving tax revenue. Furthermore, the wage and generalized subsidy bills have been contained in relation to GDP. However, direct transfers and capital spending have also declined from their already low levels. Efforts continued to strengthen bank supervision, although progress has been hindered by delays in technical assistance due to security constraints. Financial intermediation remained very low, and structural reforms to improve the business environment have been lagging. Capacity to enhance collaboration with donors and execution of projects are being improved, including by strengthening and adequately empowering the management and staff of the Executive Bureau.