Developments. Palau’s fiscal position has improved noticeably. The current fiscal deficit (expense less domestic revenue) fell from 11 percent of GDP in FY2014 to 5.5 percent in FY2015. Tax revenue rose by 1 percent of GDP due to higher receipts from the airport departure tax as tourist arrivals soared, while expense declined by 4.5 percent of GDP due to spending restraint. The overall balance rose only by 1.5 percent of GDP due to a drop in grants. The CTF reached 64 percent of GDP in FY2015, while government deposits rose to 8.1 percent of GDP, domestic accounts payable fell to 5.4 percent of GDP, and government external debt declined to 10.4 percent of GDP. Medium-term outlook . Fiscal adjustment is set to continue due to sustained spending restraint, with the current fiscal deficit falling from 5.5 percent of GDP in FY2015 to 4 percent in FY2018. The current deficit would stay at 5.5 percent of GDP in FY2016 as the fall in tourism related revenue is offset by spending restraint. From FY2017, domestic revenue would remain stable as percent of GDP but for the rise in the airport departure tax from US$50 to US$100 per tourist from April 1, 2017. This measure would raise 2.4 percent of GDP in revenue, half of which is reserved for the Civil Service Pension Fund (CSPF) and is not reflected in the government accounts. Government revenue would rise by 1.2 percent of GDP (0.6 percent in FY2017 and FY2018), but expense would also rise by the same amount as the extra revenue is reserved for the state governments and marine sanctuary, with no impact on the current fiscal balance. Spending restraint is expected to continue, with the current fiscal balance falling by 0.7 percent of GDP in FY2017 and FY2018. Public investment would be limited to that financed with capital grants and AsDB loans, with the overall fiscal balance This extra revenue is estimated to reduce the CSPF’s unfunded liabilities from 39 percent of GDP in 2015 prior to the reform to 8 percent after the reform. More generally, the fact that this large improvement in the fiscal position is not reflected in the fiscal accounts highlights the need to expand the perimeter in the fiscal statistics to include the state governments, the CSPF, the Social Security Fund, and the state owned enterprises. Page 11 temporarily moving into deficit due to higher capital spending funded with AsDB loans, but returning into surplus afterwards due to the lower current fiscal deficits and higher Compact grants. Long-term outlook . The current fiscal deficit is expected to remain at 4 percent of GDP from FY2018 onwards. Capital spending in FY2019-24 would continue to be set by capital grants and AsDB loans, with the overall fiscal balance staying in surplus as the current grants exceed the current fiscal deficit. As part of the FY2018-24 windfall is saved, the government’s net worth—defined as the CTF plus government deposits, less domestic accounts payable, government external debt, and CSPF’s unfunded liabilities—would rise from 48 percent of GDP in FY2015 to 59 percent in FY2024. The CTF would fall to 51 percent of GDP in FY2014 due to the larger withdrawals allowed under the renewed Compact agreement, while other government assets net would increase to 8.5 percent of GDP. Staff analysis suggests that the current fiscal deficit can be sustained at 4 percent of GDP post FY2024, provided that public investment is capped at 5.6 percent of GDP (Appendix VI). The overall fiscal balance falls after FY2024 as the Compact grants expire, but the government net worth stabilizes at 59 percent of GDP as the rise in other government assets net offsets the decline in the CTF. Palau: Long-term Fiscal Sustainability in the Baseline Scenario Staff’s Reform Scenario Strengthening the fiscal framework . Staff recommends targeting a net worth position of the public sector as the fiscal anchor, and using the current fiscal balance as the operational target. Targeting a net worth level would ensure fiscal self-sufficiency when the Compact grants expire in FY2024 by building sufficient government non-CTF assets to offset the decline in the CTF balance, thus keeping ample buffers. Using the current fiscal balance as the operational target would not only help achieve the desired government net worth position, but also reach a desired level of capital spending by restricting the level of current expenditure relative to domestic revenue. Ensuring long-term fiscal sustainability . Staff recommends further fiscal adjustment in the medium term and to shift the composition of public expenditure towards investment to support the growing tourism industry and enhance resilience to natural disasters and climate change. In the baseline scenario, public investment is only 6.2 percent of GDP in FY2019–24 and 5.6 percent of GDP after FY2024—lower than Palau’s historical average (8.3 percent of GDP) and below that of other Page 12 Pacific islands (11 percent of GDP). Moreover, Palau needs buffers because: (i) tax revenue is volatile given its reliance on taxes on tourism; (ii) the country is exposed to natural disasters and climate change; (iii) there are contingent liabilities in the CSPF and other public entities; and (iv) the CTF and other government assets are subject to market risk. Staff recommends targeting at government net worth position of 70 percent of GDP after FY2024, 11 percentage points more than in the baseline scenario. Staff also recommends cutting the current fiscal deficit to 1 percent of GDP by FY2020, which would not only help achieve the government’s net worth target, but also increase public investment to 8.3 percent of GDP from FY2019. Real GDP growth would fall in FY2017–18 due to the fiscal adjustment, but it would increase in FY2019–21 as the gains from higher public investment more than offset the negative impact from fiscal consolidation. After FY2020, growth would increase by about 1 percentage point in line with the rise in public investment. Palau: Long-term Fiscal Sustainability in Staff’s Reform Scenario Attaining a balanced fiscal adjustment . Further fiscal adjustment should rely on revenue and expenditure measures. Staff supports a reform that replaces the gross revenue tax (GRT) with a single rate value added tax (VAT) with no exemptions, and raises the net income tax on financial institutions and all VAT-registered businesses. Staff also recommends strengthening tax compliance and using a bidding mechanism to manage charter flights instead of quantitative limits. Expenditures should be contained by prioritizing spending and gradually eliminating subsidies. Staff recommends splitting the fiscal adjustment equally between revenue and expenditure measures. The VAT and net income tax reforms could yield 1.5 percent of GDP in additional revenue by FY2020, while the wage bill could be reduced by 1 percent of GDP and government subsidies by 0.5 percent of GDP. Strengthening public financial management (PFM) . Robust PFM is key to contain fiscal risks and support fiscal adjustment. Staff advises sound public debt management and project administration to secure debt sustainability. Staff analysis shows that public debt remains sustainable despite the recent AsDB loans by US$52 million to finance the upgrade of the Koror-Arai waste management system and the submarine fiber optic cable (Appendix VII). However, public debt remains highly sensitive to a real GDP growth shock such as those that Palau could experience if faced with large natural disasters. Staff also recommends prioritizing infrastructure that supports Page 13 tourism growth and resilience to natural disasters and climate change, adopting a medium-term budget framework, improving budget execution and planning, and strengthening cash management. Reforming public entities. Some public entities need to be reformed. The Civil Service Pension Fund (CSPF) is estimated to have unfunded liabilities by 8.3 percent of GDP even after considering the extra revenue from the increase in the airport departure tax. Staff recommends reducing benefits and raising contributions to ensure its long-term sustainability. The Palau Public Utility Corporation (PPUC) relies on government subsidies for its provision of water services. Staff advises raising tariffs and lowering operational costs to ensure full cost recovery of its operations, while providing adequate protection to the most vulnerable. The other two state owned enterprises, the Palau National Communications Corporation and the Belau Submarine Cable Corporation, have been able to cover their costs with their own revenue, without requiring government support. Authorities’ views The authorities welcomed staff’s recommendation to strengthen the fiscal framework and analysis of long-term fiscal sustainability. They noted that the recommendation of further fiscal adjustment in the medium term is well aligned with their own goal of self-financing expense with domestic revenue (zero current fiscal balance) by FY2024. They also welcomed staff advice of replacing the GRT with a VAT and rising the net income tax for financial institutions and all VAT- registered businesses. They noted that a bill replacing the GRT with a VAT was sent to Congress in FY2014, but has not yet been approved. They also stressed ongoing efforts to strengthen PFM and the medium term budget framework. The authorities also acknowledged the existence of unfunded liabilities in the CSPF, and noted that a bill shifting the CSPF from a defined-benefit to a defined- contribution system was sent to Congress in FY2014, but has also not yet been approved. They stressed that this reform would ensure the long-term sustainability of the CSPF, with the new funds from the increase in the airport departure tax used to pay for the benefits during the transition. The authorities also want to make PPUC self-sufficient by rising tariffs and reducing costs. However, they noted that service quality needs to be improved in line with planned upgrades to the water system before tariffs can be raised. Doing Business 2016: Detailed Ranking (Ranking, from 1 (best) to 189 (worst))