Context. Palau faces several structural constraints common to small island states: a narrow economic base, remote location, small population, inadequate infrastructure, weak business climate, and exposure to natural disasters and climate change. The projects in the pipeline funded by AsDB loans and grants are aimed at lessening some of the infrastructure bottlenecks. The 2016 World Bank’s Doing Business Report points to a number of weaknesses in Palau’s business climate, such as resolving insolvency, trading across borders, enforcing contracts, paying taxes, getting electricity, and access to credit. Palau (136) Starting a business Dealing with construction permits Protecting minority investors Paying taxes Getting credit Mauritius (32) Tonga (78) Trading across borders Getting electricity Enforcing contracts Registering property Resolving insolvency Sources: World Bank, Doing Business 2016. Page 14 Achieving sustainable tourism development. Tourism remains Palau’s main growth engine, but the lack of a tourism policy and weak regulation have led to excessive growth of the low budget segment. To align tourism development with the authorities’ long-term goal of positioning Palau as a high-end tourism destination, staff recommends implementing a comprehensive tourism strategy that clearly outlines land zoning rules, protects the environment, regulates service quality, has adequate infrastructure planning, and improves the skills of the labor force. Several initiatives in this direction have been tried in the past, but lack of political will, limited resources, and coordination problems have limited their implementation (Appendix VIII). New tourism developments in Koror should be avoided until infrastructure has been upgraded, but developments outside Koror and green tourism could continue. The regulatory environment also needs to be strengthened to enhance scrutiny and enforcement of regulations. Better coordination among the national and state governments is necessary to ensure effective implementation of the authorities’ long-term vision. Diversifying the economy . Economic diversification would help reducing volatility and broadening the sources of growth. To lower tourism volatility, the mission recommends promoting tourism from new destinations, including growing Asian markets. Developing domestic business activities that can supply the tourism industry such as agriculture and aquaculture, and tourism activities that would increase tourist spending, would also help diversify the sources of growth. Improving the business environment . A strong business environment would help private investment growth. Palau foreign investment approvals are decided by a Foreign Investment Board, which operates in a case by case basis. Staff recommends adopting a new foreign investment regime to simplify investment approval and open all business to foreign investment through joint ventures provided that proper regulations are in place. Staff also supports the role of the Economic Advisory Group—which includes representatives of the government, Congress, and the private sector—in coordinating the dialog between the private and public sectors to improve policy formulation and planning, including on measures to improve Palau’s business environment. Enhancing infrastructure. Infrastructure bottlenecks are limiting tourism growth. The recent surge in tourism strained water supply, sanitation, and waste disposal, while poor internet quality has been the main dissatisfaction of Palau’s visitors in tourist exit surveys. These bottlenecks will ease as the projects funded with AsDB loans and capital grants are completed, but appropriate infrastructure planning as part of a broader tourism strategy is needed. New infrastructure should also seek to increase resilience to natural disasters and climate change, which is a significant risk as the recent drought showed. Priorities include limiting developments in areas at risk of tropical storms and rising sea levels, and improving the water system. Staff welcomes the authorities’ plans to upgrade the water pipeline system in Koror and to broaden the sources of water to make it more stable. Authorities’ views The authorities concurred with staff on the need to implement a comprehensive tourism strategy consistent with the long-term view of making Palau a high-end tourism destination and keeping a pristine environment. They noted that the bureau of tourism is preparing a plan along these lines, which should be finalized in the coming months. They also agreed that new hotel developments in Koror should be avoided until infrastructure has been upgraded, although they are open to high-end hotel developments that build their own treatment plants. The authorities agreed with staff on the need to prioritize infrastructure that helps tourism growth and resilience to natural Page 15 disasters and climate change. On the latter, they highlighted a new project financed with grants from Japan to upgrade the water pipeline system in Koror, which should reduce leakages and make water distribution more efficient. In addition, they are evaluating different alternatives to broaden the sources of water to avoid shortages such as the one experienced during the recent drought. Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Credit to the private sector (Percent of GDP) Loans to deposit ratio (rhs) Palau: Banks' Domestic Lending