Context. Palau’s banks remain sound, with nonperforming loans at 2.1 percent, liquid assets at 90 percent, and return on assets at 1.4 percent. The presence of three foreign owned U.S. FDIC-insured banks that hold 93 percent of the loans and 99 percent of the deposits helps mitigate risks. But banks continue to lend little domestically despite the rapid rise in deposits, with domestic loans falling as percent of deposits and as percent of GDP. The legislation allowing the National Development Bank of Palau (NDBP) to take deposits was passed in Congress and once licensed, the NDBP will be regulated by the Financial Institutions Commission (FIC) and will be subject to the same regulations of commercial banks. The loss of correspondent banking relationships has not been an issue in Palau as the three foreign owned U.S. FDIC insured banks do all the international transactions in the country. Anti-money laundering investigations have also improved with the enhanced role of the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). Preserving financial stability. Keeping a sound financial sector is key to mitigate risks. The FIC has improved bank examinations, data collection, and reporting; while the FIU has enhanced anti- money laundering investigations. Staff recommends broadening the FIC’s supervision to all non-bank financial institutions, including credit unions, and encourages the legislators to approve the Credit Union Act that put all credit unions under FIC supervision. Staff also welcomes the authorities plan to put the NDBP under FIC supervision, subject to the same regulations of commercial banks, while allowing it to take deposits and expand its lending activities. The authorities are also encouraged to continue improving the AML/CFT regime in line with the FATF standard. Facilitating credit extension. To mobilize domestic credit, staff advises relaxing the interest rate ceiling for commercial loans to better reflect riskiness, and helping SMEs prepare business plans and financial statements. The NDBP can also help fill the financing gap for SMEs, especially in the agriculture sector. The NDBP lending activities have been constrained by the availability of financing from international financial institutions, and limited to the areas for which these funds are targeted, including agriculture, aquaculture, and housing. Once the NDBP is licensed to take deposits, it will be able to expand its lending activities to other areas of the economy. Improving statistics. Palau’s statistics are broadly adequate for surveillance thanks to technical assistance from IMF PFTAC and the Graduate School USA. Staff recommends improving tourism statistics and strengthening the statistics office to continue improving data quality. Page 16 Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment that Palau’s banks remain sound. They noted that deposits have increased rapidly, which should help banks keep high profit levels. They also acknowledged that banks continue to lend little domestically, investing most of their assets abroad. They noted that the number of individuals loans has increased significantly, but the total loan stock has fallen because of the repayment of some large commercial loans. The authorities also observed that commercial lending has not picked up partly because foreign investors do not require domestic financing for their investment projects, but instead bring their own funds. The authorities are not convinced that the limit on lending rates to commercial loans is a key constraint to domestic credit growth. They believe that the lack of business plans and financial statements for SMEs is a more important factor. The authorities expect that the NDBP will help closing the financing gap for SMEs once it starts taking deposits and expanding its lending activities. However, it may take a few years for the NDBP to satisfy all the FIC’s requirements to be licensed as a deposit taker. The authorities welcomed staff’s advice to broaden FIC supervision to all financial institutions and appreciated staff’s support to get the Credit Union Act passed in Congress.