A smooth political transition has been achieved with elections due next year. The sixth constitutional government was formed in February 2015 under Prime Minister (PM) Dr. Rui Maria de Araújo. Former PM Gusmão remains in the Cabinet as Mentoring Minister and Minister of the new Planning and Strategic Investment Ministry. Mari Alkatiri, the first elected PM, has been appointed to head the Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Oecusse Ambeno and the Oecusse Ambeno and Atauro Special Zones for Social Market Economy (ZEESM) The smooth transition to the new government and strong cross-party cooperation underscored political stability. Presidential and parliamentary elections are due in early 2017. Timor-Leste is facing difficult policy challenges due to the sharp fall in oil revenue and large developmental needs . Highly dependent on oil exports, it is also a fragile low-income country. According to industry estimates, unless new oil reserves are developed, oil production is expected to decline further and cease by 2023. The impact of persistently low oil prices on fiscal spending is limited in the short run due to the buffer provided by the Petroleum Fund (PF), as about 80-90 percent of the oil reserves has been extracted and transformed into financial assets of the PF. However, over the long run, low oil prices would delay potential investment in new oil fields and weaken the prospects for developing the petroleum sector. Fiscal revenues will be highly dependent on the investment returns of the PF (Appendix 1). The deterioration in the global outlook and lower oil prices weigh on growth prospects and add strain to the fiscal position. Compared to the previous Article IV consultation concluded in 2014, the projected trajectory of the PF balance is significantly lower in the outer years, reflecting the higher rate of excess withdrawals. This underscores the urgency of measures to restore fiscal sustainability. Under the Strategic Development Plan (SDP) introduced in 2011, Timor-Leste aims to achieve upper-middle income status by 2030, by targeting infrastructure and human capital development, promoting economic diversification, and reducing poverty. Infrastructure development needs remain critical and past expenditure results have been mixed, due largely to low implementation capacity affecting effectiveness. In the presentation of the 2016 Budget, the PM highlighted the need to ensure that public resources are used efficiently and effectively to provide quality services. The authorities have received intensive technical assistance from the Fund in the first decade since independence and have made satisfactory progress in implementing the Fund’s recommendations, although implementation challenges remain, including on the fiscal reform agenda (Appendix 2). Oil Price Projections: 2014 SR vs. 2016 SR 1/ (In U.S. dollar per barrel ) 2014 SR oil prices 2016 SR oil prices 1/ Simple average of UK Brent, Dubai, and WTI crude oil prices. SR = staff report. For 2014 SR (2016 SR), projections start in 2014 (2016), Source: IMF staff estimates and projections. Petroleum Fund Balance Projections: 2014 SR vs. 2016 SR 1/ (In billions of U.S. dollars) 2014 SR PF balance 2016 SR PF balance 1/ SR = staff report. For 2014 SR (2016 SR), projections start in 2014 (2016). Sources: Timor-Leste authorities; IMF staff estimates and projections. Page 10