Given the difficult fiscal and financing situation, the current monetary stance will be continued for the remainder of 2014 . With inflation currently at around 8 percent, the real interest rate is rather high. It would, however, be prudent to postpone any reduction in the policy rate in order to contain the inflationary pressure expected from the necessary adjustments in fuel prices. Inflation is projected to increase to about 13 percent following the increase in fuel prices in October. Page 22 CBY will remain vigilant and will stand ready to adjust policies as needed to preserve macroeconomic stability (MEFP, ¶31). As the inflationary impact of the fuel price increases fades, and the macroeconomic policy mix improves with the decline in the fiscal deficit, there will be scope to gradually reduce interest rates. The authorities are also determined to strengthen the central bank’s independence and to refocus its primary role on maintaining low inflation. The CBY will aim to modernize its monetary policy framework and to strengthen the channels of transmission of its monetary policy instruments . The current framework of direct control of interest rates and reliance on the primary market of government paper would be gradually phased out in favor of a more efficient indirect approach to monetary policy that will give greater signaling role to the central bank policy interest rate and would help develop the interbank market and also enable banks to improve liquidity management. The Sukuk market, which was introduced in 2011, continues to develop, and provides Islamic banks with additional investment opportunities to place their liquidity. Progress on this front has been limited, in part due to delayed Fund TA because of the security concerns. The CBY requested a diagnostic mission and subsequent technical assistance to enhance its liquidity management capacity and improve inflation forecasting. The Central Bank will refrain from lending to the government At the same time, the Ministry of Finance will sign a memorandum of understanding spelling out a schedule for bringing the government’s outstanding debt to the CBY within legal limits (prior action; MEFP, ¶32, Table 2). Furthermore, and in line with the recommendations of the safeguards assessment mission, the CBY will finalize another agreement with the Ministry of Finance, specifying the repayment terms and interest rates on credit extended by the CBY to public sector enterprises. Given the plans to use the IMF disbursement for budgetary financing, CBY will formalize with the Ministry of Finance the respective responsibilities for servicing obligations to the Fund (see ¶18 above). Furthermore, the planned review of the central bank law will look at areas to further strengthen its independence. Greater exchange rate flexibility over the medium term would help preserve reserves and support competitiveness. The CGER-type econometric analyses are not conclusive (Annex I). While the macroeconomic balance approach points to a possible moderate overvaluation of the real exchange rate, the external sustainability approach suggests a substantial undervaluation. These results should, be interpreted with caution, because of data limitations and the structure of the Yemeni economy—largely dominated by the hydrocarbon sector. Although the real exchange rate appreciated somewhat in 2013, the performance of nonhydrocarbon exports and remittances appears not to have been affected. However, Yemen’s relatively high domestic inflation and the recent depreciation in the currencies of its key trading partners have negative implications for The legal limit on government borrowing from the central bank is equivalent to 25 percent of the annual average of the budget’s ordinary revenue for the three financial years immediately preceding for which accounts are available. There is a need to improve data on private sector financial flows and stocks, in particular those relating to net foreign assets of the economy as a whole and nonhydrocarbon FDI. Furthermore, reliable data on relative productivity are not available. Page 23 competitiveness. A gradual increase in exchange rate flexibility over the medium term is needed to help protect reserves and support exports and economic growth over the medium term, and to ease the pressure on monetary policy. A strengthened monetary policy framework as discussed in ¶30, would be important to increase exchange rate flexibility. CBY’s intervention in the foreign exchange market will aim at smoothing out exchange rate volatility, while allowing the exchange rate to respond to market fundamentals (MEFP, ¶33). With reform implementation and increased external financing under the ECF arrangement, gross reserves are projected to remain above three months of imports over the medium term. The program sets a floor on net international reserves of the central bank to ensure this outcome.