There is room for further monetary easing . The National Bank of Romania (NBR) has implemented monetary policy in an environment of record low interest rates and inflation. In August 2014, the NBR resumed the rate cutting cycle lowering the policy rate since July 2013 by a cumulative 300 basis points to 2.25 percent in February 2015. The rate reductions were accompanied by a narrowing of the interest rate corridor, in line with the staff advice. Moreover, the NBR started to lower the still high minimum reserve requirements (MRRs). The latter, coupled with treasury operations related to growing disbursements of EU funds, has created excess liquidity in the banking system which is likely to stay in the near term. Monetary policy should maintain an easing bias, as lower-than-targeted inflation could become entrenched amid a negative output gap, imported low inflation, and declining inflation expectations. Page 14 Pass-through of Euro-Lei Exchange Rate to CPI Pre-inflation targeting Post-inflation targeting Months Source: Selected Issues Paper "Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Inflation Targeting". The degree of pass through is defined as the ratio of the cumulative impulse response in CPI to one Cholesky standard deviation shock on the euro-lei exchange rate. Staff also recommends a gradual transition of the conduct of monetary policy to a full-fledged inflation targeting regime . This could be achieved by reducing the role of the exchange rate in the policy framework and further narrowing the interest rate corridor. The latter would reduce the gap between the policy rate and interbank rates and help strengthen the clarity of monetary policy signals and the transmission channel. Staff analysis shows that greater exchange rate volatility should be a lesser concern as the share of foreign currency-denominated loans is declining and the exchange rate pass-through has diminished substantially with the adoption of inflation targeting-light (see Selected Issues paper “Exchange Rate Pass-through and Inflation Targeting”). Joining the euro area is the authorities’ medium-term policy objective . Staff views this objective as an important anchor for economic policies, especially for accelerating structural reforms. At the same time, staff called for a careful review of the euro adoption timeline, which is likely to take longer, as joining the euro zone constrains macro-policy options in the face of shocks and requires reaching a sufficient level of real convergence (see also IMF “Central and Eastern Europe: New Member States Policy Forum, 2014”). Romania not only lags in its real per capita income convergence but also in its economic transition when compared to those countries that recently joined the euro area. Real GDP Per Capita at Time of Euro Area Membership, 2013 1/ (Percent of euro area real GDP per capita) Average: 32 SVK* EST* LVA LTU ROU 1/ Data for 2013, except where denoted by star. Euro area membership: SVK (2009), EST (2011), LVA (2014), LTU (2015). Sources: Eurostat and IMF World Economic Outlook. EBRD Transition Indicators at Time of Euro Adoption 1/ Large scale privatization EST ROU LVA SVK LTU Competition policy Trade and forex system Small scale privatization Governance and enterprise restructuring Price liberalization 1/ Euro area membership: SVK (2009), EST (2011), LVA (2014) and LTU (2015). Data for Lithuania and Romania as of 2014. Values range from 1 to 4.3. A value higher than 4 characterizes an industrialized market economy. Source: EBRD. Staff’s exchange rate assessment indicates that the Romanian leu is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals . Reserve coverage is generally adequate according to most Page 15 reserve adequacy metrics (Box 2). Going forward, staff recommends limiting interventions in the foreign exchange market to smoothing excessive volatility and maintaining a prudent stance with moderate reserve accumulation in light of continued downside external risks. Authorities’ views The NBR was cautious on the speed of moving to full-fledged inflation targeting and agreed with staff’s assessment on external competitiveness and reserve adequacy . Regarding the gap between the policy and interbank rates, the NBR acknowledged the related risk of weakening the signaling power of policy decisions. While a gradual shift to full-fledged inflation targeting is envisaged, the NBR sees a role for the exchange rate as long as euroization in balance sheets is significant. The authorities also recognized the importance of maintaining adequate reserves, particularly against heightened uncertainty in international financial markets, but pointed out that reserve accumulation should also take into account the cost of holding reserves.