Macroeconomic Outlook Staff’s baseline projection is for growth to remain above potential in 2016–17 . After a near-term cyclical acceleration driven mostly by domestic consumption and a strong fiscal impulse, growth is expected to return gradually to potential. Given slow progress on structural reforms, staff’s outlook for potential growth in the outer years remains unchanged from the time of the last Article IV consultation. Underlying inflation is expected to gradually pick up and the current account deficit to widen on import growth. Staff’s baseline assumes that the authorities will not exceed 3 percent of GDP deficit in ESA terms (2.8 percent of GDP on a cash basis) as there is a wide level of political consensus to not exceed this threshold, but this would require additional measures. Real GDP (yoy) CPI inflation (yoy, eop) Unemployment rate (average) Current account balance Fiscal balance (cash) Gross general government Sources: Eurostat; Romanian authorities; and IMF staff projections. (direct debt only) Gross external debt (In percent of GDP) Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside and relate mostly to the pre-electoral environment and external uncertainties (Annex II). Further fiscal stimulus in an election year may boost consumption in the short term but will undermine sustainability of public finances and could dent market sentiment. Inappropriate measures targeting the financial sector that lack proper impact analysis and consultation could harm credit intermediation and investment, and undermine financial stability. On the external side, an abrupt deterioration in emerging market risk perception could trigger currency depreciation and raise the external debt-to-GDP ratio (Annex III). During the recent period of elevated volatility in emerging markets in 2015, Romania experienced sudden capital outflows, though not as pronounced as in regional peers. Maintaining adequate reserve levels, exchange rate flexibility, and fiscal buffers will be key in mitigating risks. Romania Flows Sensitive to External Conditions Romania Flows (Mil. USD) VIX (Index, RHS Inverted) Net Outflow Jan - 15 Mar - 15 May - 15 Aug - 15 Oct - 15 Dec - 15 Sources: Flows represent ETFs/Mutual Funds, EPFR. Output Gap, Wage Growth, and Fiscal Impulse (percent) Wages, Average Gross, growth Fiscal impulse Output gap (rhs) Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ Measured as the annual change in the primary structural general government fiscal deficit. Authorities’ views . The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s views on the near-term outlook and risks but had higher expectations for medium-term growth (above 4 percent during Page 13 2017–19). They expected that improved investor confidence and measures to enhance business environment will provide for stronger investment and contribute to higher potential output growth.