Sound fiscal policy has lowered vulnerabilities Public debt, after tripling to 40 percent of GDP during 2007–14, is projected to decline gradually starting this year under unchanged policies, supported by solid debt management and falling gross financing needs. This would provide some room to absorb future shocks, in particular underperformance of real GDP growth or the realization of banking sector contingent liabilities (Annex III). Liquidity buffers are large, amounting to nearly 5 percent of GDP. They include foreign exchange (FX) holdings equivalent to four months of total gross financing needs and a year of FX financing needs. Going forward, the authorities plan to gradually reduce the FX buffer taking into consideration overall global financial market conditions and further progress in deepening government securities markets. Page 10 Box 1 Benefits of Boosting Quality Public Infrastructure Spending in Romania Romania’s high capital spending has been relatively inefficient in the past. Rail and road infrastructure is particularly deficient. A key factor for this performance is the lack of a robust framework and capacity for developing, vetting, prioritizing, and executing public-investment projects. Efficiency of Capital Spending in the EU-28 i g d p s l t i p C ) G f o t r p g r v ( ROU POL BGR LVA HUN SVK EST CZE LTU CYP GRC HRV SVN MLT IRL LUX ESP SWE PRT FIN ITA BEL DNK AUT NLD FRA GBR DEU Infrastructure quality index, 2013–14 Sources: Eurostat; and World Competitiveness Report. Total Length of Motorways (Thousand square km) Peer average 1/ 1/ Unweighted average of Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia Sources: Eurostat. Staff simulations indicate that increased and more efficient infrastructure spending could boost growth . An immediate boost to efficiency could come from a reallocation of budget resources toward EU- funded projects, which are subject to a more stringent project management process than those funded solely from the state budget. Staff econometric analysis and simulations indicate that the GDP growth rate would be higher by ½ percentage point over the medium term, if available EU-funds were fully utilized. Growth Benefits From Higher Investment (Deviation from baseline, percentage) Potential Growth Growth Level Impact From Higher Investment (Deviation from baseline, percentage) Potential GDP GDP Sources: IMF staff estimates. Sources: IMF staff estimates. The simulation results are highly dependent on reforms to improve the quality and management of national projects and absorption of EU-funded projects . Despite some reforms under the current SBA, domestic governance and capacity issues continue to undermine absorption of EU-funds. Initial efforts to improve the prioritization of significant projects should be advanced by better aligning the prioritization calendar with the budget calendar in order to ensure that the prioritization process informs budget preparation. In addition, the list of prioritized projects could be published to inform the broader public about the allocation of resources to national priorities, including those identified in the Transport Master Plan currently under preparation. Moreover, better use could be made of technical assistance to enhance Romania’s capacity to absorb EU-funds. In the medium term, Romania should aim to establish one project management process that encompasses all projects notwithstanding funding sources. Page 11 In 2015, fiscal policy remains anchored by the medium-term budgetary objective (MTO) . The 2015 budget targets a deficit of 1.8 percent of GDP (1.5 percent of GDP in ESA terms). This is consistent with the MTO of 1.0 percent of GDP deficit in structural terms (ESA base) boosted by a 0.25 percent adjuster in 2015 for a faster absorption of EU funds, which is expected to pick up as the authorities aim to fully use the funds associated with the 2007–13 programming period. Fiscal policy is thus no longer a significant drag for the economy with just ¼ percent of GDP further consolidation in ESA terms needed next year. However, medium-term spending pressures are building . First, the potential for future restitution and court-ordered payments represents a contingent fiscal liability, potentially amounting to 6 percent of GDP. Second, the 2015 budget foresees higher capital spending to address infrastructure needs. This will require faster EU funds absorption and more efficient public investment. Shifting more projects toward EU funding should ensure more scrutiny and a higher multiplier. Third, the authorities plan to increase defense spending. Finally, Romania faces age- related social spending pressures (estimated cost of 1¾ percent of GDP by 2030). To ensure the financial sustainability of the health care system and improve health outcomes, the authorities are already implementing a comprehensive reform of the healthcare system. They have introduced a basic health package in 2014, which contributes to gradually shifting health services away from hospital-based treatments to more cost-effective ambulatory care, and are revising the reimbursement policy. At the same time, the authorities tentatively aim to lower tax rates possibly putting fiscal discipline at risk . Only about a fifth of the fiscal consolidation since the crisis was revenue based. It left Romania with a relatively high VAT rate (24 percent), increased excises, a new tax on non-building constructions, and one of the highest labor tax wedges in the EU. The revenue measures were later partly offset by a reduction in the VAT rate on bakery and flour products (September 2013), a tax exemption for reinvested profits (October 2014), and a 5 percentage-points cut in the employers’ pension contribution rate (October 2014). A new taxation regime for the oil and gas sector is set to be applied from 2016. Its design should aim at fostering investment while ensuring a fair government take. The authorities also propose for 2016 to lower the VAT rate, excises, and taxes on dividends as well as cancel the tax on non-building constructions with an estimated direct revenue loss of 2.2 percent of GDP. Staff’s baseline scenario does not include the proposed tax changes since the authorities’ plans have not yet sufficiently taken shape. In staff’s view, any tax reduction plans should go hand-in-hand with stronger revenue administration, better compliance—the VAT collection gap is the highest in the EU at 44 percent—and formalizing the economy, in particular, further efforts to advance a risk-based compliance oversight approach, given that at 18.7 percent of GDP the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio is still lower than in most EU member states. Until such reforms deliver results, there is no room to lower tax rates unless fully offset by other fiscal measures, including possibly lower inefficient capital spending until the absorption Under the EC/IMF-supported program, the cash and ESA-budget deficits would be narrowed by the amount of the adjuster in case EU-funds absorption underperforms. Page 12 capacity improves. However, a targeted tax cut for low-income employees or youth could be financed by base broadening and would likely create more employment than the recent broad- based cut (see Selected Issues paper “Cutting Labor Taxes in a Constrained Budget Environment”). Labor Tax Wedge, 1/ (Single, 50 percent average wage) EU28 General Government Taxes, 2014 (Percent of GDP) Average K V Z C V H G B V C G H Y C X F B Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook. * G B F C G K K V Z C * W * B * V H * B G X V F 1/ Data for 2013, unless denoted by star. Recent data for Cyprus and Croatia are not available. Romania cut employer pension contribution by 5 percentage points effective of October 1, 2014, lowering the tax wedge by about 2.3 percentage points. Source: European Commission, DG Economic and Financial Affairs. Fiscal structural reforms will be key to sustain the lower deficits   Wages o/w court-ordered payments Pensions The pension and civil service wage reforms of 2010 were essential pillars for fiscal sustainability . Parametric reforms to the pension system, including the removal of special pension regimes, and the introduction of a unified wage system have helped contain entitlement and wage costs. The public wage bill in 2014 was 1½ percent of GDP below its 2009 peak level and consistent with the 7 percent of GDP cap set through the Fiscal Responsibility Law (when excluding one-off court-ordered payments). However, the subsequent reinstatement of prior pension benefits for select categories of retirees and increases in the minimum wage pose risks. While an adjustment to the pay scale may be necessary, further amendments to the Pension and Unified Wage Laws of 2010 should be considered very carefully. Wage and Pension Expenditures (Percent of GDP) Sources: Romanian authorities and IMF staff calculations. Est. Public expenditure management and tax administration need to be strengthened . The creation of a public investment evaluation unit is an important achievement, but the integration of the project prioritization process into the budget planning and across government levels remains weak. A commitment control system has been pilot-tested and needs to be extended to all public institutions as a safeguard against the re-accumulation of arrears. In addition, efforts to strengthen tax administration, including extension of pilot audits on under-reported labor and modernization of the information systems with support from the World Bank, should advance and the large taxpayer unit should retain its key role. Moreover, fiscal decentralization provides in principle an opportunity to improve service delivery (in social sectors and on public investments), but capacity and governance at the local level should be improved first and fiscal Page 13 rules (including on local government debt) should be continuously respected (see Selected Issues paper “More Fiscal Decentralization: The Prerequisites”). Total Cost of Public Investment Projects by Duration (Years), 2013 (Billion lei) EU Funds Absorption, 2014 Total cost No. of projects (RHS) < + 1/ Reflects 322 central-government projects with known dates. Sources: World Bank, Romanian authorities and IMF staff calculations. ROU CZE BGR HUN LVA POL Source: European Commission. Authorities’ views The authorities reiterated their commitment to sound fiscal policies and stronger public financial management . They will determine the preferred timing for reaching the MTO when submitting their Convergence Program to the EC this spring. The authorities propose to reduce tax rates in 2016 and beyond with a view to stimulating the economy and incentivizing shifts from the informal to the formal sector. They estimate that the direct revenue loss of 2.2 percent of GDP in 2016 would be offset by more than half through these dynamic effects (estimated net revenue loss of 0.9 percent of GDP). In addition, the authorities are determined to improve revenue collection and view a reorganization of the large tax payer unit as essential.