Revenue Effects from New Tax Code and Public Wage Measures (percent of GDP) Fiscal policy is pro-cyclical and will put public debt on a gradually rising trajectory . The authorities adopted in late 2015 a package of large tax cuts costing 1.4 percent of GDP in 2016 and a further 0.8 percent of GDP in 2017 (table). This includes a reduction of the standard VAT rate from 24 to 20 percent in 2016 and to 19 percent in 2017, and reduction of fuel excises, dividend tax, health contributions and the elimination of the special construction tax. Furthermore, several expenditure-expanding measures were introduced, notably ad-hoc salary increases costing 1½ percent of GDP in gross terms. Reflecting this, staff projects the cash deficit to escalate to 3¼ percent in 2017 under current policies, well above the authorities’ cash deficit target of 2.8 percent of GDP for 2016 and 2017. Even if the authorities’ deficit path is achieved, public debt will exceed 40 percent of GDP and continue to gradually rise over the medium term. New tax code Value-added tax Excises Personal Income Taxes Corporate Income Taxes Property taxation Public wage measures (In percent of GDP) Additional spending Additional revenues (mainly social security contributions) Total effect on the budget Sources: Romanian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Fiscal Balance Targets (percent of GDP; cash basis) Budget deficit under current policies (IMF estimate) Authorities' budget target Measures needed (cumulative)* IMF-recommended budget Additional measures needed (cumulative)* Sources: Romanian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. * The line "Measures needed (cumulative)" indicates the annual measures starting from 2016 in cumulative terms needed, in the IMF staff's view, to reach the authorities' budget target. The 2017 target of 2.8 percent of GDP in cash terms corresponds to around 3 percent in ESA terms. The last line ("Additional measures needed (cumulative)") indicates in cumulative terms the additional measures needed to bring the deficit from the "Authorities' budget target" to the "IMF-recommended budget." Fiscal Balance Targets (Percent of GDP; cash basis) Budget deficit under current policies (IMF estimate) Authorities' budget target IMF Recommended Budget Measures needed (cumulative) Sources: Romanian authorities; and IMF staff calculations. The new tax code involves a welcome simplification of taxation legislation and has some small measures with positive revenue effects, including base broadening of social security contributions. The budget deterioration related to the new tax code and the public wages increases is estimated at about 2.4 percent of GDP in 2016 and 0.8 percent in 2017 as shown in the text table. The increase in the 2016 deficit over 2015 is less than 2.4 percent of GDP mainly because the 2015 deficit incorporated about 1.1 percent of GDP of temporary deficit-increasing factors that will not occur in 2016 and 2017. Page 14 Fiscal policy should instead be anchored on a well-defined debt-reduction path The current fiscal stance implies a structural relaxation of 2¼ percent in 2016 and is inappropriate from demand management perspective and, if unaddressed, risks returning Romania to the detrimental pre-crisis pattern. It also moves Romania away from its Medium- Term Objective (MTO) of 1 percent of GDP deficit (Annex V). Moreover, even though the current level of public debt is not high relative to conventional metrics (Annex III), public debt tripled between 2008 and 2015, showing the vulnerability to a sudden deterioration in public finances and the need for adequate fiscal buffers. The importance of keeping debt on a downward path was emphasized in previous Article IV consultations (Annex I). 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Sources: National Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The line "Budget deficit at 2.8 percent of GDP" is based on a deficit of 2.8 percent of GDP in cash terms (equivalent to 3 percent in ESA terms) from 2016 onwards. Public Debt Dynamics (Percent of GDP) Budget deficit at 2.8 percent of GDP IMF-recommended budget path Staff recommended gradual adjustment to lower the cash deficit to 1.5 percent of GDP by 2018 . The effort should start this year by finding and preserving savings aiming to keep the deficit below 2.5 percent of GDP. For 2017, staff recommended a deficit of 2 percent of GDP. Given relatively low levels of public spending, staff recommends achieving the adjustment by postponing the further tax reductions on VAT and excises scheduled to come into effect next year until other off-setting measures can be identified. This would generate savings of ¾ percent of GDP. As the incremental adjustment recommended for 2017 is ½ percent of GDP, these savings could be used for both achieving the deficit target and addressing other needs such as in the health and education sectors or for the gradual implementation of the unified wage law. Staff supported the government’s efforts to bolster efficiency and transparency in government spending and public administration . The authorities have made progress in prioritization of large public investment projects—as recommended by the August 2015 TA mission on public financial management—and the mission recommended extending this to cover medium- sized and local government investments. Steps have also been taken to enhance transparency of spending of public entities and the government plans to widen the use of centralized procurement. Staff recommended early passage of the public procurement law that should help to improve accountability and efficiency of public spending. The government also plans to carry out a spending review and staff recommended that the review start with a few pilot sectors to identify room for efficiency gains (see Selected Issues Paper). Targeting of social protection schemes should be strengthened. The approval of the draft law on natural resource taxation will give certainty on the tax framework. Recent public wage increases have exacerbated distortions in the remuneration system. Staff has recommended in the past to eliminate these distortions through adopting and gradually implementing a unified wage law in line with available fiscal space. Page 15 The national and sub-national fiscal rules are sound but their enforcement has been weak, undermining the credibility of the fiscal institutions . The Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL), fiscal council, and fiscal rule follow European standards (Annex V). However, the budget for 2016, approved outside the context of a program with international financial institutions, breaches the fiscal rule. In order to do so, the budget law waived the provisions of the FRL and of the fiscal rule. There is scope to better integrate the Fiscal Council’s work into the decision making of parliament, increase public awareness of the rules, better track the risk of breaching them, and strengthen the automatic sanctions envisaged by the FRL to incentivize responsible parties to apply the rules. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the merits of anchoring fiscal policy on a debt reduction path but believed that next year’s deficit target was achievable without further measures and that there was little appetite in parliament to reduce the deficit further . The authorities agreed with the importance of finding and preserving fiscal savings and were confident that this year’s cash deficit target of 2.8 percent of GDP would be met. For next year, they believed that the deficit target of 2.8 percent was achievable without further measures, unlike under staff projections. They viewed that reducing the 2017 deficit further would require legislative action, such as postponing the further tax reductions on VAT and excises scheduled to come into effect in 2017, for which they expected to find little support in parliament.