The banking sector continues to maintain adequate capital, liquidity and provisioning buffers, and asset quality has improved . Following a comprehensive NBR action plan and EU-wide methodological changes, NPLs declined in 2014 by about 8 percentage points but bank balance sheet repair is still incomplete (Figures 6 and 8). Measures included NPLs sales, write-offs and higher provisioning. NBR stress tests indicate that the solvency of the banking system would generally be resilient to severe scenarios, but require additional capital in a few banks. Instability related to Greece warrants intense monitoring and timely action by the NBR to mitigate the potential impact contagion could have on bank funding. Given the high but falling share of FX-denominated loans (56 percent), indirect FX risk remains the largest risk for the sector. However, pressure from the Swiss franc appreciation is manageable for the banking system, since the share of Swiss franc loans is relatively low at about 4.5 percent of total loans across about 75,000 borrowers. Staff encouraged voluntary bilateral loan restructurings taking into account the repayment capacity of the borrower. Reinvigorating financial intermediation remains a challenge. Foreign bank deleveraging has slowed but together with other supply factors have held back a rebound in credit growth. On the demand side, a scarcity of bankable loans and the relatively high indebtedness of SMEs contributed to negative credit growth. Enabling long-term bank funding—including by adopting a covered bond legislation—and strengthening the existing support schemes for SME lending would benefit intermediation. Legal risks remain a key concern for the banking system . A wave of recent lawsuits based on the Civil Code enacted in 2013 regarding abusive clauses in loan contracts has led to lower court decisions that are being appealed on the grounds that they go counter to market practices. If those verdicts become the basis of class action lawsuits, they could pose a threat to the system’s stability. In response, the authorities have put forward a plan to establish a specialized court that would handle such cases. However, its establishment has been repeatedly delayed for administrative reasons. Page 16 Box 2. External Sector Assessment Approach External Sustainability Over- (+) or Under- (-) Valuation Exchange Rate Assessment (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Macroeconomic Balance Current account norm Underlying current account Current account norm Underlying current account Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate Current account . Romania’s current account deficit narrowed significantly over the past two years, largely driven by strong export growth. Notwithstanding a weak external environment, exports of goods and services surged to about 40 percent of GDP in 2013–14 from the pre-crisis level of 25 percent of GDP in 2007. Goods exports as a share of the imports of Romania’s main trading partners have been steadily increasing, with transportation equipment market share in the EU more than doubling from 2008–13. A decomposition of export growth suggests that domestic push factors played an important role in explaining the recent improvement. Real exchange rate . Standard CGER-type methodologies (Consultative Group on Exchange Rates) for assessing the equilibrium exchange rate suggest that the real exchange rate is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals. The macroeconomic balance approach indicates that the projected underlying current account deficit is lower than the current account norm of 4.1 percent of GDP. Assuming that only exchange rate changes can deliver a current account adjustment, an appreciation of 3.1 percent would be needed to close the gap between the underlying current account and the norm. Similarly, the external sustainability approach points to a modest undervaluation of 3.2 percent, given that the current account norm required to maintain the international investment position at the current level (60 percent of GDP) is higher than the projected underlying deficit. Finally, taking into account the adjustment in the baseline projection, the equilibrium real exchange rate approach suggests a marginal overvaluation of 2.1 percent. Romania’s average wage has increased following the crisis, broadly mirroring economy-wide productivity gains since end-2008. Caution is needed to ensure that future minimum wage increases do not undermine competitiveness. Reserve adequacy . Reserve coverage in Romania is broadly adequate according to most reserve adequacy metrics. The reserve level of EUR 34.3 billion at end- January 2015 was above the standard rules-of-thumb for three months coverage of prospective imports and 20 percent of broad money. It was also in line with the new reserve adequacy metric for emerging markets developed by Fund staff. Comparing with the 100 percent short-term debt (at remaining maturity) benchmark, reserves are estimated to have regained a full coverage of short-term external debt by end-2014 after temporarily falling short in 2013 and during most of 2014. The improvement largely reflects a major reduction in short- term external liabilities. Going forward, in light of continued downside external risks, and potential volatility in capital flows, a prudent stance with moderate reserve accumulation remains appropriate. Gross international reserves vs. traditional metrics (Billion US$) Reserves New ARA-metric (100-150 percent) 3 months of prospective imports 100 percent of short-term debt 20 percent of M2 Sources: World Economic Outlook, International Financial Statistics, and Fund staff calculations. Source: IMF staff calculations. 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 (P) (P) (P) Page 17 Romania is in the process of modernizing its insolvency regime but not all elements are yet in place to ensure its efficacy . The new Corporate Insolvency Law has only recently been adopted and experience with its implementation is limited. The authorities are currently drafting a personal insolvency law. Several design issues need to be carefully considered and before adopting the law, the authorities should conduct an impact assessment and broad stakeholder consultations, ensure consistency with the corporate insolvency law, and strengthen the institutional framework to support effective implementation of the law. This is critical in ensuring that the personal insolvency law successfully provides those with unsustainable debt a fresh start without endangering the payment culture. The authorities plan to opt into the EU banking union but have not yet announced a timetable . While many operational issues remain to be resolved, the authorities see merit from opting in before euro adoption as the Romanian banking system comprises mostly subsidiaries of foreign banks. Staff supports the plan but called for careful preparation (see also IMF “Central and Eastern Europe: New Member States Policy Forum, 2014”). In line with euro area practices, the NBR is planning to conduct a third party-led asset quality review of the banking system in late 2015. The non-bank financial sector and its supervisor face important challenges . Significant progress has been made on institutional restructuring of the Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA) since it became the single supervisor of the non-bank financial sector in 2013. A number of barriers to capital market development were removed, which is to be enshrined in a revised capital market law. However, the insurance market is troubled by insolvency issues and weak business practices, which need to be tackled forcefully by the supervisor (Box 3). Legal reforms are urgently needed to enhance resolution powers of the FSA. Authorities’ views The authorities’ views converged to a significant extent with those of staff . They stated the intention to ensure good asset quality in the banking and insurance sectors through regular audits and with the support of third party reviews. The authorities aim to swiftly finalize the legislation for covered bonds and insurance resolution powers. Page 18 Box 3. Need for Reforms in the Insurance Sector Romania’s insurance sector is non systemic in magnitude but plagued by weaknesses The sector had a spurt of growth in the last decade but since then stagnated at the pre-crisis level. Total assets stood at about 3 percent of the GDP at end-2013 and total gross underwritten premiums reached 1.3 percent of GDP. There are 39 insurers in the industry many of which are foreign subsidiaries. Non-life business represents about 80 percent of total activity. The sector has considerable weaknesses resulting from a history of lax supervision and enforcement. Intervention and resolution are constrained by shortcomings in the legal framework. Risks for the overall financial sector derive mostly from reputational risks as direct linkages are limited. The failure of the largest insurer has revealed an urgent need for policy action A price war in the car and housing insurance lines led to low levels of reserve coverage in some entities. In February 2014, the largest insurance company (Astra, a domestically owned non-life insurer with about 15 percent of market share and mostly in the motor vehicle insurance business) was put under special administration by KPMG. The supervisor needs to move decisively to ensure recapitalization or an orderly resolution. Moreover, the insurance law and the legislation on the insurance guarantee fund need to be urgently amended to enhance the resolution procedures and to provide resolution financing. The European Commission is providing technical support and the FSA will engage in a comprehensive asset quality review with third party involvement later this year.