A renewed push for structural reforms is needed to improve public and private investment and raise potential growth . These reforms were one of the main focus areas of the most recent Fund-supported program. However, progress was mixed and the program went off track partially because of insufficient progress on structural reforms. While progress has been made to improve governance, other structural reforms have stalled and seem insufficient to raise private investment which remains well below pre-crisis levels. The key challenges are to improve the corporate governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), restructure those that have sustained long-standing problems and pose a drain on the budget, raise EU-funds absorption, and improve the investment climate. Staff welcomed recent progress in the fight against corruption and encouraged continued vigor to address remaining challenges  Corruption has been one of the top three obstacles for doing business in Romania according to the World Bank’s and EBRD’s Business Environment and Enterprise Performance survey, holding back investment and growth. It is also associated with lower tax collections as evidenced by Romania’s large VAT gap in the EU (estimated at almost 6 percent of GDP) and misallocation of public resources; in a recent EU survey over half of the companies that participated in a public procurement procedure in the last three years believed there was collusive bidding, conflict of interests in the evaluation of bids, and bribes and kickbacks. Romania is one of two countries in the EU subject to the “cooperation and verification mechanism” to help improve governance. Page 16  The authorities have undertaken several measures to step up the fight against corruption including passage of a new Criminal and Criminal Procedures Code in 2014, stepping up efforts to investigate and prosecute those suspected of corruption—including high profile figures, expediting the judicial process to secure convictions, and measures to enhance the transparency and efficiency of government spending discussed in ¶16. As a result, Romania’s ranking in corruption indicators has improved. In its most recent assessment released in January 2016, the European Commission (EC) noted that the “track record of the key judicial and integrity institutions to address high-level corruption has remained impressive.”  Notwithstanding this progress, further reforms are needed in the areas of public procurement and allocation of public funding, effectiveness of corruption investigations, establishment of conflict of interest rules, and strengthening the National Integrity Agency’s capabilities to monitor asset declarations (Box 1). Corruption Control and Inflows of Foreign Direct Investment Corruption Control Score 1/ FDI Inflows (Euro bil., rhs) 1/ Raw scores from the Worldwide Governance range from -2.5 (weak corruption control) to 2.5 (strong corruption control). 2000 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Sources: World Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators; and IMF World Economic Outlook VAT Collections Gap and Corruption Control ) i i b i T V f o P ( G T V RO LT EL SK IT Lower VAT Revenue BG LV HU CZ PL MT More Corruption ESP EE AT PT FR SI IE BE DE UK DK SE NL Control of corruption WGI average 2011-14 rescaled from 1 to 10 (1 - worst, 10 - best) Source: World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) and European Commission. VAT gap measures the difference between potential and actual VAT collection. Improving public investment Reforms that improve the efficiency of public investment in critical infrastructure sectors are essential for sustainable growth . SOEs play an important role in the major infrastructure sectors and their improved governance as well as larger involvement of private capital in those sectors remain key reform priorities. Staff recommended early adoption and steadfast implementation of the draft legislation on improving corporate governance of SOEs. Staff also advised to accelerate initial public offerings (IPOs) and the privatization program. All SOEs should be put on a firm financial footing. In some cases aggressive restructuring may be required, and in other cases, liquidation. These reforms would help improve the professionalism of SOEs’ management and resource allocation, raise profitability, reduce subsidies, and contain contingent liabilities for the state. In the energy sector, market deregulation for non-residential consumers has been largely successful and the deregulation of electricity and gas markets for residential consumers should continue. Page 17 Net Profit Margin 1/ 2/ SOE Activity by Economic Sector, 2014 Public Administration & Defense Postal and Courier Services Energy and Gas Water Supply, Sewerage, and Waste Management Mining and Quarrying Transport and Storage SOE activity (% economic activity) SOEs Private sector Manufacture of Chemicals SOE activity (% of total SOE activity) 1/ Excludes four highly profitable energy SOEs. 2/ Adjusted for the defense companies arrears clearance in 2014. Sources: Romanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Agriculture Other Services Other Sectors Sources: Ministry of Public Finance; and IMF staff estimates. Improving absorption of EU funds will boost infrastructure investment . Several actions can help: passing the draft procurement law currently in parliament transposing EU directives, preparing an action plan for the new programming period (2014–20), appropriately preparing documentation to be sent to the EC to avoid delays in processing, and prioritizing projects. Shifting ongoing projects under the previous programming period (2007–13) to the new programming period can increase absorption as some of the steps for their implementation would already have been completed. More generally, there should be a systematic effort to limit domestic financing of projects that qualify for EU funds. Raising private investment Making regulations and tax administration business friendly will support revenues and help attract private investment, particularly FDI . Overall, Romania ranks 37 th out of 189 countries in the 2016 Doing Business rankings (a lower rank signifies better ranking). Nevertheless, there is room for improvement in the areas of construction permits, property registration, protection of minority investors, and tax administration. Regarding the latter, reform efforts should focus on the taxpayers’ single window, electronic filing, consolidation of small taxes, online centralized taxpayer database, and improving timeliness of VAT refunds. In addition, revenue collection will improve if the tax administration agency strengthens its risk-based audit system and large taxpayer unit. The authorities have requested further Fund technical assistance to make progress in this area. Minimum to Average Wage Ratio 1/ Minimum wage rises well beyond productivity gains could do more harm than good (Annex VII and Selected Issues Paper). Minimum wage policy can provide protection to low income workers. However, with the sharp hike planned for this year, the ratio of minimum-to-average wage in Romania will surpass the regional average (chart). This may undermine external competitiveness and hamper job creation, particularly for low-skilled labor Peer average Peer average Sources: Eurostat; national authorities, and IMF staff calculations. 1/ 2016 data are based on minimum wage increases announced by the authorities and IMF staff projections. "Peer average" refers to the average for 17 regional countries. Page 18 and in labor-intensive industries. Staff recommended that the pace of future minimum wage increases be moderate and balance social considerations with competitiveness, productivity growth, and employment prospects. More generally, it would be useful to establish labor market expert committee and periodically reassess the impact of labor market policy including minimum wages. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff recommendations and hoped to make progress in pending areas . On corruption they emphasized that Romania should be recognized for the progress it has made in the fight against corruption; many other countries in the region had worse corruption indicators and had made less progress. They were hopeful that amendments to the revised law on corporate governance for SOEs and the draft procurement law would be passed soon by parliament. They noted that prospects for IPOs depended on progress in the legal case regarding one of the SOEs. The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment on minimum wage policy. They have established a working group comprising government officials and social partners to study and make clear guidelines for setting the minimum wage, following the EC’s recommendation. The new mechanism will help to improve the transparency in determining the future level of minimum wage. The working group is expected to present the new proposal by May 2016.