GDP and Demand Components (Billion lei, 2010 prices) Following robust growth in 2013–14, Romania’s GDP almost returned to its pre-crisis level; however, a sizable output gap remains . Robust export growth was the initial driver of economic recovery while domestic demand remained weak and lagged behind those in peer countries (Figure 1). Recently, however, the recovery has been supported by a pick-up in private consumption on the back of rising real disposable income and low interest rates. Investment, however, has remained subdued. On the supply side, after a strong agricultural harvest in 2013, robust industrial output supported economic activity in 2014. Helped by the recent rebound in economic activity, labor market conditions improved and the unemployment rate declined to 6.8 percent in 2014. Youth unemployment remained elevated at 23.3 percent in 2014Q3, about 6 percentage points above the pre-crisis level. Total Consumption Export Investment Import Sources: Haver Analytics and IMF staff calculations. Page 6 Inflation has decelerated substantially over the past two years . Annual headline inflation entered the central bank’s new target range of 2.5 percent (±1 percent) in September 2013 and has subsequently fallen below the lower bound of the target band for most of 2014 (Figure 4). Headline average inflation was at a record low 1.1 percent in 2014, with core inflation at 0.3 percent. In January 2015, inflation dropped to 0.4 percent. The fall in inflation reflects both domestic and external factors, including a reduction in VAT on flour and bakery products, low food prices, and a decline in oil prices. Furthermore, a persistent output gap and even slower recovery of domestic demand to its trend level (absorption gap), have also contributed to low inflation. Deviation from Trend Absorption and Output Gap Deviation from trend absorption Output gap Note: The deviation from trend absorption and output gap measures are based on IMF staff calculations and may differ from the European Commission, due to differences in methodology. 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Sources: Consensus Forecasts and Haver Analytics. Inflation and Two-Year Ahead Inflation Expectations Target +/- 1 ppt Target Expectations Actual Romania has considerably reduced fiscal imbalances . Over the past six years, it relied primarily on expenditure cuts to bring the fiscal deficit to 1.9 percent of GDP in 2014, a 7 percentage point reduction in structural terms (Figure 5). However, both revenues and expenditures under- performed relative to the initial 2014 budget, with almost all of the deficit spending occurring in December. Under-execution of the capital budget and current expenditures (until December) allowed for accelerated payment of obligations related to court-ordered wage claims and restitution as well as the clearance of most government arrears. Original Outturn Difference 2014 Budget (Percent of GDP) Revenue Taxes Grants Other Expenditures Current Capital 1/ Other Deficit 1/ Includes spending on EU-funded projects and other investment spending. Source: Romanian authorities IMF staff calculations. Composition of Fiscal Adjustment Revenue (Percent of GDP) Primary expenditure (Percent of potential GDP) Sources: Romanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Food items comprise about 50 percent of the core index. Page 7 The current account deficit has narrowed significantly . At ½ percent of GDP, the deficit was the smallest in ten years, a sharp drop from almost 13½ percent of GDP in 2007 (Figure 2). While imports of goods and services continued to rise on the back of the domestic demand recovery, exports grew at an even faster pace supported by continued expansion in sales of machinery and transport equipment. Staff’s analysis indicates that domestic push factors, particularly improvement in Romania’s competitiveness, are main contributors to the strong export growth (see Selected Issues paper “Export Performance and External Competitiveness”). The income balance, on the other hand, deteriorated on account of increases in profit repatriation and interest payments. On the financing side, public sector capital inflows remained strong with a continued increase in EU fund absorptions. In contrast, private sector flows remained anemic as Europe-wide deleveraging continued to weigh on FDI, and prompted further intensification of capital outflows. Bond Flows: ETFs/Mutual Funds (4 week moving total, million US dollars) Romania’s financial markets have remained relatively stable . Investor sentiment towards Romanian assets continued to be positive and Romania weathered well three episodes of enhanced volatility for emerging markets since 2013. Standard and Poor’s upgraded Romania to investment grade in May 2014 and Romania successfully tapped international capital markets again in October with a ten-year €1.5 billion Eurobond issuance. Sovereign bond and CDS spreads continued to narrow to record low levels, and the exchange rate remained largely stable (Figure 7). The overall favorable market conditions have enabled the central bank to sustain international reserves at €34.3 billion as of end-January 2015, while making substantial repayments to the IMF. Source: Haver Analytics. 1/ Region average weighted by GDP; includes Bulgaria, Hungary, and Poland. Excludes Bulgaria from August. Region average 1/ Jan-13 May-13 Jan-14 May-14 Sep-14 ‐ Sep-13 Jan-15 Bank credit growth has turned negative in early 2013 . The credit–to-GDP ratio, which rapidly accelerated during the pre-crisis period, is now converging to a trend that is consistent with lower but likely sustainable credit growth. Banks are gradually changing their funding structure towards lei as foreign parent banks continue withdrawing funds from the system, though the pace has slowed. The banking system’s solvency and liquidity position remain appropriate, although additional provisioning requirements have weighed on banks profitability (Figures 6 and 8). Normalization of Credit (Percent of GDP) Credit-to-GDP ratio (HP filtered) Linear trend (based on actual 2000-05 growth) 2000Q1 2002Q3 2005Q1 2007Q3 2010Q1 2012Q3 2014Q4 Sources: Haver Analytics, National Bank of Romania and IMF staff calculations. Parent Funding (Billion) Lei Euros (RHS) t l u r p t l u r p t Sources: Haver Analytics; and National Bank of Romania. Page 8 Romania remains one of the poorest members of the EU . Despite a slight decline since 2008, Romania has the second highest at-risk-of-poverty or social exclusion rate in 2013, at 40.4 percent, almost twice as much as the EU average. However, the Gini coefficient in 2012 was below its pre-crisis level, signaling a progressivity of fiscal policy, and the effort to protect the lowest income groups from the fiscal consolidation (IMF, 2014, Fiscal Policy and Income Equality ). Supported by the World Bank, some means-tested benefits programs have become better targeted but the envisaged merger of three programs has been delayed. Funding remains relatively tight for means-tested programs when compared to non-means-tested ones.