Romania made important progress in addressing economic imbalances and restoring growth after the global financial crisis Prudent policies, partly in the context of successive Fund- supported programs, reduced vulnerabilities and the fiscal and current account deficits improved markedly. More recently, the banks’ non-performing loans (NPL) have begun to come down. Per capita income has surpassed pre-crisis levels as growth has been robust and is projected to be amongst the highest in the region in the near term. Real GDP Growth (projected) ROM POL SVK LTA LTU CZE HUN BGR EST Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook However, economic policies have weakened recently and hard-won gains are at risk of being reversed . Last year, parliament approved measures with broad political support that are projected to substantially increase the fiscal deficit in 2016 and keep it high in 2017. This stimulus was not needed as consumption growth was already strong. It will also reverse the consolidation trend of recent years and put public debt on a gradually rising trajectory. Recent measures to provide relief to distressed borrowers are not well targeted and could threaten property rights and damage the financial sector. Progress on structural reforms has slowed, constraining potential growth. The current technocratic government took office in November 2015 and the window for passing reforms legislation will narrow in the run up to parliamentary elections before end-2016. Governance problems have received more attention recently and Romania has made progress compared to its peers in the fight against corruption . Corruption is not only a key socio-economic but also a key macroeconomic issue in Romania (Box 1). In recent years, Romania has been recognized for its progress in the fight against corruption and the anticorruption agency has high public opinion ratings. Romania’s position in perception of corruption indicators produced by Transparency International and the World Bank has improved in recent years.