Staff’s baseline scenario projects sustained growth and continued rebalancing towards domestic demand  Growth is projected at 2.7 percent in 2015 and 2.9 percent in 2016. Private consumption is expected to be the main driver, supported by improving consumer confidence, low oil prices, strong real wage growth, and record low interest rates. Investment is set to gradually recover due to greater absorption of EU funds. Potential growth is estimated to reach about 3 percent over the medium term, as higher EU funds absorption, a recovery in credit growth, and improvements in the quality of infrastructure investment through institutional reforms reduce bottlenecks to growth.   Inflation is projected to remain low in 2015, reaching an annual average of about 1 percent. Low imported inflation and a persistent negative output gap will likely keep inflation below target for most of 2015, before returning to the target range toward the end of the year. In the medium term, inflation is expected to stay broadly within the target range, as expectations become better anchored. External position . The current account deficit is projected to widen to around 1 percent of GDP in 2015, as domestic demand continues to recover. Over the medium term, staff expects the current account deficit to rise to about 3–3½ percent of GDP, in line with the current account norm for emerging market economies. Capital inflows are expected to pick up only gradually in 2015. While higher EU fund absorptions will support public sector inflows, net capital flows into the private sector are likely to remain low amid a subdued outlook in the euro area. Addressing the infrastructure gap is critical for the medium-term growth outlook Despite a history of above EU average capital spending (5 percent of GDP over the past decade), Romania’s infrastructure density is low and its quality is perceived to be the lowest in the EU, reflecting inefficiencies and lack of medium-term planning (Box 1; see also Selected Issues paper “Benefits of Boosting Quality Public Infrastructure Spending in Romania”). The mission estimates that ratcheting up EU funds absorption substantially (0.7 percent of GDP annually), if it leads to a greater density and higher quality of infrastructure, could boost the growth potential by about ½ percentage point annually over the medium term. Page 9 Quality of Infrastructure (Index) F B G X B W F K V C G Z C V H Y C H V K V G B Quality of Roads Quality of Air Transport Infrastructure Quality of Electricity Supply Overall Infrastructure Quality of Railroad Infrastructure Quality of Port Infrastructure 1/ A higher score corresponds to better infrastructure. Sources: The Global Competitiveness Report, 2013-2014 Risks to the outlook, particularly from the external environment, are tilted to the downside (Annex II). Renewed volatility in the global financial market or the euro area related to Greece could adversely impact portfolio flows and lead to deposit outflows. Moreover, a protracted period of slow growth and low inflation in the euro area could put strains on the Romanian economy. Direct economic and financial implications from geopolitical risks should be contained as trade and financial exposures to Ukraine and Russia are moderate and energy dependency is low. Large fiscal buffers, a flexible exchange rate, and an adequate level of international reserves could provide insurance in the event of an external shock. Domestically, continued underperformance of EU funds absorption and absence of structural reforms would delay a much needed infrastructure upgrade. Authorities’ views . The authorities broadly shared staff’s assessment for 2015 but see risks as broadly balanced, given upside potential from agricultural output and EU funds absorption.