Interbank Offer Rates (3 month, percent) Against the backdrop of declining inflation, policy rate cuts provided significant stimulus in recent years . The policy rate has declined from 6 percent in 2011 to the current 1.75 percent. The NBR also narrowed the interest rate corridor, in line with previous staff advice, and further reduced the minimum reserve requirements (MRRs) on both leu- and FX-denominated liabilities. However, there has been a persistent gap between the interbank and the policy rates which could undermine the effectiveness of the monetary policy framework, as also highlighted in past Fund technical assistance. Easy monetary conditions and a sharp increase in government spending in late 2015 have contributed to a buildup of liquidity in the banking system. Real interest rates, adjusting for underlying inflation, have turned negative. Sources: Haver; Eurostat; National Bank of Romania; and IMF staff calculations. 1/ Computed using the underlying inflation rate, adjusted for VAT changes. Real (3 month moving average 1/) Jan-12 Jul-12 Policy Rate Nominal Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 Jul-14 Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 While headline inflation is currently negative, underlying inflation, adjusted for recent tax changes, has been rising . Given strong domestic demand, a closing output gap, the large fiscal impulse, and significant wage growth, headline inflation (without policy action) is expected to rise to close to 3½ percent, the upper bound of the variation band of the inflation target, by end-2017 under staff and NBR projections. Page 19 Real Wage Growth b F v o Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Inflation Target 2.5% ±1pp Inflation Projections 1/ (Annual percent change, period average) 2015Q1 2015Q3 2016Q1 2016Q3 2017Q1 2017Q3 Sources: INS; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ The uncertainty interval was calculated based on the annual CPI inflation forecast errors for Romania from the IMF World Economic Outlook during April 2003 – October 2015, following the methodology described in Elekdag and Kannan (2009). Under current inflation projections, staff recommended leaving the policy rate unchanged for now but to begin to reduce the gap between the policy and interbank rates Given current negative headline inflation, low expected imported inflation, and the uncertainty around inflation expectations, the policy rate can be left unchanged until projected inflation moves more clearly above target. Nonetheless, the NBR should consider signaling a tightening bias and begin to reduce the gap between the market and policy rates by absorbing liquidity and narrowing the interest rate corridor; this will also strengthen the monetary policy framework. Given the large pro-cyclical fiscal impulse, monetary policy may need to shoulder some of the burden for managing domestic demand. In staff’s view the Romanian leu is broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals (Annex IV). Staff’s overall assessment is that Romania’s external position in 2015 was broadly in line with fundamentals. Reserve coverage is broadly adequate according to most reserve adequacy metrics. In line with staff recommendations, the NBR limited interventions in 2015 compared to the previous year. However, the excess liquidity in the domestic market and worsening of global sentiment prompted it to increase FX sales in the latter part of 2015 and in early 2016. Authorities’ views The authorities noted that monetary policy decisions would depend on NBR Board’s views regarding inflationary pressures and impact on financial markets . They agreed that inflation projections had risen and were approaching the upper bound of the variation band of the inflation target in 2017. Nevertheless, they also pointed out that in the current regional environment of low rates, monetary tightening may prompt short-term capital inflows and hence their preference for a gradual approach to policy normalization. The authorities also shared staff’s view that the Romanian currency is broadly in line with its equilibrium level. They recognized the importance of maintaining adequate reserves, particularly against heightened uncertainty in international financial markets. Page 20