Geopolitical tensions are bringing the Russian economy to a standstill (Figure 4, Table 2). Investment will further contract due to uncertainty and the recent monetary tightening. Capital outflows are expected to exceed US$100 billion in 2014, after reaching US$51 billion in the first quarter (Box 3). Consumption will remain the main growth driver; net exports are also expected to support growth as imports weaken (Table 3). Despite the economic slowdown, inflation is expected to remain well above the CBR’s target due to the recent exchange rate depreciation. A slight recovery in growth to 1 percent is projected in 2015, on the back of stronger exports and stabilization of investment. Over the medium term, growth will continue to be constrained by supply-side factors. The factors driving growth during 2000–2008, including oil price increases and utilization of spare capacity, are unlikely to support growth over the projection. In addition, the contribution of labor force is expected to be negative over the projection period due to adverse demographics and an already-low unemployment rate. Russia’s direct exposure to a deterioration of the economic situation in Ukraine is Risks are starkly on the downside (Annex III). The baseline projections assume a gradual resolution of geopolitical tensions. Even without escalation, prolonged uncertainty and the resulting deterioration of confidence could lead to lower consumption, weaker investment, and greater exchange rate pressure and capital outflows than assumed under the baseline. More fundamentally, sanctions could also derail further integration of Russia in the world economy, with the concomitant adverse impact on long-term growth as reforms are postponed. moderate : (i) exposure of Russian banks to Ukraine is less than 2 percent of Russian banks’ assets; (ii) exports to Ukraine are less than 5 percent of Russia’s total exports; and (iii) Russian loans and arrears to Gazprom amounts to US$4.3bn (0.3 percent of GDP). However, about half of Russian gas exports to Europe go through Ukraine, with limited possibility of rerouting through other pipelines in the short run. In addition, some sectors (e.g., base metals, transport equipment, and chemicals) of the Russian economy are closely-integrated with the Ukrainian economy, and disruption of these supply chains could have important sectoral impacts. Uncertainty in Ukraine could undermine confidence in Russia, affecting further domestic consumption and investment. Page 15 Box 3. Capital Flows in 2014 Net private capital outflows reached US$51 billion in the first quarter of 2014. This is much higher than the outturn for the first quarter of 2013 at US$28 billion and somewhat lower than the total for 2013 at US$60 billion. However, seasonality is usually strong, with about half of annual outflows occurring in the first quarter. Capital outflows in the first quarter were also lower than the peak of US$132 billion in 2008 Q4 during the global financial crisis. Larger net outflows were driven by higher-than-usual accumulation of financial assets abroad. In particular, 2014 Q1 saw: (i) US$19.6 billion accumulation of cash foreign currency by non-banks abroad; (ii) US$21 billion accumulation of foreign assets by banks; (iii) US$9.8 billion accumulation of other foreign assets by non-banks. In addition, borrowing from abroad reverted to below average levels at US$15 billion. During the period, domestic banks accumulated exceptional FX positions with the CBR—FX swaps of resident banks with the CBR increased by US$5 billion and FX correspondent accounts with the CBR increased by US$8 billion. Had domestic banks put this excess FX liquidity abroad, instead of parking it with the CBR, capital flows would have reached US$ 64 billion. Other risks remain significant. Among them, external risks include the fallout from the EM turmoil during the transition to higher global interest rates and an acceleration of capital outflows. With 2/3 of exports of goods and ⅓ of general government revenues depending on the energy sector, the Russian economy remains very sensitive to oil and gas prices. Domestic risks include a sharper slowdown in investment, especially if business climate does not improve and financing becomes even more constrained. In the medium term, investment may be stronger than expected, also thanks to recent gas contract with China. Russia has large buffers to face these risks but growth prospects could be damaged. Given the sizeable buffers from large international reserves, low public debt and the reduction of the corporate sector maturity and currency mismatches (Figure 5), the materialization of these risks may not endanger external sustainability but could imply a substantial setback to the growth outlook. At the end of April, gross international reserves covered 190 percent of the 2014 short-term debt outstanding at remaining maturity. However, a significant escalation of tensions could lead to a much deeper recession and jeopardize external sustainability. An escalation of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine could lead to stronger and broader sanctions targeting the financial and/or the energy sectors. Sanctions on Russian banks would further disrupt commerce, investment, and consumption. Significant trade disruptions could emerge if sanctions are targeted at the energy sector. Either of these alternatives would severely impact confidence and intensify capital outflows. Both scenarios could lead to a much worse growth outcome than assumed under the baseline and, in the extreme, even jeopardize external sustainability. While the impact so far has been limited, possible outward spillovers could be sizable. A further slowdown in Russia may affect Russia’s neighbors in Eastern Europe, Caucasus, and Central Asia through trade, financial links, and remittances (Box 4). In addition to regional spillovers, Russia Page 16 may have an effect on other countries outside the region. Russia typically accounts for 8 to 15 percent of major EM indices and its financial system is integrated with the international financial system through various financial instruments, including off-balance-sheet derivatives. A disruption of the Russian financial system or energy exports could have a considerable adverse impact on Europe The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and the risk assessment. They underscored geopolitical tensions as the main risk. The authorities also noted that pre-existing structural problems remain an important constraint for investment and growth. The Ministry of Economic Development is optimistic about the reform agenda and its implementation, projecting a medium-term growth rate of about 2 ½ percent and inflation of around 4 percent. The authorities shared their concerns that pass-through from the exchange rate depreciation to inflation may pose challenges to achieving the 2015 inflation target but the CBR reiterated its commitment to react promptly if inflation stays persistently above target. On the external side, the temporary suspension of the OECD accession talks may delay Russia’s integration to the world economy, but the authorities remain committed to continue implementing the necessary reforms and underscored the risks of less integration. They noted that development of gas extraction and production in the Far East would help Russia diversify its exports markets and broaden trade links with Asia. Page 17 Figure 4. Russian Federation: Real Sector Developments, 2000–19 Growth is associated with oil price changes … Oil Price and Real GDP Growth Projection Brent oil price (Percent change, US$/barrel) Real GDP growth (rhs) After a sharp contraction in investment in 2013, due to completion of large infrastructure projects … Gross fixed capital formation (Constant prices, percent change) Projection Unemployment rate at historical lows … Unemployment Rate …while capacity utilization and the labor force supported pre-crisis growth, but are expected to constrain future growth. Capacity Utilization and Labor Force Projection Capacity utilization (Percent) Labor Force (Millions, rhs) … a modest pick-up in investment and consumption are expected to drive aggregate demand growth over the medium term. Real GDP, Contributions to Y-o-y Growth Net exports Investment Consumption Real GDP Projection … and low productivity growth, underscore the need for structural reforms. Productivity (SA, y-o-y percent change) Sources: World Economic Outlook ; Russian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. Page 18 Figure 5. Russian Federation: External Position of the Corporate Sector, 2005–14 Page 19 Box 4. Regional Spillovers Regional spillovers from Russia could be sizable and could spread through trade flows, remittances, and the financial linkages. Neighboring countries could be affected by the slowdown in Russian growth via trade and remittances flows. Exports of goods and services to Russia amount to over 20 percent of GDP in Belarus and are substantial for a number of countries in the Baltics, Eastern Europe, Caucasus, and Central Asia. While direct trade links with central Europe are smaller, they may understate the importance of Russia for their tradable sector where exports to Russia are channeled via Germany. Several Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries receive large amounts of remittances from Russia. Russia supplies about one-third of European oil and gas consumption. While oil is relatively easy to substitute, natural gas is less so. Finland, the Baltic countries, Belarus, and Czech Republic rely almost entirely on Russian gas for their domestic consumption. Dependence is also high at 40-60 percent in central Europe and southeastern Europe. About half of gas exports from Russia transits through Ukraine, 40 percent of which could be re-routed by using Belarus and Nord Stream pipelines at full capacity. However, it would be hard to re-route LNG gas from Western Europe coastline facilities to central Europe. From Russia’s perspective, the possibility of re-routing its gas exports to Asia in the near term is limited by the absence of an appropriate pipeline system to China. Most countries’ direct banking sector linkages with Russia are limited but some international banks derive substantial profits from their Russian operations. Cyprus, Austria, and Hungary are most exposed to the Russian banking system, with total asset of their subsidiaries in Russia of about 4-10 percent of national GDP. Foreign claims by BIS-reporting countries point to further exposures of Austria, Sweden, and the Netherlands at about 2-4 percent of GDP in cross-border lending. Russian banks, on the other hand, are major lenders in Armenia, Belarus, Cyprus, and Ukraine. Direct financial linkages between Russia and most other countries via FDI and equity and debt portfolio positions are limited. Russian FDI is important for immediate neighbors, financial centers, and the Montenegro real estate sector. While 70 percent of outward and 65 percent of inward FDI positions (stocks) for Russia in 2012 was with five countries, net FDI positions with these countries were close to zero. Low net FDI positions suggest round tripping of Russian money through these locations to take advantage of better property rights and favorable tax treatment. This limits the scale of spillovers for host countries should these flows stop. Similarly, Russian inward and outward portfolio investment has been channeled mostly via financial centers both for equity and debt flows. The largest FDI investors in Russia are the US, Germany, U.K., France, and Finland, mostly in consumer sectors, such as the automotive and food markets. Withdrawal of this “real” FDI from Russia would affect technology and knowledge transfer, with an impact on potential GDP growth. Page 20 Table 1. Russian Federation: Direct Exposures to Russia, 2012 (Percent of own GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Real exposures Financial exposures Exports of goods and services Gas (in percent of gas consum- ption) 2/ Gas (in percent of energy consum- ption) FDI Remitt- ances Assets Liabi- lities Net Assets Equity Liabi- lities Debt Banks 1/ Net Assets Liabi- lities Net Total Assets of Subsidiary Banks in Russia Foreign Claims by BIS- Reporting Countries in Russia EU member countries Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia, FYR Malta Montenegro Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Serbia Slovak Republic Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Former Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyz Republic Moldova Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Other financial centers Bahamas, The Virgin Islands, British Bermuda St. Kitts and Nevis Jersey Seychelles US and BRICS United States China, P.R.: Mainland Brazil South Africa India Highlight rules: Between 10 and 20 and -10 and -20 Greater than 20 and less than -20 Sources: Eurostat; Direction of Trade; OECD; International Energy Agency; CPIS; CDIS; Bankscope; BIS; CBR; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. 1/ For Cyprus, data refer only to subsidiaries of banking institutions, and do not include subsidiaries whose parents are non-bank holding companies registered in Cyprus. The net asset position could be smaller, as Cypriot banks have sizable amount of Russian deposits. 2/ Imports can be higher than consumption due to replenishing of gas stocks and losses in distribution. Page 21 Figure 6. Russian Federation: Share of Russian Gas Exports in Domestic Gas Consumption, 2012 1/ (Percent of total gas consumption) R U S S I F E D E R T I O Existing gas pipelines Proposed gas pipelines Sources: OECD; British Petroleum; Gas Infrastructure Europe; Gazprom; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. 1/ For CIS countries not shown on map the share of Russian gas in total gas consumption is 0 except Kazakhstan where it is 9.7 percent. I T E R T I O L O E T R Y F U D Page 22