case of a more severe cyclical slowdown. The general government non-oil structural balance is expected to improve by 0.5 percent due to a reduction in VAT refunds and the implementation of the federal fiscal rule (Figure 7). This may, however, overstate the fiscal tightening as the government is expected to provide quasi-fiscal stimulus through the issuance of guarantees for multi-year projects and finance infrastructure projects through the National Wealth Fund. The modest direct fiscal tightening in 2014 appears justified despite the economic slowdown as the Russian economy remains close to its potential. In addition, adhering to the fiscal rule is essential to support its credibility given the current uncertain environment and the needed medium-term fiscal consolidation. In the event of a more severe and prolonged cyclical downturn, fiscal policy could be loosened, in view of the limited size of automatic stabilizers and the fact that monetary policy is constrained by its inflation objective. Additional fiscal measures, if needed, should be temporary and of high quality and be set in a medium-term framework that ensures sustainability. Market financing could be limited given the current geopolitical situation. In recent weeks, the federal government has canceled some domestic bond auctions, stating that the implied interest rates were too high given the sovereign rating and economic standing. In the event of a lack of adequate financing, the federal government could revert to reducing transfers to the Reserve Fund (RF) as in 2013 when non-oil revenues and privatization receipts were lower than expected. The baseline envisages an improvement in the non-oil balance over time. Non-oil revenues are expected to pick up as the economy slowly rebounds while expenditures are expected to be constrained by the implementation of the federal fiscal rule. Given the size of contingency reserves in the federal budget (about 0.3 percent of GDP in 2014) and the possibility of re-allocating spending within the budget, Crimea-related spending is not expected to affect the overall balance. Under the baseline scenario, general government debt is expected to remain sustainable and low, reaching 18 percent of GDP by the end of the forecasting period (Table 8). But additional fiscal consolidation in outer years is needed to rebuild buffers. At 4.3 percent of GDP, the RF is below the authorities’ target of 7 percent of GDP, which is designed to maintain government spending unchanged in the face of a reduction in oil prices to US$60 per barrel for 2 years. Under the baseline scenario the RF is not expected to reach its target level over the medium term. While appropriate in the short term, the diversion of resources intended for transfer to the Possible General Government Fiscal Adjustment Measures (Percent of GDP) Measure Budget Savings Cut tax expenditures Reduce wage bill Better targeted social transfers and subsidies Improve pension system Improve capital budgeting Improve tax structure Increase excise taxes Total up to 7.3 Source: Ministry of Finance, WB, IMF staff estimates Page 26 RF to offset the impact of shortfalls in non-oil revenues, privatization receipts and available financing, would further distance the authorities from their objective. However, with the RF below its target, the authorities risk pro-cyclical fiscal adjustments in the event of large and lasting oil price decline. This risk is heightened given the already high level of oil prices. Staff argued for more prudent oil-price assumption during the budget process to generate more savings. For example, discounting the current benchmark oil price by approximately 15 percent would generate enough savings to rebuild the RF to 7 percent of GDP by 2019. The resulting additional cumulative tightening (compared to the baseline scenario) of about 1.5 percent of GDP could be achieved with various measures (see table). This fiscal consolidation should be introduced gradually in order to limit the adverse impact on the projected economic recovery. Page 27 Figure 7. Russian Federation: Fiscal Policy and Oil Savings, 2000–19 The benign overall balance masks a large non-oil deficit and thus a reliance on oil revenue. General Government Balance (Percent of GDP) Projected Overall Balance Non-oil Primary Balance Transfers to extrabudgetary funds, including for pension, have been a source of pressure of federal finances. Over history, the non-oil deficit increased because of expenditures. Over the projection, lower expenditures and increased non-oil revenues will improve the deficit. Federal Government Non-oil Primary Deficit (Percent of GDP) Projected Non-Oil Primary Deficit Non-Oil Revenue Primary Expenditures (rhs) Under the rule, federal spending depends in part on a benchmark oil price. Oil revenue savings occur when benchmark price is lower than the current one. Transfers to Extrabudgetary Funds, Including Pension (Percent of GDP) Projected Oil Price and Benchmark Benchmark price Urals Blend Price FOB (USD per barrel) Projected Fiscal rule does not generate enough savings in the Reserve Fund (7 percent of GDP) to provide a buffer against volatile oil prices. Reserve Fund (Percent of GDP) Reserve Fund Projected Reserve Fund Target Nor does it generate enough savings for intergenerational equity. Federal Government Non-Oil Primary Deficit (Percent of GDP) Projected Real Permanent Oil Income Model Sources: Russian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. Page 28 An even more ambitious long-term fiscal consolidation would be required to safeguard intergenerational equity. With a non-oil primary deficit near 11.5 percent of GDP, staff argued that the general government relies too heavily on oil revenues to bring its overall deficit closer to balance. Staff noted that these revenues are associated with exhaustible resources and should therefore be saved more to safeguard intergenerational equity. Staff estimated that under the real permanent-oil-income-model approach, which maintains constant in real terms the government’s use of its net wealth, an appropriate target for the non-oil primary deficit would be roughly 5.5 percent of GDP. Currently, the baseline projection shows only a gradual improvement in the non-oil fiscal primary deficit slightly above 7.5 percent of GDP by 2019. Reducing the non-oil deficit would also offset possible Dutch disease effects and improve Russia’s external sustainability. Further pension reform would be pivotal for the consolidation effort. Despite the recent reform (Box 2), the generosity of the system is expected to decline over time and may become too low to be socially and politically acceptable, leading to fiscal pressure. Additional measures are needed to ensure the viability of the system while keeping its generosity at an acceptable level. These include: (i) increases in the retirement age (which is low in Russia by international standards); (ii) encourage the formalization of employment in the underground economy; and (iii) improving contribution compliance. Increasing the retirement age could also mitigate some of the expected decline in the labor force and consequently support growth. Achieving fiscal consolidation depends crucially on resisting spending pressures. Recent discussions about relaxing the federal fiscal rule could jeopardize the consolidation. In addition, promises to further increase military spending and public sector wages, increased fiscal pressures from geopolitical tensions, and incomplete pension reform could weigh negatively on future budgets. Consolidation at the local level, which is not covered by the fiscal rule, is especially vulnerable given the 2012 electoral promises to increase wages and local governments’ weak tax revenues. In this context, staff welcomes the recent proposal by the Ministry of Finance to limit the provision of tax expenditures. At the general government level, the authorities estimate that tax expenditure in 2012 amounted to Rub1.8 trillion or close to 3 percent of GDP. In addition, the Prime Minister has recently instructed the Ministry of Finance to propose a plan to reduce the public work force by 10 percent. Given Russia’s infrastrcture needs, public investment should be increased despite the fiscal consolidation. This implies resisting other spending pressures to preserve fiscal space and prioritizing and reallocating expenditures toward investment. Over time, this objective could be supported by the recently-introduced performance-based budgeting, which helps improve efficiency of public spending. Public spending efficiency could also be buttressed by the new procurement law (Box 6). Page 29 Box 5. Fiscal Transparency Evaluation (FTE) for Russia A recent pilot of the IMF’s new FTE assessed the Russian government’s fiscal reporting, forecasting, and risk management practices against the IMF’s revised Fiscal Transparency Code. The FTE found a number of strengths including : (i) a comprehensive legal framework for fiscal management; (ii) frequent and timely accrual-based fiscal statistics which consolidate federal and sub-national governments and extra-budgetary units; (iii) a budget, submitted and approved in a timely manner, based on credible macroeconomic forecasts and with a strong medium-term orientation; and (iv) firm central controls over key sources of fiscal risk including annual limits on debt, credit, and guarantee issuance by federal and sub-national governments. The FTE also highlighted some important gaps. First, Russia’s most comprehensive reports cover only about 60 percent of the total public sector expenditure while a fuller accounting, taking into account the large and complex array of government-controlled enterprises, would reveal a much greater involvement of the state in the economy as well as slightly negative overall net worth (Figure 1). Second, while reported balance sheets include most conventional assets and liabilities, they exclude the government’s estimated 200 percent of GDP in sub-soil oil and gas reserves and almost 300 percent of GDP in liabilities from public pensions and PPPs (Figure 2). Third, while the federal budget is relatively comprehensive, a large and growing proportion is classified as secret (rising from 14 to almost 25 percent of budget expenditure over the next three years as more agencies and activities, such as border protection, are classified as national security and spending on armaments increases), and there are plans for significant extra-budgetary activity via sovereign wealth funds. Recommendations of the FTE include: (i) clarify the boundary between general government, public corporations, and private sectors—currently the general government accounts exclude government-controlled enterprises that perform non-market activities but these should be included in the general government according to international standards; (ii) expand the institutional coverage to encompass the entire public sector; (iii) publish a more comprehensive balance sheet including sub-soil assets and pension and PPP liabilities; (iv) improve the coverage and detail of the annual budget; and (v) enhance the disclosure and management of acute and long-term fiscal risks. Figure 1: Coverage of Public Sector Expenditure Figure 2: Coverage of Public Sector Balance Sheet (Percent of GDP, 2012) (Percent of GDP, 2012) Russian Federation: Fiscal Transparency Evaluation, IMF, 2014 The coverage of fiscal reports should be extended. While Russia compiles a comprehensive set of the general government accounts that are broadly adequate for surveillance Page 30 (Informational Annex), these accounts understate the size of the general government, as they exclude government-controlled enterprises that are performing non-market activities. In addition, as noted in the recent Fiscal Transparency Evaluation (Box 5), Russia does not report statistics on the broader public sector, which would include all government-controlled enterprises. A broader definition of the public sector would reveal a much greater involvement of the state in the economy, larger public debt as well as a negative overall net worth. Finally, a large and growing share of budget expenditure is classified as “secret,” reducing the specificity and transparency of the budget. The authorities reiterated their commitment to the fiscal rule. They noted that structural reforms are needed to stimulate the economy, instead of fiscal stimulus, but noted that in the event of a significant slowdown, changes to the fiscal rule could be considered. The authorities agreed that further fiscal consolidation is required over the medium and long term as the current level of the non-oil balance is excessive. The authorities are cognizant of the spending pressures, and agreed that there is a need to increase public investment, which could come from re-allocating resources and the use of reserves. They noted that a sizeable portion of government spending goes to the public pension system and did not rule out the possibility of increasing the retirement age in the future, if needed. Russia needs more and better investment to boost growth. After 2009, Russia’s Investment and Capacity Utilization