The CBR initiated an easing cycle, introduced changes to its FX facilities and set up an FX purchase program (Figure 2). Since the end of January, the CBR started unwinding the December th emergency rate hike, reducing its policy rate by 550 bps. Banks have relied primarily on the FX repos to ease dollar funding pressures in the interbank market and support a smooth external deleveraging. In March 2015, the CBR started to increase the cost of these facilities as the FX market normalized. In May, the CBR suspended the 1-year FX repo facility and announced a program of daily FX purchases of between USD 100–200 million. In staff’s view, the ongoing monetary policy normalization is appropriate and should continue at a prudent pace . The acceleration in inflation (y-o-y) over December 2014–April 2015 reflected, to a large extent, the one-off impact of the ruble depreciation and countersanctions. Thereafter, disinflation should be driven by the recession underway, the stabilization of the ruble, and partial wage indexation in the budget. Therefore, a gradual reduction in the policy rate, commensurate with the decline in underlying inflation and inflation expectations, would be appropriate. In addition, if the authorities implement a tighter budget in 2016 than assumed by staff, Page 18 this could support a faster normalization of monetary policy. Nevertheless, there are a number of factors arguing for a prudent pace of monetary easing including the uncertainty over the external outlook, the potential for second-round effects given the magnitude of the exchange rate depreciation (Box 5), and the CBR’s need to build credibility under the recently introduced inflation targeting regime. As inflation expectations appear to be mainly adaptive, surveys of inflation expectations should be used cautiously in assessing underlying inflation (Figure 10). Finally, the easing of policy rates should be conditional on a reduction in external and financial stability risks. Box 5. Exchange Rate Pass-through Exchange rate fluctuations can have a significant impact on the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. As such, central banks should carefully estimate the exchange rate pass through to inflation. This is difficult in the case of Russia because nominal exchange rate fluctuations have been relatively limited in the recent past. Therefore, exchange rate pass through to consumer prices has been estimated using data for emerging markets. The analysis suggests that: i. ii. iii. The size of the exchange rate fluctuation matters. In particular, a larger exchange rate depreciation tends to lead to a greater impact on inflation (a larger exchange rate pass through). For example, the typical exchange rate pass through in emerging markets is estimated at 20 percent after 12 months. However, the pass though increases up to 45 percent after 6 months when the depreciation is greater than 20 percent. Episodes of depreciation are associated with greater exchange rate pass through than episodes of appreciation. In particular, the estimated pass through during periods of depreciation is five times greater than during episodes of appreciation. Inflation-targeting countries typically have lower pass through. However, this result holds only in countries where the central bank has built sufficient credibility to anchor inflation expectations. Given these results, the CBR should be careful when normalizing monetary policy. First, the ruble depreciated significantly in late 2014-early 2015, suggesting that the inflation pass through was large and relatively fast. Second, the recent appreciation of the ruble, while helpful in bringing inflation down, may not produce a large disinflationary effect. Third, introducing flexibility in the exchange rate regime is often accompanied by higher-than-normal volatility, hence it is important for the CBR to establish credibility by anchoring inflation and inflation expectations under the new regime. _________ For more details, see the Selected Issues Paper “Exchange Rate Pass-through to Inflation. Is Russia Different?” Staff agreed that the changes to the FX liquidity facilities and the introduction of an FX purchase program were broadly adequate . The normalization in the FX interbank market and the end of large FX debt redemptions called for a repricing and rationalization of these facilities. The central bank could consider limiting further the FX allotments to ensure that the facilities remain sufficient for emergency purposes. The pre-announced daily FX purchase program to build precautionary buffers would help guard against tail risks presented by the exceptional external conditions, given Russia’s limited access to international capital markets and vulnerability to commodity shocks. However the strategy should be strengthened by indicating the time-frame the central bank expects to be conducting these operations, thereby avoiding an open-ended policy that may be misconstrued as targeting an exchange rate level. Page 19 Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that monetary policy normalization should proceed at a cautious pace. The CBR noted that the exchange rate pass-through was greater and faster than expected but that disinflationary pressures are now firmly in place given the latest inflation readings, the ruble appreciation and partial wage indexation. As a result, the CBR expects inflation to come down to about 12–14 percent by the end-2015 and between 5.5–7.5 percent by end-2016, provided there are no additional shocks. This should allow further easing to avoid an overly tight monetary stance. The CBR concurred with staff that the pace of interest rate normalization should be cautious and viewed its inflation target of 4 percent as realistically achievable by 2017. The CBR believes there is a need to rebuild reserve buffers. They argued that given the exceptional circumstances and uncertainty regarding the external outlook, there is scope to increase reserves, especially given the evolution of the ruble in the first half of the year. The CBR indicated that the goal of the new FX purchasing program is to rebuild precautionary buffers. They agreed with staff that it was critical to ensure that the program is not seen as targeting a specific exchange rate and noted that they remain committed to the floating exchange rate regime. The authorities also indicated that the parameters of the FX facilities would be adjusted according to market conditions.