Russia’s growth is slowing because of pre-existing structural reasons and the fallout from geopolitical tensions. The growth slowdown that started in 2011 continued in 2013 despite accommodative policies as the economy hit capacity constraints. The fallout from recent geopolitical tensions relating to Ukraine and, to a lesser extent, the turmoil in emerging markets (EM) following the Fed’s discussion of tapering unconventional monetary policy are bringing the economy to a standstill. This follows an almost doubling of Russia’s real GDP per capita over During that period, growth also contributed to a significant decline in poverty rates and unemployment. However, after almost 15 years of growth based on rising oil prices, macroeconomic stabilization, and increasing use of spare resources, this growth framework has reached its limits. GDP per Capita and Unemployment GDP per Capita, (at constant 2005 prices, U.S. dollars) Unemployment rate, rhs Source: Haver Analytics. The authorities had begun taking some steps toward addressing the structural bottlenecks. Since the 2008–09 crisis, the Russian authorities have strengthened their macroeconomic framework with the introduction of a fiscal rule, a transition toward inflation targeting and a more flexible exchange rate. Some structural reforms were initiated: the introduction of procurement and anti-corruption laws, measures to strengthen the judicial system, the creation of a Federal Business Ombudsman and a number of initiatives aimed at improving the business and regulatory environment. However, the privatization agenda has stalled and other structural bottlenecks continue to hamper growth, seriously constraining its long-term potential. Geopolitical uncertainties are taking a heavy toll on an already weak economy. Following Russia's actions in Crimea, a number of countries imposed sanctions on Russian individuals and entities (Box 1). Concern about a possible escalation of sanctions has increased the uncertainty of doing business in Russia and is having a chilling effect on investment, while bond issuance has declined sharply. This comes at a crucial moment when the old growth model based on energy and use of spare capacity has been exhausted and moving to a new growth model based on diversification requires new investment, including foreign technology. Moreover, this risks derailing the reform agenda and a shift toward more emphasis on economic self-reliance rather than integration with the rest of the world. Page 6