decelerated more (relative to pre-crisis performance) than in most other countries and comparator groups. While some of Russia’s growth deceleration is attributable to the stabilization of oil prices, it also reflects stalled structural reforms, weak investment, declining total factor productivity (TFP), and adverse population dynamics. In particular, excessive regulation, weak governance, and a large government footprint in the economy have discouraged efficiency-enhancing investment. In the second half of 2014, the dual external shock from oil prices and sanctions exacerbated the slowdown. Sanctions triggered a sudden stop as Russian firms’ access to international markets was impaired while geopolitical tensions increased uncertainty and weakened confidence (Box 1). In late 2014, the economy was also affected by the sharp decline in terms of trade due to falling oil prices . These shocks combined to make growth anemic in 2014 (Figure 1). The growth slowdown in 2014 occurred amidst record-low unemployment, above-target inflation, and an economy operating slightly above full capacity. The ruble came under severe pressure at end-2014 , reflecting the balance of payments shocks from lower oil prices, limited access to international capital markets, and concerns about the large external debt redemptions in December. These led to large net capital outflows (USD154 billion or about 8 percent of GDP, the highest level since 1999–2000) and a significant decline in FX reserves (Figure 2). Also, inflation accelerated sharply following the exchange rate depreciation and Russia’s countersanctions (ban on imports of food products). Sanctions and market turbulence raised concerns over financial stability (Figure 3 and 4). Prior to the sharp ruble depreciation, banks’ capital and income positions were already deteriorating due to the economic slowdown. The situation worsened in mid-December 2014 as retail deposit outflows created liquidity pressures, asset prices declined and the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) raised policy interest rates, worsening banks’ net interest margins. Finally, the ruble depreciation put pressure on banks’ risk-weighted capital. See “Potential Output and the Output Gap in Russia”, Selected Issues, IMF, 2014. The annualized terms-of-trade shock is equivalent to about 8 percent of GDP. Page 9 The authorities took steps to stabilize the financial system and the economy (Box 2). The CBR allowed the exchange rate to float, tightened monetary policy significantly and expanded its FX liquidity facilities. The government introduced an anti-crisis plan, including a 2 percent of GDP bank capital support program, and revised its 2015 budget to reallocate spending to priority sectors. Box 1. Impact of Sanctions The United States (US), the European Union (EU), Japan, Switzerland, and other countries, imposed sanctions against Ukrainian and Russian individuals and entities in response to Russia’s actions in Crimea and developments in Eastern Ukraine. In particular, the US and EU sanctions prohibit US and EU persons and transactions conducted in the US and EU that involve providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in new debt with maturity of more than 30 days, by major state-owned Russian banks and energy companies. Sanctions also include a ban on exports of high-technology goods for use in the energy sector. On August 7 th , Russia introduced a one year ban and limits on imports of agricultural and food products from countries that imposed sanctions on Russia. Russia and the EU have subsequently extended the duration of sanctions. Sanctions will impact growth negatively in the short-run via weaker investment and consumption. Model-based estimates suggest that sanctions and counter-sanctions could initially reduce real GDP by 1 to 1½ percent. Prolonged sanctions, could lead to a cumulative output loss over the medium term of up to 9 percent of GDP, as lower capital accumulation and technological transfers weakens already declining productivity growth. _________ Switzerland has taken measures to prevent the circumvention of international sanctions through its territory. Box 2. Authorities’ Policy Response The authorities put together a comprehensive policy package around three main pillars: (i) accelerating the move to a floating exchange rate regime and provision of FX liquidity; (ii) stabilizing the banking system; and (iii) providing some fiscal stimulus while limiting wage indexation in order to contain second-round effects of the depreciation on inflation. The CBR floated the ruble when market pressures intensified in November 2014 to facilitate a more rapid adjustment to external shocks and curb reserve losses. Subsequently, the CBR raised the policy rate to 17 percent, including by 650 bps on December 16 th to limit financial stability risks and respond to a worsening inflation outlook. In addition, the CBR expanded its FX liquidity facilities, as new maturities were added to CBR’s FX auctions and the definition of eligible collateral was broadened. Finally, the government issued a directive requesting five large SOEs to ensure that by March 1 st 2015, the size of their net foreign asset holdings is no greater than the level as of October 1 st , 2014. The authorities introduced temporary regulatory forbearance, a capital support program, and doubled the level of insured deposits to support the banking system, to secure financial stability and avoid a credit crunch. Under forbearance, banks were (i) granted a moratorium on recognizing negative valuation changes for securities portfolios; (ii) allowed to price FX-denominated assets and liabilities at October 1 st 2014 exchange rates; and (iii) allowed flexibility in loan classification and provisioning. CBR estimates that regulatory forbearance sheltered bank’s capital position by up to 2 percentage points. The plan is to start lifting the temporary regulatory forbearance in July 2015. Funds initially worth about 2 percent of GDP—Rub 1 trillion from the 2014 Federal Budget and Rub 400 billion from the National Wealth Fund (NWF)—were allocated for the recapitalization of 27 large banks (43 percent of system assets), smaller banks affected by the sanctions and selected regional banks. In addition, the CBR undertook to recapitalize the largest bank (Sberbank which accounts for 30 percent of system assets) if needed. Finally, the government revised the 2015 budget by reallocating expenditures to increase spending on pension and support specific sectors and employment. Additional measures included budget credit to regions, federal credit guarantees, and use of the National Wealth Fund to support systemically important enterprises and banks. _________ This measure would be a Capital Flow Management measure in the institutional view (see The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Institutional View, IMF, November 2012). Staff assesses that it had limited implications for domestic and BOP stability with no implications on the effective operations of the International Monetary System. The capital support program was subsequently reduced to Rub 830 billion, as estimates of capital needs were decreased. Up to 10 percent of NWF’ assets (Rub 400 billion) could be used to capitalize banks for the purpose of implementing infrastructure projects. In addition, up to Rub 300 billion from the NWF could be used to finance real sector projects through Vnesheconombank (VEB), Russia’s Bank for Development and Foreign Economic Affairs. Page 10