noted that even though many corporations benefit from foreign exchange receipts and appear to have enough buffers to deal with the current negative market sentiment, close monitoring of systemic risks remains warranted. In addition, the uncertain geopolitical environment combined with a slowdown in growth could have an adverse impact on banks’ profitability and asset quality; on private banks via a deterioration in asset quality associated with the economic slowdown, and on (large) state-owned banks via lower profits and higher provisioning. Staff advised the CBR to continue to monitor any systemic risk build-up via its regular stress testing exercises and increased oversight. Cash 2014 maturing debt 2015 maturing debt 2016+ maturing debt Sources: Bloomberg; S&P; Company reports; and IMF staff calculations. Non-Financial Corporates (Billions of U.S. dollars) Rosneft Gazprom Lukoil Gazprom Vimpelcom Russian Railways Neft Transneft Risk from unsecured retail lending appears to be decreasing and the continued strengthening of bank supervision is welcome. Prudential measures taken by the authorities have Page 24 reduced the growth of unsecured consumer lending, though it remains relatively high (Figure 3). However, continued oversight remains warranted to ensure the effectiveness of the most recently enacted legislation and prudential measures. T he stepping up of banking supervision by the CBR has signaled a strong commitment to deal with banks in breach of banking operations or money laundering laws. Staff noted that this increased supervision will strengthen the stability of the banking system and support the necessary consolidation of the sector. Staff advised the CBR to continue to communicate widely and effectively its intended goals in order to maintain depositors’ confidence. The CBR has increased its supervisory and regulatory powers as progress is being made in implementing Basel III rules and the recommendations of the 2011 FSAP. The capacity to monitor systemic risks through regulating and supervising all bank and non-bank financial institutions was enhanced following the creation of a mega-supervisor through the merger of the CBR and the Federal Service for Financial Markets. In addition, the July amendments to the Banking Law was in line with the 2011 FSAP recommendations (Annex IV). However, reforms are still pending on introducing a unified administration regime for all banks, restricting open bank assistance by the DIA to systemic situations, and setting limits on concentration of collateral in the repo market. In preparation for the implementation of Basel III rules, legislation on capital requirements has been passed while regulation on liquidity standards is being finalized. Staff welcomed the CBR’s publication of the criteria for the designation of systemic banks, which will be subject to stricter supervision and higher capital requirements. The authorities consider the financial system to be sound and resilient. However, they broadly shared staff’s concerns about: (1) potential risks to the banking system from high policy rates, low growth, and further economic sanctions; and (2) declining but still high unsecured consumer credit growth. The CBR noted that financial and non-financial corporations are much more resilient today than they were in 2008-09 given the extensive deleveraging that has taken place in the banking system and the decline of FX and maturity mismatches for corporations as a whole. The authorities’ regular stress tests, including scenarios of large depreciation, complete shutdown from international financial markets and large negative growth, suggest that the banking sector as a whole would remain stable and resilient— although capitalization in banks representing one-third of banking system assets would drop below regulatory requirements. The CBR indicated that it stands ready to offer support to illiquid but solvent banks should financial stability be threatened. The CBR shared staff’s view that unsecured credit growth remains high, although it is declining at a rapid pace. They were confident that recently adopted prudential measures would further lower risks from unsecured consumer lending, which they viewed as non-systemic. The CBR indicated that it will continue its campaign to revoke licenses for banks that are financially weak or that have dubious operations, which it viewed as important to make the banking system stronger. The CBR claimed that this stepping up of supervision is leading to a decline in money laundering activities. Page 25 The fiscal stance is broadly appropriate for 2014 but flexibility could be considered in