inflation expectations. Inflation has increased to 7.3 percent in April 2014 (yoy) but is expected to decline to 6.5 percent by year-end given the projected decline in food prices, the limits on utility tariffs’ increases, and the emergence of a small negative output gap. Staff noted that the recent cumulative policy rates increase of 2 percentage points signaled CBR’s commitment to contain inflationary pressures. Nonetheless, staff views this monetary tightening as insufficient to bring inflation to the CBR’s target of 5 percent in 2014, given the size of the recent ruble depreciation and the lags in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Moreover, despite the cumulative hike, the real policy rate remains around zero, close to the estimated neutral rate and the slowdown is mainly structural in nature. Staff advocated that the CBR should raise further its policy rates over the next year to ensure that its 4.5 percent inflation target in 2015 is met, in order to anchor inflation expectations in the transition to a full-fledged inflation targeting framework. Higher rates would also help reduce capital outflows that have emerged amid geopolitical tensions, global liquidity tightening and rate hikes by major EMs’ central banks. The CBR should resume its policy towards greater exchange rate flexibility as soon as the current uncertainties subside. Staff argued that enhancing exchange rate flexibility and using interest rates as the main policy instrument would increase the likelihood of a successful transition to inflation targeting. Exchange rate flexibility provides an important buffer against external shocks—in particular if the shocks and the associated currency stress are prolonged. Staff recommended that as soon as the situation permits, the CBR should gradually simplify and eliminate its intervention bands, lower the size of cumulative foreign exchange interventions required to move the exchange rate corridor, and increase the size of the corridor shifts. Staff noted that the pressures on the exchange rate have abated following the increase in the policy rates and the reduction in the pace of the currency depreciation. The CBR should continue with steps to adopt inflation targeting by end–2014. The CBR has been rationalizing the structure of its instruments and announced in September that the one-week auction interest rate was to become its main policy rate with overnight standing facilities forming the upper and lower bounds of the interest rate corridor. Strengthening the transmission mechanism of monetary policy will require enhancing the signaling role of the policy rate and efforts to deepen the interbank market and reduce its volatility. A clear timeline for implementing steps Page 23 towards formal adoption of inflation targeting remains also an important goal as well as enhancing communication. In the context of a lack of bank collateral to access liquidity, amid an increasing reliance on CBR funding by banks (Figure 3), the CBR created a three-year standing facility secured by investment projects with a state guarantee. Staff views this mechanism as unlikely to foster lending for investment projects as it does not address the structural weaknesses impeding investment (Section D) and risks benefiting only large banks. The authorities reiterated their commitment to anchoring inflation while moving to inflation targeting and to a fully-flexible exchange rate by end–2014. The CBR expects inflation to come down to below 6 percent provided there are no additional external shocks and that the announced caps on tariff increases are actually implemented. Given the uncertain outlook, the CBR has adopted a wait-and-see mode with a tightening bias. The CBR concurs with staff that there are sizeable risks that inflation will be higher than projected, but reiterated its commitment to act promptly. In addition, the authorities reiterated their commitment to completing preparations for and adopting formal inflation targeting by end–2014, including greater exchange rate flexibility. Nonetheless, the CBR views the current FX intervention rule as appropriate as long as risks to financial stability remain, given the uncertain geopolitical environment and the potential confidence impact of further economic sanctions. The CBR viewed the use of capital flow management measures as potentially counterproductive, signaling policy regression. The CBR indicated that the new three-year facility was experimental and would involve only small amounts. Maturing Debt Profile and Cash in Hand of Major Russian Recent financial turbulence requires heightened scrutiny of financial stability. Staff