In early 2015, the economy contracted, the ruble strengthened, and inflation peaked. GDP contracted by 2.2 percent y-o-y (-2.5 percent q/q) in 2015Q1, owing to declining private consumption and investment, and despite rising government spending. The ruble strengthened significantly, supported by higher oil prices, tentative easing of geopolitical tensions, improvements in confidence due to the authorities’ policy response and lower external debt redemptions by Russian corporates. Weekly inflation (annualized) decelerated sharply, suggesting that the impact of the depreciation and countersanctions largely dissipated by May 2015. The external sector adjustment is underway. In the first quarter of 2015, imports declined sharply reflecting both weak domestic demand and expenditure switching due to the ruble depreciation. Export fell with global oil prices but volumes remained broadly constant. External deleveraging continued in the face of limited market access, with external debt falling to USD560 billion at end-2015Q1 from USD730 billion at end-2013. The exchange rate depreciation has moved the real exchange rate towards a level closer to medium-term fundamentals (Annex 2). However, the possible structural implications of sanctions create exceptional uncertainty about assessing the external position. A banking crisis was avoided but weaknesses persist . Higher deposit interest rates and ruble stabilization resulted in an increase in retail deposits from February 2015 and reduced the liquidity pressures the system faced. The 650 bps policy rate hike was accompanied by a temporary drying up of liquidity in the interbank market (Figure 2), which abated after the authorities announced measures to stabilize the financial system. The strengthening of the ruble, improvements in asset prices and declining spreads have reduced pressure on bank capital, which has been further supported by the authorities’ bank capital support program and regulatory forbearance. However, the banks’ profitability has continued to deteriorate as credit growth has declined sharply, interest margins have fallen, and credit quality has deteriorated. The CBR has continued closing banks, most of them very small in size, involved in dubious transactions or excessive credit risk. Since January 2014, the number of banks has declined by about 115 to around 815, with 27 licenses revoked between January–June 2015. Sanctions have forced banks and corporations to deleverage their external debt (Figure 5). Companies have turned to the local market and banks for FX funding given impaired access to international markets. As a result, external debt has been declining. Moreover, the net FX position of banks has remained positive and all sectors have continued to exhibit higher short-term external Page 11 assets than liabilities (Figure 7). Some corporates have been successful in rolling over part of their external intra-company liabilities.