A recession is projected for 2015 due to sanctions and the sharp drop in oil prices (Table 1, Figure 6). Real GDP is expected to contract by 3.4 percent in 2015, as real wages and credit growth fall, and private consumption declines. Investment is expected to continue falling due to low confidence and tight financial conditions. Net exports will support growth as imports decline on the back of falling domestic demand and ruble depreciation. The current account balance (in USD) is expected to remain broadly unchanged as a sharp fall in imports and an improvement in the services balance will mostly offset the negative impact of oil prices on exports. In 2015, net capital outflows are likely to remain elevated due to Russia’s limited access to international capital markets. As a result, FX reserves are expected to decline to about USD360 billion (13.6 months of imports). In the baseline, external and public debts remain low and manageable. The recovery in 2016 will be muted and medium-term prospects are weak. The more competitive exchange rate, increasing external demand and normalization of financial conditions will support the recovery in 2016. However, private consumption and investment are likely to remain subdued as real income growth remains slow, households continue to deleverage, and external financing is constrained. Moreover, unlike in 2008–09, when oil prices rebounded sharply and Russia’s recovery was rapid, staff’s medium-term projection is based on persistently low oil prices, suggesting a muted recovery. Coupled with the lingering effects of sanctions, negative population dynamics and slowing productivity due to the lack of structural reforms, this is expected to result in weak potential growth in the medium term (around 1.5 percent). Inflation should decline rapidly over the next two years . The recession in 2015 is expected to open an output gap of about 1 percent of potential GDP. This, together with the dissipating one-off effect of the exchange rate depreciation in late 2014–early 2015, the recent ruble appreciation, and the partial public wage indexation, will set the stage for inflation to fall to about 12 percent at end-2015 and close to 8 percent at end-2016. An increase in geopolitical tensions is the main risk to the outlook. The baseline scenario is predicated on the absence of additional external shocks. However, an escalation of geopolitical The terms-of-trade shock should be mitigated by the ruble depreciation and sharp reduction in real imports and expenditure switching. In addition, oil prices are expected to gradually increase over the medium term, but to remain well below their 2014 level. As a result, the net effect from the fall in oil prices over the medium term results in a decline in consumption and investment, but less than the initial shock. Potential output is expected to decline during the next two years due to the transition costs related to re-allocating resources across the economy following the terms-of-trade shock. The decline also reflects the impact of sanctions on domestic investment through the limited availability of financing and increased uncertainty. However, there is significant uncertainty about the evolution of potential output and hence the output gap. Page 12 tensions could create additional balance-of-payment pressures and a significant deterioration in confidence. The ruble could depreciate as capital outflows surge and inflation would increase further. Elevated uncertainty would cause investment to contract and precautionary savings to increase further, putting additional downward pressure on domestic demand. The ensuing contraction in economic activity would have a negative effect on the fiscal position and could create additional capital needs for banks. But other risks also cloud the outlook (Annex 3). Lower and/or more volatile oil prices could further dampen the economic outlook. In addition, the positive effect from a more competitive exchange rate is likely to be limited should the authorities pursue inward-looking policies. Although most corporations have enough cash on hand to finance their external debt coming due over the next 1-2 years, and have natural hedges due to energy exports, rapid deleveraging could entail reducing investment, which if sustained would further affect potential output. Possible spillovers from Ukraine could also adversely affect Russian banks, although they have already reported large provisioning against their Ukrainian exposure. A faster-than-expected end to sanctions, while positive, would pose some macroeconomic challenges, as Russia could face large and volatile capital inflows. Against these risks and uncertainties, Russia has large buffers (Figure 7). Russia has a positive and large net IIP (18 percent of GDP), a sizable current account surplus of 4.5 percent of GDP in 2015, low public debt and no need to access international markets for government financing in the short term due to the Reserve Fund (RF) buffer. In addition, while access to international capital markets has been impaired, Russian companies are expected to gradually regain access, as sanctions are lifted. Moreover, the CBR’s reserves remain adequate but could be increased somewhat to reflect Russia’s vulnerability to tail risks stemming from commodity-price shocks and the heightened level of uncertainty related to sanctions. Finally, balance-sheet currency mismatches are low and do not limit exchange rate flexibility. Thus, existing buffers reduce the likelihood of a systemic event. Sizeable outward regional spillovers from Russia are unfolding (Figure 8, Box 3). However, the Russian authorities’ policy response, which stabilized its economy, helped to mitigate outward spillovers. Despite this, Commonwealth of Independent States, Ukraine and Baltic countries, closely linked to Russia mostly through trade, remittances and FDI channels, are facing significant spillovers. Eastern Europe’s links to Russia are generally weaker though for some countries’ trade and FDI exposures are still significant (Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungary, Czech and Slovak republics). Some Western European countries, such as Austria and Cyprus, have direct financial exposures to Russia but trade links, beyond energy, are limited. On May 20 th 2015, CBR’s reserves stood at USD 360 billion. Under the Fund’s basic reserve adequacy metric, reserves within a range of USD 190–280 billion would be deemed appropriate. However, taking into account Russia’s vulnerability to commodity shocks would increase the range of appropriate reserves to USD 240–350 billion. Finally, additional reserves could be justified given that Russia’s access to international capital markets is impaired. See “Assessing Reserve Adequacy – Further Considerations”, IMF, November 2013 and “Assessing Reserve Adequacy – Specific Proposals” IMF, April 2015. Page 13 Authorities’ Views The authorities are more optimistic about Russia’s growth prospects but broadly agreed with staff’s risk assessment. The Ministries of Finance (MoF) and Economic Development (MED) expect the contraction in economic activity to be milder in 2015 and forecast positive growth of about 2.5 percent in 2016. In their assessment, the more competitive real exchange rate and the bank capital support program will have a larger impact on growth than staff estimates. Moreover, they believe that with the stabilization of confidence and rapid decline in inflation, real income growth will be higher and lead to an earlier and faster recovery in private consumption. Their medium-term outlook envisages higher potential output growth (at around 2.5 percent) than staff’s (at around 1.5 percent), as they expect import substitution to deliver higher investment growth. However, they recognized that this will require implementing structural reforms. They underscored the risks of long-lasting sanctions and lower oil prices, and emphasized the importance of preserving and rebuilding buffers. The authorities remain committed to deepen Russia’s links to CIS countries and Asia, and recognized that a long period of sanctions against Russia may disrupt further integration to the world economy. Box 3. Regional Spillovers In the face of sharply lower oil prices and geopolitical tensions, Russia has entered into a recession. This has resulted in significant spillovers to many Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), Ukraine and Baltic countries. The spillovers to Eastern Europe have been more limited. The degree of impact is commensurate with the level of countries’ trade, remittances, and FDI links to Russia. Trade, remittances, and FDI are the main channels of economic spillovers from Russia to neighboring countries, particularly the CIS (Figure 8). Belarus, Lithuania, Ukraine and Turkmenistan have the largest share of exports to Russia (over 9 percent of GDP). The remittances channel is particularly prominent for CIS oil importers, which are among the most remittance-dependent economies in the world. In 2014, remittances constituted close to 20 percent of GDP in Armenia, 24 percent of GDP in Moldova, 30 percent of GDP in the Kyrgyz Republic and 45 percent of GDP in Tajikistan, mainly sourced out of Russia. The FDI channel is also important for a number of CIS countries (Armenia, Belarus, Moldova, and Tajikistan), Bulgaria and Montenegro. The financial sector channel is more limited, given the relatively small presence of Russian banks, although exchange rate depreciations have impacted local banks, especially in highly dollarized economies. The negative spillovers have contributed to sizable downward revisions to growth forecasts across the CIS. In particular, for Belarus, Moldova, and Caucasus and Central Asia (CCA) oil importers, adverse spillovers from Russia’s recession in 2015 account for more than 2.5 percentage points of the downward growth revision relative to April 2014 forecast. For CCA oil exporters, negative spillovers from Russia contributed to about 1.4 percentage point of the downward revision in the growth forecast. The slower medium-term growth in Russia is expected to negatively impact the medium-term outlook of both CIS and Baltic countries. Currencies of most CIS countries depreciated (or were devalued) sharply relative to the US dollar following the ruble’s depreciation (in some cases accompanied by large interventions), reflecting confidence effects and expected decline in foreign currency inflows from Russia. Countries with significant trade and remittance links to Russia experienced larger currency depreciation. Rising dollarization in the region, particularly in the CCA countries, where the share of dollar deposits rose to around 60 percent in most countries, points to weak confidence and expectation of devaluations. At the same time, the sharp depreciation of the ruble and the appreciation of the US dollar (to which some CIS currencies are pegged) have put upward pressure on nominal effective exchange rates. The CBR is less optimistic, forecasting a decline of 3.2 percent in 2015, and growth of between -1.2 and 0.7 in 2016. Page 14