The banking system is facing challenging times (Figure 3). The sector reported after-tax losses in December 2014 and during the first five months of 2015. At end-April, the sector’s reported capital was comparable to a year ago, at 12.9 percent, owing to capital support from the NWF and the government (Rub 236 billion) and regulatory forbearance. Non-performing loans (NPLs) have increased by only 1.5 percentage points to 8.0 percent compared to April 2014 (Figure 4), again helped by regulatory forbearance. Staff acknowledged that anti-crisis measures helped stabilize the banking system. The acute ruble depreciation in December caused regulatory compliance challenges due to the impact on risk-weighted assets from the revaluation of FX-denominated assets. The forbearance measures insulated prudential reports from the depreciation and helped avoid regulatory triggers. The strategy was appropriately combined with intensified supervision, although staff noted that it should be strengthened by increasing transparency with regards to asset quality to improve market confidence. Moreover, staff argued for the prompt elimination of forbearance, along with the implementation of the capital support program, to avoid the emergence of additional financial stability risks in the medium term. The size of the capital support program appears to be sufficiently large (Box 6). Although profitability and capital will continue to be under pressure, recent CBR’s stress tests suggest that the government support for all the large eligible banks—before owners’ mandatory contribution—is sufficient to cover loan-loss provisioning and market losses under an adverse scenario (including an increase in NPLs to 18 percent). However, staff noted that the capital support Page 20 should be better tailored to the specific needs of individual banks and based on stress tests that are sufficiently conservative, instead of being arbitrarily set at 25 percent of a bank’s total capital. Box 6. Features of the Government’s Bank Capital Support Program In December 2014, the government launched a Rub 1 trillion (1.2 percent of GDP) bank capital support program. The main features of the program as of mid-June 2015 are: Eligibility : The program targets three categories of commercial banks: (i) Banks with at least Rub 25 billion in capital – 27 banks meet this requirement (excluding Sberbank). (ii) Banks that are directly or indirectly affected by economic sanctions; and (iii) top regional lenders (up to 13 banks). Type of capital support : Under the program, the DIA offers government bonds (OFZ) in exchange for banks’ subordinated Tier 2 debt and, for (partly) state-owned and sanctioned banks, in exchange for Tier 1 debt and preferred shares. The subordinated debt should be remunerated above the OFZ rate, but below market rates. Support is set at 25 percent of a bank’s total capital, irrespective of current or prospective capital needs, if any. Conditions : Banks receiving support must be in full compliance with CBR’s prudential requirements at the time of the capital injection. With the exception of (partly) state-owned banks, banks must raise their own funds equal to at least 50 percent of the government’s support. Owners’ contributions can be in the form of retained earnings over the duration of the subordinated debt. Other conditions include increased monitoring, a commitment to increase credit to selected sectors by 1 percent monthly for three years, and a three-year ban on increasing management salaries and the overall wage bill of the bank. Failure to comply with these conditions would result in penalties that worth up to 2 percent per year of the capital support. Procedures : Eligible banks, other than regional banks, had until June 1, 2015 to accept DIA’s offer and the process should be finalized by November 1, 2015. Thereafter, the CBR performs a due diligence to verify that banks are in compliance with the program conditions. Onsite asset quality reviews are performed at banks that have not had an onsite supervisory inspection in the preceding 12 months. In the event that a bank does not meet all the program conditions, remedial actions need to be implemented. Finally, requests for support are subject DIA board approval. In addition to the government’s capital support program, up to 10 percent of the assets of the NWF (0.5 percent of GDP) could be used to support bank’s financing of large infrastructure projects. NWF financing would be provided through subordinated deposits or purchases of subordinated debt with a maturity of up to 30 years. Resources from the NWF would be on-lent by banks (with the lending rate equal to the financing costs from the NWF). Finally, the CBR has been authorized to support Sberbank with subordinated credits (deposits, loans, bonds) amounting to up to 100 percent of its capital, if needed. _________ The program has subsequently been reduced to Rub 830 billion as estimates for capital needs have been reduced. Sberbank also meet this requirement but is excluded from the program as it is majority-owned by the CBR. Eight of the 27 banks are partly state-owned, with total capital amounting to 64 percent of the group. public sector: However, staff recommended adjustments to the program to minimize the cost to the  Tighter eligibility criteria. Only banks identified ex ante as systemically important should be eligible, while allowing weak non-systemic banks to be resolved in an orderly fashion.  Higher cost of capital, to ensure stronger efforts by banks to seek private capital before resorting to public funds. Given that markets are not currently functioning properly, the cost could be benchmarked against historical and/or international experience for similar capital instruments. Page 21 This would create incentives to repay the government support, as soon as banks regain access to capital markets. Finally, when requiring the private sector to co-finance the capital injection, the authorities should aim at achieving a level playing field between private and partly state-owned banks.  Eliminate credit growth targets as forced lending could increase credit risks and potential inefficient credit allocation. While the capital support may facilitate credit growth, credit underwriting should best be based on banks’ commercial assessment of risk and remuneration. Staff noted that the bank resolution framework has been upgraded, but further work is needed to fully address past FSAP recommendations (Annex 4). Legislation adopted in late December 2014 revokes, replaces and consolidates into one law the General Bank Insolvency Law and the 2008 Temporary Law for resolution of banks posing a threat to financial stability. The new law makes notable improvements, such as (i) more timely exchange of information between the DIA and the CBR on failing institutions; (ii) mandatory imposition of losses on shareholders prior to the use of public funds provisions; (iii) greater powers to sanction managers of failing institutions; and (iv) provisions for the bidding procedures of the assets and liabilities of a failed bank. However, staff noted that the new legislation does not provide for a number of tools contemplated in the Key Attributes for Effective Resolution Regimes, including the powers to use a bridge bank and to bail-in all unsecured uninsured liabilities. Finally, staff recommended that supervision of banks heavily dependent on CBR liquidity should be stepped up, including by requesting funding and liquidity plans that makes their business model independent of CBR support. Authorities’ Views The authorities believe the package was key to stabilizing confidence in the banking system and avoiding a credit crunch . The authorities acknowledged the need for a timely lifting of forbearance and plan to start eliminating these measures in July 2015. They emphasized that capital support provided to banks was aimed at supporting credit growth rather than to cover losses. In their view, this justifies the large number of eligible banks, the relatively low cost of capital, and the requirement that banks increase lending. The authorities also noted that the list of systemically important banks is still under discussion and is expected to include a number of regional banks in addition to the 19 banks already supervised by CBR’s SIB unit. The risk to public funds is seen as minimal as capital support is only granted to banks after CBR’s inspection. Furthermore, the wage bill restrictions are considered to be a sufficient incentive for banks to seek private sector capital. The authorities agreed that private capital would have been preferable, but argued that even if greater incentives were in place, it would be difficult to attract capital given the sanctions. The authorities agreed that over time they should reconcile the current bank resolution framework with the Key Attributes.