Parliament approved a new 2015 federal budget based on more realistic oil prices and macroeconomic assumptions. Under the new budget, the non-oil deficit is expected to deteriorate by 2 percentage points of GDP compared to 2014, (excluding the one-off bank capital support program). Compared to the initial budget, nominal spending was cut slightly, despite higher inflation in 2015, in an effort to recognize the new economic reality of lower oil prices and economic slowdown. Spending was re-allocated to priority areas such as support to the manufacturing sector (in line with the anti-crisis plan) and social payments, while some programs were cut by 10 percent, and public wages were only partially indexed to inflation. The budget also included limited tax cuts (about 0.2 percent of GDP). It assumes gross financing from the RF of about Rub 3 trillion (4 percent of GDP) in 2015, reducing considerably fiscal buffers for the future. Federal budget Initial budget Revised Budget Ruble (billion) Revenues Oil Revenues Non-Oil Revenues Expenditures Overall balance Overall balance (excluding one-off) Non-oil balance (excluding one-off) Percent of GDP Revenues Oil Revenues Non-Oil Revenues Expenditures Overall balance Overall balance (excluding one-off) Non-oil balance (excluding one-off) 1/ The 2014 budget included Rub 1000 billion for the bank recapitalization program. Staff supported a slightly expansionary fiscal stance for 2015 . The structural non-oil deficit of the general government (federal and regional governments, and extra budgetary funds) is expected to deteriorate by 0.4 percent of GDP, as the federal stimulus is expected to be offset by ongoing consolidation at other levels of government (Table 4). Fiscal policy would thus appropriately provide some stimulus given cyclical considerations, available fiscal space and a measured normalization of monetary policy, while partial wage indexation would support the disinflationary process. However, this may understate the ultimate level of fiscal stimulus as quasi-fiscal stimulus will be provided through the National Wealth Fund and the Page 15 issuance of guarantees. Staff recommended that the use of quasi-fiscal operations should be limited and coordinated to avoid an overly stimulative fiscal stance. However, staff noted that medium-term fiscal consolidation is required to adjust to lower oil prices and rebuild buffers. Assuming the maximum spending allowed under the federal fiscal rule, staff expects some stimulus in 2016 followed by fiscal consolidation, as the impact of lower oil prices is only gradually captured by the fiscal rule and therefore expenditures. This consolidation path would result in a relatively large non-oil primary deficit (almost 7 percent of GDP) and a low Reserve Fund buffer (only 1.0 percent of GDP) by 2020 (Figure 9, Table 4). Indeed, these deficits are above medium-term benchmarks estimated by staff which take into consideration intergenerational equity (Box 4). Reaching these benchmarks would entail additional adjustment, relative to the baseline, of 2–3 percent of GDP over the medium term. Accordingly, a limited fiscal adjusment could begin in 2016. Ultimately, the pace of fiscal consolidation may need to be adjusted to protect the nascent recovery or in the event of a more prolonged or protracted recession. Staff cautioned that current rigidities create a challenge to achieving fiscal adjustment. In particular, the application of the fiscal rule and pension indexation could make it difficult to achieve the necessary fiscal adjustment. Under the fiscal rule, the oil price benchmark is a backward-looking average, thus requiring only a gradual consolidation despite the expected persistence of the oil price shock. This could be exacerbated by the conversion of benchmark revenues into rubles using a much depreciated exchange rate. Furthermore, full indexation of pension benefits (to 2015 inflation) could permanently increase spending by about 1.1 percent of GDP in 2016, which would need to be offset by reducing other spending to comply with the fiscal rule. Staff recommended changes to the fiscal rule to help support medium-term fiscal sustainability . In particular, staff discussed a menu of options to improve two operational aspects of the rule: (i) increasing the pace of adjustment of the oil price benchmark to allow for a more timely fiscal adjustment; and (ii) gradually raising the amount of savings generated by the fiscal rule to a surplus of 1–2 percent of GDP, as the projected non-oil primary deficits are above the medium-term benchmarks estimated by staff which take into consideration intergenerational equity (Box 4). Improvements along these two dimensions could be made without a significant reform of the principles governing the fiscal rule. Other changes to the fiscal rule could also be considered such as (i) expressing the rule in terms of minimum savings instead of maximum spending to focus the policy debate on savings; (ii) including a limit on spending growth, to avoid pro-cyclical fiscal policy when there is a revenue windfall; and (iii) adjusting non-oil revenues to the economic cycle, and using potential GDP to calculate net financing. However, adjusting for the economic cycle is complicated Under the fiscal rule, federal expenditures are capped, ex ante, as the sum of (i) projected non-oil revenues; (ii) oil revenues at a benchmark price (in USD) converted to rubles; and (iii) net financing of one percent of GDP. However, in contrast to previous years, the authorities are considering converting oil revenues using a historical average of the exchange rate, instead of the projected exchange rate, which could result in lower spending than assumed by staff. Page 16 and subject to great uncertainty, as cyclically adjusted balances are often revised ex post due to revisions to potential GDP. Detailed fiscal measures will also be critical for the credibility of the consolidation program. In particular, a reform of the pension system could deliver substantial fiscal savings over time. Other possible areas for fiscal consolidation include (i) better targeting of social transfers; (ii) reducing energy subsidies; and (iii) cutting tax expenditures. Fiscal consolidation should safeguard public investment, education and health care spending while improving the efficiency of capital budgeting to increase returns on public investment. Authorities’ Views Possible Fiscal Adjustment Measures (Percent of GDP) Measure Short-term Cut tax expenditures Increase excise taxes Medium-to-long-term Reduce energy subsidies Better targeted social transfers Increase retirement age Reduce early pensions Improve capital budgeting Total Budget Savings up to 2.7 up to 7.1 2.0 - 3.0 up to 9.8 Source: Ministry of Finance, WB, IMF staff estimates The authorities agreed with the need for medium-term fiscal consolidation. In their view, the recent oil price decline should be treated as permanent, requiring fiscal adjustment based on permanent measures. They believed that a balanced budget by 2018 would be consistent with medium-term fiscal sustainability and are considering tightening fiscal policy by limiting spending starting in 2016. They also recognized the challenges created by the current fiscal rule and pension benefit indexation. In that context, the authorities agreed that there is a need to revisit the fiscal rule and welcomed the set of possible modifications suggested by staff. Following the workshop on pension reform delivered by IMF experts in March, the authorities are seeking politically feasible reforms to ensure the system’s viability. They argued that a combination of fewer early retirement benefits, and an increase and equalization of statutory retirement ages would bring about a significant improvement in the pension system’s balance. At the request of the authorities, IMF staff delivered a workshop on fiscal rules on June 22–23, 2015. Page 17 Box 4. Russia’s Fiscal Rule Resource-rich countries face two important fiscal challenges: (i) conducting a prudent fiscal policy consistent with the long-term value of their resource wealth; and (ii) managing the impact of short-term resource-revenue volatility. The recent sharp oil price decline has exacerbated these challenges. Having an appropriate fiscal framework helps to manage these challenges, reduces “Dutch disease” effects, and limits the risks of large and disruptive adjustments in the future i.e. fiscal sustainability risks. Russia introduced an oil-price based fiscal rule in December 2012, but it could be further improved. Under the rule, the oil-price benchmark is set as the minimum of (i) a backward-looking moving average of up to ten years of Urals oil prices (USD/barrel); and (ii) a three-year backward looking average. The fiscal rule could be modified to: (i) allow for a faster adjustment in fiscal policy in response to oil-price developments; and (ii) generate more savings as Russia’s current and projected non-oil primary deficits are larger than suggested by typical long-term fiscal benchmarks. Improvements along these two dimensions could be made without a significant reform of the principles governing the fiscal rule. In particular, the oil price benchmark could adjust more rapidly to developments in the oil market. To adjust more rapidly to perceived changes in the long-term price of oil, the calculation of the oil-price benchmark could usefully include future oil prices, as is done in other countries such as Mexico and Mongolia. An alternative to including future oil prices could be to convert revenues to rubles using an exchange rate that is more consistent with the oil price benchmark, instead of the projected exchange rate (as was done in the past) i.e. the projected exchange rate assumes lower oil prices than the oil price benchmark. However, determining the appropriate exchange rate for conversion is complicated by the fact that (i) the ruble has not been floating until recently; (ii) the level of the exchange rate reflects a number of non-oil factors, including inflation differentials and, recently, the impact of sanctions against Russia. Furthermore, converting revenues using such an exchange rate could complicate communications with the public and markets, as the exchange rate used to convert revenues would be different than the projected one. The fiscal rule could generate more savings to safeguard intergenerational equity. Estimates of long-term fiscal benchmarks consistent with intergenerational equity points to a federal non-oil primary deficit (NOPD) in the range of 3-4.5 percent of GDP. Generating such NOPDs could be achieved by changing the “net financing” of 1 percent of GDP allowed under the fiscal rule, which increases the maximum level of spending and the deficit, to “net savings” of 1–2 percent of GDP. _________ For more details, see the Selected Issues Paper “Russia’s Fiscal Framework and the Oil Price Shock.”