Staff supported the authorities’ efforts to develop the export sector, both by diversifying into new markets and improving the export base, with a view to lower the trade gap . This included taking advantage of opportunities provided by regional integration, particularly through the EAC. Exports are currently dominated by tea, coffee, minerals, and tourism. Since 2012, exports to the DRC and EAC account for about 17 percent and 8 percent, respectively, of Rwanda’s total exports. MEFP 14-15 The government argued that its export strategy focused on adding value to traditional exports (e.g., washing coffee) and moving into new areas (e.g., horticulture and pyrethrum) and was being achieved through targeted interventions in industrial development . The construction of the Kigali convention center and plans to build a new airport reflect the authorities’ desire to expand business tourism and some success has already been achieved in industrial development. For example, some light manufacturing has started to take off (shoes, textiles), but the authorities acknowledged that the scale of this activity was still small. Moreover, with Rwanda being land-locked, they agreed that lowering the costs of doing business in terms of reliable provision of power and better transportation would be required before these types of activities can expand on a large scale. Rwanda has the third best doing business indicator in Sub-Saharan Africa with cross border trade a notable weakness. The authorities have allowed for greater exchange rate flexibility and aim to maintain import cover of about 4 months . In recent years, staff has supported the authorities move to allow greater exchange rate flexibility, allowing the exchange rate to be market determined. The Rwandan Franc depreciated against the US dollar by over 13 percent since 2012 (through October). The real effective exchange rate has remained fairly stable in recent years and appears to be in line with fundamentals . The real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciated by about 2 percent in 2013 mainly due to the fall in the nominal value of the Rwandan franc against the currencies of its main trading partners. Based on the extended external balance assessment (EBA- lite) current account gap estimate, staff assesses the 2013 REER to be broadly consistent with its long run fundamentals (a point estimate of about 3.1 percent overvaluation, Box 8). An alternative equilibrium real exchange rate estimate would seem to confirm this assessment. These indicators should be interpreted with caution due to limited respondents, geographic coverage and standardized assumptions. Page 22 Box 8. Rwanda: External Stability Assessment Overall assessment. The immediate risks to the external position appear to be manageable but medium-term vulnerabilities will need to be addressed. Rwanda remains susceptible to external shocks given its narrow export base and reliance on aid flows. The effective implementation of structural reforms to improve export capacity and diversification under EDPRS II is critical to mitigate risks arising from the narrow export base and volatility of commodity prices. Further lowering of the costs of doing business and removal of other structural impediments to speeding up private sector’s share of the economy are essential to improving Rwanda’s external competitiveness and attracting large FDI flows. Limited international capital market access could be used to complement traditional sources of external financing but needs to be done prudently to avoid external debt sustainability problems. The underlying current account deficit in 2013 is very close to its estimated norm. The extended External Balance Assessment (EBA-lite) methodology estimates a CA norm of -5.7 percent of GDP and a gap of -1.4 percent in 2013 (figure 1). However, the current account deficit is expected to deteriorate in 2014 to 11.8 percent of GDP, mainly due to weaker export performance and healthy growth in imports, but will gradually improve thereafter over the medium term to 8.4 percent of GDP in 2018 as exports rebound. Given the low export base, the Rwandan economy remains vulnerable to external shocks, for example, to a fall in commodity prices or a slowdown in trade partners’ demand. However, these risks are expected to be mitigated over the medium term by the anticipated improvement in export performance via the implementation of the export expansion and diversification strategy under the EDPRS II. Figure 1. EBA-lite Current Account Balance Estimates CA-Norm-2013 CA-Fitted Source: IMF Staff estimates. The real effective exchange rate (REER) is broadly in line with its long-run equilibrium. The real effective exchange rate depreciated by about 1.7 percent in 2013 mainly due to the fall in the nominal value of the Rwandan franc against the currencies of its main trading partners. The authorities have allowed greater flexibility in the Rwandan franc in foreign currency market. Based on EBA-lite current account gap estimate and a long-run elasticity of -0.46 the REER is estimated to be 3.1 percent overvalued in 2013, and hence broadly consistent with its long-run fundamentals. Maintaining a more flexible exchange rate regime in the medium term would continue to support efforts to enhance export competitiveness. Methodology EBA-lite Current Account balance Source: IMF Staff calculations Current account Percent of GDP Current account norm Percent of GDP REER overvaluation Percent Capital and financial accounts flows. In 2013, traditional aid flows were complemented by commercial borrowing via the Eurobond issuance to finance the current account deficit. FDI flows were 2 percent of GDP. In the near-term aid flows will continue to play an important role in external financing in Rwanda. Implementation of structural reforms in the private sector is anticipated to increase FDI flows over the medium term. Page 23 Box 8. Rwanda: External Stability Assessment (concluded) The low risk of external debt distress rating has expanded the envelope of available concessional borrowing, while reducing the share of grants in aid flows. With the government’s access to international capital markets, commercial borrowing could also complement traditional aid flows in financing of the current account deficit. The limited space for commercial borrowing means however that this form of debt financing should be undertaken judiciously to preserve debt sustainability. International reserves level is broadly adequate. Reserves covered 5 months of imports in 2013, in line with the average for 2009-2013. Over the medium-term, reserves are expected to remain over 4 months of imports. A cost-benefit approach to the optimal level of reserves in LICs suggests that projected reserves would be broadly consistent with the optimal level estimated at 4-5 months of imports, assuming an opportunity cost of holding reserves in the range of 3-4 percent (figure 2). Figure 2: Optimal Level of Reserves: Rwanda (months of imports) Cost of holding reserves, percent Broader competitiveness indicators. The 2015 Doing Business Indicators ranks Rwanda 46 out of 189 countries, the third best overall ranking for any Sub-Saharan country, behind Mauritius and South Africa respectively. But while it compares favorably on most indicators relative to the EAC and SSA, its indicators of cross border trade are inferior to its regional peers (Figure 3). This suggests that important structural competitiveness challenges remain. _________________________________ IMF Working Paper The External Balance Assessment (EBA) Methodology (WP/13/272). EBA-lite estimates include a broader set of emerging market and low-income countries than the EBA approach. IMF Working Paper Optimal Precautionary Reserves for Low-Income Countries: A Cost-Benefit Analysis (WP/11/249) and IMF Board Paper Assessing Reserve Adequacy (PIN No. 11/47). The cost of reserves is approximated by the difference in the return on public investment and the real return secured from investing in relatively safer and more liquid foreign assets Page 24 Rwanda’s level of foreign exchange reserves remains adequate but the room for maneuver is limited. Import cover is near the 4 months target, which is consistent with estimates of Rwanda’s optimal reserve level and also the target set by the EAC convergence criterion. Staff cautioned that in the past, the profile of reserve coverage was strongly correlated with aid inflows. The challenge, therefore, will be to maintain the current level of reserve coverage while reducing reliance on foreign aid. Maintaining reserves cover at 4 months of imports over the medium term would be consistent with a current account deficit (including grants) leveling out at about 8 percent of GDP.