Rwanda has significant investment plans to help overcome the infrastructure constraint, but the financing of most of these projects is yet to be finalized. There is currently a pipeline of projects in the areas of energy, transportation (air and road) and water with projected financing from development partners (including IDA and AfDB) of about US$1.5 billion for these projects over the medium term (2014-19). Two additional priorities for the government include the new airport at Bugesera and Rwanda’s share of the regional railway (with costs of US$750 million and US$1.5 billion, respectively), but financing for these two projects has not yet been identified. MEFP 18-20 The authorities concurred that strengthening implementation capacity was key to timely completion of projects. Two flagship projects (the Nyabarongo power plant and the KCC) were running about 1 year behind schedule on account of technical issues. The authorities acknowledged that more time was needed at the initiation stage to work through potential pitfalls and limit the size of corrective measures during implementation. A Minister of State in charge of planning has thus been appointed to oversee the strengthening of linkages between planning and budgeting, help establish a public investment committee and a national investment plan team to ensure better planning of public projects. A readiness filter is to be introduced that will require each project above US$1 million to undergo a feasibility study and cost benefit analysis before it is implemented. Moreover, quarterly reports will be sent to Cabinet on the status of projects and responsibility for the proper implementation of the projects will be set at the Ministerial level. Staff supported the authorities’ plan and suggested establishing an explicit Public Investment Program (PIP) listing all major projects and their expected phasing and financing. Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to fully explore concessional financing options and private sector participation before considering non-concessional resources, but recognized that recourse to some non-concessional financing was inevitable and appropriate, given the country’s infrastructure needs and available fiscal space. On account of uncertainties in the timing of project implementation and the availability of alternative sources of financing, the authorities did not have an explicit timeline for contracting non-concessional borrowing. The new debt unit at the Ministry of E. Dabla-Norris et al. Optimal Precautionary Reserves for LICs IMFWP11/249 Page 25 Finance was charged with analyzing various debt sustainability scenarios based on the IMF and World Bank LIC DSA methodology. The authorities underscored the importance of infrastructure spending to relieve bottlenecks but they wanted to keep the low risk rating that allowed them to access additional concessional financing. The staff and authorities reviewed alternative scenarios under the DSA to ensure consistency with Rwanda’s current low risk of debt distress. Under the baseline scenario all debt burden indicators are projected to remain below the policy-dependent thresholds. Standard stress tests show a marginal temporary breach of the PV of the debt service-to-revenues ratio in 2023 when the Eurobond issued in 2013 matures. As this breach is temporary, and it is assumed that Rwanda will be able to rollover the maturing Eurobond, the assessment of a low risk of debt distress remains. Alternative financing scenarios under the DSA also suggests that Rwanda has limited flexibility to use non-concessional financing options. The analysis shows that non-concessional borrowing of US$ 500 million during 2015 would not adversely affect Rwanda’s debt risk rating. However, recourse to larger non-concessional borrowing would increase public debt vulnerability and may raise Rwanda’s risk of debt distress. Staff advised the authorities to smooth out the profile of any new non-concessional borrowing and urged that project selection should be made carefully. The issuance of a single large bond for a small country like Rwanda could lead to a cost premium and would pose rollover risks at maturity, especially in less favorable circumstances. Staff supported the government’s strategy of availing itself of the larger concessional financing resources offered by donors because of the low debt distress rating. Staff also recommended splitting non-concessional borrowing over a multi-year horizon to contain rollover risks and fully lining-up financing prior to project commitment. On project selection, while recognizing that the new airport was a national priority, staff urged the authorities to share the financing of this project with private sector partners so that future risks would be diversified. Page 26