MEFP 2-8 Economic growth picked up in the first half of 2014, while inflation remains subdued. Growth rebounded in the first half of 2014 to 6.8 percent year-on-year, driven primarily by industry and services (Table 1). High frequency coincident indicators suggest that economic activity was somewhat more subdued in the third quarter (Figure 2). Inflation declined to 0.5 percent year-on- year in October, driven by low import prices for food and fuel and increased supply of domestic fresh food products (Figure 3). Core inflation, (excluding fresh foods and fuels) stood at 3.5 percent. The fiscal deficit in FY2013/14 was slightly less than planned under the PSI (Figure 4 and Table 2) . Revenues overperformed largely because of higher receipts from peace keeping operations and capital grants. Current expenditures were in line with the PSI while capital expenditures were lower on account of delays in project implementation. Because of the lower deficit, net domestic financing was less than predicted under the program. The current account deficit widened in the first half of 2014, driven by a worsening in the trade balance (Table 3). Imports grew by 13 percent (y-o-y), while exports remained broadly flat, reflecting weak tourism and restrictions imposed on the movement of people between DRC and Rwanda that were in effect through August, as well as a reduction in prices of minerals and tea. The National Bank of Rwanda (NBR) has kept the monetary policy stance unchanged. With the continued decline in inflation, real interest rates have increased and credit to the private sector was kept at 13.5 percent (y-on-y) in June (Table 4, Figures 5 and 6). Broad money growth accelerated by end-June, partly driven by higher foreign inflows and associated higher spending at the end of the fiscal year, while reserve money evolved in line with the program. The exchange rate has depreciated against the dollar by 3 percent through end-October. Monetary developments in the second half of 2014 have so far been broadly in line with the program.