Fiscal Policy The fiscal deficit for FY14/15 continues to be in line with available resources. The fiscal deficit for 2014/15, after adjusting for a switch in financing between grants and loans, is 0.2 percentage point of GDP larger than budgeted, on account of lower-than-budgeted grants. The headline deficit is 2.1 percentage points of GDP wider though, reflecting the change in the structure of multilateral financing of about 1.9 percentage points of GDP, associated with Rwanda attaining a low risk of debt distress (see text table). The somewhat higher deficit and net shortfall in external finance is being met by higher net domestic financing (0.5 percent of GDP), in line with the PSI. MEFP 12-13, 16 Fiscal Highlights (in percent of GDP) Latest Budget Difference (Percent of fiscal year GDP) Revenue Grants Budgetary grants Current expenditure Capital Expenditure Net Lending Overall Balance Adjusted Overall balance Financing External Budgetary Loans Project Loans Amortization Domestic Sources: Rwandan authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Overall balance adjusted for the switch between grant and loan financing by netting out budgetary loans The mission urged the authorities to sustain efforts to mobilize more revenue . Tax revenue is expected to increase by 1 percent of GDP this fiscal year, bringing it to almost 16 percent of GDP. Tax efforts over the past year have yielded revenue gains, including the expansion of electronic tax filing and payment and the greater use of the electronic billing machines. The current tax effort, however, is still low with respect to comparator countries in Africa, and below the 25 percent of GDP target set by the EAC. While partly explained by structural issues (a large share of Page 18 agriculture and subsistence farming; loss of revenue from increasing regional free trade as the EAC moves towards a lower common tariff; large informal economy; and shifting composition of imports), staff emphasized that raising more revenue required combining efforts to improve revenue administration and broaden the tax base. The authorities were confident the tax measures being implemented would ensure a tax collection achievement that was close to the initial target set in the budget. Moreover, because of uncertainty about tax collection, the authorities have set up a contingency category such that that if revenues turn out lower than targeted under the program, they would reduce expenditures to conserve borrowing space. The government remains committed to achieving the medium-term target for tax revenue. The overall increase in tax revenue mobilization of about 3½ percentage points of GDP through FY16/17 is in line with the original target under the PSI, once the weaker than envisaged economic growth is taken into account. In addition to better revenue administration, medium- term plans to improve revenue mobilization focus on mining and agriculture, as well as improving the regime for fixed property, with a combined, expected annual yield of 0.4 percent of GDP when implemented, all of which follow FAD TA recommendations. Implementation is expected according to the following timeline: On mining, the authorities aim to ring fence mining operations to limit cross subsidization, introduce regulations to support implementation of transfer pricing provisions, and clarify the process of the administration of royalties by end-January 2015. On property taxes, the first priority is to secure the transfer of tax collection rights from the local governments to the central government, by end-June 2015. The adjustment of property tax legislation will subsequently be made over time with initial steps involving the migration from a land lease fee to a fixed asset tax in Kigali. On agriculture, the authorities plan to conduct a benchmarking study based on the experience in other comparable countries before changing the tax code. Recommendations from IMF staff include withdrawing the tax exemption for agricultural incomes with turnover below 12 million RWF and improving the compliance of the SME presumptive tax regime for agricultural operations. Over the medium term, staff and the authorities agreed that the fiscal trajectory will likely be characterized by lower, stable budget deficits as the economy approaches its potential growth rate. The fiscal deficit is projected to decline to below 4 percent of GDP, in line with projected available aid from development partners and concessional resources. The authorities emphasized that the medium term path was also consistent with the objective of limiting crowding out so as to facilitate private sector investment projects. The cumulative output growth shortfall over the 13/14-16/17 period would lower the tax revenue ratio by about 0.75 percent of GDP based on a tax buoyancy coefficient of 0.15. A land lease fee is a simplified area based land tax whereas a fixed asset tax is a property tax levied on the market value of a fixed asset. Page 19 Monetary and Financial Sector Policies MEFP 21-25 The NBR saw merit in keeping the monetary stance unchanged in view of the inflation and growth outlook. In its view headline inflation had declined on account of temporary factors, driven by lower prices for food and fuel, and end-2014 inflation is expected to be about 3 percent. Going forward, inflation is expected to converge to the authorities’ medium term target of 5 percent as the economy nears its potential and the output gap narrows. The mission welcomed efforts aimed at strengthening the monetary framework and encouraged further reforms to improve the transmission mechanism. The NBR has implemented a series of measures aimed at absorbing excess liquidity and improving the interbank market (see IMF CR 14/185). Additionally, the modeling unit of the central bank has been strengthened to provide forward-looking model-based information to the monetary policy committee (See Box 7). To enhance its communication with market participants, the NBR has started publishing inflation reports to complement its semi-annual updates on monetary and financial sector developments. Structural impediments continue to limit the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism . The pass-through of the policy rate to market rates has been relatively slow. The National Bank of Rwanda partly attributes the inertia to high costs of banking and limited competition. The NBR pointed out that measures were being considered to improve the pool of funds available to commercial banks, including by tapping into the more liquid markets in the region, to reduce the cost of wholesale funding. Continued exchange rate flexibility is critical to preserve policy buffers. The NBR noted that foreign exchange interventions were primarily aimed at limiting volatility, but there was also a need to provide foreign exchange to support imports in a context where foreign exchange flows remained tight. Staff concurred, but emphasized that the NBR has limited room for maneuver now that reserve cover is at about 4 months of prospective imports, and it was critical to preserve reserve buffers. Exchange rate flexibility would also help preserve Rwanda’s competitiveness. The financial sector remains sound, but emerging vulnerabilities require close monitoring . The main financial soundness indicators have continued to improve following the deterioration at the peak of the aid-shock in 2013 (Table 5). Non-performing loans are now on a declining trend but a sector disaggregation reveals that high NPLs persist in the real estate and hotel sectors, reflecting an over-supply in some segments of both markets. Staff emphasized the need for close monitoring of the quality of credit and avoiding too rapid an expansion of credit at the level of households. The NBR responded that the level of NPLs was being monitored closely and was on the decline, reflecting the effectiveness of the macroprudential policies rolled out in 2013. They also noted that the ongoing bolstering of the regulatory and supervisory frameworks will allow the NBR to continue to support financial stability. Plans to consolidate the Umurenge SACCOs into a large cooperative bank by mid-2015 remain on track. The authorities have joined the Eastern and Southern Africa AML group and plan to bolster their AML/CFT framework based on the group’s assessment report. Page 20 Box 7. Explaining Money Target Misses in Rwanda The National Bank of Rwanda (NBR) has been working on strengthening its monetary policy framework and improving its understanding of the transmission mechanism. The use of a semi-structural macroeconomic model that links the monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation is part of this process. Such a model can be integrated into a wider set of processes and tools to prepare coherent macroeconomic forecasts, perform scenario analysis, and inform the monetary policy formulation process. The current exercise extends the framework in Charry, Gupta and Thakoor (2014) to incorporate an explicit role for money targets and target misses in analyzing monetary policy in Rwanda. This allows for a better understanding of the performance of the NBR, which targets money as its operational instrument. Figure 1 shows the target misses for base money in terms of YoY growth rates. Actual base money was below the target in all periods, with an exception for 2008Q1. This is consistent with the perception of the target as an upper limit for base money. One of the reasons for the deviations is that once the central bank sets the target, the economy is subject to a range of shocks (figure 2). These can be grouped into two categories. First, those arising from the actions of the NBR, such as deviations of money growth from targets consistent with implicit inflation targets. Second, unexpected shocks to money demand (resulting from changes in velocity, multiplier, real demand, or interest rates). Monetary policy and money demand shocks (particularly due to changes in velocity and multiplier) explain the bulk of the misses. Policy formulation in Rwanda has been adapted to the changing nature of money demand resulting in target misses. For program purposes, the reserve money target is set within a band to give the authorities greater space in the conduct of monetary policy. Figure 1: Targets have been often undershot Figure 2: Shocks explaining the bulk of deviations Supply Shocks Demand Shocks UIP Shocks MP Shocks MP Shocks -- Money Targets Velocity and Multiplier Shocks Money Demand Shocks Rest 2008:Q1 2008:Q3 2009:Q1 2009:Q3 2010:Q1 2010:Q3 2011:Q1 2011:Q3 2012:Q1 2012:Q3 2013:Q1 2013:Q3 Source: BNR data Source: IMF staff estimates References: Charry, L., Gupta, P., Thakoor V., (2014), “Introducing a semi-structural macroeconomic model for Rwanda”, IMF WP14/131 Portillo, R., Thakoor, V., Vlcek, J., “A macroeconomic model with money targeting for Rwanda”, IMF Working Paper (forthcoming) Efforts to develop the capital markets are ongoing. Measures include: the issuance of instruments with longer maturities, the quarterly issuance of government bonds, and ongoing collaboration with the IFC as regard issuing both regional bonds and developing technical expertise and infrastructure in Rwanda. Additionally, an automated clearing and settlement platform is now in place and the authorities are currently working on implementing an automated trading platform. Initiatives are also ongoing to connect the various markets in region. The authorities believe that the new instruments and infrastructure will provide a platform to deepen the capital markets in Rwanda. The ongoing implementation of the second Financial Sector Development Plan aims to tackle the Page 21 impediments to financial intermediation and increase saving and investment opportunities, thereby furthering financial inclusion.