The government’s Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2013-2018 (EDPRS2) priority areas include : economic transformation, rural development, productivity and youth employment, and accountable governance. Attaining middle-income country status would require Rwanda to sustain high growth rates over time. Staff argued that sustaining high growth over the long run is contingent on successfully transitioning to a private sector led and export driven economy, given the aid outlook. Rwanda’s ambitions hinge significantly on translating improvements in the investment climate into private investment. This requires tackling the high cost of doing business and bridging the infrastructure deficit. Overcoming the infrastructure constraints will require significant government investment and a careful prioritization of the investment program, exploring all available sources of concessional financing. Inclusive Growth The government emphasized its primary objective of lowering the poverty rate further. The authorities expect that continued emphasis on homegrown and adapted interventions, including by strengthening the provision of social services, especially to the rural poor, will maintain momentum in lowering poverty. Policies geared toward agriculture have accounted for the bulk of the decline in poverty and the government intends to maintain this strategy (Box 2). Notwithstanding some uncertainty about the extent of improvement in yields in recent years, there has been a clear improvement in the productivity of the agricultural sector and agricultural statistics are now better able to capture these trends (Box 3). Page 10 Box 2. The “Complete Farmer” Approach to Inclusive Growth Rwanda has made significant inroads in poverty reduction between 2000 and 2011 (Figure 1). Other dimensions of inclusive growth (average consumption by income levels (Figure 2), education, health, and living standards) have also shown a marked improvement. Much of this progress has been achieved through a targeted approach to poverty reduction, with a particular emphasis on agriculture through the “complete farmer” approach (Figure 3). Figure 1: Poverty has been on a downward trend d h Extreme Poverty Poverty Source: Rwandan authorities Figure 2: Consumption has increased most among the Figure 3: Agriculture has played a significant role in poorest percentiles poverty reduction between 2001 and 2011 Other Factors and Unexplained Part Increased Agricultural Production Non-Farm Wage Employment Non-Farm Self Employment Decreased Dependency Ratio Increased Agricultural Commercialization Source: Rwandan authorities Source: World Bank Policies that have contributed to improved productivity and output can be grouped into four categories: Improved access to inputs and markets : The initial policies focused on improving access to fertilizer and seeds through a government subsidy program. This program was implemented at a relatively low cost (about RWF10 bn at its peak) and is being phased out. Additionally, the area under irrigation has been gradually increased and regional markets have been set up to allow farmers to deliver their products in a timely manner. Community-based models : The decentralized models focus on educating farmers on land use and improve capacity building at the grassroots. Going forward, land reform will encourage farmers to regroup into cooperatives to benefit from economies of scale. Page 11 Box 2. The “Complete Farmer” Approach to Inclusive Growth (concluded) Private sector engagement : The private sector has been allowed to play a greater role in the provision of agricultural inputs and auxiliary services. These include post-harvest management and optimizing on seasonal factors. Additionally, commercial agreements between smaller farmers and the private sector has provided farmers with a readily available market, while allowing the private sector to have easy access to raw materials for commercialization and processing. Financial inclusion : All the above programs are aligned with access to finance initiatives run by banks. The private sector has also started schemes whereby farmers are provided with financial support at the beginning of the season in return of trading their output. Box 3. Agricultural Statistics in Rwanda Most of the countries in East Africa continue to rely on the routine data collection system of the Ministry of Agriculture–where agricultural extension officers try to collect data on area cultivated and yield rates for major crop types. The number of extension officers is inadequate to collect data from millions of agricultural households, and they do not have the statistical training or resources to collect the data effectively, resulting in poor estimates of crop production. A few countries use the Crop Assessment Survey (CAS) developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for food security purposes to try and estimate crop production for national accounts. However, the CAS is conducted prior to harvest and measures food crops still growing in the field rather than actual production. As a result, the yield rates and output are generally overestimated. In 2012, the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda and the Ministry of Agriculture agreed to replace the CAS with a continuous Seasonal Agriculture Survey (SAS) that would provide the data needed to assess food security as well as for compilation of national accounts. The SAS is based on a land census developed using satellite imaging to map all arable land in Rwanda at time of planting. Multiple frame sampling is used, combining both land area frame sampling and list frame sampling. The area frame is used to sample small scale farmers, while the list frame is used for large scale farmers. The use of arable land rather than households for sampling results in better estimation of crops production. The survey collects production and gross capital formation data from all operators using the sampled land and these data are complemented by information gathered from yearly updated list frame of large scale farmers. For each season, two interviews are conducted – at planting and harvest time. Plots are demarcated to provide the exact area for each of the multiple crops grown on the same parcel of land. The operator has to report inputs for each crop area and output taken from each crop area; as well as providing information on erosion, salinity, anti-erosion measures, gross fixed capital formation, changes in inventories, and the socio- demographic characteristics of the operators. Data on horticulture and other perennial crops are collected annually. The data on total land planted by region from the maps is then used to rate up the sample data to get aggregated data on area planted and production at the regional and national level by crop type. A separate module is used to collect detailed data on livestock and livestock products from the village nearest to the land sampled. Data are produced for national accounts as well as food security assessment purposes. As a result of implementing the continuous SAS, Rwanda now has the most accurate and reliable agricultural statistics in the East African region. Page 12 Demographics and Employment Harnessing the potential provided by Rwanda’s demographic transition requires significant non-agricultural job creation to absorb the rapidly growing labor force (Boxes 4 and 5) Staff noted that the transformation of the Rwandan economy had been more rapid than many others on the continent with a larger decline in the share of agriculture in employment. However, most of the shift in employment had gone into low value-added services. With the large demographic surge ahead, it was necessary to develop policies to facilitate the growth of household enterprises and small and medium sized businesses, especially given that the ability of the agricultural sector in Rwanda to act as an employer of last resort was increasingly limited. The authorities are putting in place a five year employment plan specifically to facilitate the creation of non-agricultural jobs. The government’s new employment strategy has a three-pronged focus based on skills development, the fostering of entrepreneurship for SMEs, and support for household enterprises. Skills development is being enhanced through a revamp of the government’s numerous labor training schemes and the introduction of an informal apprenticeship system providing master trainers and craftsmen the tools to transfer hands-on skills. The government is also designing an online national knowledge management system to improve information sharing and coordination to improve the match between employer needs and workforce skills. SMEs are being targeted through practical entrepreneurship and mentoring and coaching by “business development advisors” and better access to finance and business services. The household enterprise sector is being cultivated through the set-up of sector specialists in all districts that can pinpoint successful projects and help provide access to finance. Staff supported the authorities’ plans for employment and gender equality. On employment, the development of the household enterprise sector is key since this is the sector where the bulk of new jobs would be created Recent concerns expressed by the World Bank regarding current conditions for household enterprises in Rwanda were being addressed through the employment plan (provision of public space for household enterprises in Kigali and an impact assessment of the effects of local taxes). On closing the gender gap, Rwanda has instituted an approach that involves affirmative action to correct gender-related imbalances, and gender main- streaming, and integrate a gender perspective in policies, activities, and budgets in all sectors. As a result, Rwanda has been able to close the gender gap in educational attainment at primary and secondary school, and increase substantially women representation in government senior level positions (Box 6). Also, the overall female labor force participation is high, particularly in the rural areas where women mostly work in subsistence farming. Household enterprises are micro enterprises with at most one to three employees. Page 13 Box 4. Harnessing the Demographic Dividend Rwanda’s projected population of 12.4 million in 2015 is expected to double by 2050 and nearly treble by 2100 (Figure 1). Its working age population (WAP) is also projected to increase from 7 million to 16 million by 2050. The share of its WAP will increase from about 56 percent to peak at about 66 percent in 2070. Figure 1: Population will triple by 2100 Figure 2: Projected demographic dividend 65+ s U s G With demographics WAS Constant demographics (WAS =50%) Dividend= 1266 USD Year 2070 f Source: IMF staff based on UN Population Database Source: IMF staff estimates Rwanda’s demographic transition provides a window of opportunity, which if properly tapped can generate a “demographic dividend”. Such transitions contributed to the “Asian Miracle”, but there are also countries where such opportunities passed by without any meaningful progress as countries failed to put in place appropriate policies. Asia’s more favorable economic outcomes have been attributed to stronger focus on human and physical capital, higher labor participation rates, and an initial emphasis on labor intensive export-led growth that created jobs and supported a transition into sectors with higher TFP. A recent study by Drummond, Thakoor and Yu (2014) finds that the median African country with an initial per capita income level of around US$550 in 2010 can expect to benefit from a demographic dividend of about US$1,350 by 2100. The resulting GDP per capita of US$3,865 (in constant 2005 terms) is higher by about 56 percent. Using the same approach for Rwanda suggests GDP per capita by 2070, could be higher by about 70 percent. While GDP per capita is expected to peak at around US$1,750 in the baseline, factoring in demographics causes GDP per capita to rise to US$3,000 by 2070. The projected increase in Rwanda’s working age population can be transformational, but can also be a source of social risks, particularly if the economy does not create sufficient jobs to absorb those joining the labor market. Key factors to harnessing the demographic dividend include investment in human capital and from the development of new sectors beyond agriculture. Reference: Drummond, P., Thakoor, V., Yu, S., (2014), Africa Rising: Harnessing the Demographic Dividend , IMF WP 14/143: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp14143.pdf Page 14 Box 5. Rwanda: Employment in Rwanda Rwanda has been successful over the past decade in moving people out of agriculture as a first step in the process of structural transformation. Among a sample of sub-Saharan African economies, its agricultural employment share has fallen the most, but, as is common among SSA countries, most of the displaced workers have ended up in low value-added services rather than industry. It does however boast a higher fraction of wage workers in industry compared to most other non-resource LICs and the recent rise in the share of wage workers is projected to continue through 2020 as shown in Figure 1 (see Fox et al. 2013 for details on the methodology). Figure 1. Employment Distribution Figure 2. Selected Countries: Labor Productivity and Changes in Employment Shares, 2000–10 (In percent) f LIC household enterprises Agriculture h s m m g h C LIC wage services LIC wage industry LIC Unemployed KHM KHM GHA SEN TZA RWA VNM BGD ZMB BGD CMR GHA VNM UGA BFA TZA RWA MOZ UGA BFA CMR MOZ Agriculture Industry Services CMR MOZ ZMB UGA ZMB SEN BFA BGD SEN GHA VNM RWA TZA KHM Sectoral labor productiivity relative to average (initial period) Source: IMF staff estimates based on household surveys Source: IMF staff estimates based on household surveys Figure 2 shows how Sub-Saharan African economies have been transforming over the past decade. The figure plots changes in the sector employment share (y axis) against the level of labor productivity in each sector relative to the average for each country (initial period, x axis). For most countries workers have moved out of agriculture (lower left quadrant) into services (upper right quadrant) with a slight increase in the industry employment share for a few countries. This experience contrasts with that of the low income Asian countries (Cambodia and Vietnam) that have succeeded in raising the industry employment share significantly. Reference: L. Fox et al. (2013) Africa has work to do: employment prospects in the new century , IMF WP 13/201 Page 15 Box 6. Closing the Gender Gap in Rwanda The Government of Rwanda has established a two-pronged approach to gender equality : (i) the gender mainstreaming approach, which includes integrating a gender perspective into policies, activities, and budgets in all sectors; and (ii) the affirmative action approach that seeks to correct gender imbalances. The 2003 Constitution has enshrined the principle of gender equality by establishing 30 percent quotas for women representation in all decision making structures. The 1999 Civil Code and the 2013 law governing land ensure women equality in terms of land ownership and inheritance. As a result, Rwanda was classified 7th (out of 136 countries) in the in the rankings of the World Economic Forum’s 2014 Global Gender Gap Report. Three indicators measure how Rwanda has been able to close the gender gap: Educational attainment : Rwanda has been able to close the gender gap in education at primary and secondary levels. Net attendance rates in primary education are even slightly higher for girls than for boys (92 percent and 90 percent, respectively). Completion rate of primary school is also higher for girls than for boys (82 percent compared with 75 percent, respectively). The net attendance rates at secondary level drop significantly for both sexes, but remain very close (10 percent and 11 percent for girls and boys, respectively). Employment and earnings The female labor participation (FLFP) rate at 86 percent is slightly higher than for men (84). Women continue to provide the bulk of labor in the agriculture sector, mostly working on subsistence farming (75 percent for women compared with about 60 percent of men). Almost one third of Rwandan households are headed by women, of which about 90 percent work in agriculture, compared with about 60 percent of male heads. While about one third of men are engaged in non-farm wage activities, only around 8 percent of women gain wages off farm. In fact, women are four times more likely to work as unpaid family workers. Women are overrepresented in the informal sector and among the poor, particularly head of households. Political empowerment : The gender gap in political representation has narrowed, and female representation in senior positions has increased. In 2013, Rwanda had the world’s highest female participation in the two chambers of Parliament at 53 percent (63 percent in Parliament). About 30 percent of Ministers were females; women made up of half of the Supreme Court justices and about 40 percent of judges. At the village levels, women are mostly represented in local councils. Women are almost equally affected by poverty as men . During 2006-11, poverty fell at about the same rate for male and female-headed households. The average number of children per woman dropped from 6.1 in 2005 to 4.6 in 2010 and Rwanda’s fertility rate is now well below the Sub-Saharan average of 5.1. Page 16 Box 6. Closing the Gender Gap in Rwanda (concluded) Figure 1: Ratio of Female to Male Net Primary Enrolment (in percent) Figure 2: Ratio of Female to Male Net Secondary Enrolment (in percent) Rwanda: Gender Parity in Education SSA World SSA World Source: Rwanda, EICV 2 and 3 World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013 Source: Rwanda, EICV 2 and 3 World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013 Figure 3: Net Female Primary Enrolment Rate (in percent) Figure 4: Net Female Secondary Enrolment Rate (in percent) SSA World SSA World Source: Rwanda, EICV 2 and 3 World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013 Source: Rwanda, EICV 2 and 3 World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013 Female Labor Force Participation Rate (FLPR) (percent) Employment by Key Sectors (percent) Agriculture (women) Agriculture (men) Non-agriculture (women) Non-agriculture (men) SSA World Source: Rwanda, EICV,1, 2, and 3 World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013 Source: Rwanda, EICV,1, 2, and 3 World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2013 Rwanda: Females in High Political Positions Parliament: Chamber of Deputies and Senate Female Male Ministers Female Male Judges Female Male Mayors Female Male Source: NISR, Statistical Year Book 2013 Page 17