Growth is recovering and core inflation remains subdued . Real GDP expanded by around 2 percent in fiscal year 2013/14 (July to June), supported by reconstruction activities, a rapid expansion in commerce and transportation services related to preparations for the United Nations Small Island Developing States (SIDS) conference, which took place in September 2014, and a recovery in agriculture (Figure 1). Inflation rose recently on the back of higher food prices, but underlying inflation (excluding food, transport and communication) remains stable at around 2 percent. Page 11 Box 1. Samoa: Effect of Recent Natural Disasters on Debt Mean Pacific Island small states Frequency of Occurrence of Natural Disasters (In percent) Fiji Solomon Islands Vanuatu Caribbean small states Tonga Micronesia Tuvalu Kiribati Marshall Islands Palau 1/ Ratio of number of years with natural disaster to the number of years during 1960- Sources: Center for Research on Epidemiology for Disasters, International Disaster Database; IMF, staff estimates. Using a synthetic control approach indicates that the tsunami in 2009 was responsible for an increase in debt of 10 percent of GDP, while the recent cyclone in 2012 led to another 5 percent of GDP increase. On average, Samoa has been hit by a major natural disaster once every five years. Recent natural disasters in Samoa required reconstruction costs of 40 percent of GDP (23 percent of GDP for the tsunami in 2009 and 17 percent of GDP for cyclone Evan in 2012). A synthetic control approach can evaluate the impact of these natural disasters on external debt. This approach uses a panel of countries that have not been hit by natural disasters, but have similar observable characteristics, to create a synthetic comparator or control. By comparing changes in the external debt-to-GDP ratio between Samoa and the synthetic control, the methodology can assess the impact of natural disasters. The results indicate the two natural disasters added about 15 percent of GDP to Samoa’s external debt. The gap of the external debt–to-GDP ratio between Samoa and the synthetic control hovers around 10 percentage points after the tsunami in 2009 and widens to 15 percent after the cyclone. This suggests that, in order to create a cushion for another natural disaster, Samoa’s debt target should aim at 40 percent of GDP over the longer term, given the authorities’ medium-term debt ceiling of 50 percent of GDP. (treatment) Synthetic Samoa (control) External Debt to GDP Ratio (In percent) 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Note: In fiscal year (July/June). Prepared by Kazuaki Washimi. See Cabezon, Hunter, Tumbarello and Wu, “Strengthening Macro-Fiscal Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the Small States of the Pacific,” IMF Working Paper (forthcoming). For the methodology, see Abadie et al (2007). Page 12 The external current account deficit widened as the economy recovered, but reserves remain adequate . Following cyclone Evan, the external current account widened to 8 percent of GDP in 2013/14 as imports rose while exports lagged following damage to infrastructure and crops from the cyclone (Figure 2). At the same time tourism and remittances remained largely flat (although they have begun to pick up recently). Foreign inflows of capital grants and direct investment helped boost reserves, which rose to 4 months of prospective imports of goods and non-factor services in 2014. The authorities have run a very accommodative macroeconomic policy to cushion the effects of the global financial crisis and two natural disasters . The fiscal deficit deteriorated sharply after 2008 and has remained above 5 percent (except in 2012/13). For 2013/14, tax revenue increased by 1 percent of GDP thanks to improved administration, but expenditure remained above historical levels due to reconstruction efforts and preparations for the SIDS conference. As a result, the fiscal deficit reached 5.3 percent of GDP in 2013/14 (GFS 2001) (Figure 3). Monetary policy has also remained accommodative, with the policy rate at the zero lower bound since 2010. Samoa’s exchange rate, which is pegged against a basket of major trading partner currencies, has remained broadly stable. PFIs have become increasingly important suppliers of credit . Despite ample liquidity, commercial bank credit growth was negative throughout most of 2012-14, as banks were repairing their balance sheets after natural disasters. As a result, the government directed PFIs to refinance SOE loans with commercial banks. More recently, bank credit has recovered due to a number of large one-off transactions, but underlying growth remains anemic (Figure 4). PFIs have also supplied credit to the economy for reconstruction. They control about 40 percent of all credit to the economy and 42 percent of all assets in the financial system. While it is difficult to identify a relationship between growth and bank credit, when PFI credit is included there is evidence that overall credit has supported GDP growth in the period since the Global Financial Crisis (Box 2). PFIs have a large and growing role Underlying commercial bank loans 1/ PFI loans Credit to the economy 1/ Excludes one-off transactions. Credit growth (Year-on-year percentage change) Underlying commercial bank loan growth 1/ PFI loan growth 1/ Excludes one-off transactions. Page 13 Box 2. Samoa: Contribution of Finance to Growth A vector auto- regression analysis including real credit and growth points to the importance of PFI credit in the recovery. A financial conditions index seems to perform as a leading indicator of real activity. Total Credit Growth and Real GDP Growth (Year-on-year percent change) A vector auto-regression (VAR) analysis is estimated to disentangle the effects of each financial variable on growth Casual empiricism suggests that there is a relationship between total credit growth (commercial banks and PFIs) and real GDP growth. To investigate this relationship further, this analysis estimates a VAR with bank credit, PFI credit (both in real terms) and real GDP and the real effective exchange rate (REER). All the variables are in terms of the year-on-year percent change. tsunami cyclone real GDP real credit growth The VAR analysis suggests the PFI credit helped substitute for bank credit and support growth after a 2012 cyclone . The Granger causality test suggests both PFI credit and bank credit Granger-cause growth, while REER does not. Historical decomposition of growth indicates PFI credit has contributed to growth after Cyclone Evan, making up for weak bank credit growth. A second approach uses a financial conditions index (FCI) to examine the relationship between finance and real GDP growth . This analysis applies principal component analysis to identify an unobservable common factor from a group of financial indicators, including bank credit, PFI credit, interest rate spreads (lending rate minus policy rate), and the nominal effective exchange rate. The estimated FCI clearly shows the loosening of financial conditions starting in 2008 in response to the global financial crisis and subsequent external shocks. It tracks well with GDP growth and has the largest correlation at a 6-month lead after 2006. Historical Decomposion of Growth (Year-on-year percentage) ‐ tsunami cyclone Others Bank credit Real GDP REER PFI credit Financial Conditions Index (Year-on-year percent change) accommodative tsunami cyclone restrictive Real GDP FCI (right axis) Prepared by Kazuaki Washimi. The Cholesky ordering is REER, real GDP, PFI credit and bank credit with a lag of two quarters. The results do not change qualitatively with a different ordering. Real interest rate is not included, as the impulse response does not produce economically meaningful results. The choice of variables is based on Osorio et al. (IMF WP/11/170). Samoa does not have any stock market indices given there is no capital market. Page 14