Public Financial Institutions Policies are needed to contain the risk of contingent liabilities to the public finances from PFIs, and to redesign their role to support private financial markets. The authorities have used PFIs to supply credit for reconstruction in the face of two major natural disasters. But in some cases PFIs compete directly with commercial banks in key sectors such as tourism, housing and consumer lending, inhibiting the development of local finance (Box 3). The asset quality of the Development Bank of Samoa (DBS) has deteriorated significantly in recent years, and failure of DBS could constitute an important risk for public debt, growth and financial stability. Staff analysis suggests that a failure of PFIs could add up to 7 percent of GDP to the public debt (mostly from liabilities in the DBS to the government or explicitly guaranteed by the government), and further defaults among SOEs could add another 17 percent of GDP, for a total of 24 percent of GDP. The FSAP identified the following recommendations to contain risks and enhance the role of PFIs (Appendix II): Formulate a coherent policy framework for the PFIs. The role of PFIs should be redesigned to provide development finance that is complementary to, rather than in competition with, commercial bank products. In the process, weaknesses in asset quality and performance should be addressed. In particular,  Development Bank of Samoa (DBS) . A large part of DBS’ loan portfolio has been restructured, and the quality of assets is uncertain. To avoid further losses, new lending outside of its original mandate should be halted, and a comprehensive restructuring of the bank should be initiated. The current range and nature of operations should be narrowed in line with its original charter to finance agricultural production and SMEs. In addition, urgent reforms need to be put in place to address its operational inefficiencies and financial weakness, including improved credit and risk management, strengthening recovery procedures and accounting practices.  Samoa National Provident Fund (SNPF) . The risk of insolvency in the SNPF is low, as its lending is covered by member contributions. Nevertheless, the high level of borrowing by members depletes pension savings, which runs counter to the purpose of the fund. The fund should gradually reduce lending against contributions, and diversify its investment portfolio, including by increasing offshore investments. SNPF should also seek technical assistance to conduct a comprehensive review of its actuarial soundness, including the investment of its assets. Page 16 Box 3. Samoa: Public Financial Institutions PFIs have been growing rapidly and moving increasingly into areas where they compete with commercial banks. Asset quality has deteriorated and for some, liabilities are to government institutions (central bank) or government guaranteed. Public Financial Institutions (PFIs) in Samoa have been growing rapidly and make up a substantial part of the financial sector. Among the PFIs, the Samoa National Provident Fund (SNPF) and Development Bank of Samoa (DBS) are the largest in terms of assets but both Unit Trust of Samoa (UTOS) and the Samoa Housing Corporation (SHC) have been expanding rapidly. Samoa: Public Financial Institutions, FY 2014 Total assets (% of GDP) Share in financial system (%) Development Bank of Samoa (DBS). The DBS was established in 1974 to provide development assistance to agriculture and SMEs. The DBS on-lends funds from international institutions but has recently been funded through credit lines from the central bank to make loans for reconstruction, as a policy response to natural disasters. A large part of DBS’ portfolio is concentrated in tourism, but it has loans in every sector. Most of these loans were extended with subsidized interest rates. The quality of DBS’ portfolio seems substantially impaired, and it has offered a one year moratorium on interest and principal payments to a large proportion of its clients. Gross loans&investments (% of GDP) Borrowing (% of GDP) CAR Net profit 1/ NPLs (% of total loans) ROA (%) 2/ Return of capital (%) 3/ Source: Annual Reports of PFIs, FSAP questionnaire, and staff calculations 1/ For SNPF the net surplus from investment income is shown. 2/ Ratio of net profits to total assets. 3/ Ratio of net profits to capital and reserves. DBS SHC SNPF UTOS Samoa National Provident Fund (SNPF). The SNPF was established in 1972 as a compulsory retirement savings scheme in which a minimum 5 percent contribution is paid both by employees and employers. Public employees and those in private formal employment contribute, covering 78 percent of the formally employed population. The SNPF concentrates on loans to its members, for which it has natural collateral in their contributions. These loans are provided for up to 50 percent of members’ contributions. About 60 percent of its assets comprise loans to its members, and most members borrow up to the entire 50 percent allowed. The SNPF also lends to other PFIs. Unit Trust of Samoa (UTOS). UTOS is an open-ended private unit trust established in 2010 to provide opportunities to small investors to participate in privatized SOEs, in particular the privatization of the state telecommunications monopoly. In the absence of further privatizations, UTOS’ activities were diversified into a financing vehicle for SOEs: it issues capital notes to SOEs, who in turn borrow from the Trust, backed by a limited general government guarantee. By intermediating funds among SOEs and maintaining a leveraged position the Trust has generated high returns to unit holders. Samoa Housing Corporation (SHC). The SHC was established in 1989 to facilitate access to housing and is also funded by the central bank with government guarantees. This box is largely based on the FSAP Technical Note on Public Financial Institutions (forthcoming). Page 17  Unit Trust of Samoa (UTOS) . In the near-term, the mandate of the Trust needs to be clarified and its increased risk to unit holders from leveraged positions needs to be fully disclosed. The government should decide whether to convert UTOS into a policy bank or deleverage it and continue as a conventional mutual fund. Going forward, credit risk management and accounting practices need to be improved. Enhancing the transparency and governance of the PFIs with improved accounting and disclosure practices. An important first step will be to strengthen accounting, reporting and disclosure standards making PFIs IFRS compliant. Incorporating the PFIs under the supervisory and regulatory framework of the central bank. All PFIs have recently come under the supervision of the Central Bank of Samoa (CBS), but prudential and regulatory guidelines need to be issued for UTOS and Samoa Housing Corporation (SHC), with UTOS being supervised as a bank. The CBS should improve the collection and verification of data from PFIs and deepen off-site analysis, including through stress-testing. Refraining from conducting further policy lending through PFIs not financed directly through the budget This would enhance transparency and reduce the risk for the balance sheet of the CBS. Authorities’ views . The authorities recognized the risks in the public financial institutions, but see them (particularly DBS and UTOS) as instruments to supply credit for reconstruction during crisis, and to lower interest rates. The authorities agreed with the need to reorient DBS’ lending to the agricultural sector and SMEs. They also noted that there are plans to reduce the ratio of lending against contributions at the SNPF from 50 percent to 40 percent over the next two years, and to diversify its investments. The new Ministry of Public Enterprises, planned this year, will provide an opportunity to review governance and reporting of PFI operations. The CBS is moving quickly to improve financial oversight of PFIs, including through the issuance and revision of prudential regulations (particularly the SHC and UTOS) based on FSAP recommendations, and the conduct of on-site inspections this year. Commercial Banks Improving regulation and supervision of commercial banks would reduce the risk of an adverse feedback from another external shock . Banks have high and rising NPLs, and are vulnerable to shocks, according to stress-tests conducted by the FSAP. There is also significant uncertainty about the underlying data on asset quality and provisioning. These vulnerabilities could lead to a major credit squeeze on the economy and a bailout by government in the event of another natural disaster. Policies to address these vulnerabilities are thus critical for macro-financial stability. The FSAP found that financial oversight, including regulation and supervision, needs to be strengthened. The most important recommendations in this regard include (Appendix II): Page 18 Improving capacity for banking supervision and regulation. The CBS should hire additional staff for financial oversight, as planned, and move to implement risk based supervision. Conducting regular on-site supervision. Priority should be given in the short-term to local banks. The CBS should conduct an asset quality review of potentially vulnerable banks, possibly through appointing an external assessor. Upgrading off-site supervision . Improving the collection, verification and analysis of bank data for off-site supervision purposes. Authorities’ views. The authorities appreciate the FSAP, and are taking steps to implement its recommendations. They took concerns about potential weakness in the banking sector seriously and are planning to conduct on-site inspections this year. The CBS is also taking steps to modernize its legal and regulatory framework for banking supervision, and reform the banking resolution and crisis management framework. A review of the legal framework was completed and a technical assistance mission was fielded in April, 2015. The authorities have also requested technical assistance for on-site supervision, prudential data collection and verification, stress testing, bank resolution and crisis management, and a program of technical assistance in these areas is being designed in coordination with the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center (PFTAC).