Samoa is one of the most remote Pacific islands, subject to natural disasters. It is dependent on tourism, remittances and development aid. It has a strong record of macroeconomic management, and before the global financial crisis was one of the fastest growing Pacific island countries. A tsunami in September 2009 and cyclone Evan in December 2012 caused major destruction, and prompted the government to request disbursements under the Rapid-Access Component of the Exogenous Shock Facility in 2010 and the Rapid Credit Facility in 2013. Reconstruction is estimated to have cost 40 percent of GDP and added about 15 percent of GDP to Samoa’s external debt (Box 1). Macroeconomic stability has been maintained in the face of external shocks and growth is recovering, but risks have accumulated. Debt (mostly external) rose rapidly from 30 percent of GDP in 2008 to 55 percent in 2014, well above the authorities’ medium-term target of 50 percent of GDP. In addition, a subsidized lending program through the public financial institutions (PFIs) and government guaranteed debt in the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) represent contingent liabilities for the public debt. A recent financial sector assessment program (FSAP) mission identified vulnerabilities that could add to these risks. The mission found that commercial banks are liquid and report high capitalization, but non-performing loans are rising, and part of the banking system is vulnerable to further shocks. The mission also found that some PFIs are vulnerable to shocks due to low asset quality and weak loan portfolios. Any distress in local commercial banks could require public funds, further impacting the government debt. Policies are broadly in line with past Fund advice, although implementation was interrupted by cyclone Evan in 2013. A fiscal consolidation was initiated in 2012/13, but was delayed by a rise in expenditures related to reconstruction, and the public debt rose. The authorities have now retaken plans for a fiscal consolidation to reduce the public debt. The exchange rate has remained stable and monetary policy has supported the recovery. Structural reforms have moved forward in some areas, including in the management of public finances and SOE reforms, and some progress has been made towards laying the groundwork for the use of customary lands as collateral.