Fiscal Policy Samoa’s fiscal framework is anchored on a target debt ratio of 50 percent of GDP specified in its medium-term debt management strategy. Given the vulnerabilities Samoa faces, staff proposed a lower long-term public debt target of 40 percent of GDP, but supported the authorities’ stated goal of reducing public debt to 50 percent of GDP by 2020. An updated Debt Sustainability Analysis (Annex I) indicates that Samoa has moved from a high to a moderate risk of debt distress. However, including contingent liabilities from PFIs and SOEs of 24 percent of GDP mentioned above, the overall risk to public debt sustainability is higher. The authorities’ budget and medium-term fiscal framework includes a fiscal consolidation to reach their debt target . The approach is based on sustaining recent improvements in revenue administration and bringing current expenditure to pre-crisis levels, mainly through the containment of personnel costs (limited to 45 percent of current expenditure), while still keeping capital spending above its historical level to support growth. For 2014/15, current expenditures related to reconstruction (required to restore public health and education services after the cyclone) will be reduced as reconstruction is completed. A significant component of capital expenditure will be investments in rebuilding the airport, financed by a loan from China of about 6 percent of GDP, which is expected to be disbursed evenly over three years. Under this scenario, the overall fiscal deficit would fall from 3½ percent of GDP in 2014/15 to around 1½ percent of GDP in 2016/17 (GFS 2001 format), and then to around ½ percent of GDP in the medium term. This would be sufficient to bring the debt ratio to 50 percent of GDP by 2020. This is also consistent with Page 19 a strategy of running primary surpluses in non-disaster years to finance periodic disaster costs. Implementing further reforms identified in the recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, including non-tax revenue reform, budgeting, accounting and reporting, and managing fiscal risks from SOEs, will be important to support the authorities’ fiscal consolidation. Samoa: Underlying Fiscal Balance, 2008/09–2016/17 2013/14 2014/15 Budgeted Revenue (net of grants) Expenditure (net of grants) Capital expenditure (net of grants) Current expenditure (net of grants) Overall balance (net of grants) Sources: Data provided by the Samoan authorities and Fund staff estimates. Care should be taken to ensure that consolidation does not affect spending on social priorities. While extreme poverty is rare in Samoa, there are challenges related to basic needs poverty, non-communicable diseases and the quality of education (Box 4). Authorities’ views. The authorities concurred with the 40 percent of GDP long-term debt target and the intermediate goal of bringing debt to 50 percent of GDP by 2020 through a gradual fiscal consolidation. They pointed out that personnel expenditures were already below their medium term fiscal framework’s target of 45 percent of current expenditure. Planned implementation of changes in non-tax revenue in 2015/16 (implementing fees for some public services) and a review of the VAT could also support revenue. Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate A supportive monetary policy is appropriate as long as underlying inflationary pressures are absent. The policy rate has been at the lower bound for over four years, and bank liquidity is high, but the transmission mechanism for monetary policy is weak due to a lack of competition in commercial banks, weakness in some bank balance sheets, and structural impediments to finance. As the economy recovers it will be important to improve the functioning of monetary policy by reforms in these areas, particularly improving bank regulation and supervision, and making customary lands more accessible for use as collateral (discussed below). It will also be important to mop up excess liquidity and raise interest rates. Staff analysis and other indicators suggest no significant misalignment of the currency (Box 5) . The current exchange rate peg against a basket of major trading partner currencies has served Samoa well, and reserves are adequate under the standard metric. There are signs that tourism and some agricultural exports are recovering, and the decline in oil and other commodity Page 20 prices is expected to support the external position in the near term. Nevertheless, given Samoa’s vulnerability to natural disasters, a strong external position with higher reserve buffers would Box 4. Samoa: Recent Social Developments and Challenges While extreme poverty is rare, basic needs poverty affects about one quarter of the population. Pressing social challenges include maintaining public services for the poor, addressing non- communicable diseases and improving the quality of education. Samoa is in the process of updating its information on poverty. The latest estimates are from the 2008 household income and expenditure survey (HIES). The survey was updated in 2014, but the results are still in the process of being analyzed. While extreme poverty is rare, 26.7 percent of the population experienced basic needs poverty in 2008, with the incidence highest in the capital Apia and lowest in the less populated main island of Sava’i. Samoa faces a number of important social challenges that need to be addressed to continue to reduce basic needs poverty and improve the inclusiveness of growth Promoting the quality and accessibility of public services to the poor. The poorest 40 percent of Samoa’s population rely heavily on publicly-funded health and education services, which account for about one-third of total government spending. Ensuring fiscal sustainability and rebuilding buffers will be important to ensure these social expenditures are insulated from future external shocks. Addressing the growing prevalence of non-communicable diseases (NCDs). NCDs (such as diabetes, heart disease and stroke) create significant social costs and account for 70 percent of all deaths in Samoa. An effective strategy to tackle NCDs will include reorienting public expenditure towards prevention, curtailing the consumption of food and drinks linked to obesity, and scaling up the Package of Essential Non-Communicable Disease Interventions for Primary Health Care in Low Resource Settings (PEN Package), which is currently being piloted in a sample of district hospitals. Improving the quality of education. Samoa has made significant gains in education. But, the government’s Education Sector Plan notes that “at all levels, the quality of provision is the major problem”. Improving the quality of education will require implementing professional standards, increasing training and on-going support to teachers, and providing incentive for teachers to improve qualifications. The information for this box was provided by the World Bank. Page 21 Box 5. Samoa: External Sector Assessment Staff’s overall assessment is that there is no significant indication of a misalignment of the current exchange rate and reserves are adequate. Nevertheless, a higher level of reserves would provide a valuable cushion in the case of another natural disaster. A CGER assessment for Samoa presents mixed results . While the macro balance approach indicates 18 percent undervaluation, other approaches show a range of 1- 19 percent overvaluation. The equilibrium exchange rate approach (ERER) suggests no significant misalignment. Other indicators point to no significant misalignment . The medium-term current account deficit is expected to be close to 5 percent of GDP. Export growth and tourism are expected to recover as reconstruction is completed and investments in hotels and the airport mature. Samoa is a net importer of fuel and the recent decline in oil prices is expected to improve the trade balance by about 3½ percent of GDP. Capital grants associated with reconstruction will also decline in the medium-term, but foreign direct investment flows will remain at their current level. Reserves are adequate by the standard metric Reserves are slightly above the optimal level of 4 months of imports of goods and services estimated by the optimal reserve approach. The results depend on the long-term opportunity cost of holding reserves, which is assumed conservatively at 3.8 percent based on the long-term average real bank lending rate. This box was prepared by Farid Talishli. Exchange Rate Assessment: Baseline Results 1/ (In percent) CA/GDP REER Norm Underlying 1/ Overvaluation MB approach 2/ ERER approach 3/ ES approach PPP approach Source: Fund staff estimates. 1/ Staff projection over 2019 2/ Based on a semi-elasticity of the CA/GDP with respect to the REER of -0.16. Underlying CA excludes imports related to grants. 3/ Overvaluation is assessed relative to 2014 Q3. ERER Approach Real Effective Exchange Rate 1/ (2010=100) Actual Equilibrium 1/ The shaded area represents the 90 percent confidence interval of the equilibrium real exchange rate estimate. Samoa's reserves are slightly above estimated optimal levels (In months of imports) Current level of reserves (4.3) Cost of holding reserves, percent Page 22 provide greater resilience. A first line of action is to support cost competitiveness in tradable goods and tourism through comprehensive structural reforms. Staff also discussed the possibility of exchange rate devaluation in case of an additional external shock, but noted this would have to take place in the context of strong domestic policies and a robust financial system. While a devaluation would improve price competitiveness, it could have adverse effects on debt sustainability, since over 90 percent of the public debt is in foreign currency. Authorities’ views. The authorities consider that current monetary policy is broadly appropriate, and stand ready to adjust interest rates and liquidity as necessary. They broadly agreed that structural impediments to finance affected the transmission of monetary policy, but noted that high concentration in banking posed a particular challenge. They viewed the current level of reserves as adequate, and noted the countercyclical role of grants and remittances during past crises. They were willing to consider adjustments in the exchange rate if conditions warranted, but agreed that a devaluation could have adverse effects on debt sustainability.