The government’s structural reform agenda appropriately emphasizes agriculture and tourism, revitalized exports and an enabling environment for business . In agriculture, the government should continue to move forward with the World Bank to introduce import substituting varieties of fruits and vegetables and light agricultural processing, as has been done in the coconut industry. In tourism, efforts to negotiate new flights are welcome, but the government also needs to concentrate on reforms to lower the cost of doing business, particularly the very high cost of electricity. Reforms to SOE governance are beginning to bear fruit in the form of better performance and oversight, but the government should stay the course in planned privatizations and amendments to the Public Bodies Act. Structural improvements in the financial sector will also be important to support private sector development, financial inclusion and growth . Samoa has a high level of access to financial services by individuals and lower interest margins than most Pacific Island countries (Figure 5). Nevertheless, its remoteness and small scale lead to a lack of competition and a high cost of financial services, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises. Financing to SMEs is provided by commercial banks and the DBS. There is also one microfinance institution which is beginning to make loans to SMEs and a government guarantee scheme for SME loans (with funds of 0.4 percent of GDP). However, the high level of collateralization of loans, and the large share of customary land that cannot be used as collateral are the main obstacle to credit, including for SMEs. The absence of a credit bureau or movable collateral registry, and the absence of standard accounting practices among SMEs, are also significant impediments. While recent data is limited, the latest enterprise survey from 2009, and a SME market assessment from 2012, confirm that a majority of SMEs experience financing constraints. It will thus be important to address these constraints to credit to allow better financial access for SMEs and to support growth. Page 23 Authorities’ views. The authorities noted that they are pursuing diversification of agricultural production and processing for export with the help of development partners, including for niche markets (for example organic certification or gluten free products) where Samoa’s lack of scale economies is less of a disadvantage. They also noted that there are solar and wind energy investments poised to come on line which would help lower the cost of electricity. The authorities agreed that development of essential financial infrastructure is a priority. While they see the establishment of a credit bureau as a private sector investment, they noted that personal property registry legislation is in place and implementation will be forthcoming, and agreed that the lack of financial literacy among SMEs is an obstacle to credit. The authorities have been working with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to make customary land more accessible for business transactions. A policy framework will be discussed in Cabinet in the first half of 2015, with the aim of revising legislation before 2016 (after consultation with major stakeholders) so that leases of customary lands can be used more easily and securely as collateral for loans, while safeguarding the rights of customary land holders.