Near term growth will be supported by one-off events. Growth is expected to be 2½ percent for 2014/15, supported by the SIDS conference (which took place in the first quarter of the fiscal year), preparations for the Commonwealth Youth Games in September 2015, construction of a new airport terminal, and lower fuel prices. Lower oil prices will also contribute to benign inflation. The current account deficit is expected to narrow by about 1½ percentage points of GDP on the back of lower oil prices and a gradual rebound in agricultural exports and tourism. Consistent with this growth outlook, overall credit is expected to rise by 5½ percent, with commercial bank credit growth at 6 percent, as the entrance of a new regional bank (Bank of South Pacific - BSP) results in a drive to expand loan portfolios. PFIs are expected to continue expanding lending at around 5 per- cent, significantly lower than their historical growth rate, as lending resources have diminished. Medium-term growth is expected to converge to 2 percent, supported by the expansion of agriculture and tourism . However, 2016/17 will see a decline as a major manufacturing employer, Yazaki corporation, closes its harness assembly operation following the exit of Toyota from auto production in Australia. Inflation is expected to remain between 2 and 3 percent as import prices remain stable and domestic agricultural supply continues to expand. A gradual fiscal consolidation and a pick-up in exports and tourism are expected to keep the current account deficit at around 5 percent of GDP. Medium-term credit growth is assumed to be in line with nominal GDP growth. Risks to the outlook . The main external risk for Samoa is the occurrence of another natural disaster (Appendix I). Samoa also faces risks of slow growth in major trading partners (Australia, New Zealand and the US) and (indirectly) China. Domestic risks are centered around a delay in the policy response to vulnerabilities in the financial sector and rebuilding buffers. In particular, a delay in fiscal consolidation and further increases in public debt would reduce fiscal space to respond to natural disasters and further affect confidence and growth. Other domestic risks include financial distress in PFIs. While according to the FSAP the failure of a PFI would not have a systemic effect on banks, it would cause the public finances to deteriorate. At the same time, distress in local commercial banks could also require public funds. An external shock propagated through the financial system could thus have a large impact on public debt, undermining confidence and growth. Delays in implementing structural reforms, including policies to promote financial deepening, will result in anemic growth. The near-term outlook assumes a moderate pick-up in commercial bank credit growth, which could also constitute a downside risk to growth should it not materialize. Authorities’ views . The authorities broadly concurred with the outlook. They noted that the risk of a down-turn in 2016/17 could be mitigated by a shift of activity of Yazaki corporation to other types of business. They also saw an upside to growth from higher tourist arrivals after the completion of a new airport and the reconstruction of major hotels. The authorities were aware of the risks in PFIs and banks. They also recognize the level of public debt is high and their budget and multi-year fiscal framework calls for a gradual fiscal consolidation. Page 15