The central government deficit is expected to decline slightly to 1.1 percent of GDP in 2014. After peaking at 4.1 percent of GDP in 2011, fiscal consolidation brought the deficit down to a more manageable level of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2013. The 2014 income tax reform adjusted tax brackets and reduced exemptions. Together with the introduction of an electronic certification system to enhance collection, 2014 tax revenue is projected to have increased by almost 1½ percent of GDP to 17 percent of GDP. At the same time, reining in the public sector wage bill helped contain expenditure growth. However, some of the improvement in the central government balance reflects cuts in transfers to the social security fund. Between 2012 and 2014, these transfers declined by €14 million, while the fund’s operational deficit increased by €16.5 million to €27 million (2 percent of GDP). The 2015 budget preserves the consolidation efforts based on modest further efficiency gains. The authorities plan to reduce expenditure on the public administration by a further 0.2 percent of GDP, principally by reducing allowances and overtime, merging public offices, encouraging early retirement, and more generally reviewing the number of employees. Tax revenue is projected to remain stable, while expenditure on transfers to social security and interest payments are projected to increase. However, capital expenditure is expected to fall, leaving the overall balance unchanged at -1.1 percent of GDP. Page 10 Debt is on an upward path, projected to reach 27 percent of GDP by 2020 under a scenario without policy change. A comprehensive reassessment of outstanding tax refunds led to a sharp decrease in net accounts payable in 2011–12, revising public debt down by almost 7 percent of GDP. However, successive recapitalizations of CRSM together with budget deficits increased public debt to 23 percent of GDP at end 2014, up from 11 percent in 2007. Over the same period, government deposits decreased from 12 to 3 percent of GDP. Going forward, debt is projected to gradually increase further on moderate fiscal deficits amidst modest economic growth. Debt is mostly financed by domestic bank loans and the CRSM recapitalization bond. San Marino has not issued bonds on the international capital market. Rebuilding the buffers that served San Marino well during the crisis remains paramount. Fiscal adjustment of 2½ percent in discretionary measures at the central government level, realized over five years, would put debt on a downward path. The adjustment should start in 2016, once the recovery is firmly underway, but credible plans should be announced as early as possible. Plans should be skewed towards expenditure cuts, in recognition of San Marino’s new post-crisis economic realities in which output declined by a third and hence spending as a share of GDP increased markedly compared to 2008. However, such expenditure cuts should not result in increased deficits in the social security fund. Under such a fiscal stance, the government would have sufficient fiscal buffers to withstand a contingent shock (e.g., from further bank recapitalization needs) in the magnitude of 20 percent of GDP, with debt still peaking below 50 percent of GDP (Annex II). Over the medium term, parametric reform of social security is needed to ensure its sustainability. Without it, social security balances will run down fast amid pressure to increase transfers from the central government. Expenditure policy should center on curtailing the public sector wage bill, public pensions, and health benefits. A recent expenditure review suggested measures should target the public sector wage bill—both through wages (which remain some 10 percent above those in the private sector) and employment—the public pension system, and health care benefits. Such policies would reduce deficits both at the central government level as well as in the social security fund. The measures could yield some 2 percent of GDP, creating space for well-targeted increases of around ½ percent of GDP in capital spending, which has been reduced to unsustainably low levels over the last few years. Private sector participation in capital spending could be explored, as long as modalities provide real risk sharing and limit contingent liabilities. The planned introduction of the VAT is welcome and efforts should be made to find additional revenue sources. In particular, a real estate tax yielding about 1 percent of GDP would provide an equitable and efficient source of income. Alternatively, raising the VAT rate above its planned level could be considered. The decision on the actual rate should be informed by an analysis of projected VAT revenue and its sensitivity to the VAT rate. Exemptions from the standard VAT rate should be limited to a narrow set of basic goods. An increase of the corporate tax rate is not advisable, as it would negatively affect competitiveness. Establishing market access for the sovereign would help diversify funding sources. Even if more expensive than domestic borrowing, market access provides a crucial buffer in the Page 11 event of shocks that simultaneously raise borrowing needs and leave domestic banks unable to lend to the government. Accessing the markets for the first time could involve non-negligible costs but the current international financial environment could prove attractive for issuance. The authorities agreed with the importance of rebuilding fiscal buffers to cushion the impact of future shocks. In this regard, they plan to continue to curb current expenditure and reduce the deficit. This will create room for planned additional capital expenditure relating to infrastructure and a high-tech business incubator. They also saw the need for policy action to make pension liabilities sustainable. On revenues, the authorities did not believe reinstating a real estate tax is feasible and note that a higher VAT would have inflationary effects. With respect to accessing international markets, the authorities agreed on the possible benefits and noted that they are investigating various avenues for financing.