San Marino made important progress toward improving the business environment and liberalizing the labor market. Improvements in the business environment support a gradual rebalancing of the economy towards industry and nonfinancial services. The government has, for example, set up a high-tech business incubator, put in place a simple and fast online process to establish a business (improving the country’s ranking by 17 positions to 76 th in the World Bank’s Doing Business ranking), and has simplified the registration of property. Recent changes to labor market policies, such as establishing an entry-level wage below the lowest level in collective wage agreements, and temporary lower social security contributions when hiring unemployed workers, Currently service businesses pay a 3 percent service tax, while most imports face a standard import tax of 17 percent. The VAT will replace these taxes and is expected to improve efficiency. Page 18 support employment. The government has also exempted small high-tech businesses in the incubator from the slow and complicated procedures to hire skilled nonresident workers. A more favorable business environment and flexible labor market are essential to successfully transition to a more diversified economy. Further improvements to the business environment as well as reforming the insolvency and debt restructuring regimes (see ¶14 and the Selected Issue Paper) would support economic diversification towards a nonbank growth model. Incentives and tax breaks for new investments and projects can also be included in the policy mix, but should be subject to a careful cost-benefit analysis. Further streamlining of the procedures to hire skilled nonresident workers should be considered, as this would enable San Marino to take greater advantage of the labor market in the dynamic neighboring Italian regions. Price competitiveness improved modestly, while net foreign assets remained stable. On the back of the steep euro depreciation since mid-2014, a proxy for San Marino’s real effective exchange rate (REER) has now fallen close to its lowest level since the start of the crisis, largely on the back of movement in Italy’s real effective exchange. These available price- based indicators and the stability of net foreign assets at around two months of imports (Figure 2) suggest no significant balance of payments imbalances. San Marino’s continued emphasis on international cooperation has paid off and remains crucial going forward. Last year, San Marino (together with Andorra and Monaco) has started negotiations on an association agreement with the EU. In addition, San Marino’s improved openness and transparency enabled the conclusion of the bilateral economic cooperation agreement with Italy and Italy’s inclusion of San Marino in its tax whitelist. Going forward, the Sammarinese authorities should continue improving this cooperation with Italy. In particular, the CBSM’s new senior management will need to rebuild and broaden the relations with the Bank of Italy, which previously relied on a few individuals that were replaced. In this context, the recent legislative change to allow the exchange of credit information with the Bank of Italy even in the absence of a signed Memorandum of Understanding is a positive development. It enables the Italy’s REER corrected for differences in developments in the consumer price index for Italy and San Marino. Starting aBusinessDealing with Getting ElectricityRegistering PropertyGetting CreditProtectingMinority…Paying Taxes Trading Across Borders Enforcing ContractsResolvingInsolvency Ranking for Doing Business (Scale: Rank 200 center, rank 1 outer edge) ProtectingMinority Investors Dealing with ConstructionPermits F b l y t g F b l REER San Marino's CPI as % of Italy'sSources: IFS and staff calculations Real Effective Exchange Rate and CPI Relative to Italy (2008M1=100) Page 19 imminent start of the credit register to be followed by the exchange of credit information with Italy later this year. The expected completion of the national risk assessment this summer and the start of the exchange of tax information in 2017 are further welcome steps. The authorities agreed on the need to diversify San Marino’s economy, and the crucial role that international cooperation plays in this regard. They consider continued structural reform important to facilitate economic diversification. In this regard, the authorities emphasized the success of the high-tech business incubator as well as the start of Sammarinese business aviation and cargo services at Rimini airport under a special agreement with Italy. Future plans include upgrading the basic tourism infrastructure, to facilitate further private investment in this sector with the aim of attracting multi-day tourists and increasing per-visitor spending. The authorities expect to soon start seeing the economic benefits from inclusion in Italy’s tax whitelist. The broader long- term goal remains concluding the association agreement with the EU, fully integrating San Marino with the EU’s four freedoms and thus leveling the playing field for Sammarinese business in Europe.