Recent improvements in the business environment and government policies support development of the nonbanking sector. The new simple and fast online process to establish a business and ongoing effort to simplify the registration of property should boost investment and economic activity. Once up and running, the new credit registry would facilitate access to credit. Other recent welcome government initiatives include setting up a high-tech business incubator and starting talks with Italy to allow Sammarinese companies to operate business aviation and cargo services at a nearby Italian airport. Nevertheless, it remains important to perform careful cost-benefit analysis of the incentives and tax breaks involved in such projects. Changes to labor market policies and vocational training should further support employment and growth. Recently introduced incentives for employment include the establishment of entry-level wages below the lowest level in collective wage agreements, and temporary lower social security contributions when hiring unemployed workers. Further reform of the labor market, culminating in changes to the labor law, is under discussion. The process to hire nonresidents remains slow and complicated, and in practice results in hiring caps. Recent exemptions from this process for high-tech business in the incubator may provide a model for the broader economy, allowing San Marino to take greater advantage of the labor market in Emilia- Romagna, the dynamic neighboring Italian region. Unemployed workers are provided with vocational training, in order to diminish existing skills gaps. To increase the productivity of the labor force further, worker education and vocational training could be employed more broadly. An inflation differential and a wage gap with Italy suggest price competitiveness may be an issue. A proxy for San Marino’s real effective exchange rate (REER) has fallen back to Italy’s REER corrected for differences in developments in the consumer price index for Italy and San Marino. Page 12 early 2008 levels, but the inflation differential with Italy continues on a gradual upward trend. Together with a 12 percent wage gap with Italy, this suggests San Marino’s REER may be overvalued. The recommended structural and fiscal policies should serve to close this gap over time. International cooperation improved significantly and continued commitment in this area remains crucial for a very small open economy like San Marino. Most importantly, towards end 2014, Italy included San Marino in its tax whitelist and the bilateral economic cooperation agreement was concluded. Looking forward, the prompt conclusion of the memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Bank of Italy that will allow the uninterrupted payment card services and may fully open the Italian banking market for Sammarinese banks is a priority. In this regard, the ongoing setup of the credit register is very important. Moreover, San Marino—together with Andorra and Monaco—has started negotiations on an association agreement with the EU, focused on fully integrating the country with the EU’s four freedoms. The imminent launch of a national AML/CFT risk assessment is commendable. The authorities are also preparing to be among the early adopters of the OECD initiative for exchange of tax information (to be launched in 2017 following the FATCA model). Together with MONEYVAL’s recognition of San Marino’s anti-money laundering efforts, these actions will contribute to further shedding the perception of San Marino as an offshore haven. The authorities agreed that San Marino has to diversify its economy and find a new growth model and saw their focus on international cooperation as key. They pointed to the various initiatives underway including the high-tech business incubator, a science park, and various efforts to boost tourism revenue and infrastructure more generally. The authorities are committed to simplifying bureaucracy and improving the business environment in order to both attract foreign direct investment and improve productivity for existing companies. They explained the wage cost differential with Italy is smaller than implied by the data, as wages in neighboring Italian regions are significantly above the Italian national average numbers. They are moving forward with the technical setup of the credit register, and have amended the banking law to F b l y O t g Real Effective Exchange Rate (2008=100) Source: IFS. Wage Gap with Italy 1/ 2/ Sources: Sammarinese authorities; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Average of four industrial sectors. 2/ Aposititive number means Sammarinese wages are higher than Italian wages. Page 13 allow for reciprocal international credit information exchange. This should allow negotiations on the MoU with the Bank of Italy to proceed, with the aim of concluding soon. Ultimately, the EU association agreement is seen as taking the country to its goal of full integration of all sectors of the Sammarinese economy into the EU single market.