The Banking System The banking system remains fragile with high and still increasing nonperforming loans, relatively low provisions, and large operating losses. Reflecting the still weak economic environment, Sammarinese banks’ NPLs have edged up to close to 46 percent of total gross loans (3 percent excluding CRSM) as of end-September 2015. Half of these NPLs are vis-à-vis nonresidents. Over the last year, loan loss provisioning has not fully kept pace, leading to a slight decline of the NPL coverage ratio to 29 percent. Declining interest margins, reflecting weak lending activity and the burden of impaired assets, together with relatively high operating costs resulted in net losses of €35 million (€18 million excluding CSRM), or 2½ percent of GDP, in 2015. The banking system falls marginally short of the 11 percent minimum capital adequacy requirement. In particular, CRSM’s capital position is weak, despite significant public capital support, and stands at 7.5 percent— €46 million (3¼ percent of GDP) short of the minimum capital requirement. Excluding CRSM, the system’s capital adequacy ratio was 13.1 percent at end-September 2015. However, banks’ capitalization might be overstated, as the level of loan loss provisions is relatively low. Banks’ liquidity buffers have remained broadly stable. As of end-September 2015, liquid assets cover almost 60 percent of short-term liabilities. The Sammarinese authorities estimate that the recent Italian policy on voluntary disclosure of offshore assets has resulted in nonresident deposit outflows of about €260 million until early 2016, and could lead to some additional outflows. Y w T Nonperforming Loans in Systemic Banking Crisis (in percent of total loans) Sources: CBS; L.Laeven and F. Valencia, 2012, “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,” IMF WP/12/163, June; and Financial Soundness Indicators Database. CAR NPL ratio Coverage ratio San Marino: Banking System Sources: Central Bank of San Marino Page 10 The authorities should devise a comprehensive strategy to repair banks’ balance sheets. Given the institutional setting (see ¶5), San Marino’s possibilities to deal with the problem are limited and should be carefully crafted. The strategy should consist of the following steps: Asset quality reviews (AQRs) . Forward-looking AQRs for all banks are critical to reduce uncertainty on banks’ asset quality. Recent on-site supervisory AQRs for three banks resulted in upward adjustment of provisions. Given existing capacity constraints, the CBSM should consider hiring external parties to speed up the process. Provisioning. On the basis of the AQR results, the CBSM should require banks to quickly meet the need for additional provisions in order to bring their NPL coverage ratios to adequate levels. Capitalization . The increase in provisions is likely to bring the capitalization of some banks below the regulatory minimum. These banks should be required to present time-bound market-based recapitalization plans to the CBSM. The plans should include a predefined set of safeguards, such as no dividend payments. Foreign investors could support recapitalization efforts, but sound fit-and-proper standards should apply. Resolution . Banks for which solvency deficiencies are unlikely to be addressed within a reasonable period of time should be resolved. For banks deemed systemically important to the domestic economy, the state could subscribe remaining capital shortfalls, while carefully considering the case for diluting existing shareholders upfront. Dealing with the existing stock of NPLs remains a priority. As of end-2015, total NPLs stood at €2 billion (47 percent of total loans or 140 percent of GDP). Of this stock, €1.1 billion (57 percent of total) pertains to CRSM, mostly due to its Italian subsidiary (Delta Group) in liquidation. Excluding CRSM, about half of the remaining €837 million of NPLs are related to loans to nonresidents, mostly in Italy. This large stock of NPLs is a drag on banks’ profitability and inhibits their capacity to intermediate and extend new loans. So far, banks have managed NPLs internally, but the three largest banks are considering creating a joint asset management company (AMC). Three special purpose vehicles have been established to deal exclusively with the impaired assets of weak banks absorbed by other Sammarinese credit institutions (see Selected Issues Paper). The three largest banks are also planning setting up a joint AMC, although, given the difficulty in agreeing on common valuation criteria for transferred assets, the AMC is expected to comprise separate funds for each of the banks. A more effective pooling of the NPL portfolios would help achieve larger economies of scale, consolidate debtor positions, and could attract potential foreign investors. However, any capital release should be avoided, since banks retain full ownership of the funds (see Selected Issues Paper). Page 11 Box 1. San Marino’s Banking System: An Overview Since the outbreak of the global crisis, San Marino’s banking sector has consolidated substantially. The abrupt deleveraging and the rapid asset quality deterioration revealed pockets of vulnerability in the system. The CBSM played a key role in preserving financial stability, notably by quickly intervening some small institutions in difficulty. As a result, between 2009 and 2015, the number of operational credit institutions has declined from 12 to 7, one of which de facto operates as “bad bank” for another credit institution, while the number of operative fiduciary companies dropped from 48 to 8 over the same period. The two largest banks, CRSM and Banca di San Marino, account for 56 percent of total assets and deposits of the system. On average, about 52 percent of the loans are vis-à-vis nonresidents, while only 25 percent of deposits is from nonresidents. Nonetheless, the banking sector remains very large and vulnerable. The size of San Marino’s banking sector, measured as asset to GDP, is comparable to Cyprus and Ireland. Contrary to most other financial centers, all banks are domestically owned. Although liquidity buffers appear adequate, on average, the lack of foreign- owned subsidiaries or branches in the system prevents the Sammarinese banks from having even indirect access to sources of emergency liquidity assistance. With average capital-adequacy ratio at around 11 percent, high nonperforming loans, and relatively low loan-loss provisions, the Sammarinese banking system compares unfavorably with peer countries. Opening of the real estate market to nonresidents could further support the process. In the domestic market, a significant share of NPLs is related to mortgage loans. An important factor impeding timely and effective recovery of this debt is the stagnant Sammarinese property market. The market has limited capacity to absorb a large number of foreclosed properties, reflecting, among other things, existing restrictions to nonresident ownership. To improve the functioning of the property market, the authorities should explore the scope for a gradual opening of the Domestic dep. Other dom.liab. Non-res. dep. Other for.liab. San Marino: Funding of Banks' Total Assets Sources: IFS; WEO; and IMF staff calculations. Asset to GDP ratioNumber of credit institut.o/w foreign subsidiaries and branchesTier 1capital adequacy ratioNPL ratioNPL coverage ratioLiquidity ratioLiquid assets to short-term liabilitiesROASan Marino4.87011.945.629.431.057.2-0.8Cyprus5.2373215.745.633.819.530.50.2Ireland5.1221922.114.940.2……1.0Luxembourg19.414613319.7……57.967.40.9Malta5.4271412.29.024.031.250.41.2Sources: CBSM; ECB; IMF FSI Database; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Latest available information. Selected Banking Sector Indicators Page 12 Sammarinese real estate market to nonresident investors, in line with San Marino’s longer-term goal to integrate into the EU. This would support asset prices and hence facilitate NPL resolution. Legal, regulatory and tax reforms would help deal with problem loans. While the Sammarinese framework for debt enforcement is relatively effective, the insolvency regime is almost exclusively used for asset liquidations and does not provide effective tools for debt restructuring. As a result, the system does not maximize value by preserving the continuity of financially distressed but viable businesses. To address some of these gaps in the insolvency system, the Sammarinese banks have recently adopted a code of conduct guiding multi-creditor coordination during debt restructuring. However, this process is voluntary and lacks mechanisms to make the terms of restructuring agreements binding for minority dissenting creditors (see Selected Issues Paper). In addition, the use of closed-fund AMCs by banks is complicated by a number of regulatory requirements. Dealing with these issues more comprehensively will require further legal and regulatory changes. Moreover, to encourage provisioning and write-offs, the current limit on tax deductibility of 5 percent of total loans per annum should be reconsidered. Additional challenges arise from the cross-border nature of a large part of NPLs. Many NPLs have a cross-border element, e.g., the borrower is nonresident and/or the collateral securing the loan is located outside San Marino, mostly in Italy. This gives rise to legal obstacles that complicate the management and resolution of problem loans, resulting in delays and high costs. Improving the framework for bilateral judicial cooperation between San Marino and Italy could help address these issues. Provisioning standards and bank supervision should be strengthened to reduce the likelihood of similar problems in the future. To prevent NPL provisioning problems from re- occurring, the CBSM should gradually introduce more stringent provisioning requirements and employ stricter on-site supervision. The start of the credit registry later this year will help improve banks’ credit risk assessment. Macroprudential measures, such as limits to loan-to-value and debt- to-income ratios, could also help mitigate the buildup of systemic credit risk in the banking sector. Cassa di Risparmio The fourth recapitalization of CRSM in four years is underway. CRSM underwent three separate recapitalizations over the period 2012– 14 (Box 2). Its assets declined to €1.7 billion, or 121 percent of GDP by end 2015 (from 213 percent of GDP in 2009), including its Delta portfolio of Italian loans of about €700 million. Yet, CRSM remains undercapitalized, likely under-provisioned, and loss-making. In January 2016, at the request of the CBSM, CRSM submitted a revised business plan based on an estimated capital gap of €54 million, €40 million Assets (€millions, LHS) CAR (percent, RHS) NPL ratio (gross, percent, RHS) NPL ratio (net, percent, RHS) San Marino: CRSM Page 13 of which would be funded by a tier-2 hybrid bond subscribed by the state. In turn, the state will issue a €40 million bond, underwritten by CRSM and the other Sammarinese banks. These bonds will be offered to the public, with placement guaranteed by the banks in case the offer goes under- subscribed. Merging a real estate company controlled by the state and the foundation (CRSM’s major nonstate shareholder, see Box 2) into CRSM and the subsequent revaluation of CRSM’s entire real estate portfolio is expected to close the remaining €14 million capital gap and provide an additional €10 million capital to absorb projected 2016–17 losses. Box 2. Past CRSM Recapitalizations CRSM is San Marino’s oldest and largest bank. Even though its size has rapidly declined, it accounts for 30 percent of the system’s total assets (121 percent of GDP), 38 percent of total loans, and 30 percent of customer deposits. CRSM is a domestic bank, majority owned by a foundation established by law in San Marino for charitable purposes. Since the 2014 recapitalization, the state owns 46 percent of shares, as well as the majority of voting rights. The foundation consists of some 160 individuals, who together propose and elect new foundation members. The foundation’s resources are entirely financed by dividends received from CRSM in the past. CRSM was recapitalized three times over the period 2012–2014. The liquidation Delta Group, its large Italian subsidiary, by the Bank of Italy due to alleged fraud in 2009 took a severe tall on CRSM’s capitalization. As losses ate into its capital buffers, the bank needed repeated capital injections to meet its minimum regulatory capital requirement. The first recapitalization took place in late 2012. The government extended a low interest loan to CRSM’s for €60 million, which the then injected into the bank’s capital together with €20 million of its own funds. With this, the foundation retained its equity stake in the bank. In exchange, the government obtained some concessions, such as the possibility to name the chairman of the bank’s board and two other board members. A second recapitalization was undertaken in early 2013. The bank issued subordinated debt for €40 million, €35 million of which was underwritten by the social security fund. For the second time, public support was granted with no dilution of the foundation’s stake and limited or no conditionality. In 2014, the bank was recapitalized for the third time. The state injected €85 million in capital in exchange for a 46 percent minority equity stake, as well as the right to appoint a majority of the bank’s board members, in addition to the board’s chairperson. A government bond fully subscribed by CRSM financed the capital injection. Despite repeated public support (totaling 13 percent of GDP), the foundation was able to preserve a majority stake as well as veto power over any sale of the state’s shares in the bank. The modalities of this operation fall short of international best practice. The recapitalization does not include upfront dilution of existing nonstate shareholders, who, according to best practice, should be the first in line to finance losses. While offering the state bond to the public is a step in the right direction, the authorities could have considered external financing to fully break the bank-sovereign feedback loop. Page 14 To limit the risk of further public support, the current recapitalization of CRSM should be contingent on a solid reorganization plan that brings the bank back to profitability. The bank’s revised business plan continues to rely on overly optimistic assumptions even in the envisaged adverse scenario. The plan should illustrate how the bank would be able to regain profitability under a relatively conservative downside scenario, likely requiring a more aggressive downsizing. Contingency plans need to be formulated in case the restructuring process is unsuccessful. In addition, the state as the main shareholder should appoint experienced turnaround experts to CRSM’s board and executive management positions. Without such measures, the bank is likely to remain loss-making and hence the risk of future recapitalization needs remains high. Addressing the financial sector challenges requires close coordination among the stakeholders and additional resources. Developing a strategy aimed at cleaning-up banks’ balance sheets and streamlining laws, regulation, and taxation calls for close coordination between the CBSM, the government, the banks, and the judiciary. To this end, the establishment of a time- bound working group could be considered. Furthermore, the CBSM requires additional resources, and full independence in their deployment. Going forward, it needs sufficient capacity to bolster bank supervision (including the AQRs), transpose EU directives (including the Capital Requirements Regulations and Directive and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, as required by the monetary agreement with the EU), and finalize the credit register. The authorities concur that banks’ balance sheets need to be repaired. They note that capacity constraints have prevented speeding up banks’ AQRs. The central bank is working on a comprehensive strategy to address the NPL problem. The authorities acknowledged the need for close coordination in developing and implementing this strategy. Since insolvency procedures are seldom used in San Marino, the authorities were of the view that improvements in the legal and regulatory framework might deliver only marginal benefits. Nevertheless, they considered staff’s recommendations useful and welcome. They stressed that scrapping the limit on tax deductibility of provisions and write-offs might have substantial fiscal consequences, as the limit also applies to nonfinancial companies. Thus they saw a temporary exemption from this limit narrowly targeted at banks’ existing NPL portfolios as a more viable solution. The authorities see bringing CRSM back to profitability as a crucial challenge. They pointed out that CRSM’s Delta portfolio consists of restructured loans, for which credit risk should now be low, and note that excluding Delta assets, CRSM’s financial position would be broadly in line with the rest of the Sammarinese banking system. To inform a strategy to deal with CRSM’s restructuring, the authorities have requested IMF technical assistance. The authorities have also started renegotiating CRSM’s ownership structure with the foundation, to better reflect past and current state support. Page 15