The Banking System Liquidity ratios appear adequate, but NPLs have surged to over 40 percent, putting pressure on capital buffers. The ratio of liquid assets to short-term liabilities rose to 50 percent, from 30 percent in 2012. The recent Italian policy on voluntary disclosure of assets to the tax authorities—under which Italian citizens may have an incentive to repatriate offshore assets—has raised uncertainty about outflows of nonresident deposits. Still, the liquidity buffers should enable banks to withstand such withdrawals. Overall, the banking system’s capital adequacy ratio stands at 12.7 percent, well above the 11 percent minimum capital ratio, although recently recapitalized Cassa di Risparmio della Repubblica di San Marino (CRSM) still falls short with an estimated capital ratio of 7.5 percent. However, NPLs spiked by €932 million to 42 percent of total loans in the year to June 2014, from 22 percent a year earlier. Most of the increase, €876 million, was related to CRSM’s recapitalization (see below), when loans from its restructured Delta subsidiary were restructured and brought on to its own balance sheet. Still, NPLs in the rest of the system Page 6 also rose significantly, in part due to strengthened enforcement of existing regulation. NPLs are concentrated in the household, construction, and service sectors and expected to remain elevated for a prolonged period of time even as the economy returns to modest growth. Since provisions did not keep up with the increase in NPLs, the coverage ratio dropped to 28 percent (33 percent for the system excluding CRSM). In the first half of 2014, losses in the banking system decreased by 20 percent year-over-year to €14 million (equivalent to 1 percent of GDP). The weak asset quality raises concerns about the financial system, and may hinder economic growth. While a bank-by-bank asset quality review is needed to determine appropriate provision levels, the current level of 28 percent appears low both by historical standards (provisions stood at 44 percent on average in 2009–10) and compared with peer countries (Box 1). Underprovisioning of NPLs raises several issues. First, it taints the reliability of capital measures, as full recognition of expected losses on NPLs would negatively impact capital. This has happened already at CRSM in the recapitalization process, while at several other banks, the need to take additional provisions has affected profits. Second, banks’ incentives to sell NPLs remain weak, as such sales would result in large book losses. Third, it may reduce credit supply and limit economic adjustment if banks keep underperforming firms that are not able to repay their loans from restructuring. Lastly, forbearance with respect to provisioning may ultimately increase losses, as no action towards a solution is taken. Box 1. San Marino’s Banking System in International Perspective With 470 percent of GDP in assets ( € 6.2 billion), the Sammarinese banking system is very large. However, it is much smaller than at the onset of the global financial crisis, when it accounted for 650 percent of GDP. In relative terms, it is close to Cyprus’s (575 percent of GDP) but an order of magnitude smaller than Luxembourg’s (about 2,000 percent of GDP). Overall, 40 percent of assets are claims on nonresidents. Two banks are more domestically oriented, with about 70 percent of domestic loans in their portfolio. On the funding side, 75 percent of deposits are from residents. Most banks are domestically owned. At 28 percent, the coverage ratio of NPLs is relatively low by international standards. San Marino’s ratio is significantly below most other European countries’. While the system’s capital ratio exceeds the required level, NPLs net of provisions are very large relative to capital. Thus, higher-than-expected losses on NPLs could quickly erode capital buffers. International comparisons should be interpreted with caution, though, since restructured Delta loans on CRSM’s balance sheet account for 35 percent of system NPLs. Excluding restructured loans—which can be expected to yield relatively high recovery and hence feature relatively low provisioning rates—the coverage ratio is 42 percent. For the bad loan portfolio—the worst category of NPLs—coverage is significantly higher at 57 percent. In historical perspective, coverage is about 15 percentage points lower than in 2009–10. Overall, the NPL coverage ratio hence appears to be low. MaltaItalyGreeceCyprusSan Marino NPLs Net of Provisions to Capital CyprusSan MarinoItalyGreeceFrance Coverage Ratios 01020304050607020092010201120122013Jun-14 Coverage Ratio of San Marino Banking System (Percent)Sources: Central Bank of San Marino and IMF FSIs.1/ Partlyreflecting CRSMprovisions taken in 2012 to cover NPLs recognized in 2013. Page 7 The authorities should come up with a plan to deal with low coverage ratios and potential capital shortfalls in the banking system. Failure to do so may exacerbate losses going forward and depress credit supply. Such a plan should include the following steps: Asset quality review (AQR) . An AQR is critical to reduce uncertainty by establishing a clear baseline, based on accurate loan classification, collateral valuations, and bank-by-bank assessments of expected losses and provisioning levels. These AQRs should build on the Central Bank of San Marino’s (CBSM) ongoing on-site supervisory bank inspections. In case of capacity constraints, the authorities should consider hiring external parties to perform the AQRs. Provisioning . The CBSM should encourage banks to raise their provisions ahead of the AQR results. Once the AQR has been completed, the CBSM should demand banks bring provisions up to the needed level, while strict on-site supervision should ensure compliance with provisioning rules going forward. The CBSM should also gradually introduce more stringent provisioning requirements to ensure adequate provisioning levels in the future. Capitalization . Higher provisions could result in capital shortfalls. Banks with capital shortfalls should retain their earnings to increase capital. Banks where retained earnings would not quickly close the gap should be given a limited amount of time to present market-based recapitalization plans to the central bank, and another time limit to execute them. Resolution . Banks that remain critically undercapitalized should be resolved. Banks deemed systemically important should be recapitalized according to best international practices, including full unconditionally and upfront dilution of existing shareholders. Foreign investment could support recapitalization efforts, but high standards should apply to investors. In particular, the authorities should carefully examine the business plans of potential foreign investors and apply best-practice fit and proper standards. It is essential to address the large stock of NPLs, by escalating collection efforts and exploring sales of bad assets. Banks should pursue collection of bad loans aggressively. For some banks, setting up special purpose vehicles to host NPLs or the outright sale of part of their NPL portfolios could aid this process. In case banks lack specific collection expertise, the authorities could encourage banks to set up modalities to share such expertise (e.g., through joint training). Furthermore, the limit on tax deductibility of provisions should be raised from its current level of 5 percent of loans per annum, as it disincentivizes provisioning. The plan to adopt Basel III is welcome, and there is scope to improve the supervision and resolution framework. The authorities are preparing a timeline to guide the adoption of Basel III standards by 2017. This process will allow for continued improvements in the supervisory framework, which should pay special attention to liquidity buffers, ensuring they continue to be large enough to withstand sizeable outflows of nonresident deposits. The bank resolution framework should be adapted to improve the deposit insurance system and to put Page 8 speedy and least-cost resolution of failed banks at its core, amending the banking law to introduce a special bank resolution regime. The role of the central bank is central to many of these recommendations. In order to deliver on the above plan on provisioning, work on the implementation of Basel III, and more generally deal with its growing set of responsibilities, the CBSM needs additional resources and independence in their deployment. Furthermore, the role of the CBSM in both the operation and supervision of pension funds needs to be reviewed to avoid conflicts of interest. Constraints on hiring foreign experts to deal with bank restructuring should be reconsidered. Cassa di Risparmio CRSM was recapitalized, but modalities did not follow best-practice. The bank has required a total of 13 percent of GDP in public support during 2012–14, with the last recapitalization agreement implemented in April 2014. This was due mainly to large losses on its investment in the Italian Delta group, which was intervened by Italian supervisors and put under compulsory administration. The 2013–14 recapitalization was a necessary step and introduced partial dilution of shareholders. However, the shareholders were not fully and unconditionally diluted, but instead kept a majority equity stake. And while the state now gets to nominate a majority of the banks’ board members, the foundation (CRSM’s majority shareholder) still nominates a minority of board members and has to approve any sale of the state’s shares in the bank. The bank’s turnaround remains incomplete, amid continuing operational losses. Even after recapitalization, at end 2014 CRSM’s capital ratio is only 7.5 percent, €51 million short of the minimum regulatory capital. This shortfall is significantly worse than envisaged in the original recapitalization plan. Moreover, the bank continues to make losses (€31 million in 2014, compared to €36 million in 2013 and €156 million in 2012) and its provisions cover just a quarter of NPLs. To limit the risk of further public support, it is important to speed up CRSM’s restructuring and improve its governance. The authorities should demand a business plan from CRSM that shows how, under a realistic but conservative scenario, the bank will become profitable and reach the minimum capital requirement within three years. Significant cost cuts and reducing the size of the balance sheet further should be part of the strategy. Adverse contingency plans should be drafted, to be prepared in case the business plan proves unsuccessful. The state should The agreement was negotiated in 2013 and discussed in last year’s staff report (IMF Country Report 14/104). 5,000Dec-09Dec-10Dec-11Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14 Assets (€millions, left scale) CAR (percent, right scale) NPL ratio (net, percent, right scale) San Marino: CRSM Page 9 promptly appoint seasoned turnaround experts to CRSM’s board and executive positions. To facilitate this, revisions to the recapitalization agreement between the foundation and the state should be considered to give the state complete ownership and control of CRSM. Without these actions, the risk that CRSM will require further public support in the future is considerable. The authorities noted that the financial system as a whole is transitioning to a new business model and that on-site bank inspections are ongoing. They thought that better relations with Italy will soon allow Sammarinese banks to operate in Italy as deposit-taking institutions, thus creating opportunities for growth. Still, they recognized this strategy remains untested. The authorities contended that judging the adequate level of provisions should depend on the composition of the NPL portfolio. In particular, a large share of NPLs concerns leasing assets, where banks own the underlying asset. They also noted that restructured Delta loans in CRSM account for a large share of total NPLs, and that, as these loans have already been restructured, their recovery rate is expected to be higher. Nonetheless, the authorities agreed on the need for AQRs for the largest banks, which the CBSM is conducting as part of its ongoing on- site inspection program. On CRSM, the authorities saw getting the bank back to health as the most important challenge. They emphasized the successful recapitalization that took place last year, while acknowledging modalities deviated from best practice. Looking forward, they will carefully review the business plan CRSM recently submitted to ensure its viability.