The economy is bottoming out after six years of recession. The impact of the global financial crisis, which led to a massive outflow of nonresident deposits and a sharp downsizing of its large financial sector (Box 1) caused an extraordinary loss of a third of San Marino’s output—the largest in Europe. As a consequence, nonperforming loans (NPLs) increased rapidly to close to 46 percent of loans. The banking system continues to deleverage, and the economy remains in transition to a new business model. However, the authorities’ efforts in recent years, as well as the inclusion in Italy’s whitelist in late 2014 and the stabilization of bank deposits, set the stage for a modest recovery of about 1 percent in 2015. Industrial production and car registrations increased by 2 and 3 percent, respectively, while labor market condition stabilized. Modest growth of 1–1¼ percent is projected for 2016 and the medium-term, on the back of rebounding consumption and investment, but this is insufficient to bring the economy back to its precrisis levels. A sound fiscal position allowed San Marino to use public finances to support the economy. In the wake of the output contraction, the central government balance turned to a moderate deficit. In addition, public funds were used to recapitalize Cassa di Risparmio della Repubblica di San Marino (CRSM)—the largest bank in the country—totaling 13 percent of GDP (in three rounds of recapitalization). This has led to an increase in net public debt from virtually zero at the beginning of the crisis to about 20 percent of GDP in 2015. Notwithstanding the low level of public debt, options for budget financing remain limited, as the sovereign has not established access to international markets. Nominal GDP (€millions, right scale) GDP growth (percent) San Marino: GDP Sources: San Marino Statistical Office ojecti on Italy Greece Portugal Ireland Cyprus GDP Developments in Selected Countries (2008=100) Sources: San Marino Statistical Office; IMF, WEO. Proje ctio San Marino: Banking System Assets Page 8 Headwinds from a weak financial sector continue to cloud San Marino’s medium-term outlook (Annex I). The banking system is undergoing a sharp adjustment, with bank assets having declined from over 600 percent of GDP in 2008 to about 400 percent in 2015. Moreover, the recession in San Marino, but also in Italy where many banks have customers , led to a sharp increase in nonperforming loans and weakened the banking system. Lingering problems impede the functioning of the banking system and weigh on economic growth through effects on wealth, the provision of credit, and tax receipts, and their resolution remains a key challenge. Other risks to the outlook are broadly balanced. Prolonged slow growth in Italy, and more generally in the euro area, remains a downside risk both through external demand as well as through the quality of Sammarinese banks’ significant Italian assets. On the upside, the normalization of economic relations with Italy (primarily San Marino’s inclusion in Italy’s tax whitelist) could stimulate bilateral economic activity more than expected. In addition, as a euroized microstate, San Marino faces a number of specific challenges. San Marino’s very small size results in capacity constraints—including skills shortages in specific areas—, that limit the possibilities of economic diversification, and implies that even micro policy actions, such as attracting just a few small enterprises or selling a small number of homes used as collateral for nonperforming loans, often have macroeconomic implications. Macroeconomic statistics exhibit gaps: no balance of payments data is available and national accounts are published with a one-year lag. On the positive side, the country’s size has led to a relatively consensus-based decision-making process and facilitates speedy implementation of agreed policies. Although euroized, San Marino is not a member of the European Union (EU) and the Eurosystem and therefore lacks a lender-of-last-resort facility. At the same time, its financial system is somewhat sheltered from turmoil on international capital markets, as the banks are fully domestically owned, not quoted on the stock exchange, and do not rely on (external) wholesale funding. Over the medium term, the country faces the significant challenge of diversifying its model of economic growth away from banking, and improving competitiveness to integrate its economy more fully into the world economy. Authorities’ views The authorities shared staff’s assessment that the economy is slowly returning to growth. They see positive trends in employment and new business startups. At the same time, they emphasized that the short-term costs of the ongoing efforts to comply with international best practice (e.g., the introduction of extensive anti-money laundering practices and the transposition of EU directives, see ¶20) and the implementation of deep structural reforms have thus far outweighed the long-term benefits. Going forward, the authorities emphasized their objective is to increase economic flexibility in order to improve competitiveness. They see promoting economic diversification as the main challenge and remain strongly committed to continue structural reforms. In this regard, they highlighted that capacity bottlenecks of the state administration and Central Bank of San Marino (CBSM) should be addressed. Page 9