San Marino’s offshore banking model of economic growth imploded over the last half decade. The global financial crisis and the inclusion of San Marino on Italy’s tax blacklist led to a large outflow of nonresident deposits and a sharp decrease in the size of and asset quality in its financial sector. The country’s largest bank has needed three bailouts, following the debt restructuring of its Italian Delta subsidiary. Combined with low external demand due to the crisis in Europe, this led to an extraordinary loss of a third of San Marino’s output since 2008. As the offshore banking model of growth will not return, much of this output loss likely represents a permanent level shift in GDP. The banking system remains in transition to a new business model, focused more on domestic lending. Although a sound fiscal stance before the crisis provided ample buffers, the large output decline and bank recapitalization needs have put the fiscal position under pressure. The central government balance swung from a surplus of some 2–3 percent of GDP prior to the crisis to a deficit of about 2½ percent of GDP, notwithstanding the authorities’ consolidation efforts. This, together with the fall in GDP and bank recapitalization costs, exhausted cash buffers and raised public debt to 23 percent of GDP. Furthermore, the social security fund’s position has weakened significantly. The economy is exhibiting tentative signs of stabilization. The inclusion in Italy’s tax whitelist in late 2014 and stabilization of bank deposits are paving the way for a modest recovery over the next few years. Although GDP fell 4½ percent in 2013, high-frequency data such as business turnover and confidence, and decreasing bank losses, point to a more moderate contraction in 2014. Overall, the economy is estimated to have shrunk by 1 percent in 2014 and to return to modest growth of 1 percent in 2015. Meanwhile, unemployment has risen to over 8 percent. Similar to a year ago, risks remain tilted to the downside, as the weak financial sector continues to cast a shadow over San Marino’s medium-term outlook (Annex I). Nominal GDP (€millions, right scale) GDP growth (percent) San Marino: GDP Sources: National Accounts Percent of GDP (left scale) Billions of euros (right scale) San Marino: Banking System Assets Page 5 Prolonged slow growth in Italy and the euro area remains a downside risk to growth and the financial sector going forward, through external demand and the quality of banks’ Italian assets. Much economic activity is linked closely with Italy, while 42 percent of bank assets and 25 percent of deposits are nonresident, mostly Italian. On the upside, the recent inclusion in Italy’s whitelist could stimulate bilateral economic activity more than expected. Still, high nonperforming loans (NPLs) in the banking system and the incomplete restructuring of the largest bank in the country pose vulnerabilities. Should stress in the financial system escalate, further recapitalization needs are likely to arise with direct implications for fiscal balances and growth, increasing the potential for a negative bank-sovereign feedback loop. In the medium term, San Marino faces the significant challenge of adapting to the new economic environment. Sustaining growth and job creation will require diversifying away from banking, and integrating more fully into neighboring Emilia-Romagna—as well as Europe and the world. The authorities shared staff’s assessment that the economy is stabilizing. In particular, they emphasized that San Marino’s inclusion in Italy’s tax whitelist and the recent conclusion of a bilateral economic cooperation agreement will provide support to the incipient recovery. The authorities recognized the need for the economy to find a new growth model. Still, they also saw opportunities for the financial sector to grow through increased international activities once the banks will be allowed to operate in Italy as deposit-taking institutions, rather than serving Italian clients mainly from San Marino as they currently do.