The end-December 2015 PC on the domestic primary deficit was missed by a small margin (0.3 percent of GDP) and staff supports corrective measures introduced by the authorities to address this slippage. Staff agrees with the introduction of legislations to lower the minimum taxable income, raise the minimum presumptive levy charged to individuals and firms, and transfer the execution powers for collection of tax arrears from the fiscal court judge to the tax administration unit (¶ 20) aimed at boosting tax collection. Staff also supports corrective measures introduced by the authorities to address the missed indicative targets on the floor of pro-poor spending (¶ 12) and the ceiling on dobra money. Program monitoring. All PCs and indicative targets for the first half of 2016 remain the same as approved by the Executive Board. Staff and the authorities have however, agreed to propose a modification to the PCs on the domestic primary deficit and net international reserves (while staff proposes to modify the two PCs slightly, they remain the same in percent of GDP and in terms of months of imports respectively) and indicative targets on tax revenue and base money in the second half of 2016 to align with the pace of reforms in revenue administration and faster-than-programmed accumulation of net foreign assets and net government deposits in 2015 (Table 3 of MEFP attachment I). Four new structural benchmarks for 2016 have been proposed covering a change in tax administration legislation, a public investment management assessment (PIMA) and the associated implementation plan, VAT law, and establishment of an Audit Board policy at BCSTP (Table 4 of MEFP attachment I). The second review is expected to be completed by December 2016, the third review by June 2017, and the fourth review by December 2017. The program is fully financed and staff’s assessment of São Tomé and Príncipe’s capacity to repay the Fund remains broadly unchanged from the ECF arrangement request (Table 11). São Tomé and Príncipe’s capacity to repay the Fund remains strong, as obligations remain small relative to exports and reserves. An updated safeguards assessment, completed in February 2016, found that severe capacity constraints contributed to a weak safeguards framework at the central bank. In particular, independent oversight on audit and control mechanisms was lacking and the BCSTP law needs to be amended to strengthen the autonomy of the central bank. In addition, to strengthen independent oversight on the bank’s operations, the BCSTP should establish an Audit Board Policy that includes roles and responsibilities similar to a conventional audit committee (end-December 2016 structural benchmark), and identify a qualified external expert to assist the Audit Board. Reforms to the BCSTP law, currently underway, should be done in consultation with the Fund. Page 31 Risks to the program are high. Apart from slower growth than envisaged, financial sector vulnerabilities could become more pressing, risks to reform commitment in a presidential election year could crystallize and weak capacity could constrain program implementation. Continued technical assistance particularly in banking supervision, PFM and tax administration and policy would in part mitigate risks related to capacity.