While the banking system is generally seen as stable and dollarization is on the decline, discussions centered on possible ways to improve its performance and resilience. There is room to improve the banking system’s performance and resilience . The staff analysis presented in Appendix 2 reveals a higher prevalence of banks in São Tomé and Príncipe relative to peer small island states, suggesting that the country is relatively over-banked. Moreover, although the banking system’s average capital adequacy ratio appears adequate, this indicator has been trending downward and it masks underlying weaknesses in some cases. Asset quality has also deteriorated, reflecting unsound lending practices and poor risk management during the credit boom that ended in 2011. In addition, with subdued economic activity and rising nonperforming loans, profitability indicators have declined and are likely to remain under pressure for the foreseeable future, in the absence of corrective action. The slowing in private sector credit growth together with largely inoperative money and interbank markets has contributed to a buildup of excess liquidity, which may undermine the central bank’s efforts to properly manage liquidity. On the positive side, staff recognized the success in reducing dollarization in the banking system, including through a combination of market and prudential forces, and commended the authorities’ efforts in this regard. In view of the above findings, staff made the following recommendations to the authorities Stepping up efforts to strengthen supervision and enforce prudential requirements throughout the banking system, including the strict enforcement of the minimum capital-to- risk-weighted asset ratio of 12 percent. Considering ways to foster the merger of some small banks to increase the banking system’s efficiency and profitability, and promote financial stability further. Page 14 Enforcing the legal requirement that all commercial banks publish their financial accounts to enhance transparency and facilitate assessments of counterparty risks. Encouraging banks to revisit their business plans and investment strategies in light of more uncertain oil prospects, and to adjust their balance sheets accordingly. The authorities were appreciative of the staff analysis and agreed that there was a need to improve the overall health of the banking sector . However, they attributed greater weight to the need to address the underlying causes of the high fixed costs of the banking system, including costly electricity and telecommunications. They also noted that the cumbersome and costly judicial process was affecting bank profitability, and that delays in court adjudication affected the enforcement of creditor claims. The authorities, therefore, stressed the need to improve São Tomé and Príncipe’s infrastructure and strengthen its legislative and judicial frameworks. While a solution to these long-standing challenges is clearly needed, staff noted that this could take time and was not under the direct control of the central bank, and stressed that restructuring the banking system was a more immediate solution to improve financial stability. The authorities reiterated their commitment to taking prompt corrective action to resolve outstanding issues pertaining to distressed banks . They indicated their intention to appoint a provisional administrator for Island Bank, and informed staff that they were vetting offers from potential investors interested in Island Bank. The authorities added that addressing the needs of distressed banks would not have any fiscal implications, and indicated that the central bank is prepared to liquidate Island Bank if no firm investor commitments are received in due course. The authorities stated a clear preference for allowing more time for banks to adjust to diminished oil prospects . While agreeing that the high share of nonperforming loans is a drag on banks’ balance sheets, the authorities expressed concern that forcing banks to move too fast with portfolio cleaning would only amplify their losses given the weak economy and dearth of investment alternatives. In this context, they noted that the newly-created Bankers’ Association would facilitate discussions on the way forward amongst industry participants and policy makers. This forum has now tabled for discussion the deteriorating bank asset quality and other related issues, and it could also serve as a useful forum for discussing needed legislative and judicial reforms that are needed to reduce costs in the banking sector. Page 15