Adherence to a prudent fiscal policy stance in the context of the fixed exchange rate regime has helped to foster macroeconomic stability despite the country’s vulnerability to shocks. After experiencing significant real economic growth volatility and high inflation through 2009, growth has become more stable since and inflation reached single digits recently (Table 1, and Figure 1). However, real economic growth slowed to 4 percent in 2012, reflecting a scaling back of project financing and foreign direct investment as many of São Tomé and Príncipe’s key partners were hard hit by the global economic slowdown. Growth is projected to remain unchanged at 4 percent in 2013 in light of lingering uncertainties stemming from the challenging external environment and continued weak external financing prospects. Despite São Tomé and Príncipe’s vulnerability to supply shocks, inflation has continued to recede following the adoption of the peg to the euro in January 2010 and maintenance of fiscal discipline since then (see below). Although annual inflation reached 10½ percent at end-2012, following unseasonably heavy rains, which disrupted the supply of perishables, inflationary pressures abated by early 2013 and annual inflation reached 6½ percent in August 2013 (its lowest level in two decades). The fiscal stance has been prudent in recent years (Tables 2 and 3, and Figure 2). After an initial slippage in 2009, the domestic primary balance has improved steadily thereafter, reflecting efforts to increase tax revenues and contain domestically-financed capital expenditures and goods Domestic arrears between: the Treasury and EMAE, the state-owned water and electricity company; EMAE and ENCO, the fuel importer; and between ENCO and the Treasury (fuel tax arrears). Page 7 and services outlays. However, the authorities have had difficulty sustaining the tax effort, which dipped from 16½ percent of GDP in 2010–11 to just 14 percent of GDP in 2012. Although this pro- cyclical outcome reflected the influence of the weakening economy on customs duties and consumption and profit taxes, revenue mobilization was also adversely affected by a still narrow tax base and the persistence of cross-arrears, which include fuel tax arrears. Fiscal performance through end-June 2013 was satisfactory, but cross-arrears flared up again . The authorities offset the underperformance of tax revenues (due to the weakening economy and accumulation of fuel tax arrears) and a higher wage bill—related to the adoption of a new career ladder in the national security sector and overtime payments for teachers that were not foreseen in the budget—with higher nontax revenues and lower discretionary spending. In particular, transfers from parastatal and fishing royalties were front-loaded, and license fees related to the sale of the government’s stake in STP Cabo to an Angolan telecommunications company boosted nontax revenues, while there was under-execution of transfer payments and domestically- financed capital expenditure, as well as lower goods and services outlays. Following the adoption of the fixed exchange rate regime, monetary aggregate growth has been consistent with maintaining the credibility of the peg (Tables 4 and 5, and Figure 3). Broad money growth accelerated in 2012, reflecting a larger than projected accumulation of foreign assets, but it has since abated. Year-on-year growth in broad money slowed from an average of 18¾ percent during the second half of 2012 to 16½ percent during the first half of 2013, and it is now broadly in line with nominal GDP growth. This also reflects the tailing off of private sector credit growth as household debt levels reached record highs, and the dearth of suitable bankable investment opportunities despite some banks’ holdings of excess reserves with the central bank above the statutory requirement. The financial soundness of the banking system was adversely impacted by rapid credit expansion until 2011 in the context of poor risk management and lending practices (Table 6, and Figure 3). The data reveal low overall profitability, a high and rising share of nonperforming loans, and a rapidly declining trend in banks’ capital-to-risk-weighted-asset ratios. On the positive side, dollarization in the banking system continues to decline, reflecting measures to foster the use of the local currency, as well as the public’s increased confidence in the peg as inflation converges to international levels. In April 2013, the central bank took over the operations of Island Bank, after this small commercial bank (with only 5 percent of the system’s deposits) failed to comply with supervisory requirements and did not submit a remedial action plan. Page 8 The external current account deficit continues to decline and central bank’s international reserves to improve (Tables 7, 8, and 9, and Figure 4). Weaker economic activity has led to reduced imports of goods and services and an improved external current account balance. After falling below three months of imports in mid-2012, the central bank has since accumulated international reserves considerably. International reserves, which have been boosted by privatization receipts from the sale of STP Cabo and grants from the World Bank and Timor-Leste, stood at around 5½ months of imports at end-September 2013. São Tomé and Príncipe’s economic outlook will depend on strengthening the economy’s resilience in the wake of diminished near-term oil prospects (Box 4). Fiscal and external debt sustainability indicators are expected to improve more slowly following Total’s unexpected announced withdrawal from Block 1 of the JDZ. The authorities will have to continue relying on grants and highly concessional financing for many years to come, and more difficult budget financing prospects will necessitate a tighter fiscal policy stance. Commercial banks will also have to adapt to the new reality, and the ones that have entered the market lured mainly by the prospects of oil will have to change their market strategy and strengthen their balance sheets, including by further recapitalization. There is also a need to restructure and strengthen the banking system through mergers and/or closure of distressed and weak banks. Finally, the authorities will have to promote even more forcefully the development of non-oil priority sectors, such as tourism, agriculture, and fisheries, including by further improving the business climate and upgrading the country’s infrastructure with private sector support. The outlook for 2014 continues to be affected by difficult global conditions . Real GDP growth has been revised downward, from 5½ to 5 percent, reflecting lingering uncertainties in the world economy, weak external financing prospects for investment projects, and the changed oil outlook. Inflation is projected to reach 6 percent by end-2014, as inflation expectations continue to be anchored by a prudent fiscal policy stance and the peg of the dobra to the euro. The external current account deficit is expected to narrow further, with weaker than previously projected economic activity leading to lower import growth; and the central bank’s international reserves are expected to remain comfortably above 3½ months of imports (the program’s new floor). Nevertheless, risks to the outlook are manageable . Downside risks include significant spending overruns in the run-up to next year’s local and parliamentary elections, which in past election cycles derailed fiscal rectitude. The authorities, however, are fully committed to resisting The projected start of oil production under the alternative oil scenario described in the DSA has been pushed back to 2019. Page 9 spending pressures. The outlook could also be adversely affected by the materialization of supply shocks (leading to higher inflation and lower growth), spillovers from a further deterioration in financial conditions in Europe (resulting in delays in project execution due to financing shortfalls), and delays in restructuring São Tomé and Príncipe’s banking sector (leading to continued low profitability in the sector and stagnant credit). Upside risks include the possibility of stronger growth in Europe, lower-than-projected inflation for 2013, and oil production.