The large and growing excess liquidity is undermining the authorities’ effort at monetary management. Excess liquidity was estimated at 24 percent of deposits or about 5 percent of GDP at the end of 2015. It is distributed asymmetrically among banks, with the bulk concentrated in the largest bank, while a couple of banks struggle to meet the minimum required reserve levels. Excess liquidity has built up mainly from net inflows of external resources, and its persistence suggests that involuntary excess liquidity is more than a temporary deviation away from the optimal structure of commercial banks’ balance sheets. While current headline inflation is in line with the authorities’ target of keeping inflation around 4 percent in 2016 and declining further to 3 percent over the medium term, there are risks of elevating underlying inflationary pressures coming from growing excess liquidity which could fuel aggregate demand pressures. Staff underscored the need to further refine the liquidity forecasting and management tools (MEFP attachment I ¶ 18–19). The current forecasting tools allow for improved information gathering and better analysis of the autonomous factors that drive liquidity. However, forecasting errors (though reduced) still hamper an accurate assessment of the liquidity needs of the banking system; further minimizing these errors and determining banks’ needs would inform the timing and quantum of issuance of new treasury bills and bonds in the nascent money market. Moreover, the recently-introduced interbank money market has not generated the required participation by banks due to perceptions of stigma, while the successful introduction of government treasury bills in June 2015 and the doubling of the amount on offer to about 2 percent of GDP this year, though bold, are insufficient to address the liquidity overhang. The implementation of the strategy to address the large and growing NPLs (¶ 38), further development of the financial infrastructure (¶ 37), and reforms to improve the business environment (¶ 41 and 42) will encourage commercial banks to start lending on the margins to reduce involuntary reserves in an environment of positive real interest rates. The BCSTP believes the lack of participation by banks in the interbank money market is only temporary given recent developments in the domestic financial market. The BCSTP is working with banks to address these challenges while at the same time improving the functioning of the government securities market—creating the conditions for longer-term liquidity management—as well as developing the secondary market.