The central bank continues to develop its monetary liquidity management framework and supervisory capabilities . It has now successfully extended the liquidity forecasting horizon to one month and is adopting a systematic approach to analyze forecasting errors as a precursor to the introduction in due course of money market instruments. In a bid to address capacity constraints, the central bank has recently recruited three additional staff to the Banking Supervision Department, but staffing levels remain below optimum. A program of on-site inspections is currently in progress, and all commercial banks are now expected to be inspected by end-June 2014, after the inspection of the two remaining banks that have not yet been subject to inspection (structural benchmark). In addition, the central bank will conduct by end-2013 a second on-site inspection of one bank that was previously inspected. Other specific achievements in 2013 included Completing the on-site inspection of the largest commercial bank in the first half of the year. Supporting the exchange rate peg by maintaining net international reserves at the central bank above the equivalent of three months of imports, and investing additional international reserves in high quality and liquid financial assets. Expanding the role of the Internal Audit Department to track more systematically the implementation of external auditors’ recommendations and monitor the main risks to the central bank’s balance sheet. Taking over the operations of Island Bank, following the bank’s failure to comply with supervisory requirements and to submit a remedial action plan. Reforms planned for the next year strengthen the economy’s resilience to shocks, bolster the central bank’s independence and supervisory practices, and promote financial literacy and transparency include Increasing the program’s floor on net international reserves from 3 to 3½ months of imports to boost confidence in the wake of reduced oil prospects in the near term. Reinforcing compliance with solvency and other regulatory standards by requiring that all commercial banks that operate in São Tomé and Príncipe have a capital-to-risk-weighted- Page 16 asset ratio of at least 12 percent by end-March 2014 (structural benchmark), and strictly enforcing other banking regulations, such as reserve requirements and dissemination of data to the credit registry, with application of penalties to non-compliant institutions. Conducting on-site inspections of the two remaining commercial banks that have not yet been subject to inspection by end-June 2014 (structural benchmark), and increasing the frequency of on-site inspections thereafter, as well as improved analysis of the commercial banks’ quarterly reports, made possible in part through the hiring of additional bank supervisors. Enhancing commercial bank transparency by ensuring that all commercial banks publish their financial results for 2012 by end-March 2014. Commercial banks should aim to publish their 2013 accounts by end-September 2014, or face penalties for non-compliance (structural benchmark). Developing and beginning to implement a work program to introduce a new chart-of- accounts and reporting at the central bank in line with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), with technical assistance from the Central Bank of Brazil. Preparing by end-September 2014 a revised draft of the Central Bank Law that strengthens the autonomy of the central bank in line with international standards, including in the resolution of problem banks (structural benchmark). Improving external communications policies to enhance financial literacy and boost confidence in the financial system, including regular publication of reports and economic bulletins, strengthening the capacity of the Office of Consumer Affairs, and promoting financial literacy. Encouraging the use of modern technology, including credit and debit cards, point-of-sale terminals, ATMs, and secure mobile-banking, with the objective of expanding the operations of the electronic payments system to the whole country. Further changes to the legal framework, including to the Financial Institutions Law, may also be required. Page 17