Fostering private sector led economic growth and diversification will require an improved business climate . São Tomé and Príncipe has recently made progress in improving its business environment, but more needs to be done to diversify production and put the economy on a sustainable growth path. Although São Tomé and Príncipe was ranked as one of the top reformers in 2011 in the World Bank’s 2012 Doing Business Survey this effort was not sustained. In the recently released 2014 Survey, São Tomé and Príncipe’s ranking slipped a few positions. Its ranking is also lower than comparator small states and well below the average for sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, the 2014 survey shows a decline in eight out of 10 indicators, with only modest improvements pertaining to the ease of getting electricity and enforcing contracts. While the Doing Business Survey generally provides an indication of progress and areas in need of improvement its results, including for São Tomé and Príncipe, should be interpreted with caution given, inter alia, limited coverage of businesses constraints and small number of informants. Page 20 The authorities agreed that there was a pressing need for additional structural reforms to boost private investment and raise productivity through an improved business climate Improvements to physical infrastructure and key legislative and administrative reforms are needed with respect to: enhanced trade facilitation; strengthening property and investor rights, access to credit, simplification of the payment of taxes, and improved access to construction licenses; as well as improved transportation networks and utility services. Some of the concerns raised in the Doing Business Survey will be addressed by the planned one-stop shop within the customs administration . Preparatory arrangements are now underway for the launching the new trade-related one-stop-shop by early-2015. Once in place, the new facility will reduce trade-related transaction costs and enhance São Tomé and Príncipe’s external competitiveness. It will also have a positive effect on revenue collection, by permitting the single and simultaneous payment of customs duties and other fees and taxes due to all institutions involved in the clearance of goods. According to the authorities, key milestones include: establishing by end-June 2014 the connectivity of the Customs and Tax Directorate (structural benchmark); and the elimination by end-December 2014 of hard-copy documents and introduction of electronic signing and approval of documents (structural benchmark). This facility will also compliment the one-stop shop for investors established in 2011, which was designed to centralize the administrative requirements for establishing a business in São Tomé and Príncipe and reduce investor costs. F. Strengthening the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Framework The authorities have taken steps to address the deficiencies of São Tomé and