Prospects for commercial oil production increased the size of the banking sector significantly. The financial sector is highly-concentrated and characterized by excess liquidity and low profitability (SIP section II). One large bank accounts for about half of the system’s deposits and loans; six small banks account for the other half (Figure 4). Total assets of the banking system increased from 25.9 percent of GDP in 2001 to 86.8 percent of GDP by 2012 before falling to 79.9 percent of GDP in 2015. Foreign currency denominated deposits Page 24 and loans have been trending downward since the introduction of the peg to the euro in 2010, but remain high and subject to risks of capital flight in the absence of appropriate prudential measures. The number of banks also increased from 1 in 2001 to 7 by 2015, all in anticipation of increased economic activity in relation to commercial oil production. Indicators of profitability remain weak, amidst high operating cost and weak demand for loans, with only the largest bank remaining profitable while other banks face negative (some highly) returns on assets. Return on equity has also been deteriorating and was estimated at -27 percent in 2015, eroding the capital base of some banks. However, the central bank’s intervention and corrective measures are beginning to yield results. Three out of seven banks have increased their capital to the minimum required level. BCSTP is moving—under the new bank resolution law which provides the necessary legal framework for swift and orderly resolution of banks—to create a transition bank as a first step toward resolving Banco Equador which has been under administration over the past year. The BCSTP has now introduced a regulatory framework on bridge banks, based on the recently passed banking resolution law, to help guide any potential resolution and restructuring of banks, including private sector solutions. The quality of banks’ aggregated loan book deteriorated significantly since the last Article IV in 2013. The asset quality of most banks has been weakening as reflected in increasing NPLs, and presents significant vulnerabilities as well as hindering financial intermediation (Figure 5 and SIP section II). The ratio of NPLs to total loans almost doubled from around 16 percent to about 30 percent. This increase in NPLs was driven by substandard and loss loans, which indicates further deterioration in asset quality. As a result, the BCSTP has demanded increases in provisioning (doubling it in the last year alone). Bank-by-bank NPLs show a worrying picture, with only one bank with an NPL ratio of less than 10 percent. Two banks have NPLs close to 50 percent while the remaining banks have NPLs ranging between 20 and 30 percent, reflecting similar trends in other small financial systems (SIP section IV). Staff stressed the urgent need for a comprehensive strategy to address the large stock of NPLs in the banking system and the introduction of a contingency plan to deal with potential fiscal risks. The NPL strategy, among other things, should also look at reforming the debt enforcement and insolvency regimes, introducing out-of-court workout that aims at rehabilitating viable debtors, and measures to improve the operational capacity of banks to work out NPLs. This should be backed by a more detailed asset quality review (AQR) involving stocktaking, review of provisioning requirements, in-depth examination of banks’ large exposure, and where necessary, recapitalization of affected banks to reduce the uncertainty currently surrounding the quality of assets carried by banks. This will also require appropriate measures at the bank level (e.g., addressing weak The domestic arrears is mainly due to the oil importing company and the electricity generating company, and does not significantly affect suppliers nor contribute to the large and rising NPLs. Page 25 underwriting standards including improvements in credit policies and governance) and beefing up risked-based supervision to minimize spillovers from the banking sector to the rest of the economy. Enhancing both on- and off-site supervision, tightening and enforcing prudential norms are critical to containing credit risk. The authorities are strongly urged to use all legal tools available (including the recently passed banking resolution law), combined with private sector solutions (backed by the new regulation on bridge banks) to address any vulnerabilities identified during the comprehensive AQR, and where necessary, set up a contingency plan in subsequent budgets to address any residual fiscal risk. Linkages between developments in the financial sector and the overall economy are bi-directional (Figure 3 and SIP section II). Continued vigilance over the financial sector is warranted given the adverse impacts of macro-related risks on the financial sector and the negative spillback to the real economy. More recently, the lack of dynamism in the real economy, following the declining prospects for commercial oil production, has constrained credit expansion as banks struggle to find new businesses. This has impacted negatively on banks’ balance sheet and profitability. The BCSTP has had to intervene in 3 banks in the last 3 years, with one bank currently under administration. A potential resolution of the bank under administration, if new shareholders are not identified, could induce a cost of about 4 percent of GDP to the budget. There is also a negative feedback from the current slowdown in credit expansion, in particular to small enterprises, on economic activities and