of Spending Debt vulnerabilities remain high. The updated debt sustainability analysis (DSA), which reflects lower upfront borrowing and disbursements in 2015, still shows that São Tomé and Príncipe remains at high risk of debt distress, after receiving HIPC debt relief in 2007. With challenges in budget execution in 2015, stronger implementation effort and oversight is required in order to maintain the deficit target path in the program, which is consistent with the available non-debt creating financing—aimed at bringing debt toward a moderate risk of debt distress. São Tomé and Príncipe has outstanding arrears to non-Paris Club creditors— Angola and the People’s Republic of China. These arrears predate the HIPC completion point and amount to US$53 million at end-2015. They are the only debt obligations to these creditors and there is no other debt service falling due on them. In past Fund programs, these arrears have been deemed away, reflecting the HIPC agreement and the best efforts of the São Tomé and Príncipe authorities to resolve the arrears to non-Paris Club creditors. The authorities have approached non-Paris Club creditors The law was subsequently passed by the National Assembly and gazetted. Page 19 in order to negotiate debt relief on comparable terms but no bilateral agreement has been reached so far. The staff assesses that the arrears can continue to be deemed away under the revised lending-into-official arrears policy approved by the Board in December 2015. Under the new policy the arrears can be deemed away if the underlying Paris Club agreement is assessed to be adequately representative, i.e., if Paris Club creditors provide the majority of the financing contributions required from official bilateral creditors. In the case of São Tomé and Príncipe, the Paris Club creditors’ share of required contributions from official bilateral creditors amounted to about 52 percent and hence can be considered representative for the purposes of the new policy. Even though the deadline set out in the Paris Club agreed minutes to conclude bilateral agreements with non-Paris Club creditors has passed, staff assesses that the São Tomé and Príncipe authorities have since continued making best efforts to conclude the agreements with Angola and the People’s Republic of China. As under the old policy, staff will continue to revisit this assessment at each review, to make a judgment about whether the authorities continue to make best efforts to resolve the arrears. The authorities share staff’s recommendation to anchor medium-term fiscal policy on bringing debt to a downward trajectory toward a moderate risk of debt distress. At the heart of achieving this objective is sustained adjustment to the domestic primary deficit (MEFP attachment I ¶ 11). Experience across smaller countries offers support to the policy of reducing debt by reducing the domestic primary deficit through boosting tax revenues and containing discretionary expenditure. Such an effort will require a significant social and political commitment over the course of several years. The authorities confirmed their determination to a medium-term domestic primary deficit of 1–1½ percent of GDP. Consistent with the above, the projected domestic primary deficit target of 2 percent of GDP, in the 2016 budget, is in line with the program. The sharp increase in the overall fiscal deficit in 2016 is due to higher capital spending financed mostly from planned privatization proceeds from government’s shares in the largest bank and the telecom company and from disbursements of already contracted project loans and previously programmed new concessional loans from Kuwait and Turkey. The increase in the overall fiscal deficit, as a result of increased capital spending, does not affect the program debt trajectory. It however, helps to offset the negative impact of the slowdown in tourism and stressed financial sector on growth, thereby maintaining the medium-term growth path originally envisaged under the program. The authorities agreed to staff’s recommendation to stand ready to make timely offsetting cuts in primary domestic expenditure while safeguarding pro-poor spending should the full amount of expected budget support fail to materialize, but noted that given the very rigid expenditure profile, any shortfall in budget support could result in some cuts in social spending. Page 20 Text Chart 1. Tax Revenue (Percent of GDP) Sao Tome and Principe Small States in Fragile States (median) SSA (median) Small States (median) Accelerating improvements in revenue collection should be an integral part of the medium-term fiscal policy strategy (MEFP attachment I ¶ 12). The goal is to increase tax revenue collection to the levels of the peers by 2018. The tax collection effort has been low relative to the recent past and compared to peers. This has been, in part, due to poor collection of tax arrears including from ENCO, and non-collection from new taxpayers identified during the operation tax inclusion. Reversing the current situation and improving the collection require decisive effort to curb fraud and tax evasion through greater, more rigorous, and regular audits, improving the capacity and incentives at the large taxpayer unit, increasing the number of products subject to imposition of minimum custom value, and introducing a number of legislative changes, including lowering the minimum taxable income, raising the minimum presumptive levy charged to individuals and firms, and transferring the execution powers for collection of tax arrears from the fiscal court judge to the tax administration (end-June 2016 structural benchmark). Source: World Economic Outlook Data. The government has delayed the introduction of value added tax (VAT) beyond (MEFP attachment I ¶ 12). While VAT introduction would significantly widen the tax base and enhance domestic revenue collection, staff welcomes the government’s decision to shift the introduction to 2018 to allow for more comprehensive preparatory work, including the drafting and passing of the VAT law, the tax policy design, introduction of revenue administration structures to support the implementation of VAT, training of staff, and a public education campaign (Box 3). The IMF and other partners (including the AfDB) are providing the necessary assistance. The current program does not yet assume the revenue impact of the introduction of VAT. On the spending side, the authorities are placing emphasis on strengthening public financial management and transparency (MEFP attachment I ¶ 14). The main goal is to ensure efficiency in public expenditure. Although the authorities have taken some initial steps to improve its information management system and data analysis capacities, swift implementation of further measures is critical. Specific measures will include rolling out of SAFEe from the current pilot stage to cover all ministries, autonomous services, other sovereign institutions, regional and local government to strengthen public financial oversight. The authorities are considering enhancing SAFEe with added functionality such as reconciliation of treasury bank accounts, revenue tracking, management of fixed assets and a government contracts registry to facilitate the preparation of more comprehensive general government accounts. In addition, the authorities intend to move towards medium-term fiscal and expenditure frameworks in 2017. Page 21 Box 3. Conditions for Success of Value Added Tax in São Tomé and Príncipe Broad legislative reform. The introduction of VAT should be conceived as part of a broader reform plan of indirect taxation (introduction of excise consumption tax, revision of the customs tariff). Changes in income tax legislation will be necessary to maintain the coherence in the tax system (for example, harmonization of thresholds subject to the real regime). With regard to the VAT legislation specifically, the experience of countries that have adopted this tax in recent years points to the following best practices: (i) a broad tax base with a fairly small number of exemptions to ensure good performance of the tax and prevent economic distortions created by tax incentives; (ii) a single rate to simplify the tax system and facilitate administration, reduce compliance costs of taxpayers' obligations and minimize the risk of evasion; (iii) adoption of a zero rate applied only to exports; and a relatively high application threshold to eliminate incidence on small operators, reduce the number of collectors and facilitate management of the tax by the tax administration. The use of a single threshold for all companies, whatever their legal form, is a good practice. Preparation of tax administration. Apart from the quality of the VAT law, the successful introduction of the tax depends critically on the capacity of the tax and customs administrations to administer it. The launch of VAT project is not recommended before the tax administration is properly prepared. In the current stage, the tax directorate needs both an organizational restructuring and deep reforms to strengthen the tax administration. There is a need to adopt a functional organization in line with modern tax administrations, where central services are dedicated primarily to supporting task, steering, coordinating, monitoring and evaluating the activities of operational services. The new organization should also include proper segmentation of taxpayers, an internal audit function to prevent moral hazard, and an enhanced tax enforcement function. Beyond organizational restructuring, there is an urgent need to strengthen the tax administration in the following areas: (i) developing human capacity; (ii) improving working conditions and (iii) strengthening fiscal operations, including needs for more dynamic and secured management of a taxpayer database, management of taxpayer files based on risk analysis that reflects strong concentration of revenue in a small number of taxpayers, and reorienting inspection activity towards broadening the tax base and imposing fines on tax evasion, and adopting a computer application with basic functionality such as automatic notification of defaulting taxpayers and the extraction of statistics and support for oversight and improved education of taxpayers and services to users. A premature launch of the VAT would exacerbate the existing obstacles and could lead to failure of the project. In 2016, efforts should be concentrated on measures to strengthen fiscal operations to continue to ensure the mobilization of fiscal resources. adjustment mechanism, taking advantage of the current low international crude oil price environment (MEFP attachment I ¶ 13). This will ensure full cost recovery, prevent the accumulation of new domestic arrears to ENCO and reduce pressure on the budget. The government has committed to use the initial positive price differential at the time of the introduction of the automatic fuel price mechanism to partially lower prices at the pump while the rest of the differential will be locked in by raising the surcharge rates on fuel, and using the proceeds to accelerate arrears reduction to ENCO. The authorities are going ahead with the introduction of an automatic fuel price The government has identified key growth-enhancing infrastructure spending needed to increase growth to around 6 percent—the minimum required to significantly impact poverty. Some of these key projects are: the deepwater port project for which the Page 22 government has already signed MOUs (about US$800 million) with China Harbor Engineering Company to design a PPP with financing from the private sector; the extension of the airport runway in São Tomé; and the development of alternative sources of cheaper energy (other than thermal). Staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to focus on the extension of the airport runway and alternative sources of energy, and only embark on the deepwater port project if a careful and comprehensive feasibility study establishes its economic viability and also if it is entirely private sector financed without government contingent liabilities. A successful implementation of the infrastructure program depends critically on implementing the existing debt framework law and strengthening debt management capacity (MEFP attachment I ¶ 17). This will involve policy actions that include the preparation of a national debt strategy that fixes a ceiling on the overall debt of the non- financial public sector and annual debt policies that fix annual ceilings for each public entity. The government plans to carry out a new debt management performance assessment (DeMPA) by end-December 2016 with the support of development partners. This will highlight areas of focus for improvements. Enhanced capacity for debt management will be anchored on an updated medium-term debt management strategy, a manual of procedures for debt management, a computer-based debt management system and staff training. Also, the government has prepared a comprehensive draft public private partnership (PPP) law and framework to guide the growing expressions of interests for PPPs following the London investors’ conference in October 2015. The PPP law is expected to be finalized by end-September 2016. This should be backed by enhanced investment management capacity (MEFP attachment I ¶ 16). The government’s fairly low project execution ratio suggests a need for improving capacity in project implementation and evaluation and gradually scaling up capital expenditure to ensure that the authorities have adequate time to build their technical expertise. Staff urged the authorities to introduce: (i) a centralized framework for appraising and prioritizing capital expenditure projects and (ii) a public investment management assessment (PIMA) framework and associated implementation plan (end-December 2016). This should help reconcile competing funding demands with available resources while ensuring consistency with the government’s policies and objectives. The authorities agreed with the risks flagged by the updated DSA. There was general recognition of these vulnerabilities and there is an ongoing effort to mitigate them through the range of fiscal reforms discussed above, including efforts at strengthening debt management and improving debt recording and monitoring. The authorities are committed to continuing to prioritize grants and focus on priority projects financed by concessional loans. The authorities have also prepared a borrowing plan (MEFP ¶ 18, MEFP Text Table 1) including sources and uses of the planned financing. Staff’s view, after reviewing the existing MOUs, is that there were no liabilities that are not contingent on further negotiations/agreement by the government, and that the MOUs as they stood, did not breach the PC on nonconcessional borrowing. Page 23