The authorities are on track to achieving the 2013 domestic primary deficit target of 3.1 percent of GDP . The domestic primary deficit target remains unchanged despite higher projected personnel costs (an increase of about Db37 billion, or ⅔ percent of GDP, over the budgeted amount), due to the cost of the introduction of new job ladders in the health, education, and security sectors and a 10 percent increase in teachers’ wages (effective August 2013). Revenue collections will be higher-than-programmed because of higher nontax revenue stemming from license fees associated with the sale of the government’s stake in STP Cabo, while the tax-to-GDP ratio will be unchanged (from 2012 levels) as ongoing efforts to strengthen the tax and customs administrations and broaden the tax base are expected to offset the adverse effects on tax collections of weaker economic growth. Finally, non-interest recurrent spending is projected to remain in line with earlier projections, despite higher personnel costs as mentioned above, due to non-wage recurrent and domestically-financed capital expenditure reprioritization and restraint. The fiscal program for 2013 remains fully funded. Additional external inflows more than offset a delay in scholarship grants from Nigeria, which are now expected in 2014. Unanticipated inflows in 2013 included: increased budget support from the World Bank (an additional US$1.3 million); budget support from Timor-Leste (US$7 million); and proceeds from the sale of the government’s stake in STP Cabo (US$6.4 million). These additional inflows have funded a pickup in Page 11 project execution relative to the first half of year, and will be used to clear Treasury’s arrears to EMAE by end-2013 (structural benchmark). The 2014 budget will maintain fiscal rectitude during an election year . The budget will target a domestic primary deficit of 3.0 percent of GDP, which is fully consistent with available non- debt creating financing from the World Bank, Nigeria, and transfers from the National Oil Account (NOA). Gains from the widening of the tax base and improved taxpayer segmentation (designed to enhance compliance among large taxpayers) are projected to result in a modest increase in the tax effort. On the spending side, the authorities are fully committed to containing the growth of the public sector wage bill in line with projected average inflation. The elimination (in 2013) and non- accumulation (in 2014 and beyond) of Treasury’s arrears to EMAE is expected to serve as a catalyst for the reduction of EMAE’s arrears to ENCO and facilitate the elimination of ENCO’s fuel tax arrears. Looking ahead, fiscal consolidation will be implemented gradually to limit its contractionary impact . A cumulative adjustment of the domestic primary deficit of 1.0 percent of GDP will be phased in over three years, starting in the year after local and parliamentary elections. This will enable the authorities to weather the initial negative impact of Total’s decision and undertake the fiscal adjustment once the recovery is firmly underway. Given the relatively low level of recurrent and domestically-financed capital expenditure, there is limited scope for further expenditure containment. Thus, notwithstanding ongoing efforts at strengthening expenditure prioritization and public financial management, the needed fiscal adjustment will be more heavily weighted toward revenue enhancement, comprising a mix of customs and tax administrative reforms and, as needed, tax policy measures. While the authorities reiterated their commitment to fiscal prudence, they had some reservations about the medium-term revenue projections . The authorities expressed concern about the revenue projections which, they noted, depended to some extent on the resolution of the arrears issue between EMAE and ENCO. Staff stressed that the revenue projections were indeed consistent with a regularization of fuel tax payments by ENCO. In addition, staff noted that revenue projections were in line with São Tomé and Príncipe’s past revenue performance and expected improvements in the tax and customs administrations due to extensive technical assistance provided by the Fund and others. Structural reforms to strengthen public finances Specific achievements in 2013 in the fiscal reform area included the following Page 12 Creation of a macro-fiscal unit, with representatives from the Ministry of Planning and Finance, Central Bank, and National Institute of Statistics (INE), which has begun the preliminary work toward implementing a medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF). Steps to make the government’s financial administration system (SAFE-e) fully operational, including the activation of the system’s accounting module. Reforms that are ongoing or currently slated for 2014 include Adopting a comprehensive solution to the problem of cross-arrears. The plan to eliminate cross-arrears between the Treasury, EMAE and ENCO and to avoid their recurrence is now expected to be finalized by end-March 2014 (structural benchmark) and the elimination of Treasury’s arrears to EMAE by end-December 2013 (structural benchmark). In addition, quarterly ITs have been introduced to monitor during 2014 the non-accumulation of Treasury’s arrears to EMAE. Expanding the tax base by launching the “Operation Taxpayer Inclusion” project and adopting and executing quarterly metrics for the number of newly registered taxpayers. The project is designed to register on a cumulative basis 500 and 800 new taxpayers, respectively, by end-June 2014 and end-December 2014 (structural benchmarks), and ultimately targets registration of an additional 3,000 taxpayers by the project’s end. Enhancing taxpayer management within the Tax Directorate by increasing security of the Taxpayer Registry, and by creating a dedicated large taxpayer unit and of a single taxpayer computerized file system (structural benchmark, December 2013). Progressing toward completion of the second phase of ASYCUDA World through activation of all the functionalities and the establishment of a fully computerized procedure (structural benchmark, December 2013). Preparing the general government accounts for 2012 and presenting them to the National Assembly and Court of Audit by end-December 2013 (structural benchmark). Combating tax fraud and evasion by improving the selection of taxpayers for audit through risk analysis, expanding tax coverage throughout the country, and strengthening the National Tax Court, by allowing it to perform its duties with own resources. Page 13 Increasing taxpayer voluntary compliance by improving the quality of services provided to taxpayers, simplifying and harmonizing tax procedures, extending tax services to the more remote areas of the country, and conducting visits to newly created firms. Providing the tax and customs administrations with the necessary resources, including additional staff and equipment, to implement the reforms mentioned above.