The authorities remain fully committed to the pursuit of sound policies that are helping to consolidate macroeconomic stability despite a challenging external environment and more uncertain oil prospects. The new government that came into office in late 2012 remains committed to fiscal discipline . The previous minority government was censured by the National Assembly on November 26, 2012, and formally dismissed by President Pinto da Costa on December 4, 2012. A coalition, majority government consisting of the other three parties with representation in the National Assembly was formed under the leadership of Prime Minister Gabriel Costa and sworn in by the President on December 12, 2012. Since taking office, the new government has demonstrated its commitment to resisting spending pressures that in past election cycles derailed fiscal rectitude (local and parliamentary elections are expected to be held by August 2014). The government is committed to implementing the National Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper II and to the consolidation of macroeconomic and financial stability (Box 1). These policies aim to reduce poverty through wealth creation, and promote economic development through fiscal prudence, financial stability, and the creation of an enabling environment for private investment and inclusive growth. Fiscal policy continues to support macroeconomic stability and ongoing efforts to mitigate debt sustainability risks, by ensuring that the domestic primary deficit is in line with available non-debt-creating financing while mobilizing additional domestic revenue for priority infrastructure and pro-poor spending. Given the critical role of good liquidity management and effective banking supervision in maintaining financial stability, the central bank will continue to improve its liquidity forecasting capabilities, and it will continue to implement diligently its planned on-site inspections of commercial banks. The recent decision by the French oil company Total to withdraw from Block 1 of the Joint Development Zone (JDZ) with Nigeria is akin to a significant external shock, calling for a strengthening of macroeconomic and financial policies given more uncertain oil prospects (Box 2). Oil production was projected to start in Block 1 of the JDZ in 2015. While the authorities remain optimistic about the country’s longer-term prospects for oil production, citing the interest of several medium-size oil companies to take over from Total, they also recognize the need to strengthen macroeconomic and financial policies. In particular, increased uncertainty around the timing and volume of oil production suggests the need to gradually tighten fiscal policy and reduce the size the banking system—with a view to increasing the system’s efficiency, profitability, and Page 6 resilience—and to promote even more forcefully the development of non-oil priority sectors, such as tourism, agriculture and fisheries. Implementation of the main recommendations of the last Article IV consultation discussions has been relatively good (Box 3). Executive Directors emphasized the need to maintain fiscal prudence and stabilize the domestic primary deficit in line with available non-debt creating flows, while enhancing tax revenues through a reduction of tax exemptions. They also recommended the adoption of reforms designed to eliminate cross-arrears. In addition, noting São Tomé and Príncipe’s high risk of debt distress, Executive Directors advised the authorities to increase their reliance on grants and highly concessional finance. These recommendations have either been adopted or are being addressed within the context of the ECF supported arrangement, although tangible progress toward the elimination of cross-arrears remains elusive.