PROGRAM Overall, program implementation through end-June 2013 was satisfactory, but implementation challenges delayed some structural reforms. Program performance through end-June 2013 was satisfactory (MEFP, Table 1). All continuous and quantitative performance criteria (PCs) were met, but two out of three indicative targets (ITs) were missed. The authorities met, with wide margins, the PCs on domestic primary balance and central bank’s net international reserves. However, the larger-than-programmed increase in net international reserves contributed to a narrow miss of the IT on base money. The IT on central government domestic arrears was missed mainly due to the resurgence of the cross- arrears problem, but the IT on pro-poor spending was met despite difficult financing conditions. Structural reforms have progressed, albeit at an uneven pace (MEFP, Table 2). One of two end-June 2013 structural benchmarks was met and progress has been steadfast toward implementation of three end-December 2013 structural benchmarks, pertaining to improvements in both tax and customs administration and enhancements to the consumer price index. Completion of the on-site inspection of the country’s largest commercial bank was done before the end-June 2013 target date, despite staffing constraints due to the central bank’s administrative takeover of Island Bank. The 2010 government accounts were finalized and presented to the Court of Audit in June 2013 (the first time in over two decades that government accounts have been prepared and submitted). The authorities are working on the 2011 and 2012 government accounts, but preparing the latter using the accounting feature of SAFE-e will take longer than expected given delays in the It has been very difficult to forecast base money in São Tomé and Príncipe due to the large size of foreign exchange flows relative to the economy and the limited sterilization options available to the central bank. However, the wild swings of base money growth (Figure 3, left-middle graph) seem to have had limited impact on inflation since the adoption of the peg to the euro in early 2010. Page 10 provision of technical assistance and training in this area. The formulation of a plan to clear cross- arrears between ENCO, EMAE, and the Treasury and to avoid their recurrence is still pending. A critical element of this strategy is to improve EMAE’s cash flow. The authorities have recently asked the World Bank and the IFC to provide options to address this issue, which may include contracting out the management of EMAE to a reputable international operator.