Staff analysis found no conclusive evidence of a real exchange rate misalignment, but pointed to the need to continue reducing external vulnerabilities given the country’s narrow export base and more uncertain oil prospects. São Tomé and Príncipe’s external position is vulnerable owing to a number of factors, including the country’s narrow export base (Appendix II). The external current account is projected to remain in deficit over the long term, reflecting both the narrow export base and a heavy import dependency on food, fuel, and project-related investment goods. Given São Tomé and Príncipe’s high risk of debt distress and structural international trade deficit, achieving external sustainability will require continued reliance on FDI, grants, and highly concessional loans. Staff analysis showed no conclusive evidence of a real exchange rate misalignment over the medium term . In particular, the exchange rate assessment exercise, based on the IMF’s Consultative Group on Exchange Rate (CGER) methodologies, showed that the exchange rate is overvalued in the short-run but broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals. In the short run, both the macroeconomic balance (MB) and external sustainability (ES) approaches suggested overvaluation (6 and 10 percent, respectively). The models demonstrated that the real exchange rate is generally in line with fundamentals over the medium term (undervaluation of 2½ percent (MB) and overvaluation of 1 percent (ES)). The equilibrium real exchange rate approach, which is subject to large uncertainties surrounding the estimates due to data limitations, showed that the dobra is significantly overvalued in the short run (about 34 percent) and medium-term (about 37 percent). The potential adverse impact of the real appreciation of the currency since the adoption of the fixed exchange rate regime, due the inflation differential between São Tomé and Príncipe and its trading partners, is mitigated in part by other extenuating factors. On the one hand, the gradual disinflation process currently underway can be expected to continue if fiscal prudence is sustained—thereby significantly reducing the scope of the problem. In addition, the authorities’ commitment to social investment spending and utilization of aid inflows for productivity-enhancing capital investment The equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER) approach is a reduced form regression model, unlike the two other approaches which use behavioral based regression models. It does not perform well when there are data limitations and short historical time series, as in the case of São Tomé and Príncipe. Hamann and Prati (IMF, WP/02/228) examine the disinflation experience of a panel of countries and concluded that exchange rate stabilizations were more likely to be successful than money-based stabilizations in the context of durable and sufficient policy adjustment. Page 18 should help to boost São Tomé and Príncipe’s underlying growth potential and strengthen its fundamentals. Staff assess that the risk of capital reversals is low since the bulk of capital flows are in the form of equity and public sector borrowing . The authorities have also been taking steps to reduce their external vulnerabilities, including by building up international reserves, but will need to accelerate structural reforms given the increased uncertainties surrounding oil production. In this regard, staff advised the central bank to maintain a comfortable international reserves position, and recommended a continuation of ongoing efforts to further diversify and expand the export base by targeting reforms that improve the country’s competitiveness and business climate. Staff assessed that the central bank’s international reserves have reached levels that are broadly in line with peer countries and considered adequate to withstand external shocks At about 5½ months of imports, international reserves at the central bank are in line with the recommended five to six months of imports for low-income commodity exporters with a fixed exchange rate. They are also significantly higher than traditional measures of adequacy, such as three months of imports, 20 percent of M2, and the so-called IMF metric (30 percent of short-term external debt, 15 percent of official foreign liabilities, 10 percent of M2, and 10 percent of exports). In addition, the authorities have access to US$ 7.2 million in NOA deposits and €25 million from a contingent credit line with Portugal. The authorities underscored their commitment to external sustainability, but cautioned that unlocking the country’s growth potential would necessitate additional capital investment . They added that it would take time to reduce the current account deficit given the country’s infrastructure needs and structural trade deficit. While recognizing the vulnerabilities caused by high debt levels, the authorities noted that a low risk of capital reversals was a mitigating factor, lowering the risks of external borrowing for infrastructure development. At the same time, they stressed that identifying additional sources of capital was critical to enable the country to reach its full growth potential. They added that both the disinflation process and international reserve Dabla-Norris, Era, and others, “Optimal Precautionary Reserves for Low-Income Countries: A Cost-Benefit Analysis,” IMF Working Paper 11/249, Figure 7. In support of the exchange rate peg to the Euro, the authorities have an agreement with Portugal according to which Portugal stands ready to provide support in the form of a credit line of up to €25 million, adding another 3½ months of imports cushion to international reserves. Page 19 accumulation were encouraging signs and that the economic recovery was well underway, which would enhance São Tomé and Príncipe’s external position. While they valued the staff analysis, the authorities argued that the analysis could be further strengthened with better data and identified the development of an international investment position (IIP) dataset as a top priority. The authorities remain fully committed to the fixed exchange rate regime and the current level of the peg, which is seen as an effective nominal anchor for inflation . Thus, in view of the pressing need to diversify and grow the economy’s productive and export base, staff stressed that an added premium was placed on achieving external competitiveness through continued tight demand management and structural reforms designed to raise productivity and boost private investment. In addition staff identified factor price flexibility and improvements in the business climate as critical elements of this strategy (see below). São Tomé and Príncipe continues to maintain one foreign exchange restriction . It avails itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV, but does not maintain restrictions under Article XIV. However, it maintains one measure subject to Fund approval under Article VIII—namely, an exchange restriction arising from Article 3(i) and Article 10.1(b) of the Investment Code (Law No. 7/2008) regarding limitations on the transferability of net income. As the authorities have not provided a specific timetable for the removal of the existing restriction, staff do not recommend its approval by the Executive Board.