Recent economic developments Economic activity remained robust in 2013, but slowed relative to the very strong growth seen in 2010–12 . In 2013, real GDP growth slowed to 4 percent from 5.8 percent in 2012 due to a 1 percent decline in oil output and slower growth in public sector GDP (Figure 2). Growth in the non- oil private sector remained strong at 6 percent. Oil Non-oil Overall GDP Real GDP Growth, 2005–15 Projections Page 6 Status of Staff Recommendations Made During the 2013 Article IV Consultation Recommendation Current Status Macroeconomic policies need to remain Inflation has slowed, although a careful eye needs to be kept on vigilant for signs of overheating. rising equity prices, high levels of liquidity, the fiscal stimulus mainly driven by government investment, and growing domestic absorption. Fiscal consolidation is needed to strengthen Fiscal consolidation has not happened. In 2013, the non-oil primary buffers and increase savings for future fiscal deficit (in percent of non-oil GDP) remained unchanged from generations. 2012. With expenditure on goods and services and capital projects expected to grow strongly, the non-oil deficit is expected to increase in 2014. Strengthen fiscal management and ensure the Progress is ongoing. The authorities are in the process of quality of government spending. establishing a macro-fiscal unit and work has started on developing multi-year projections and fiscal scenarios to strengthen the analysis of fiscal policy. Improvements in the efficiency of public spending are being targeted through the introduction of qualitative Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for line ministries in the forthcoming Tenth National Development Plan. An upward adjustment in energy prices is No adjustment in energy prices is currently envisaged. The needed to contain the growth in domestic government is focusing on improving efficiency standards. The energy demand development of public transportation networks which is underway is viewed as a prerequisite for any policy action in this area. Introduce a formal, clear, and transparent The authorities are reviewing international best practices with respect macro-prudential framework. to macroprudential policy frameworks. However, Early Warning Systems (EWS) have been strengthened and there are plans to publish a Financial Stability Report for the first time. Policies are needed to increase the The authorities are continuing to develop their labor market strategy competitiveness of Saudi workers in the private which aims to increase the employment of Saudi nationals in the sector. private sector. The education system is also being strengthened. Despite an increase in private sector hiring of Saudi nationals, the public sector continues to be the dominant source of new jobs for them. Further improve economic statistics. FSI data are now reported to the Fund and published on a quarterly basis. Improved coverage of other investment flows has reduced errors and omissions in the balance of payments. Work is well- advanced for the publication of fiscal data in GFSM2001 format. A house price index is being developed by SAMA. Source: IMF staff. Page 7 The unemployment rate of nationals has fallen over the past year . While the overall unemployment rate was broadly unchanged at 5.5 percent at end-2013, the unemployment rate of Saudi nationals fell from 12 percent to 11.5 percent during the year. This was due to a decline in the female unemployment rate from 35.7 percent to 32.1 percent, with the male unemployment rate holding steady at about 6 percent. Although at low levels, female labor force participation rates have risen in recent years, from 12.6 percent at end-2006, to 16.4 percent at end-June 2013. Inflation has eased over the past year . From a high of 4 percent in April 2013, inflation fell to 2.7 percent in May 2014, largely due to lower food price inflation in line with international trends (Figure 3). The growth of bank credit to the private sector has slowed . After reaching a peak of 16.4 percent in May 2013, bank credit growth weakened to 11.8 percent in April 2014. A broader measure of private credit which includes lending by the Specialized Credit Institutions (SCIs) shows a similar trend through end-2013 (latest available data). Real estate lending by banks has grown by around 30 percent over the past year, albeit from a low base, as banks have moved into the mortgage market following the passage of the mortgage law in July 2012. The fiscal surplus declined in 2013 and the fiscal breakeven oil price increased . The overall fiscal surplus fell to 5.8 percent of GDP from 12 percent of GDP in 2012, while the non-oil primary fiscal deficit (as a share of non-oil GDP) remained unchanged at 59.5 percent (Figure 4). Expenditure increased by 8.5 percent in 2013, with a strong pickup in the fourth quarter due to capital spending on the Mecca and Medina expansion projects. Spending on wages and salaries remained flat, although this partly reflected the absence of the thirteenth month wage payment that was made in 2012. Strong expenditure growth has continued in the first quarter of 2014. Assuming that Saudi Arabia’s oil export quantities are not affected if oil prices fall, the breakeven oil price — the oil price required to balance the budget —has risen to $89 a barrel in 2013 from $78 a barrel in 2012. The current account surplus declined in 2013, but remained large at around 18 percent of GDP . Oil export receipts decreased slightly as the average oil price fell, while non-oil export growth slowed due to weaker demand for petrochemical products. Remittance outflows increased significantly, by 19 percent, as stronger enforcement of domestic laws resulted in a large number of expatriate workers who were working illegally in the country returning home. The authorities are in the process of undertaking a significant expansion in the facilities at the two holy cities of Mecca and Medina. This will enable the accommodation of a larger number of pilgrims when completed. The thirteenth month wage payment results from the difference between the Gregorian and Hijri calendars and occurs every three years. Page 8 The economy has not been affected by the recent global financial market volatility and equity prices have risen . Financial linkages with the global economy are limited and equity prices have risen by around 30 percent since the middle of last year (Figure 5). The price-earnings ratio has risen from around 15.5 in mid-2013 to 19 at present. While this increase in equity prices could partly be due to catch-up—Saudi Arabia and other GCC equity markets initially underperformed the rest of the emerging markets after the global financial crisis—it may also be a result of an increase in the flow of capital into a relatively shallow equity market. Outlook The near-term outlook is positive, with growth projected to pick up to 4½ percent in 2014 and 2015 . Oil production is expected to be little changed from 2013 as continued strong growth in North American production is sufficient to meet increased global demand. High- frequency indicators such as the HSBC/Markit PMI and the NCB Business Optimism Index (BOI) suggest continued strong growth in the non-oil private sector as large scale infrastructure projects continue to underpin aggregate demand. Non-oil growth is projected at 5½ percent, with private sector growth unchanged from 2013 at 6 percent. Inflation is expected to remain subdued given slowing food price inflation, although strong government spending may put upward pressure on prices of construction materials. Over the medium term, growth is expected to remain robust driven by government spending . Government spending on transportation infrastructure, housing projects, and the Mecca and Medina expansion is expected to support strong non-oil private sector growth of 5¾ percent, broadly in line with staff estimates of potential. While short-term interest rates will rise as the Fed eventually raises its policy rate (given the pegged exchange rate), high levels of banking system liquidity are likely to slow the pass-through to deposit and lending rates, mitigating the impact on the real economy. Inflation is expected to edge up to 3.6 percent by 2017 as food price inflation stabilizes, government spending continues to put pressure on prices, but rents ease as new housing supply comes on the market. The fiscal surplus is expected to decline further this year and the budget is projected to move into deficit in 2015 . With expenditure on goods and services and capital projects See “Productivity Growth and Potential Output in Saudi Arabia,” IMF Country Report 13/230. Jan-07Jan-08Jan-09Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14 Saudi Arabia: Equity Market, 2007–14 Y-o-y percent change (RHS) Tadawul All-Share IndexSource: Haver Analytics. Page 9 expected to continue to grow strongly, the fiscal surplus is expected to decline to only 2.5 percent of GDP in 2014, and the non-oil fiscal deficit is likely to increase and exceed the level reached during the large fiscal expansion in 2011. In 2015 and beyond, lower projected oil prices and a slight decline in oil exports are expected to lead to a fall in oil revenues. Public investment is projected to initially rise as a share of GDP until 2016 as the metro, housing, and Mecca and Medina expansion projects pick up pace, and then ease slightly thereafter, but remain at high levels. The wage bill is forecast to grow in line with inflation, and spending on goods and services in line with non-oil GDP. This expenditure path and lower oil revenues lead to an overall fiscal deficit in 2015, which is expected to deteriorate further to almost 7½ percent of GDP by 2019. The non-oil primary fiscal deficit (as a percent of non-oil GDP) declines to 50 percent by 2019. The current account surplus is projected to decline over the medium-term as oil revenues fall and import growth remains robust. From close to 18 percent of GDP in 2013, the current account surplus is projected to narrow to 7 percent of GDP in 2019, while the non-oil current account is in a large deficit. Oil revenues are expected to decline given the assumed fall in oil prices, while government spending is expected to underpin import growth. With large construction projects reliant on expatriate workers, remittance outflows would continue to rise. SAMA’s gross foreign assets are projected to decline to 25 months of import coverage by the end of the projection period. Risks and spillovers Risks to the growth outlook are broadly balanced . On the upside, higher oil prices or production, stronger than expected government spending, or wealth effects from further increases in equity prices could further strengthen growth, while a weaker global oil market or an eventual drop in equity prices if a bubble develops and then bursts are downside risks to the growth outlook. The main channel for the inward and outward transmission of spillovers to/from Saudi Arabia is through the oil market (see the Risk Assessment Matrix). As the only country with substantial spare production capacity, Saudi Arabia has continued to act to balance demand and supply in the global oil market, so it is affected not only through movements in prices, but also export quantities. Financial markets currently indicate a broadly symmetric distribution of risks around a downward trend in the oil price over the next 5 years. If Fed tapering results in heightened financial market volatility and slower global growth, the slowdown in emerging markets deepens relative to the baseline, or major financial disruptions take place in China, demand for oil would fall. A faster-than-expected increase in U.S. oil output or increased output from other countries would likewise put downward pressure on Saudi production and/or oil prices. On the other hand, uncertainties about the situation surrounding Ukraine and unrest in key oil exporting countries including Iraq and Libya mean that negative supply shocks, which would likely see oil prices and Saudi oil production rise, are also possible. Page 10 Saudi Arabia. Risk Assessment Matrix Nature/source of risk Relative Expected impact on the economy if risk is realized/ recommended Surges in global financial market volatility (related to Likelihood High policy response Medium/Low Markets have differentiated Saudi Arabia from vulnerable EMs. With the UMP exit), leading to economic peg to the dollar, short-term interest rates would increase, although the and fiscal stress, and constraints monetary transmission mechanism is weak so pass-through to lending on country policy settings. rates and non-oil growth would be limited. Oil prices would fall as global Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies. High growth slows. Direct financial linkages are relatively modest. Fiscal policy can respond to slowing growth given substantial buffers, while SAMA can provide liquidity to the financial system as needed. Medium/Low The most significant channel of impact would be through oil prices. The impact on the banking system would be small given high capital and liquidity ratios. Banks do not rely on wholesale funding and total foreign credit exposure is low. Fiscal policy can respond to slowing growth given substantial buffers, while SAMA can provide liquidity to the financial system as needed. A sustained decline in oil High prices triggered by slower global demand and the coming-on-stream of excess capacity (medium-term). Slower global growth and increased supply from other countries would likely see a larger decline in oil prices than in the two risk scenarios above. Fiscal and external revenues would fall, as would private sector confidence. The government has fiscal and external buffers to smooth key expenditures in the medium-term, while banks are well-capitalized and liquid. However, the depletion of buffers would entail a more negative impact as fiscal spending would need to adjust, adversely affecting non-oil growth and bank balance sheets. Growth slowdown in China: Medium/Low (i) continued buildup and The most significant channel of impact would be through oil prices and eventual unwinding of excess production adjustments given China’s central role in driving global oil capacity; (ii) significant demand. Fiscal policy can respond to slowing growth given substantial slowdown of growth in 2014. buffers, while SAMA can provide liquidity to the financial system as needed. Regional geopolitical risks (financial flows, commodity (Russia/Ukraine) Oil prices and Saudi production would rise, leading to higher export and prices, and supply chains). fiscal revenues. Effects through financial channels would be limited. Given such a shock would likely be temporary, the government should save the Middle East) additional revenues. The impact on growth would be limited. High liquidity drives a bubble in the equity market which Banks are well-capitalized. Individuals holding equities would be affected then bursts. and consumption growth would slow due to wealth effects. Policymakers should monitor risks. If equity prices keep rising strongly, consideration should be given first to specific measures to limit lending for equity investments. If ineffective, steps to reduce liquidity including by raising the reserve requirement ratio would be needed. The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed in the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). Page 11 Inward spillovers from global financial markets are limited . The Saudi Arabian stock market and the domestic interbank and SAMA bill market were unaffected by tapering discussions and their implementation since 2013. Likewise, January’s emerging market turmoil had almost no impact on Saudi financial markets. Spillovers from regional developments seem somewhat larger. This was most clearly seen during the Syrian standoff in late August 2013 when the stock market in Saudi Arabia temporarily fell. Stress tests from the 2011 FSAP update suggest that the direct impact of Fed tapering on the banking system are likely to be small. Indeed, given the structure of their balance sheets, banks will likely benefit from a modest rise in interest rates that does not have a significant impact on non-performing loans (NPLs). While NPLs would rise if growth slowed, the banking system should be able to absorb these losses given the strong capital and liquidity buffers. A larger rise in interest rates may affect banks’ balance sheets in the medium term by slowing or even reversing the growth in non-interest bearing deposits. The equity market has risen strongly over the past year, and may continue to rise in the period ahead given the still abundant liquidity in the domestic economy . While this would positively impact growth in the near-term, the risks of a later correction would increase. Even current equity valuations appear somewhat on the rich side relative to global and regional markets. At present, macroeconomic policies are in a strong position to respond to these risks because of the substantial buffers that have been established in the government and banking sectors . In particular, if the downside risks discussed above were to emerge, the government would be able to use its financial assets to smooth the path of government spending and provide temporary support to the economy if needed. On the financial side, high bank capital ratios would be able to absorb a rise in NPLs, while the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) would be able to provide liquidity to the banking sector as needed. Remittance outflows, strong domestic demand, and official financing are other important outward spillover channels from Saudi Arabia . With a large number of expatriate workers in the country, remittance outflows are a very important source of income for many countries in the region (Egypt, Yemen, Jordan, Lebanon, and Sudan) and in South and South-East Asia (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Philippines, and Sri Lanka). Strong domestic demand has continued to generate strong import growth into Saudi Arabia. Lastly, Saudi Arabia is a generous provider of financial assistance, with significant support being committed to countries in the region. Recipient CountryAmount DisbursedAmount CommittedBahrain69 2,844 Djibouti18 68 Egypt5,944 6,494 Jordan1,907 2,976 Morocco488 1,642 Oman- 2,500 Sudan240 527 West Bank and Gaza1,041 1,791 Yemen1,160 3,824 Total10,867 22,666 Source: Ministry of Finance. Financial Assistance from Saudi Arabia to Arab States, January 2011 to April 2014 (US$ million) Page 12