The authorities emphasized their commitment to reforms . They said the goals set out in Vision 2030 are designed to transform the economy over the next 15 years to diversify growth, reduce the dependence on oil, increase the role of the private sector, and create more jobs for nationals (Box 4). They noted that substantial reforms have already been undertaken including to reduce government spending, adjust energy prices, introduce key performance indicators for ministries, and strengthen the management of public investment. The objectives in the NTP and other forthcoming policy plans that support Vision 2030 will broaden and deepen these ongoing reforms. The recent cabinet reshuffle and the merging and restructuring of a number of Ministries are designed to streamline decision-making and introduce greater accountability in government to support the reform process. Staff welcomed the acceleration of reforms, and noted that their direction is consistent with previous IMF policy advice. The goals and objectives in Vision 2030 and the NTP are bold and far-reaching. They will be challenging to meet and will require considerable political follow-through to implement. Staff emphasized the importance of clearly laying out the policy measures that will help achieve these goals and objectives and prioritizing and sequencing the reforms to reduce the risk of implementation bottlenecks and limit the possibility of pushback and reform fatigue from the population. Staff suggested that with fiscal adjustment needing to proceed given the large fiscal deficit, but likely to have a negative short-term effect on growth and employment, it would be important to introduce growth-enhancing structural reforms to help offset this effect to the extent possible. The impact of slower growth on the banking sector is likely to be limited (see paragraph 46). Staff suggested an initial focus on structural reforms that improve the functioning of product and financial markets rather than those that raise the cost of labor. The authorities said they are discussing prioritization and sequencing as they move to finalize the reforms and are putting an emphasis on reforms that will provide a short-term growth dividend. They are also working on ensuring effective coordination across ministries, and taking steps to strengthen the civil service to improve implementation capacity. The authorities saw the staff’s growth projections in 2016 as too pessimistic. They expected the ongoing expansions in the petrochemical, utility, and mining industries and a pickup in visitors to Mecca and Medina to have a larger impact on non-oil growth while they thought the impact of fiscal consolidation would be limited given the composition of adjustment and the scope for improving spending efficiency. Looking further ahead, the authorities and staff agreed that with government expenditure growth set to remain low, non-oil growth would be importantly Page 20 determined by reforms to boost productivity and private investment and increase labor force participation (see the Selected Issues paper on “Growth in a Low Oil Price Environment”). Box 4. Key Economic Targets Announced in Vision 2030 and the NTP Economic targets Labor markets Unemployment to be reduced from 11.6 percent currently to 7 percent (9 percent by 2020). Women’s participation in workforce to be increased from 22 percent currently to 30 percent (28 percent by 2020). Create 450,000 jobs in nongovernment sector by 2020. Reduce civil service workforce by 20 percent by 2020. Trade Fiscal Share of non-oil exports to be increased to 50 percent of total from current 16 percent. Non-oil revenue to be increased from SR163 billion in 2015 to SR1 trillion by 2030 (SR530 billion by 2020). Reduce wages and salaries as share of budget spending. Achieve balanced budget. Subsidy reform Subsidies to be removed; direct cash payments to low and middle income households who rely on subsidies. Private and SME sectors Share of private sector in economy to be increased to 65 percent of GDP from 40 percent currently; SME sector contribution to be raised from 20 percent of GDP to 35 percent. FDI Sector objectives/targets Tourism Healthcare To increase FDI share of GDP from 3.8 percent to 5.7 percent of GDP. Liberalizing tourist visa regime. Plans to build world’s biggest Islamic museum alongside other heritage sites Increase number of Umrah pilgrims from abroad from 6 to 30 million per year (15 million by 2020). Plans to increase private sector role in healthcare and increase average life expectancy from 74 to 80 years. Oil and gas Increase share of domestically owned (localized) oil and gas sector output from 40 percent to Housing Military Education Productivity Immigration policy Aramco 75 percent. Focus on affordable housing and boost home ownership from 47 percent to 52 percent by Military industry holding company to be created. Boost local participation in defense production. Curriculum modernization; greater focus on training teachers and measuring performance. To move into top-10 position on Global Competitiveness Index (25th currently). Raise ranking in Global Logistics Performance Index from 49th place currently to 25 th. Raise ranking within Government Effectiveness Index from 80th currently to 20 th Green card-like program for foreign workers within five years. Visa exemption for expats working in King Abdullah business district. IPO of up to 5 percent equity stake; dual listing likely. Government estimates value of Public Investment Fund (PIF) Aramco at over $2 trillion. SWF to be created to diversify away from oil. PIF assets to be increased from SR600 All targets are for 2030, unless otherwise stated. Source: Vision 2030 and National Transformation Program. billion currently to SR7 trillion by 2030. Page 21 Status of Staff Recommendations Made During the 2015 Article IV Consultation Recommendation Current Status A sizeable and sustained fiscal consolidation needs to begin. Fiscal consolidation began in 2015H2 and continued with the 2016 budget. The authorities have said they will balance the budget, but have not yet set out a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan to do this. Strengthen the fiscal policy framework. A macro-fiscal unit has been established within the Ministry of Finance Comprehensive energy price reforms are needed. Strengthen the non-oil revenue base. and a head appointed. Fund TA is being provided to support its operations. The authorities are aiming to move toward a medium-term fiscal framework and have introduced key performance indicators for Ministries. In the 2016 budget, the government announced its intention to gradually raise energy and water prices over a 5 year period. A first round of price increases has been implemented raising prices between 10-134 percent depending on the product. The government will introduce excise taxes on tobacco and sugary drinks in 2017 and a VAT in 2018. IMF TA is being provided. A tax on undeveloped land is being finalized. Review capital and current expenditures to better align spending with policy priorities. The National Project Management Office has been set up to strengthen project management. All capital and current spending is being reviewed and prioritized. Reduce the government wage bill A review of allowances for government employees is ongoing. Employment in the civil service fell in 2015 and the NTP targets a reduction in the government wage bill of 5 percent by 2020. Issue debt to finance the fiscal deficit rather than relying solely on asset draw-downs. The government issued domestic debt in 2015 for the first time since 2007. An international loan has been finalized in 2016 and a sovereign bond may be issued later this year. Fund TA is being provided on establishing a Debt Management Office (DMO). Strengthen macroprudential policy framework to mitigate financial sector risks in a countercyclical way. The authorities are considering setting up a National Financial Stability Committee. Early Warning Systems (EWS) have been strengthened. The countercyclical capital buffers (CCB) framework has been introduced. A first Financial Stability Report was published in June 2015 and a second in May 2016. Introduce reforms to strengthen financial regulation and supervision. The domestically systemically important banks (D-SIB) framework has been published. Identified banks should comply with the higher capital charges in 2016. Policies are needed to increase the employment of Saudis in the private sector and spur diversification. The authorities are re-starting their privatization program to reduce the role of the public sector in the economy. Retail and wholesale sectors have been opened to 100 percent foreign investment. The authorities are continuing to develop their labor market strategy, but private sector employment of Saudi nationals declined in 2015. Page 22 Staff welcomed the government’s clear and open communication of the goals of Vision 2030 and its efforts to increase government transparency. Continued communication as the specific reforms are announced is important—explaining to the public the costs and benefits of the reforms will be crucial to their success. The reforms will also need to be seen as equitable, and the less well-off should be protected to the extent possible from their negative effects. The authorities explained that their intention is to be very transparent to increase the accountability of government. Once objectives and targets are set, progress will be regularly monitored via a dashboard and updates published. Encouraging private sector-led growth The authorities and staff agreed that the role of the private sector is vital. High oil prices and government spending increases have been the main engines of growth over the past decade and have tilted the incentives for nationals toward public sector employment and private sector production towards non-tradables. Increasing factor inputs boosted real GDP growth, but productivity suffered. The government is developing plans to encourage private investment, spur productivity growth, and increase the employment of nationals in the private sector. The government is moving ahead with plans for privatization and greater use of PPPs. Their aim is to sell two airports and the grain silos corporation this year and they intend to undertake a broader range of asset sales and PPPs in the coming years, including selling a stake in Aramco. Staff welcomed this agenda and suggested that the privatization and PPP program should have a clear timetable, be underpinned by a legal and institutional framework, and take place in a transparent environment that fosters competition (see Selected Issues paper on “Privatization and PPPs in Saudi Arabia: Past Experience and the Way Forward”). Given the proposed sale of a stake in Aramco, staff also thought it would be appropriate to review the tax regime as it applies to the oil sector to ensure it is in line with international best practices. For PPPs, it will be important that they are structured to avoid unexpected fiscal costs in the future, and that capacity is built to monitor their operations and ensure proper service delivery. Staff welcomed the ongoing reforms to strengthen the business environment and encourage SME development . The recent decision to open fully the retail and wholesale sectors to foreign investment and the introduction of the new companies’ law—which reduces the administrative burden on SMEs, strengthens minority shareholder rights, and improves corporate governance—are steps in the right direction. Work is also continuing on the new insolvency law and stronger contract enforcement—difficulties resolving insolvencies and uncertainties about contract enforcement are cited as impediments to doing business (Figure 8). FDI inflows have slowed substantially in recent years, and a review of FDI policy would be useful. Increasing competition, particularly in some service sectors, will also be important. The authorities explained that the contribution of SMEs to GDP in Saudi Arabia is low and they are aiming to increase this over time. They have set up an SME Authority to oversee all government policies affecting the SME sector, are working to reduce the legal and administrative burden of setting up a business, and are continuing with the Kafalah loan-guarantee program. Page 23 Further development of the domestic capital markets is a policy priority. The authorities explained that the recently announced reforms to increase investment opportunities for foreign investors and facilitate trade and settlement of securities transactions are designed to support further equity market development. Staff noted that the domestic debt market remains underdeveloped and companies are very reliant on bank financing. The authorities agreed that development of the private debt market is important, and the Capital Market Authority (CMA) is currently reviewing procedures to make it easier for companies to issue debt and is amending legislation to allow foreign investors to invest in listed domestic bonds. With the government now issuing domestic debt, there is an opportunity to establish a risk-free yield curve and support the development of the private debt market (see paragraph 39). The government has made considerable efforts in recent years to encourage the employment of Saudis in the private sector, but more needs to be done: Setting expectations about the future availability of public sector jobs . The government should state clearly that future public sector employment opportunities will be very limited. This would help set expectations and incentivize greater job search and the acquisition of skills relevant for the private sector. Reducing the wage gap between Saudi and expatriate workers The lack of mobility of expatriate workers keeps their wages down and makes them more attractive to employers. Allowing greater mobility of expatriate workers would likely increase their wages over time and reduce the wage gap between Saudi and expatriate workers. The proposed changes in visa policies that will delink a worker’s visa from the sponsor should help in this regard. Staff expressed concerns that proposed reforms to the Nitaqat program—which requires companies to meet certain employment quotas for nationals that vary by sector and size of company—may result in a system that is more costly and difficult to implement. They suggested that a simpler system of higher fees or limits on visas may be more effective, but would need to be phased in gradually to allow companies time to adjust. Education reforms and skills development should focus on improving quality Saudi Arabia has invested heavily in education, and with most children now attending school, the focus needs to shift to improving education quality and developing the skills in demand in the private sector. Increasing female participation is essential Over 50 percent of university graduates are women, but the participation rate of female nationals is very low despite the recent increase. Policies need to improve transportation options, offer telework and other flexible work arrangements, and ensure adequate childcare facilities. Fiscal consolidation should continue A sizeable and sustained fiscal consolidation is needed. Achieving the fiscal targets in the 2016 budget is a key first priority, and the authorities noted that data for the first four months of the year indicated that the budgeted reduction in spending is on track. Spending restraint is being supported by strict controls on transfers across budget lines, limiting overtime and other wage allowances, reducing contracted spending, and tighter controls on government employment. An Page 24 unallocated “Budget Support Provision” (22 percent of total spending) was created within the overall 2016 spending envelope to meet priority spending identified during the year. Staff emphasized that it is essential that spending commitments are controlled and payments not deferred as happened at the end of 2015. Staff urged the authorities to develop a clear and credible medium-term fiscal consolidation plan. Vision 2030 sets the broad objective of balancing the budget, and the NTP, which was released after the mission, sets strategic objectives and 2020 targets for non-oil revenues, subsidy reforms, and the government wage bill. The government has also laid out cost estimates of the NTP initiatives that have been approved to start in 2016. These total about 2 percent of GDP a year from 2016–20. The NTP does not, however, bring the individual revenue and expenditure targets together in an overall fiscal framework, nor in most cases does it specify the measures that will be taken to achieve the targets. Taken at face value, the targets in the NTP seem to imply a much larger fiscal adjustment over the next 5 years than is needed to balance the budget. Staff believes that too rapid a pace of fiscal adjustment would have significant adverse consequences for non-oil growth and employment. Staff supported a target of balancing the budget as set out in Vision 2030 and the NTP . Achieved over the next 5 years (staff adjustment scenario in the text table), this fiscal path would stabilize the government’s net financial asset-to-GDP ratio at a little above zero and preserve space to manage future shocks and policy priorities (Figure 9). It would also move the primary balance toward a level consistent with intergenerational equity (a surplus of 3.7 percent of GDP in 2021) while strengthening the external position. If oil prices were to exceed expectations, the additional revenues should be saved, while if they were below expectations a determination would need to be made as to whether the decline was temporary or permanent. If temporary, staff would support maintaining planned expenditures, but if permanent, some further expenditure adjustment would be necessary. Fiscal consolidation will have costs for short-run growth, but will deliver stronger growth over the medium-term (Figure 10). In the adjustment scenario, non-oil growth is expected to be weaker in 2017–19 than in the baseline, but it recovers more strongly as fiscal consolidation reduces risk premium and crowding-out effects. Effective sequencing will help moderate the adverse effects of consolidation. The fiscal measures in 2015 and 2016 will deliver a large upfront reduction in spending, but it will be important that a balance between revenue increases and expenditure restraint is delivered in subsequent years. Public investment projects that meet clearly identified needs are likely to deliver higher economic returns than current spending and should be protected from expenditure cutbacks. Further, measures should be sequenced to deliver a steady pace of fiscal consolidation. The authorities and staff agreed that revenue reforms will need to be a central part of the fiscal adjustment . They are planning to introduce excise taxes on tobacco and sugary drinks in 2017 and a VAT in January 2018. For the VAT, once the broad GCC agreement has been finalized, it will be up to individual countries to enact their own legislation consistent with the principles of the agreement. A list of zero-rated or exempted items has been agreed by the GCC (individual countries Page 25 can choose which items are zero-rated/exempted on the list), the rate will initially be 5 percent, and the turnover threshold has been set at $1 million. To meet the targeted implementation date, however, the GCC agreement needs to be finalized soon and administrative preparations started. The revenue impact of the excises and VAT is estimated by staff at about SAR 40 billion. Staff expressed support for these measures and the “white lands” tax (a 2.5 percent tax on undeveloped land) which has just been approved by the Cabinet, although they suggested that zero-rating and exemptions to the VAT should be minimized and cautioned against earmarking revenues from the “white lands” tax for housing projects. A higher VAT rate should be considered if agreement within the GCC can be reached and this would be preferable to some of the less efficient fees that are currently under consideration. As a longer-term objective, an income tax on domestic companies (foreign companies are already subject to an income tax while domestic companies currently pay Zakat) and a tax on high-end property could be considered, but the short-term priority should be on the successful implementation of the excises, VAT, and white lands tax. Saudi Arabia Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios, 2014–21 (Percent of GDP) Cumulative201420152016201720182019202020212016-21 Baseline Scenario Overall balance-3.4-15.9-13.0-9.6-8.8-7.0-6.3-7.7Non-oil primary balance 1/ (Percent of non-oil GDP) -64.0-50.8-39.3-36.2-35.7-32.6-32.0-33.1Non-oil primary revenue3.94.95.95.97.38.08.18.2Primary spending40.241.235.432.333.531.931.732.6(1) Total government debt1.65.014.320.225.128.832.036.1(2) Government Deposits with SAMA50.043.339.433.728.825.222.118.8Net government financial assets (2-1)48.438.325.113.63.7-3.6-9.9-17.3Current account balance9.8-8.3-6.4-2.7-1.9-1.2-0.7-0.3Central Bank gross reserves (in months of imports)35.432.327.924.421.418.816.614.7Credit to the private sector (percentage change)11.89.26.05.35.95.95.35.2Real GDP growth (percent)3.63.51.22.02.62.62.32.3Real oil GDP growth (percent)2.14.00.61.11.21.21.11.1Real non-oil GDP growth (percent)4.83.11.62.73.63.63.23.1 -12.53.03.30.91.80.7-1.48.2 13.211.43.20.53.10.6-1.017.7 Fiscal Adjustment Scenario Overall balance-3.4-15.9-13.0-8.8-5.3-2.2-0.30.0 Non-oil primary balance (Percent of non-oil GDP) -64.0-50.8-39.3-34.2-29.7-24.5-21.8-20.4Non-oil primary revenue3.94.95.97.29.911.812.913.8Primary spending40.241.235.432.532.230.429.829.8(1) Total government debt1.65.014.319.321.721.920.719.5(2) Government Deposits with SAMA50.043.339.433.228.926.324.522.9Net government financial assets (2-1)48.438.325.113.97.34.53.73.4Current account balance9.8-8.3-6.4-2.6-0.71.22.74.1Central Bank gross reserves (in months of imports)35.432.328.125.223.422.321.922.3Credit to the private sector (percentage change)11.89.26.05.86.56.98.68.6Real GDP growth (percent)3.63.51.21.31.31.51.51.7Real oil GDP growth (percent)2.14.00.6-0.1-0.4-1.0-1.4-1.5Real non-oil GDP growth (percent)4.83.11.62.42.63.23.53.8 Fiscal Adjustment Under the adjustment Scenario Annual change in overall balance to GDP..-12.53.04.23.53.11.90.315.9..13.211.45.14.55.22.61.430.4 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff estimates and projections.Annual change in non-oil primary balance to non-oil GDP Prel./Est.Proj.Annual change in non-oil primary balance to non-oil GDP Annual change in overall balance to GDP Fiscal Adjustment Under the Baseline: Page 26 Net Fiscal Savings Under the Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios (SAR billion) Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to further increase energy and water prices . The plan is to gradually raise these prices to international prices/cost recovery levels over the next 5 years—the government has said that having a compensation mechanism in place for lower-income households is a prerequisite for further price increases. On the corporate side, providing support to increase energy efficiency will go some way to offsetting the impact of higher prices. The net revenue impact of these price increases after compensation is estimated by staff at about 5 percent of GDP in 2021 (Box 5). Containing the government wage bill is essential. Government spending on wages and salaries is high by international standards. The authorities explained that the government has been restricting new hiring and this resulted in a net decline in civil service employment last year. The NTP set an objective of reducing civil service employment by 20 percent by 2020. It has also initiated a program that is being piloted in a number of ministries to improve human resource practices within government, including by devolving recruitment decisions. Staff called for a civil service review to identify additional savings including through attrition and reforms of the salary and allowance structure. The government is also looking for other current expenditure savings including through a review of procurement processes and the benchmarking of service costs against best practices. 16MENAMENA Oil ExportersGCCSaudi Arabia Government Expenditures on Wages (in percent of GDP) Avg 2000-2010 Avg 2011-2015 Sources: IMF,World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations. V V dd nnu dd dd pp illi Page 27 Box 5. Energy and Water Price Reforms: What Has Happened and What’s Next? In December 2015, the authorities announced an increase in prices across most major energy and water products without compensation to businesses or households (Table 1). These price increases are expected to generate revenues of SR 28 billion ($7.5 billion) for Aramco in 2016 and will be reflected as higher revenues for the government (Table 2). Electricity and water tariffs were either raised or made applicable to lower consumption users, with the estimated revenue gains from these tariff increases expected to offset the higher fuel input cost of the producers. In the 2016 budget, the government indicated that energy and water prices could be raised gradually over the next 5 years, while “minimizing negative effects on low and mid-income households and business competitiveness”. Staff estimates suggest that increasing energy and water prices to international /cost recovery levels over a 5-year period would generate additional gross revenue gains by end-2021 of SR 314 billion or about 10 percent of GDP (Table 2). To ensure the success and sustainability of the price increases, the following issues need to be resolved: A clear and transparent mechanism to compensate households The authorities are developing “household accounts” through which compensation will be paid. While targeted transfers to low-income households are preferable, a universal compensation mechanism targeted at a level that only fully compensates low-income households could be considered if it eases the implementation of the reforms. A far-reaching communication campaign is essential to help generate broad political and public support, and should be undertaken throughout the reform process. The information campaign should explain the rational, objectives, and benefits of the reform, and inform the public of the pace of price increase and the compensating measures. Establishing an automatic pricing formula, once prices reach market/cost recovery levels, will distance the government from the pricing of energy products, thus reducing the chances of reform reversal, and ensure that changes in international prices are reflects in domestic prices. Oman and UAE have already introduced automatic pricing formula. Strengthening operational efficiency of energy producing State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) would help them remain profitable at higher input costs. Gasoline 2.6 17.8 Diesel (Gas oil) 1.7 36.1 LPG Public0.04 1.1Oil Industry0.01 0.4 Fuel Oil Public0.23 18.4Oil Industry0.02 1.9 Asphalt 0.06 0.3 Jet Fuel 0.28 2.1 Natural Gas Public2.2 4.6Oil Industry0.5 1.0 Total/ Gross revenue gains (US$)7.5 83.8Gross revenue gains (SR)28.3 314.3Household: Cash transfers Wealth sharing (per capita) Social protection (based on household size and targeted) 28.3Non-Households: Mitigating measures/offsetting factors 1/104.6Net revenue gains (SR)28.3 144.3 Source: IMF staff estimates. in US$ billion 1/. Offsetting factors for non-households takes into account that firms with long-term energy supply contracts will continue to receive low prices, government's own energy consumption and government support to companies to adjust to higher energy prices. Table 2. Saudi Arabia: Revenue Gains from Energy price reform by 2021 2016 2017-2021 ud gy du ndu K du du mm Page 28 The government is strengthening the management of public investment. The National Project Management Office (NPMO) was recently established to take the lead role in improving project management standards across ministries, and the project approval process has been strengthened which should result in more targeted and efficient spending. Staff noted that despite the sharp cutbacks in 2015 and 2016, capital spending remains high by international standards and they welcomed the steps the authorities are taking to strengthen public investment management. More broadly, the authorities explained that one of the central goals of their reform plan is to improve the efficiency, accountability and transparency of government spending. They saw this as being essential in supporting the broader reforms that are being undertaken. To this end, a performance management program has been introduced for ministries. Key performance indicators (KPIs) have been established, including through the NTP, and will be reported to and monitored by the recently established performance management agency. Staff stressed that reforms to the fiscal framework would need to be an integral part of the fiscal adjustment process to reduce implementation risks . The priorities should be to develop a medium-term fiscal framework, strengthen the annual budget process, and increase transparency and accountability. The fiscal framework should include fiscal targets to guide the medium-term adjustment, and a formal fiscal rule could eventually be considered to support the accumulation of substantial financial buffers during periods of high oil prices and delink expenditures from oil revenue volatility. The framework should also assess risks to the fiscal outlook, including from the future pension commitments of PPA and GOSI. Staff believes that a review of the public expenditure management system should be undertaken to ensure that the deferred payments to contractors are not repeated, and suggested that while the “budget support provision” may help in facilitating adjustment in 2016, it is not consistent with effective budgeting over the medium-term. The authorities saw the establishment of a macro-fiscal unit and the appointment of the unit head as important steps in strengthening their macro-fiscal analysis. Staff emphasized the importance of improving fiscal transparency and better integrating key public entities into the budget . While welcoming the recent move to GFSM2014 format for the 2016 fiscal data, staff emphasized that fiscal transparency is lagging compared to other G-20 countries. The 2016 budget published more details about revenues and expenditures than previous years, but still did not provide full information about the 2015 outturn or 2016 budgeted revenues and expenditures. A step toward enhancing fiscal transparency would be to start publishing full details of annual budgeted revenues and expenditures and within-year quarterly fiscal updates on budget execution. The Public Investment Fund (PIF) and Aramco should be better integrated in the fiscal framework and their operations made more transparent. The government K NN Z Z Y K Z q nu q Page 29 should clarify the rules and the level of transfers between the budget and the PIF, and it should receive its share of oil revenues from Aramco and then make transparent payments for expenditures carried out by Aramco on its behalf. These steps to increase fiscal transparency will be needed to effectively monitor progress toward the NTP objectives. Asset-liability management and budget financing The government is continuing to assess its options for financing the fiscal deficit. The authorities have finalized a $10 billion loan from international banks and they are now considering issuing a sovereign bond. Domestically, they are continuing to issue bonds to banks and non-bank institutions, and have expanded issuance beyond fixed rate instruments to include floating rate notes and murabaha (a common form of Islamic financing). Staff indicated that the choice of fiscal financing strategy will have important implications for the domestic economy and the financial sector. In particular, relying on a combination of asset drawdown and domestic and external borrowing is likely to best strike a balance between addressing risk/return tradeoffs and minimizing the macro-fiscal-financial implications of domestic debt issuance on credit provision in an environment of more difficult bank funding conditions (Selected Issues paper on “Financing the Fiscal Deficit—Possible Options and Their Potential Implications”). The authorities are setting up a Debt Management Office (DMO) within the Ministry of Finance . Staff urged the authorities to quickly make the DMO operational and start developing a medium-term debt management strategy (MTDS) to guide the government’s borrowing program. In staff’s view, the debt issuance program should encourage the development of a deep and liquid domestic debt market, including for the private sector. Improving communication with the market, including by announcing an issuance calendar in advance, and developing a secondary market for government securities will help in this regard. Staff encouraged the authorities to introduce auctions for government debt whereby yields are market determined and better reflect market liquidity conditions. Saudi Arabia needs to develop an integrated approach to managing its balance sheet. Without looking at both sides of the balance sheet, mismatches in assets and liabilities might pose undue risks, while there will always be trade-offs between incurring debt and selling assets. The authorities noted that they are taking steps to clarify asset management responsibilities. The PIF’s mandate is being changed towards a more typical sovereign wealth fund, with a longer-term horizon and higher risk tolerance level, and focused only on returns rather than development objectives. SAMA will continue to manage gross reserves which are held more for precautionary purposes.