Saudi Arabia has begun a fundamental policy shift to respond to low oil prices . The government has introduced a series of reforms over the past year and has recently set out plans for a bold and ambitious transformation of the Saudi Arabian economy in Vision 2030 . The policies that will help achieve the goals of Vision 2030 are to be set out in a series of policy plans. The first—the National Transformation Program (NTP)—was released in early June. It lays out 178 strategic objectives with over 340 targets and benchmarks for 24 ministries and government entities to be achieved by 2020. The cabinet has recently been reshuffled and a number of Ministries have been merged or restructured to support the reforms. Meeting the aspirations of a young and growing population is a significant challenge With fiscal consolidation affecting growth, the challenges of generating jobs and ensuring sufficient housing and resource (water, power) availability will rise. About 1.6-1.8 million Saudi nationals are expected to enter the labor force over the next 5 years given demographic trends and an expected increase in labor force participation rates. Saudi nationals have been traditionally largely employed in the public sector, where job creation is expected to slow in the coming years. Creating sufficient jobs for nationals in the private sector will be key. Saudi Arabia has strong policy buffers that have been built over the past decade At end-2015, government deposits at SAMA stood at about $280 billion, SAMA net reserves at $609 billion (32 months of imports), and government debt was around 5 percent of GDP. The government also has large shareholding in domestic companies. These policy buffers are being used to smooth the adjustment process. A gradual increase in oil prices is expected in the next few years, but prices are not expected to recover to the levels seen in the first half of 2014 . Investment in the global oil industry is falling and together with demand growth this should support firmer prices going forward, although stocks are high and will take some time to clear. Noting that Saudi Arabia is one of the world’s most efficient oil producers, the authorities are continuing to meet the demand for oil from their customers. Production remained at around 10.2 mb/d in the first five months of 2016. Regional tensions continue . The ongoing conflicts in Iraq, Syria, and Yemen are creating a difficult security environment. Page 10