The external stability assessment suggests that the main external risk is the large current account deficit. Although Senegal’s exchange rate shows no significant signs of misalignment, Senegal’s current account deficit remains high, at about 10 percent of GDP but may improve by about one percentage point if the projected oil price decline continues (Table 3). Improvements registered since 2012 are likely to be wiped out in 2014 by the impact of Ebola, as well as the tardy onset of the rainy season. The positive impacts of the PSE including fiscal consolidation should reduce the deficit in the long-term. However, it will remain above 8 percent in the medium term. Until recently, current account deficits were financed mainly by grants and concessional borrowing. However, the country is increasingly exposed to shifting market sentiment as a result of increased non-concessional borrowing, including Eurobonds. Senegal is showing signs of eroding competitiveness, with lagging export and FDI growth compared to peers. Senegal’s global market share has barely increased over the past decade, and the contribution of exports to GDP has remained around 25 percent. The country also lags behind its peers in attracting FDI, whilst remittances, at 11 percent of GDP, have remained an important and stable source of foreign exchange. For the last few years, Senegal has received about 2 percent of GDP in FDI, compared to an average of over 7 percent for other lower middle-income Senegal, a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3 and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. The WAEMU’s exchange regime is a conventional peg to the euro. Page 15 SSA countries. Other weak areas include access to credit, enforcement of contract and property rights. Irrespective of recent improvement, the overall ranking of Senegal on competitiveness remains low (Chart 4). Chart 4. Global Competitiveness Index (2013-14 world ranking) The World Economic Forum ranked Senegal 112th out of 142 countries in terms of competitiveness See SIP, chapter 3 for details While Senegal’s export base is relatively well diversified, high-quality exports bear a comparatively low weight. Senegal faces difficulties in quality upgrading compared to three benchmark countries. Sectors for which the quality of exported products is comparatively low, such as food and live animals, constitute a large share of exported products (Chart 5). With Senegal’s labor force concentrated in agriculture, policies fostering agricultural product quality may be useful to supplement FDI driven export diversification. Page 16 Chart 5. Export Diversification Export concentration appears to be highest in low-quality sectors ) y Q d P P h = ( SITC Category Food and live animals Beverages and tobacco Crude materials, inedible, except fuels Mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials Animal and vegetable oils and fats Chemicals Manufact goods classified chiefly by material Machinery and transport equipment Miscellaneous manufactured articles Commod. & transacts. Not class. Accord. To kind (Size of bubbles is proportional to share of industry in total exports) See SIP chapter 4 f for details. The probability of debt distress remains low in the baseline scenario. In this scenario, all the debt burden indicators remain below their policy-dependent indicative thresholds, and debt ratios in present value (PV) terms are lower than in the previous debt sustainability analysis (Figure 6). These improvements reflect institutional reforms that have raised Senegal’s CPIA rating. The external PPG debt ratios remain below their respective thresholds in the baseline scenarios. Two spikes in debt service reflect the assumption of the repayment of the Eurobonds at maturity, which would lead to two small and temporary breaches under the most extreme stress test (a 30 percent depreciation of the currency). Under an alternative scenario with higher spending and higher debt accumulation, there is some deterioration in debt burden indicators (Figure 7). The indicators remain below their policy-dependent thresholds, but the PV of debt to GDP ratio and the PV of debt-to-exports ratio deteriorate somewhat, even assuming faster growth than in the baseline. This suggests that with higher capital spending and debt accumulation, Senegal could be at risk of losing its “low risk” rating, if growth dividends do not materialize, Measures to unlock FDI-driven exports, fiscal restraint and prudent debt management will be critical to averting external stability risks. The external position will be helped by achieving the PSE targets for export diversification driven by FDI and continued efforts in fiscal consolidation, supported by the proposed PSE debt anchor. However, the authorities will need to continue exercising caution in resorting to non-concessional borrowing. The authorities reiterated their commitment to vigilant debt management, noting that they are monitoring closely not only This scenario assumes that higher capital spending boosts the fiscal deficit by about 0.7 percentage point of GDP in 2015-19, growth is assumed to increase by 1 percentage point over the same period. Page 17 debt sustainability risks, but also rollover risks. Staff and the authorities agreed on the need to intensify efforts to boost Senegal’s competitiveness, drawing on the experience of peers.