Implementation of the PSE would benefit from efforts on budget institutions. Staff welcomes the authorities’ interest to reform their institutional framework and strengthen transparency and fiscal discipline. The reallocation of resources required by the PSE entails stronger budget institutions with regard to fiscal policy design, public investment management, and budget implementation. Fiscal policy design should be anchored in a medium-term budget framework (MTBF). Senegal has been working on an MTBF for the past year in compliance with the 2011 PFM law. The publication of a first MTBF could be targeted during the course of 2015. This document should present the aforementioned debt path and explain the macro-fiscal policy strategy over the next three years consistent with it. In particular, the MTBF should discuss the sustainability of the wage bill and large public investment projects. Subsequent versions of the MTBF should clearly explain Page 12 deviations from the previous document and, if necessary, state corrective measures to meet the macro-fiscal targets. To support these efforts, spending reviews could be conducted in specific sectors. The authorities are working towards introducing MTBF, including with technical assistance from development partners. Public investment management (PIM) needs further improvement. Senegal has already implemented several good practices in PIM even if some arrangements, such as feasibility studies and socio-economic assessments, need significant improvement. Staff welcomes recent efforts to reclassify non-capital spending from the investment to the recurrent budget and encourages the authorities to finalize this initiative. Next steps could focus on improving information on both financial and physical execution of investment with respect to coverage, timeliness, and accuracy. This should cover internally and externally funded projects, as well as those implemented by agencies and would require IT management improvements. The public investment plan could be strengthened and anchored to the MTBF, to ensure availability of resources for the life of each project. Ex-ante and ex-post assessments of projects should also be developed, with a focus on large or risky projects. The authorities are aware of the problems related to PIM and plan to address them as part of the ongoing PFM reforms. Budget execution management needs to progress alongside other reforms. PSE success depends on re-composition of the budget, for which strong budget institutions are critical (Chart 3). In turn, PFM reforms should improve both budget preparation and execution. In Senegal, public agencies represent a significant challenge to fiscal discipline and sustainability as their decision can have medium to long term impact on public finances (payroll, multi-year commitments). The execution process should provide sufficient room to face contingencies including an adverse macroeconomic environment. A mid-year review of budget execution, including projections for the remainder of the year, could help manage strategic execution. The authorities agreed with staff recommendations and requested technical assistance from the Fund on fiscal policy design, efficient public investment management, and fiscal discipline in budget execution. Page 13 Chart 3. Budget Institutions Budget institutions in Senegal rank below comparators Advanced Emerging Low-Income Senegal Budget Execution m p m I Parliamentary Approval Top-Down Approach Fiscal Reporting Macro-Fiscal Forecasting Fiscal Risk Management Indep. Fiscal Agency Budget Unity Fiscal Objectives Inter-Govt Arrangements Medium-term Budget Framework Performance Orientation b. Planification See SIP, chapter 2 for details. In particular, the staff welcomes first steps for the introduction of a “Precautionary Reserve Envelope” (PRE) process in 2015, which should be developed further in the medium term. The fully-fledged PRE would be a strengthened version of the regulations already put in place by the Ministry of Finance to face in-year contingencies (5% of current and capital expenditure). To be credible, the PRE must identify specific measures subject to a freeze. For instance, the PRE could cover all net creation of positions, excluding front line staff in health and education (nurses, doctors and teachers) and in the security services, as well as budget lines for equipment. The staff advises on a minimum envelope of some 0.5 percent of GDP to be included in the PRE process in 2015 and beyond, to cover potential adverse macroeconomic developments. Funds from the reserves should be released taking into consideration positive cost-benefit calculations, environmental factors, access to concessional financing, overall revenue performance, or other relevant factors. Page 14 The agency reform plan should be consistently implemented with regular updates presented to the National Assembly . In line with earlier commitments, the authorities are strongly encouraged to close, as rapidly as possible, the 16 agencies identified in the reform plan and merge eight other agencies into three agencies. Pending dissolution of agencies identified for closure, only the wage bill should be financed for such entities. Reports on the monitoring of budget execution by the agencies should be produced and published on the website of the Ministry of Finance. The 2015 budget law includes an annex with the complete list of agencies and funds and an update on the implementation of the agency reform plan. The authorities are encouraged to prepare performance contracts for all agencies and monitor closely their reform process. New agencies should not be created without a prior cost-benefit analysis of their feasibility. The authorities are working on the implementation of the agency reform plan. The efforts to implement the single treasury account have been insufficient and should be pursued with determination. To help accelerate movement to a single treasury account, the staff encourages the authorities to introduce a procedure whereby the appropriations to any department or agency will be released only at the level of spending in 2014 until they have closed their accounts and integrated them into the single Treasury account system. The authorities took note of these recommendations.