For the PSE to succeed, Senegal will need to improve its business climate. Senegal has few legal impediments to trade and investment, but it continues to rank among the lowest in the World Bank ease of doing business survey. In the 2015 Doing Business report, Senegal ranks 161th, up from 171th in 2014. Senegal is among the top 10 countries that have made significant progress in improving their business environment. However much remains to be done to put in place a sound business environment and promote private investment, as Senegal still ranks behind its peers in the regions, such as Mali, Côte d'Ivoire, Togo and Benin. The efforts to improve the business climate would need to be accelerated along the lines, inter alia, of Rwanda and Mauritius, which experienced rapid improvements. Staff welcomes reforms to improve access to credit, streamline regulations, and strengthen investor protection and property rights. Additional measures to improve the business environment are still needed (Box 2). The authorities plan to follow up on these recommendations in cooperation with the World Bank. Page 19 Box 2. Measures to Improve the Business Climate Reduce the minimum capital requirement to make it easier to start a business. Reduce the time for obtaining construction permits. Replace the requirement for authorization from the tax authority with a notification requirement, Introduce WAEMU regulations on licensing and operation of credit bureaus to improve the credit and create a single step for the property transfer at the land registry. information system. related-party transactions to the board of directors; making it possible to inspect the documents on related- party transactions and appoint auditors to conduct inspections and for shareholder plaintiffs to request documents relevant to the subject of the claim during the trial. Strengthen minority investor protections by introducing greater requirements for disclosure of Abolish the vehicle tax. Make it possible to download the declaration forms for VAT online to simplify tax payments. Senegal should also continue promoting the removal of barriers to the movement of trade and factors in the context of regional agreements. The free flow of labor and capital is critical to complement the free flow of goods and services. It is particularly important to open the labor market for productive employment in Senegal and to ensure that the skills required to sustain growth are readily available to investors. Skill mismatches that may exclude some Senegalese workers should be addressed directly by retraining rather than by restricting the hiring of needed skills from elsewhere in the region. The authorities were receptive to these recommendations and plan to work with other WAEMU members on their implementation. Reforms in the energy sector are underway but recurrent delays hamper private sector development and add pressures on the budget. The authorities’ estimate in their 2015 budget that the direct costs (tariff compensation to SENELEC, investment, etc.) and indirect costs (mainly customs and tax arrears by SENELEC) may amount to CFAF 230 billion (2.8 percent of GDP) (Chart 7). These subsidies tend to benefit the suppliers of inputs to SENELEC and the better-off who consume the bulk of electricity. At the same time, the expansion of power generation lags dismally behind and unreliable electricity provision hampers economic and social development. The 2015 level of subsidies to SENELEC may be substantially lower if the projected drop in oil prices materializes. Page 20 Chart 7. Total Support to the Energy Sector (in CFAF billion / Percent of GDP) The energy sector weighs heavily on public financing with the total annual support exceeding 2.8 percent of GDP See SIP, chapter 5 for details. The authorities are implementing a comprehensive electricity sector reform program with support from development partners. The authorities’ strategy is to invest in lower-cost electricity generation, which would lower electricity prices and eliminate subsidies whilst increasing production to a level commensurate with Senegal’s development needs. But repeated revisions of the investment plan have delayed the introduction of lower-cost generation capacity, and budgetary subsidies remain high. Staff encourages the authorities to accelerate reforms in the energy sector and to continue to improve transparency. The World Bank and the African Development Bank will have the lead on this issue. Staff reiterates the importance of contingency planning at the investment plan and budget level to avoid unexpected fiscal costs from delays. Further action on lowering electricity costs is critical as the decline in oil prices, even if sustained, would not eliminate subsidies. Reforms should ensure that new jobs are created and the social safety nets are effective with benefits shared equitably. The overall spending on social safety nets in Senegal is substantially below many other SSA countries. Action is particularly important in Senegal as most people are vulnerable to shocks (Chart 8). Some of the growth dividends of the PSE would need to be invested to gradually expand the social Chart 8. Strategy to Cope with Shocks (In Percent of Households) Social safety nets are a critical as most households in Senegal have no strategy to cope with shocks. Utilization of Savings Aid from Friends Sale of Assets No Strategy Loss of Livestock Loss of Harvest Serious Death of Family Illness/Accident Member See SIP, chapter 6 for details Page 21 safety net whilst promoting empowerment and emphasizing conditional cash transfers. To promote social welfare and ensure that the benefits of growth are fairly shared, the staff urges the authorities to create space for expanding the private formal sector through simplified regulations, especially for start-ups and SMEs, and through a labor market reform that would protect workers rather than jobs. This would require making it relatively easy, inexpensive and fast for firms to lay off staff (together with some provisions for legal action by Government in the case of unfair dismissals). However, to protect workers, Government would need to provide support during a reasonable period of job search and may need to subsidize on the job training where skills may need to be improved.