Senegal’s political situation remains stable. The new government, formed after the recent local elections, is committed to speed up implementation of the Plan Sénégal Emergent (PSE), the authorities’ new development strategy. The PSE responds to chronic underperformance which is reflected in the growing popular impatience at the slow pace of reforms, low growth, widespread poverty, and high unemployment. The next presidential elections are expected to take place in 2017, and there is a sense of urgency to deliver on long-overdue reforms and electoral promises. Challenges facing the new government remain substantial to push the economy to realize its potential. The 2013 real GDP growth is estimated at 3.5 percent and may turn even lower once the final data are published. For 2014, growth is expected to reach 4.5 percent, 0.4 percentage points below earlier estimates, reflecting an expected softening in the tourism sector because of the Ebola epidemic compounded by the late start of the rainy season. Inflation remains low. The current account deficit is expected to decline but would stay at about 10 percent of GDP because of depressed exports and high import volumes, mainly of oil. If the projected oil price decline continues, the current account will improve by about one percentage point in 2015 and the medium term relative to the baseline. It is financed by a combination of non-concessional and concessional borrowing. Successful PSE reforms could lift growth to 7 percent in the medium term driven by FDI generated exports . FDI would be crowded in by reforms and investment in human capital and public infrastructure. Economic activity would benefit from an expansion of globally competitive production including investment in new sectors and substantial recovery in the mining and tourism sectors. Growth would be anchored by increased electricity generation at lower cost, an improved business climate, better governance, and public financial management. Risks to the PSE scenario are significant . The main risks are domestic and, therefore, under the control of the authorities. They relate mainly to weak or slow implementation of the reforms envisaged by the PSE, revenue shortfalls that would not allow sufficient mobilization of resources in support of the PSE, failure to curb unproductive public consumption, and delays in raising expenditure efficiency, in particular of domestically financed capital expenditure. The decline in oil prices may lead to lower fiscal revenue, which will be largely offset by lower electricity subsidies if corresponding policy actions are taken, with a marginal impact on the overall balance. Possible exogenous shocks include spillovers from regional crises, including Ebola and the security situation in neighboring countries and climatic shocks that would affect agriculture. External risks include increases in the cost of public borrowing, should investors lose confidence in Senegal’s debt servicing capacity, and the global effects of the unwinding of unconventional monetary policies. Finally, potential spillovers from slower growth in advanced and/or emerging partners may affect Senegal’s exports. The risks from Ebola are real and on the downside . A single imported case was successfully treated and contained in September 2014. However, apprehensions about the epidemic Page 6 are likely to affect the tourism sector during the peak period of November to April. In addition, the closing of the border with Guinea will marginally affect exports. Staff agrees with the authorities’ estimate that the impact of Ebola will be relatively small, at about half a percent of GDP provided the epidemic does not spread.