(As of September 30, 2016) Membership Status: Joined: August 31, 1962; General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency (Exchange rate) Reserve Tranche Position SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: ESF Arrangements B. Latest Financial Arrangements Article VIII %Allocation Type ESF Date of Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn Arrangement Dec 19, 2008 Jun 10, 2010 Apr 28, 2003 Apr 20, 1998 Apr 27, 2006 Apr 19, 2002 Formerly PRGF. Projected Payments to Fund Principal Charges/Interest Forthcoming Total When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of such arrears will be shown in this section. Page 86 Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Commitment of HIPC assistance Decision point date Assistance committed by all creditors (US$ million) Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million) (SDR equivalent in millions) Completion point date II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR million) Assistance disbursed to the member Interim assistance Completion point balance Additional disbursement of interest income Total disbursements Enhanced Framework Jun 2000 Apr. 2004 Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the decision point. Hence these two amounts cannot be added. Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim period. Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI): MDRI-eligible debt (SDR million) Financed by: MDRI Trust Remaining HIPC resources II. Debt Relief by Facility (SDR million) Eligible Debt Delivery Date GRA January 2006 PRGF Total The MDRI provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member countries that qualify for the assistance. Grant assistance from the MDRI Trust and HIPC resources provide debt relief to cover the full stock of debt owed to the Fund as of end-2004 that remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for such debt relief. Page 87 Implementation of Catastrophe Containment and Relief (CCR): Not Applicable As of February 4, 2015, the Post-Catastrophe Debt Relief Trust has been transformed to the Catastrophe Containment and Relief (CCR) Trust. Exchange System: Senegal, a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3 and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. The WAEMU’s exchange regime is a conventional peg to the euro. The union's common currency, the CFA franc, had been pegged to the French franc at the rate of CFAF 1 = F 0.02. Effective January 12, 1994, the CFA franc was devalued and the new parity set at CFAF 1 = F 0.01. Effective December 31, 1998, the parity was switched to the euro at a rate of CFAF 655.96 = €1. The authorities confirmed that Senegal had not imposed measures that could give rise to exchange restrictions subject to Fund jurisdiction. They will inform the Fund, if any such measure is introduced. Aspects of the exchange system were also discussed in the report “WAEMU: Common Policies for Member Countries” (Country Report No. 14/84). Article IV Consultations: The previous consultation discussions were held during September 16–26, 2014. The Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on December 15, 2014 and the staff report was published on January 14, 2015 (Country Report No. 15/2). In concluding the 2014 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors noted that satisfactory program implementation has helped Senegal preserve macroeconomic stability. However, due to internal and external factors, the economy has continued to underperform and unemployment and poverty remain high. The large current account deficit and increasing exposure of the external position to shifting market sentiment pose additional risks to the outlook. Directors stressed that prudent policies and ambitious structural reforms are critical to boosting growth and reducing poverty. In this regard, they welcomed the authorities’ new development strategy as outlined in “Plan Sénégal Emergent” (PSE) and looked forward to its steadfast and timely implementation. Directors emphasized that accelerating the pace of structural reforms will be key to achieving the PSE objectives. They agreed that reform efforts should be aimed at improving governance and the business climate in order to promote private sector development and to attract foreign direct investment. Priority should also be given to making delivery of public services more efficient, improving the impact of public spending through PFM reforms, containing public consumption to generate the fiscal space for investment in human capital and public infrastructure, and strengthening social safety nets. A comprehensive restructuring of the energy sector and increasing Page 88 export competitiveness will also be important. Directors welcomed the authorities’ plans to engage with a few comparator countries to develop an active peer learning effort to roll out the required reforms. Directors encouraged the authorities to anchor fiscal policy on long-term debt sustainability within a medium-term budget framework and reach the WAEMU convergence criteria on the fiscal deficit of 3 percent of GDP by 2019. They noted that attaining this goal will require further strengthening of tax and expenditure policy measures. While supporting the PSE priorities, Directors emphasized that all related investment should be consistent with the authorities’ earlier fiscal consolidation plans and Senegal’s absorptive capacity. In addition, decisions to contract nonconcessional financing should be carefully weighed. Directors welcomed the initiative to improve the quality of public investment by establishing a precautionary reserve envelope from which funding would only be released for projects with proper feasibility studies. Directors encouraged the authorities to extend this in the 2016 budget. Directors stressed that continued efforts will be needed to improve public financial management, budget institutions, and economic governance. They underscored that reforms should focus on key areas such as macro-fiscal policy design, development of a medium-term expenditure framework and improved fiscal discipline in budget execution. Directors highlighted the importance of addressing financial sector vulnerabilities, especially the quality of bank assets. They encouraged continued vigilance of the high level of non-performing loans in close cooperation with the BCEAO and WAEMU Banking Commission. Directors supported the strategy to improve access to financial services. Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) Participation: A joint team of the World Bank and the IMF conducted a mission under the FSAP program in 2000 and 2001. The Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) was issued in 2001 (IMF Country Report No. 01/189). An FSAP update was undertaken in 2004, focusing on development issues (in particular nationwide supply of basic financial services and access of SMEs to credit, in line with the priorities defined in the PRSP (IMF Country Report No. 05/126). A regional FSAP for the WAEMU was undertaken in 2007 and the FSSA was issued in May 2008 (SM/08/139). A ROSC on the data module was published in 2002. An FAD mission conducted a ROSC on the fiscal transparency module in 2005. Page 89 Technical Assistance (2010–16): AFRITAC West Year Area Focus Quarterly national accounts (QNA); institutional sector accounts Tax administration modernization Follow-up mission QNA; institutional sector accounts Strengthening of financial management information systems: IT master plan and interconnections (3 AFW visits) Establishment of medium-sized enterprise tax Public debt analysis center Annual Government Finance Statistics Annual and quarterly national accounts Annual and Quarterly national accounts Budget preparation; WAEMU compliant budget classification, Medium-Term Planning and budgeting and payroll management (5 visits: 2011-12) Assistance to the Treasury function; organization and process, WAEMU compliant standard, and central government balance sheet (4 visits: 2014-15) Financial regime of autonomous agencies DSA workshop Help the authorities produce a national borrowing policy document Page 90 Year Area Bank Supervision and Regulations Public Debt Public Debt Management Focus Annual and Quarterly Government Finance Statistics Public Debt Management, Government securities policy issuance Payroll management: methods and model MTBF: articulation with the macroeconomic frame Budget execution; streamlining the chain of expenditure and decentralizing budget management (2 visits) securities policy issuance, Diversification of debt market instruments Updating National Accounting system GFS Workshop (International and Regional Methodology training) Public Debt management Transfer pricing Public Expenditure Management securities policy issuance Updating National Accounting system; ONA TOFE implementation/GFS update A workshop on transfer prices with a focus on telecommunication sector General Balance of Government accounts Headquarters B. Department Date Jan. 2010 Feb. 2010 Jul. 10 Oct. 2010 Fiscal Affairs Form Purpose Review of the expenditure chain Staff/AFRITAC Staff/Expert/ AFRITAC PFM (Treasury Single Account and cash forecasts) Page 91 Nov. 2010 Dec. 2010 Review of tax policy and tax expenditures Public financial management and accounting (state, PEs, agencies) May 11 Sep. 2011 Nov. 2011 Dec. 2011 Jan. 2012 Consolidation of accounts May & Sep. 2012, and FAD staff/Experts TPA multi-Module Missions on tax reform and revenue administration Jul. 2012 PIT and Taxation of the Banking and Telecoms Sectors Budget Execution, Fiscal Reporting, and Cash Management Strengthening Cash Management and Treasury Single Account Wage Bill Budgeting and Execution Mining and tax exemptions Capital expenditure forecasting Jun. 2013 Jul. 2013 Aug. 2013 VAT documents and exemptions Customs diagnostics and administration External grants budgeting Tax policy administration FAD staff/Experts Tax policy administration Implementing WAEMU directives Page 92 Expenditure rationalization Tax administration, develop IT system to improve tax administration Mar. 2015 Jan. 2015 Sep. 2015 Nov. 2015 Feb. 2016 Jun. 2016 Jul. 2016 Jul.2016 Tax administration, tax arrears Module 1 Regional Workshop (WAEMU Regional Workshop) Fiscal Reform Budget management Growth strategy development Tax administration reform Tax reforms and Directorate General Tax reforms Budget framework Tax assessment Review of the TPA-TTF program and the design of a draft project under the RMTF Aug.2016 Sep. 2016 Assessment of the IT system to identify its strengths and weaknesses and advise on the preparation of the hackathon Senegal technical delegation visit to French Ministry of Finance in the area of Information Management and Public Financial Management Statistics Oct. 2014 Financial monetary statistics Government finance statistics STA Expert National Accounts (multiple visits) Page 93 Legal Tax law (general, VAT) Monetary and Capital Markets VAT May 2012 Jun. 2012 Sep. 2010 Tax law (general, tax procedures) Tax procedures Needs assessment Jan.-Feb. 2011 Staff/World Bank Medium-Term Debt Strategy (MDTS) Jan. 2014 Jul. 2014 Regional bank supervision Public debt Bank restructuring Bank Supervision Government securities policy issuance Sep. 2014-Feb 2015 Staff Resident Representative C. Stationed in Dakar since July 24, 1984; the position has been held by Mr. Boileau Loko since September 2013. D. Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism The onsite visit for Senegal's AML/CFT evaluation took place in July/August 2007 in the context of ECOWAS’s Inter-Governmental Action Group Against Money Laundering in West Africa (GIABA). The report was adopted in early May 2008 by the GIABA Plenary held in Accra, Ghana. The report highlighted several areas of weaknesses in the AML/CFT system, confirmed by a score of 12 non-compliant and 16 partially compliant ratings out of the 40+9 FATF AML/CFT recommendations. In May 2009 Senegal joined the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units (FIUs). The FIU publishes on its website statistics on suspicious transaction reports received, the number of cases transmitted to the judiciary, and the number of convictions. Senegal’s eighth follow-up report was discussed at GIABA’s May 2016 Plenary. It acknowledged the progress achieved in its legal, regulatory and institutional framework, including the efforts to revise the AML/CFT legal framework in line with the 2012 FATF standard, and encouraged Senegal to continue making improvements. Senegal was removed from the follow-up process and will be assessed under the 2012 FATF standard in early 2017. Page 94 JOINT MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN IMPLEMENTATION