Fiscal policy for the remainder of 2014 For 2014, the authorities agreed with staff that achieving the fiscal deficit target of 5.2 percent of the revised GDP will send a positive signal. Donors and markets will welcome adherence to the PSE principle that fiscal sustainability will not be compromised. This target is within reach owing to a good revenue performance, in line with projections. The shortfall in tax revenue at end-September was marginal and should be reabsorbed by end-December. However, upward pressures persist on current spending, including from higher compensation to the national electricity company (SENELEC). These deviations are offset by a lower wage bill, as the hiring of contractual employees was reduced, and savings in consumption of other goods and services. The authorities intend to continue implementing tax policy and revenue administration measures. They plan to reduce tax arrears and VAT credits. In addition, the revised budget approved in October 2014 envisages an increase in the income and telecommunications taxes effective January 1, 2015. Studies have been launched to assess new financial and environmental taxes. Financing for the rest of the year has been secured. The budget will be financed mainly by external concessional loans and borrowing on the regional market. In addition, for debt management purposes, in July, the authorities issued a 10-year US$500 million Eurobond at 6.25 percent and a CFAF 100 billion Sukuk, its first Islamic bond. The proceeds will substitute for shorter maturity domestic financing and reimburse part of the more expensive syndicated loan issued last year. Page 9 The Ebola outbreak requires immediate attention. In the wake of the single imported case of Ebola, the authorities provided additional resources to the Ministry of Health in addition to support received from development partners (WHO, UNDP). To mitigate macro-risks related to Ebola, the authorities are also undertaking contingency planning. A team coordinated by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) is preparing requests for additional and exceptional budget support from development partners. Additional support should provide temporary assistance for programs that can be worked out in advance with key operators in each sector in case Ebola has regional spillovers or the impact from perceptions in the rest of the world adversely affects tourism and land, maritime and air transport. Fiscal policy for 2015 and the medium term The authorities submitted their draft 2015 budget to the National Assembly with a fiscal deficit of 4.7 percent of GDP, reflecting fiscal consolidation of 0.5 percent of GDP . This is slightly less ambitious than originally planned, as the authorities plan to quickly scale up investment on PSE-related projects. On the revenue side, the budget assumes that stronger GDP growth would expand the taxable base, which would allow raising additional revenue. Also, the implementation of the new Tax Code is expected to bear full fruit. In addition, the authorities intend to recover substantial amounts of unpaid taxes from previous years, strengthen tax and customs administration, and rationalize taxation of the financial sector and telecommunication. On the expenditure side, the budget incorporates spending equivalent to 2.1 percent of GDP for 27 key PSE-related projects. To finance PSE-related investment, the authorities are taking policy measures amounting to 1.5 percent of GDP and plan to borrow an additional 0.6 percent of GDP, if needed. To create additional space for PSE-related investment, they also decided to keep public consumption constant in real terms, including freezing the wage bill for all non front-line staff, and reorient lower priority investment toward PSE-related projects. Chart 2. Fiscal Deficit Projections While fully sharing PSE priorities, staff recommended a less ambitious scaling up of public investment in 2015, which would allow reducing the deficit to 4 percent of GDP (Chart 2). Staff urged the authorities to maintain the original fiscal consolidation path projected under the PSI until there is firm evidence that the growth dividends of PSE reforms are kicking in. A higher deficit without stronger growth would increase fiscal and debt vulnerabilities. Moreover, the absorptive capacity in Senegal remains low, and additional investment may not be used efficiently. (In percent of GDP) Auth. The authorities responded that they would take a cautious approach to the scaling up of public investment and introduce a Precautionary Reserve Envelope (PRE). For 2015, the PRE involves freezing expenditure allocations See SIP, chapter 2 for details. Page 10 for projects without feasibility studies. In the draft 2015 budget, the authorities included 10 PSE- related investment projects in the amount of CFAF 52 bn (0.7 percent of GDP) that would be put in the reserve. The Ministry of Finance would release funding for these projects only after line ministries complete acceptable feasibility studies. In the authorities’ view, this measure would provide a valuable safeguard against a too-rapid increase in public investment spending. A more comprehensive version of the PRE would be introduced starting from the 2016 budget. The authorities expressed concerns regarding possible revenue shortfalls related to the Ebola epidemic in the region. They estimated the overall impact from the epidemic on the fiscal deficit in 2015 could reach about 0.3 percent of GDP, mainly in the form of lost revenue related to tourism. The impact may be larger if the epidemic is not contained, with an impact on public spending. The authorities intend to reflect the impact of Ebola on the public finances in a supplementary budget later in 2015 once they have more clarity. Staff agreed that a fiscal shock stemming from Ebola should be accommodated. In view of the risks to the 2015 fiscal outlook, staff encouraged the authorities to consider additional fiscals measures (Box 1). For the medium term, the authorities intend to maintain the envisaged fiscal consolidation path. By 2019, the authorities plan to bring the fiscal deficit to the WAEMU target of 3 percent of GDP. Box 1. Possible Additional Fiscal Measures for 2015 Assign a team to monitor the impact of tax policy reforms already approved on revenue collection and to Recover at least 50 percent of unpaid taxes in 2015. Start using from January 2015 the Single Taxpayer Identification number (NINEA) for enforcement and Give consideration to a bonus/malus system to reward/penalize taxpayers who chose to use the NINEA. Revenue measures cross checking of various taxes, in particular in the customs. recommend corrective measures in case of underperformance. Expenditure measures management to the implementation of electricity sector reforms and the level of the required subsidy. objective would be to put in place a new policy on allowances which could be bundled and linked to performance contracts. Rationalize current expenditures in agencies by limiting spending to wages pending closure of agencies which are to be shut down. Eliminate redundant agencies and merge those identified in the agency reform plan published by the government in 2013. budgetary resources whilst encouraging banks to provide student loans. Include in the performance contract with SENELEC a provision to link the pay of the board and senior Implement a review of wage supplements and subject increases to performance-based rules. The Implement the new policy on scholarships within a ceiling determined on the basis of availability of Better target subsidies in agriculture Page 11 To maintain long-run fiscal sustainability, the authorities are considering to anchor fiscal policy on a debt path consistent with debt sustainability. In particular, staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to keep the debt-to-GDP ratio below 52 percent, lower than the WAEMU convergence criterion (70 percent). This level is consistent with the authorities declared intention in the PSE that new investments should be accommodated with corresponding cuts in public consumption or additional revenues, without any recourse to additional debt. Staff recommends that this debt path be announced in the budget with a commitment that in case of a deviation, the following budget would include a list of actions aimed at putting the debt back on the original path within four years. The Minister of Finance would also be required to explain to the National Assembly the reasons for the initial deviation. In the course of 2015 these provisions could be enshrined into law. The authorities have broadly agreed with these recommendations. To improve traction for key PSE-related reforms, staff suggests that the authorities map each critical reform to the personal responsibility of an official. For this purpose, a team could be set up within the Ministry of Finance with the mandate to lead the reform effort. The team could consist of public officials who in addition to their normal duties would take on specific tasks to monitor the implementation of reforms. The team would develop timelines with key milestones for each reform, and in case of slippages recommend corrective action. The team could also be asked to identify comparator countries with which to develop an active collaboration program. Practitioners with experience in the reforms would share their experience and provide advice on how Senegal might approach the reforms. These proposals would then be passed on to the Minister of Finance who would seek approval from government. The authorities are beginning to move in this direction as part of the reflection on how best to mobilize support from the Fund and other development partners for the PSE. Finally, the authorities intend to continue improving fiscal transparency. Quarterly budget appropriations and their execution will be published on the website of the Ministry of Finance in a form accessible to the public and the finance commission of the National Assembly.