Senegal’s growth in recent years has been sluggish, which has hampered inclusive growth and poverty reduction . A period of relatively strong, although still under-par, growth in 1995–2005 of 4.5 percent led to a substantial decline in poverty from 68 to 48 percent. However, in 2006–2013 growth decelerated to an average of 3.4 percent, reflecting insufficiently broad and rapid reforms to deal with a poor business climate, persistent problems in the energy sector, poor infrastructure, low efficiency of public investment and significant unproductive public consumption spending on subsidies, transfers and administrative overhead. In addition, Senegal was hit by a series of exogenous shocks, such as the spikes in food and fuel prices, the global financial crisis, regional droughts and floods, and more recently, the spillovers from Ebola. As a result, poverty has declined only slightly in recent years and stands at about 47 percent. At the same time, debt ratios have increased with total public debt projected to reach 49 percent of GDP in 2014. The fiscal deficit, which was below 4 percent of GDP in 2007, steadily widened to 6.7 percent of GDP in 2011 before undergoing renewed fiscal consolidation with the deficit falling by 1.6 percentage points over the last three years to reach 5.2 percent of GDP in 2014. To exit the trap of low growth and high poverty, the government has developed an ambitious program (“Plan Sénégal Emergent”, PSE). The PSE intends to make Senegal a hub for West Africa by achieving high rates of equitably shared growth. It is articulated around three pillars: (i) higher and sustainable growth through structural transformation; (ii) human development and social protection; and (iii) improved governance, peace, and security. The PSE envisages structural reforms to attract FDI and increase private investment. It also calls for constraining public consumption and increasing public savings to generate fiscal space for higher public investment in human capital and public infrastructure. International experience suggests that PSE growth targets are achievable in the long run if appropriate policies are put in place. Since 1990, many countries have achieved the high and sustained growth envisaged in the PSE by putting in place policy and institutional reforms. In contrast, some countries that tried to grow based largely on increased government spending, Page 7 including Senegal in the recent past, ended up with more debt, and on average, worse growth. For the PSE to succeed, the authorities will need to identify and distill the experience of comparator countries to put in place the package of reforms required to attract FDI, increase the role of private investment, and expand exports. The authorities are following up on staff recommendations to identify a few comparator countries to develop an active peer learning effort accelerate the rollout of reforms required for PSE to succeed. The authorities agree with staff that PSE success rests on accelerating reforms to boost FDI and exports. The PSE offers good diagnostics and a sensible development strategy, including the right mix of private investment (two thirds) that should be crowded in by more public investment in both human capital and infrastructure. However, the risk is that required reforms are neglected whilst public spending is increased. The staff encourages broad and speedy regulatory reforms required to attract investors who currently hesitate to invest in Senegal. Growth unlocked by PSE-related reforms should be inclusive and job-rich. This will require continued efforts to expand opportunities and job creation in emerging sectors based on expanded FDI and in agriculture by raising productivity. The authorities are broadly receptive to staff advice to (i) accelerate implementation of business climate reforms; (ii) improve governance to provide certainty to investors; (iii) improve women’s access to resources and to property rights;(iv)reform the state to more effectively deliver public services; (v) improve the impact of public spending through PFM reforms including better public investment management; (vi) freeze public consumption in real terms to create space for investment in human capital and public infrastructure; and(vii) strengthen social safety nets based on World Bank advice. Chart 1. Growth Projections Higher growth is achievable but at a slower pace than envisaged The authorities see 2015 as a break-through year, where Senegal will move from planning to action. The authorities project a spike in growth next year to 5.4 percent after the impact of Ebola. This would be driven by foreign direct investment in the phosphate industry, public investment in infrastructure, domestic private investment in the cement industry and reforms in the agricultural sector. These include development of new farming areas, irrigation, better seed preparation, procurement of fertilizers and rehabilitation of stocking facilities. The authorities project growth would accelerate further in 2016-18 to 6-7 percent and reach 7.3 percent in 2019 (Chart 1). See SIP, chapter 1 for details. (Percent) by the authorities Auth. 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Page 8 Staff agrees that the PSE, if fully implemented, would unlock high growth. However, opinions differed with respect to how fast it can be achieved. If the authorities can tackle difficult outstanding structural reforms, they may be able to achieve their targeted growth path in the long run. However, this would require accelerating, broadening and deepening reforms that would mobilize FDI for globally competitive production more rapidly than currently planned. Interest groups that favor the status quo remain entrenched and reforms may be implemented at a slower pace than envisaged amid pressure to ramp up public investment. Consequently, the staff considers that in 2015 growth will not exceed 4.6 percent and could reach 7 percent by 2019 if PSE-related reforms are started immediately and implemented consistently. These staff projections are reflected in the baseline. To mitigate the risks, reforms to improve public investment management should be accelerated. The authorities are receptive to staff advice to (i) work with the World Bank, AfDB and other development partners to ensure that only high quality projects are being accommodated; (ii) base the 2015 budget on conservative growth assumptions, rather than on rapid growth dividends; (iii) postpone public investment projects with low rates of return; (iv) include projects in the budget only after rigorous vetting, and (v) launch a PFM reform project with Fund support and EU financing.