The program aims to support financial sector stability and resilience, while improving financial intermediation. The financial sector agenda is built around diagnostics of banks’ balance sheets, an overhaul of the bank resolution framework, and the development of a comprehensive strategy to address high levels of distressed debt. Background The mostly foreign-owned banking sector has remained resilient in the face of increasingly difficult economic conditions. Overall capitalization appears strong, as regulatory capital—largely consisting of Tier 1 instruments—amounted to almost 20 percent of risk-weighted assets in November 2014. The banking sector remains highly liquid and is increasingly reliant on deposits as a funding source. This stems from a combination of moderate but steady deposit growth and continued decline in parent funding of the Foreign-owned subsidiaries, the majority of which are from the EU, account for about 75 percent of total assets, whereas local banks are mostly state owned. November 2014 Return on equity (%) Regulatorycapital to risk-weighted assetsGross nonperforming loans to total loans (%)Coreliquid assets to total assets (%) Financial Soundness Indicators, 2010-14 Source: NationalBank of Serbia Page 18 Serbian subsidiaries of foreign banks, arising from low credit demand. As a result, the system’s loan-to-deposit ratio has improved to about 95 percent. However, the profitability of the Serbian banking sector has been below the regional average, in part due to the difficult macroeconomic environment and reduced business volumes (Figure 11 and Table 9). Nonperforming loans pose a significant challenge for Serbian banks. Since 2008, the NPL ratio has more than doubled, exceeding those of most regional peers (Figure 11). Corporate NPLs are particularly high (almost 30 percent of corporate loans in 2014:Q3) and constitute the bulk of the overall distressed debt. At the same time, high regulatory loan-loss reserves, which exceed provisioning on the basis of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) accounting standards, provide a capital cushion against credit losses, and thus help underpin financial sector stability. However, such regulatory requirements do not result in losses being recognized in banks’ financial statements. Mounting vulnerabilities in some state-owned banks led to their failures. Four of these banks fell into distress and had to be resolved at a significant fiscal cost of 1¾ percent of GDP over 2012–14. Their resolution also revealed challenges in the application of the existing bank resolution framework. As a result, the government developed a comprehensive strategy for state-owned banks in 2014 to enhance their resilience (MEFP ¶23), which is being implemented. In particular, it aims to bolster institutions that fulfill a strategic function in the Serbian banking system, while selling or winding down in an orderly fashion other state-owned institutions, including via asset and liability transfers. The authorities are also committed to strengthening banks’ corporate governance and risk control frameworks, in accordance with international best practices. Credit to the economy has contracted since 2013, putting a drag on the economic recovery. The authorities believe that this is due to both demand and supply-side constraints, as weak economic prospects lead to low demand for credit. At the same time, high corporate indebtedness and perceived credit risk prompt banks to tighten lending standards and reduce their willingness to extend credit, thereby weakening financial intermediation. Policy discussions The authorities and staff agreed that a thorough assessment of the banks’ balance sheets is necessary to anchor the financial sector policy agenda. These diagnostic studies, similar to asset quality reviews conducted in EU countries, will help verify the health of the banking system, dispel uncertainty about banks’ asset quality, and guide regulatory and supervisory policies (MEFP ¶20). They will shed light on banks’ collateral valuation practices, assess the adequacy of provisioning, and provide better information for combating vulnerabilities. In parallel, the authorities will further enhance the supervisory and regulatory frameworks by leveraging standards and requirements contained in the EU’s Single Rule Book, international best practices, and the insights drawn from the diagnostic studies (MEFP ¶19). Page 19 The authorities, in collaboration with IFIs, are committed to designing and implementing a comprehensive strategy for dealing with NPLs. There was broad agreement that, if left unchecked, high NPLs can adversely affect financial stability, as credit losses sap bank profitability. The strategy should thus aim to: (i) assess, and—where necessary—enhance banks’ capacity for dealing with NPLs; (ii) promote out-of-court restructuring; (iii) improve in-court corporate debt-resolution mechanisms; and (iv) remove impediments obstructing the development of a market for distressed debt (MEFP ¶22). Given the multidimensional nature of the debt overhang, the implementation of the strategy will require strong commitment and the collaboration of all stakeholders. The authorities have taken steps to significantly strengthen the bank resolution framework, with technical assistance from the Fund. The reform establishes a robust framework that will facilitate timely resolution of banks while minimizing fiscal risks (MEFP ¶21). The new framework reflects international best practices and draws, as appropriate for Serbia’s specific conditions, on the EU’s Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive. The framework is based on the principle of loss allocation to private sector participants in line with creditor hierarchy. It expands the menu of resolution powers and tools to allow early and decisive intervention. It also improves transparency and predictability through legal and procedural clarity and advance preparation for orderly resolution. Moreover, resolution powers will be centralized at the NBS, with safeguards to duly separate resolution and supervision functions. In parallel, the governance and operational capacity of the Deposit Insurance Agency is being strengthened with technical assistance from the World Bank and the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). The authorities will continue to implement measures aimed at increasing dinarization of the financial system to strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism. Staff agreed that maintaining macroeconomic stability and keeping inflation within the target range will help improve confidence and promote demand for dinar-denominated assets. Staff also supported efforts to lengthen the maturity of dinar-denominated government securities in the local market and to promote hedging instruments (MEFP ¶24).