Background Controlling inflation has been a challenge for Serbia’s inflation targeting (IT) regime. Inflation has been frequently outside the tolerance band since the inception of the full-fledged IT framework in 2009. The factors contributing to the high inflation volatility were: (i) sizeable food price shocks that stemmed partly from protection of agricultural markets and relatively low food imports, (ii) large pass-through from periodic bouts of depreciation, (iii) weak monetary policy transmission mechanism due to exceptionally high euroization, and (iv) unpredictable changes in regulated prices. Page 16 Tight monetary policy had to compensate for the overly loose fiscal policy. Serbia’s mounting fiscal imbalances and public debt kept the risk premium (measured by the EMBIG spread) generally higher than in peer countries. This imposed constraints on monetary policy, requiring relatively high policy interest rates to ward off exchange rate pressures, led to elevated interest rates on bank lending, and dampened credit growth. Policy discussions The NBS reaffirmed its commitment to inflation targeting and the flexible exchange rate regime. Staff agreed that the inflation targeting system remains appropriate for Serbia, despite the challenges in its implementation, as it helps anchor inflation expectations. In view of the exchange rate’s important role as shock absorber, especially given widespread price and wage rigidities, staff supported the increasing exchange rate flexibility observed in the 250300350SRBHRVHUNROMPOLBGR EMBIG spread, period average for 2014:Q3 Y 2014:Q3 Bank lending interest rates (in real terms) to non-financial corporations, 2012-2014:Q3 1/ Source:Bloomberg, NBS and Fund staff calculations. 1/ Nominal interest rates on loans in local currency adjusted for CPI inflation.2/ Interest rate on FX-linked loans to non-financial corporations. Inflation CPI Inflation Lower bound Upper bound Inflation target Source: National Bankof Serbia Contribution to Annual Inflation Food All other goods and services 12-month Inflation Source: National Bankof Serbia Page 17 second half of 2014 and cautioned against large-scale or sustained foreign exchange market interventions. The authorities reaffirmed that interventions are used only for smoothing excessive volatility (MEFP ¶15). Staff also emphasized the need for better liquidity management and coordination, and the authorities agreed to reestablish the Liquidity Management Committee (MEFP ¶11). The NBS and staff agreed that the fiscal consolidation now underway creates room for further gradual monetary policy easing. The fiscal adjustment initiated in late 2014— against a background of declining domestic credit—creates space for the loosening of monetary policy (MEFP ¶14). This rebalancing of the policy mix will help to reduce real interest rates and foster credit growth to the economy. However, staff emphasized that the pace of easing should be cautious and reflect external financing conditions, inflation expectations, and the progress in fiscal consolidation. Staff therefore recommended that future key policy rate reductions should take place only in the absence of balance of payments pressures. Staff also supported the recent reductions in the reserve requirements, which were set at high levels to stem large capital inflows during the pre-crisis years. There was also agreement that the capital account liberalization required in the context of EU accession should be gradual, particularly in removing restrictions on inflows to short-term securities and the ability of residents to open deposits abroad (MEFP ¶16).