The Serbian economy has been facing protracted structural challenges. Prior to the 2008 global financial crisis, strong growth was achieved at the expense of accumulating internal and external imbalances (Figure 1). At the same time, the unfinished structural reform agenda led to mounting competitiveness problems, poor labor market outcomes, large current account deficits, high and volatile inflation, and periodic exchange rate pressures (Figures 2 and 3). Weak public institutions and large fiscal imbalances in recent years have led to a rapid buildup of public debt (Figure 4). In addition, Serbia was hit by exogenous shocks, such as an extreme winter and drought in 2012, and devastating floods in 2014. As a result, Serbia’s GDP is still below its pre-crisis level. Serbia now has a window of opportunity to break from past policies and embark on stabilization and reform. The new coalition government, appointed in April 2014 and commanding a parliamentary majority, reaffirmed Serbia’s path of EU accession and committed to implementing reforms needed to restore macroeconomic stability and achieve sustainable growth. This commitment has already been underscored by the launch of important structural reforms and strong steps toward fiscal consolidation (Box 1). To support their reform program, the authorities have requested a three-year precautionary SBA. Box 1. Implementation of Past Fund Advice The implementation of past Article IV recommendations accelerated in 2014. While the authorities agreed with many of the Fund’s recommendations in past years, policy implementation had been incomplete. In 2014, important structural reforms were introduced in the summer and fiscal consolidation started in the fall. In the fiscal area, the Fund’s past advice focused on: (i) regaining fiscal sustainability through a reduction of mandatory spending; (ii) improving public financial management; and (iii) raising the efficiency of tax administration. A fiscal rule and a public debt ceiling (45 percent of GDP) introduced in 2011 to strengthen fiscal discipline were not followed and the fiscal situation deteriorated subsequently. Despite measures implemented in the past two years (i.e., VAT and CIT tax rate increases in 2012, lower wage and pension indexation in 2012–13, and a solidarity tax on high public wages with an attrition rule in the civil service in early 2014), the consolidation efforts were piecemeal and the size of the adjustment was limited. However, important fiscal consolidation measures have been introduced since mid-2014, including a parametric pension reform in line with the Fund’s advice, a 10 percent public sector wage cut, and a progressive reduction of pensions (MEFP ¶¶6–7). While there have been modest improvements in the PFM area, notably in arrears monitoring and control, tax administration reform has yet to start. In the area of monetary and financial sector policies, the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) maintained a tight monetary policy stance in the presence of loose fiscal policy and uncertain capital flows, in line with the Fund’s previous advice. However, the NBS tightly managed the exchange rate through foreign exchange market interventions till mid-2014. Furthermore, the gap between the key policy rate and the average reverse repo rate, which sends an uncertain signal about the monetary policy stance, has remained. While weaknesses in several public banks eventually prompted resolutions at the expense of taxpayers, strong prudential policies were maintained, in line with the Fund’s recommendations. Notable progress has been Page 6 Box 1. Implementation of Past Fund Advice (Concluded) made in the area of strengthening the bank resolution framework, in collaboration with the Fund, the World Bank, and the EBRD. The related legislative changes have been finalized in early February 2015. In structural areas , the Fund had previously advised: (i) labor market reforms to foster private sector job creation and tackle persistently high unemployment; (ii) regulatory reforms to improve Serbia’s rigid business environment; and (iii) public enterprise reforms to reduce excessive state intervention in public enterprises. While these reforms had largely stalled in the past years, important legislative reforms were introduced since mid-2014 in line with the Fund’s advice. Comprehensive amendments to the Labor Law have provided a legal basis for more efficient labor market functioning, and amendments to the Urban Planning and Construction Law cleared the way for more timely issuance of construction permits, removing a key bottleneck for investment. Recent changes to the Bankruptcy Law and a new Privatization Law have created more effective tools needed to resolve non-viable state and socially-owned enterprises. The authorities have also offered more than 500 socially-owned enterprises for sale in 2014.