In 2014, the Serbian economy fell into recession for the third time in six years. After a recovery in 2013, the economy contracted by an estimated 2 percent in 2014, as devastating floods in May took a heavy toll on industrial production and the energy sector, and weaknesses in economic activity in the trading partners reduced demand for Serbia’s exports (Figure 5). Formal employment has continued to fall, indicating persistent weaknesses in the labor market, and real net earnings remained flat. Credit to the economy continued to contract due to the challenging economic environment and NPL overhang. Inflation fell to record low levels due to contracting domestic demand and low imported inflation. Headline inflation has been below the inflation tolerance (IT) band due to a decline in food prices since late 2013 (Figure 6). Core inflation fell subsequently as well, suggesting broad-based disinflation pressures, similar to trends observed in the region. In response, the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) reduced the key policy rate by 50 basis points to In late 2014, the GDP time series were revised in line with 2010 SNA methodology, and nominal GDP was revised upward by an average of about 7 percent. This reduces all ratios as a share of GDP compared to previously reported statistics. Serbia Trading partners 1/ Emerging Europe 2/ Real Gross Domestic Product (Year-on-year percent change)Sources: SORS; WEO; Direction of Trade Database; and IMF staff estimates.1/ 10 largest trading partners by export value. 2/ ALB, BIH, BFR, HRV, HUN, UVK, LTU, MKD, MNE, POL, ROU, SRB, and TUR. Page 7 8 percent, and lowered reserve requirements on banks’ foreign exchange liabilities by 3 percentage points to stimulate lending. Despite the reduction, the key policy rate remained relatively high in real terms due to low inflation. The gradual adjustment of the current account was interrupted by the floods and weak external demand. The improvement in the current account deficit in 2013, mainly due to expanding automobile exports, halted in 2014 on account of flood-related net electricity imports and a slower European market for automobiles, though lower oil prices in the second half of 2014 partly compensated for the expansion of imports (Figure 7). International reserves remained at comfortable levels despite capital outflows. The dinar came under pressure in the second half of 2014, as the widening current account deficit compounded the effects of continued net outflows from the banking sector and debt service by the public sector. This was further amplified by a weakening of market sentiment toward Serbia due to delayed fiscal adjustment and uncertainty regarding the policy course. In response, the NBS increased exchange rate flexibility after almost a year-long period of tight management, though foreign exchange market interventions continued (Figure 8). Despite a reduction by €1.3 billion over 12 months, gross international reserves stood at 6¾ months of imports (or at 205 percent of the Fund reserves metric, well above the 100–150 recommended range) at end-2014. While the 2014 budget took steps toward fiscal adjustment, the headline deficit worsened, largely as a result of the floods. The legislated consolidation measures included a new solidarity tax on public wages and a tax on farmer income, introduction of a 5:1 attrition rule in public administration, and an increase in the lower VAT rate from 8 to 10 percent. Nevertheless, the flood-induced recession and the ensuing recovery spending led to the approval of a supplementary budget in October 2014. As a result, the general government deficit Required reserves ratios were reduced from 29 to 26 percent for maturities of less than two years and from 22 to 19 percent for maturities of two years or more. This was accompanied by a reduction in the share payable in foreign exchange by 6 percentage points. Inflation Consumer prices (CPI) CPI excluding energy, food, alcohol and tobacco Food and non-alcoholic beverages Energy Source: The NBS. Inflationtolerance band Serbia CPI Euro area CPI Emerging Europe CPI 1/ Serbia domestic demand (RHS) Consumer Price Index and Domestic Demand (Year-on-year percent change)Sources: SORS; WEO; and IMF staff estimates.1/ ALB, BIH, BFR, HRV, HUN, UVK, LTU, MKD, MNE, POL, ROU, SRB, and TUR. Page 8 increased to an estimated 7½ percent of GDP in 2014, public debt reached about 70 percent of GDP, and gross financing needs rose sharply (Figure 4). Yields on domestic debt continued to fall in line with developments in emerging markets.