Background Public finances deteriorated in the past several years. The core problems arose from: (i) declining revenues despite tax rate hikes, (ii) continued rise of already unsustainably high mandatory spending, especially public wage and pension bills, (iii) expanding state aid to ailing SOEs, usually in the form of direct subsidies and guarantees for borrowing which often were called, and (iv) cost of resolving ailing public banks (Figure 4). This was partially offset by the compression of capital spending, in part arising from the inability to execute budgeted projects. While most of the external public debt is owed to multilateral and bilateral creditors, which has State aid to SOEs includes direct subsidies, net lending through the budget, assumption of SOEs’ debt, and the service of guaranteed debt called by creditors. Page 12 helped keep the average nominal interest rate low, the rising share of market debt in recent years has pushed up the interest bill substantially. Serbia has had a poor track record of meeting its own targets due to weak fiscal framework. The main problems in public financial management included a fragmented budget process across time and the various parts of the general government, and the absence of effective multi-year orientation of spending policies. Incomplete transparency of fiscal operations, insufficient external and internal audit procedures, and recourse to quasi-fiscal operations also played a role. Policy discussions The authorities and staff agreed that a strong adjustment program is needed to stabilize public debt by 2017 and put it firmly on a downward path thereafter. This requires a reduction of the structural primary fiscal balance by about 3½ percent of GDP during 2015–17. The authorities viewed frontloading of measures as feasible in view of the political momentum that has been built, and as appropriate to enhance the credibility of reforms. The 2015 budget and supportive legislation approved by the National Assembly in December 2014 reflect these efforts. Over the medium term, the authorities considered the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) as a relevant fiscal anchor and concurred with staff that SGP criteria should be reached by the time of EU accession. Fiscal deficit excl. amortization of called guarantees Amortization of called guarantees Net issuance of guarantees and off budget lending Exchange rate valuation effects Nominal GDP Net accumulation of financial assets (including residual) Change in public debt Serbia: Change in Public Debt, 2011-14 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimations. 2007 Fiscal Plan 2008 Fiscal Plan 2009 Fiscal Plan 2010 Fiscal Plan 2011 Fiscal Plan 2012 Fiscal Plan 2013 Fiscal Plan Actual Fiscal Balance 1/ Actual and Projected Fiscal Balances (Percent GDP) 1/ Actual fiscalbalance series are calculated using revised nominal GDP. Tax revenue Wages and pensions Subsidies, net lending, and amortization of called guarantees Interest payments Capital spending Other spending Augmented deficit Serbia: Change in Fiscal Deficit, 2011-14 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimations. Page 13 Despite the large fiscal adjustment, the projected decline in public debt is susceptible to a number of shocks (Annex I). In particular, the debt sustainability analysis suggests that a standard shock to real GDP growth would considerably increase the peak level of the public debt. In addition, the high share of foreign currency debt, which has been exacerbated by the issuance of eurobonds since 2011, gives rise to a significant vulnerability to currency depreciations. Furthermore, staff simulations indicate that debt sustainability could be jeopardized if only half of the envisaged fiscal adjustment is implemented over the program period (Figure 9). However, the authorities agreed to use potential proceeds from forthcoming privatizations to reduce the stock of public debt, while also creating room for high-return investment projects (MEFP ¶30). To achieve the required consolidation, the authorities will rely primarily on durable expenditure measures. The package of fiscal consolidation measures, many of which have already been introduced in late 2014, is expected to yield gross nominal savings of 4¾ percent of GDP compared to unchanged policies and generate the targeted structural adjustment. The measures aim to address primarily unsustainable mandatory spending and reduce state aid (Table 6). In addition, the fiscal frameworks will be strengthened by improving fiscal institutions and implementing PFM reforms. Given that various tax rates have already been raised in the past two years, staff emphasized that future efforts should focus primarily on improving the efficiency of tax collections and broadening the tax base in line with the Fund’s recent technical assistance, but advised against assuming associated fiscal gains in the macro framework. The authorities supported this approach and agreed to use any unanticipated revenue gains to reduce public debt in 2015, and thereafter to split them between reducing debt and supporting high-priority investments (MEFP ¶10). Contingency measures, such as raising the VAT and gasoline excise taxes, would be considered in the event of revenue shortfalls (MEFP ¶10). Fiscal Measures, 2015–17 (percent of GDP) Tackling unsustainable mandatory spending The authorities recognized that curbing the sizeable spending on public wages and pensions is critical for a durable fiscal adjustment. Thus, the program envisages a reduction of the wage and pension bills to more sustainable levels of 7 and 11 percent of GDP, respectively, supported by the following measures: 201520162017Cumulative 2015-17Total fiscal measures2.71.01.04.7mandatory spending 1/1.60.61.03.2 state aid 1/0.80.00.00.8other measures 2/0.30.40.00.71/ Netting out the cancellation of the solidarity tax.2/ Revenue effects of electricity price increases, amendments of local government financing law, reduction of the markup on domestic goods and services and an excise on non-alcoholic drinks. Page 14 Public wage reduction was the first step taken toward curbing mandatory expenditure (MEFP ¶6). An across-the-board 10 percent nominal wage cut (while protecting the minimum monthly wage of 25,000 dinars) was legislated with the 2014 supplementary budget and became effective as of November 2014. The cut applies to the broader public sector, including SOEs, which will help reduce the reliance of some SOEs on subsidies. In addition, legislation adopted in December 2014 suspends nominal indexation of wages until the wage bill (excluding severance payments) reaches the target level by the end of the program period (MEFP ¶8). A comprehensive general government wage system reform will follow the wage cuts, with the aim to simplify it and make it more manageable and equitable across various general government entities. It will include aligning base wages, unifying pay grades across comparable jobs, streamlining the wage coefficients, and integrating other elements of pay into the wage base. As the reform requires substantial preparation, staff concurred with the authorities that the transition period to the new system will be determined in the course of 2015 (MEFP ¶8). Rightsizing general government employment. The authorities have committed to a two- stage process. General government employment will be reduced by 5 percent through the continued application of the attrition rule and targeted separations by mid-2015 (MEFP ¶8). Subsequently, there will be additional rightsizing based on deeper reform of the general government employment through organizational and functional restructuring in 2016–17 (MEFP ¶9). Pension bill reduction . A progressive cut in nominal pensions (22 percent for pensions between 25,000 and 40,000 dinars and 25 percent for higher pensions) was legislated from November 2014 to yield an effective 5 percent reduction of the pension bill. The parametric pension system changes implemented in mid-2014 (a higher statutory retirement age for women, increased minimum retirement age, and introduction of actuarial penalties for early retirement) will help maintain the sustainability of the pension system in the longer term (MEFP ¶7). BB RR Y Government Wage Bill, 2013 (Percent of GDP)Emerging economies (average) Advanced economies (average) Source:WEO RR EE NN Pension Expenditure, 2012 (Percent of GDP)Emerging economies (average) Advanced economies (average) Sources: Eurostat; andthe Ministry of Finance. 1/ Serbiadata as of 2013. Page 15 Reducing state aid The authorities aim to reduce subsidies and have launched a reform of inefficient and loss-making SOEs to curb the need for state aid . The program focuses on the reduction of subsidies and elimination of liquidity support to the largest SOEs which have been the main recipients of budget support in past years, particularly in the transportation and energy sectors (MEFP ¶8). Moreover, the authorities concurred that a comprehensive reform of the largest SOEs is needed to strengthen their financial positions and contain fiscal risks over time (MEFP ¶31). These reforms are being designed in cooperation with other international financial institutions (IFIs) and the EU. In addition, subsidies to agriculture have been reduced from 2015. Improving fiscal institutions and PFM reform The authorities are committed to improving the PFM framework. They agreed with staff that limiting fiscal risks and strengthening institutions will support fiscal consolidation. Specific measures, in line with IMF technical assistance recommendations, will aim to bolster fiscal planning by introducing three-year expenditure ceilings, and strengthen the Ministry of Finance’s capacity to monitor and control fiscal risks. Staff recommended that the authorities perform fiscal impact analysis of all new legislative initiatives, ensure full assessment of all proposed public-private partnerships (PPPs), increase fiscal transparency, and reinforce expenditure control (MEFP ¶11).