Background The Serbian economy suffers from protracted structural weaknesses. Significant bottlenecks to private sector activity stem from delayed transition to a market economy. Serbia lags behind its peers in many aspects of the business climate, such as issuance of construction permits, licensing, and paying taxes (Table 10). The challenging business ALBBIHBGRHRV CZE EST LVALTUMKDPOL ROU SRBSVK y = -0.881x + 21.4160 m m FDI stock (IIP) per capita Unemployment rates vs. FDI, 2013 Sources: IFS; and WEO. Page 20 environment reduces incentives for investment—the stock of FDI per capita is significantly lower compared with the New Member States of the EU. This, in turn, hampers private sector growth and competitiveness, and leads to a narrow export base and wide current account deficits. The structural and labor market rigidities have also contributed to persistently high unemployment (particularly among young people), low labor force participation rate, and relatively high reliance on remittances from abroad (Figures 3 and 7). This poses a key social concern. In addition, significant resources are trapped in inefficient public enterprises (Box 3). Box 3. Public Enterprises in Serbia Public enterprises represent an important share of the Serbian economy. As of end-2014, more than 1,400 public enterprises had over 250,000 employees, accounting for 15–20 percent of total formal employment. This comprised mainly state and local public enterprises (almost 800), as well as a large number of socially-owned enterprises (more than 600), of which 512 are in restructuring and privatization processes in the Privatization Agency (PA) portfolio. In addition, there are also several joint-stock or limited liability companies operating in competitive industries (such as Telekom). Public enterprises include some of the largest employers in the country, such as Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS-electricity generation) and Zeleznice Srbije (Serbia Railways), which employed around 38,000 and 18,000 workers, respectively, as of end-2014. The fiscal costs associated with the public enterprises have been rising rapidly in recent years. Direct fiscal costs include subsidies, net lending, and payments of called guarantees. These amounted to more than 2 percent of GDP in 2014, and were concentrated in 7 companies, largely in the transportation and energy sectors. These costs have risen rapidly in the past few years, mainly due to the worsening performance of the SOEs, and could rise further if the underlying problems are not addressed. Additional direct fiscal costs arise from tax and social contribution arrears mainly among socially-owned enterprises. Furthermore, public enterprises give rise to indirect fiscal costs , which include implicit subsidies on borrowing costs due to issuance of state guarantees, and arrears to other public enterprises. Comprehensive data on the size of these costs are in not available, but they are expected to be very significant as well. 2.0 2.5 20132014 Total subsidies, net lending and payments of called guarantees (percent of GDP) Sources: Ministry of Finance, and IMF staff calculations. Page 21 Policy discussion The authorities and staff agreed that structural reforms are essential to boost Serbia’s growth potential. There are three broad priorities to be implemented over the medium term: (i) job creation, (ii) improving the business environment and competitiveness, and (iii) resolution and reform of SOEs: Job creation. The authorities took a key step in adopting amendments to the Labor Law in mid-2014 aimed at removing disincentives for hiring and making wage bargaining and employment procedures more flexible. Specifically, the reform limits severance payments by linking them to service with the current employer rather than life-time employment, extends the maximum length of temporary contracts from one year to two years, clarifies and simplifies separation rules, and tightens the rules for extensions of collective agreements to all firms in the sector. Staff welcomed these changes and advised that steadfast implementation of the law is key for labor market efficiency (MEFP ¶27). The authorities underscored that job creation is a central element of their economic policies. They also committed to implementing their National Employment Strategy for 2011–20 and the National Employment Action Plan for 2015, which envisage specific job-supporting programs. These comprise job matching services, career counseling and training for both pre-redundancy workers and the unemployed, employer subsidies targeting disadvantaged job seekers, and self-employment support. Staff also emphasized the importance of evenhanded application of severance payments across the public sector, in light of the forthcoming rightsizing of the public administration and resolution of SOEs. Improving the business environment. The authorities committed to a number of short- and medium-term measures, aimed at removing obstacles to private sector development, attracting new investments, and fostering job creation (MEFP ¶32). These include, among others, (i) implementation of the regulatory framework for establishing one-stop shops for issuing construction permits, and for conversion of land-usage rights into ownership rights, (ii) adoption and implementation of a new Investment Law to enable efficient coordination of investment-related permits, and (iii) implementation of a strategy for improving the business environment for the small and medium enterprises (SMEs) for 2015–20. Resolution and reform of SOEs. The authorities are committed to wide-ranging SOE reforms in order to improve their operational viability and limit fiscal risks (MEFP ¶28–31). In this regard, staff welcomed the recent amendments to the Bankruptcy Law and the new Privatization Law, which were pre-requisites for a successful implementation of this reform. Going forward, a significant reduction of state aid to SOEs is a key priority of the program, to be achieved by: (i) curtailing direct and indirect subsidies, (ii) limiting issuance of new guarantees, and (iii) enhancing accountability, transparency, and monitoring of these enterprises. The program includes strategies for two broad categories of state-owned enterprises. The first group includes over 500 companies in the portfolio of the Privatization Agency, of which almost 200 have been slated for immediate bankruptcy, over 200 will be privatized, and resolution for the remainder was put on hold until technical and legal issues Page 22 are resolved. The second group comprises large SOEs including the electricity, gas, railways and road companies, where corporate and financial restructuring plans need to be developed in the course of 2015 and implemented in the coming years (MEFP ¶31). These plans will determine specific future steps for improving collections, increasing efficiency and cost savings, and tariff increases: (i) the electricity generation company (EPS) will underpin its sustainability by financial restructuring, which will include raising regulated electricity prices and thereby moving household tariffs closer to cost-recovery levels, (ii) Srbijagas will reduce its reliance on subsidies after an increase in natural gas network fees and resolution of its biggest debtors, (iii) Railways of Serbia will cut costs in the context of a comprehensive organizational and financial restructuring, and (iv) the road companies will be merged and their efficiency boosted by corporate and financial restructuring. The SOE reforms are drawing on expertise of other IFIs.