Background and macroeconomic outlook . Macroeconomic outcomes remain solid, with signs that most of the external pressures experienced in 2014 have abated. Output growth was subdued in 2014, reflecting weakness in the main exports, tourism and canned tuna. Weak exports combined with strong domestic demand led to depreciation pressures on the exchange rate, which resulted in a 16 percent drop against the dollar from August through October 2014. Beginning in late 2014, tighter monetary policy, a recovery in tourism, and falling global fuel prices, together with the effects of the depreciation on imports, helped to contain the external pressures and stabilize the exchange rate. The combination of spending discipline and buoyant fiscal revenues—driven by strong imports—resulted in a primary surplus of over 4½ percent of GDP in 2014, exceeding the target, albeit with lower infrastructure investment than had been planned. The depreciation began to pass through to inflation in 2015, with year-on-year inflation reaching 5.8 percent in March. In early 2015, the exchange rate began to recover modestly against the dollar (bringing depreciation from July 2014 through April 2015 down to 9 percent). With a continuing recovery in tourism and the effect of lower fuel prices, projected growth for 2015 is slightly higher than earlier envisaged at 3½ percent. Financial sector soundness indicators remain in the comfortable range; the Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) intervened in a small off-shore bank in November 2014, with no significant repercussions on the domestic economy (Table 5 and Annex 7). Financial soundness indicators for the domestic banking system continue to be solid despite the recent rapid rise in private sector credit, with capital adequacy ratios substantially above the regulatory minimum, strong profitability indicators, and a roughly stable non-performing loan ratio. In the wake of worldwide de-risking associated with the increased attention given to AML/CFT obligations, Bank of Muscat International Offshore (BMIO) – a joint venture between a government owned Seychelles bank (Nouvobanq) and a Bahrain based subsidiary of Bank Muscat – lost its correspondent relationship, and the CBS took management control. As an offshore bank with funds primarily invested in liquid securities, there were no significant linkages with or repercussions on the economy in Seychelles. The CBS continues to manage the institution, pending a reorganization plan to be approved by its shareholders. The large current account deficit in 2014 is expected to contract sharply in 2015, helped by monetary policy tightening and an improvement in the terms of trade . Weak export revenues combined with strong imports pushed the current account deficit to 21.0 percent of GDP in The domestic demand pressures that led to the sharp rise in imports were fueled both by a 13 percent (year-on- year) rise in personal earnings economy-wide, associated with a large public sector wage increase, and a 26 percent expansion in private sector credit. The demand pressures came despite the continuation of a generally tight fiscal stance. Historical pass-through data suggest a pass-through of 65 percent over 18 months. The CBS has found a new correspondent relationship and has commissioned KPMG Mauritius to formulate a reorganization plan, including strengthening its internal controls. MCM has offered advice on the process. Page 11 2014. In 2015, the current account deficit is projected to shrink nearly 6 percentage points of GDP, thanks to lower world commodity prices (especially for fuel), lower import demand, and a recovery in export volumes. In addition to a decline in FDI-related imports, import demand will be restrained by the lagged effects of the 2014 depreciation, continued tight monetary policy (which is expected to gradually contain private sector credit growth), and a public sector wage freeze. Rising volumes for tourism and canned tuna are expected to partially offset falling prices in dollar terms. A recovery in European tourism and continued growth from emerging markets (EMs) will likely boost tourist arrivals, although downside risks are considerable (see below). However, tourism and tuna export revenues in dollar terms are suffering from significant downward price pressures, offsetting the measured improvement in the terms of trade. Beyond 2015, macroeconomic stability and resilience are expected to strengthen as policies further anchor expectations and build buffers. Spillovers. As a small, extremely open, tourism-dependent economy, Seychelles remains highly sensitive to inward spillovers. The most important ones are falling fuel prices, the appreciation of the US dollar against the euro, and weak growth in Europe and certain EMs. Lower fuel prices have lessened pressures on the balance of payments. No major fiscal impact is expected from lower fuel prices, however, since consumer prices adjust automatically and fuel taxes are specific rather than ad valorem. With over a third of the public debt stock in Euros and SDR, the balance sheet impact of the change in dollar/Euro cross-rate is partially mitigated. On the other hand, the margins in the tourism sector are coming under pressure from the fall in the Euro relative to the dollar—most hotels sell their rooms through international tourism operators, fixing prices in Euros for the year ahead, while the bulk of costs for the hotels are in US dollars and Seychellois Rupees. Tourism arrivals are closely linked to economic performance in Europe and increasingly certain EMs (Annex 3). Risks As an extremely open economy, Seychelles faces an inherently high vulnerability to external shocks, as well as domestic risks, stemming for example from policy slippages or the SOE sector . The successful management of the external pressures last year demonstrated the authorities’ commitment to the flexibility built into the program, as well as some resilience in the economy. However, the external environment continues to pose multiple risks (see Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM), Box 1); tourism revenues are vulnerable to numerous developments, including a weak recovery in the Euro zone and geopolitical risks in the Middle East and Russia; the latter risks could add to balance of payments pressures through their knock-on effects on fuel prices. Moreover, experience has shown that domestic policy loosening can quickly destabilize Seychelles’ open economy. The large wage increases in 2014 and losses in SOEs in 2011-2012 translated quickly into Seychelles has not benefitted fully from the fall in world fuel prices; since it buys in small quantities and has a long- term supply contract, its purchase prices have not fallen as much as world market prices. While there is a slight fiscal easing expected in 2015, the public sector wage freeze will have a more significant impact on the current account, given its impact on private sector earnings and consequently on credit (for example through debt to income ratios). Tourism prices are not included in the terms of trade measure. The CBS, with the support of the IMF’s Statistics Department (STA), has implemented a new methodology to estimate tourism earnings, based on tourism-related transactions reported by authorized foreign exchange dealers. Under this methodology, tourism earnings have been revised up by a significant amount, which contributes to the current account improvement. Page 12 external pressures. Over the medium term poor operating results from key state-owned enterprises could also place additional pressures on the budget (see below). Box 1. Seychelles: Risk Assessment Matrix (2015) Source of threat Likeli- hood Severity Impact Policy response Financial distress at major SOEs Relaxation of fiscal discipline Protracted period of slow growth in advanced and emerging economies Persistent dollar strength M-H Outbreak of disease/ perception of health risks M-H Domestic risks Either a falling fiscal balance, a spike in public debt and/or a squeezing of priority expenditure areas as the government bails out SOEs, or potential economic disruption and increased investment uncertainty if SOEs are allowed to fail. Improve capacity at PEMC to monitor and assess performance of SOEs. Strengthen governance structures, including independent oversight role for SSI can perform. Support Development Committee’s role in assessing large investment projects. Any relaxation of fiscal discipline in the run-up to the election could quickly feed through to the balance of payments and threaten the targets for reserve accumulation and debt reduction. External risks If slow growth in Europe and the previously fast-growing Asian and Middle Eastern markets led to a drop in tourism receipts, the result would be lower growth and weaker balance of payments. Continued strength of the dollar vs. the Euro would have a negative impact on the profitability of the tourism sector, which prices in Euros and faces costs largely in dollars. Any outbreak of contagious disease in Seychelles or one of the Gulf hubs that channels tourists could adversely affect the tourism industry. Ensure continuity in current policy. Ensure exchange rate flexibility to act as shock absorber. Encourage continued diversification of tourism markets. Avoid ad-hoc measures to support the tourism sector while undermining long-term revenue potential. Support diversification of source of tourists and travel connections; ensure appropriate health checks. Geopolitical fragmentation that erodes the globalization process (Middle East and Russia/Ukraine) If instability in the Middle East were to impact the key hubs in the Gulf region, tourism arrivals could be adversely affected, and higher fuel prices would put pressure on the balance of payments. Similarly, deterioration in the Russia/Ukraine situation could reduce tourist arrivals. Support an open, competitive air transport policy which encourages diversification in the source of tourists and travel connections. Adjust macroeconomic policies to account for the effects of higher fuel prices and rely on exchange rate flexibility to keep exchange rate in line with changing fundamentals. In late 2011 and 2012, rising losses in SEYPEC’s tanker business and the effects of Air Seychelles’ financial difficulties, along with rising fuel and food prices leading to a deterioration in the balance of goods and services, contributed to pressures on the exchange rate (Country Report No. 13/24, page 4, and Country Report No. 13/202, page 4). Page 13