The program is broadly on track, bolstering sustainability and resilience. The fiscal balance benefited from revenue overperformance driven by the strong import demand. Spending levels were roughly as anticipated, though with some decline in quality, as unexpected support of $8.5 million to Air Seychelles was offset by reduced lending to the Public Utilities Corporation due to delays in project implementation. The net result was the performance criterion (PC) on the fiscal primary surplus was exceeded by ⅓ percent of GDP. After the rupee stabilized against the dollar in November, the CBS was able to purchase nearly US$10 million and comfortably exceed the net international reserves (NIR) PC. However, this purchase, equivalent to 6 percent of base money, boosted liquidity. Following difficulties in policy coordination, operation of liquidity management tools, and end-year liquidity forecasting, the PC on the ceiling for daily average reserve money was breached by 0.4 percent. Nonetheless, inflation remained contained, well below program projections, and reserve money was brought down below the program ceiling in January. Since the deviation from the target was minor and temporary, staff support the authorities’ request for a waiver. Some program targets for 2015 are proposed to be strengthened. Considering the improved external conditions, the previously conservative NIR targets for 2015 have been revised upward to lock in last year’s overperformance and maintain stable reserve levels, despite downward pressure due to the valuation effect. The average daily reserve money ceiling for the second quarter has been lowered slightly to help rein in private sector credit growth. Other macroeconomic program targets remain appropriate. Implementation of the structural agenda is generally proceeding as planned, despite some delays (Tables 2a and 2b of Attachment 1, Appendix I) The authorities met the two end- December 2014 structural benchmarks (SBs) on time, while they met the end-March 2015 and the end-June 2014 SBs with a delay—a substantial one in the latter case. The National Assembly amended the Seychelles Revenue Commission (SRC) Act to align the legislation with OECD guidelines in December 2014 and ratified the Multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters in April 2015 (SB, end-June 2014) To maintain momentum in reforming this sector, the authorities are proposing a new benchmark on submitting legislation to the National Assembly on international corporate providers and trusts by end-December, which is being developed in consultation with the OECD and other international partners. Measures aimed at enhancing SOE oversight, including outside review of investment decisions (end-March 2015 SB), This amount had been agreed in the 2012 restructuring but it was not expected it would be needed in 2014 and thus had not been incorporated into the 2014 budget. In early November, the CBS and Treasury completed the agreed issuance of T-bills for monetary purposes. The price-based deposit auctions proved insufficiently flexible to attract buyers in rapidly evolving conditions. T-bill auctions for monetary purposes resumed in late December 2014 with the objective of bringing reserve money under the ceiling but failed to attract enough interest, as banks preferred to hold liquidity for end-year contingencies. Because the public sector foreign exchange cash flow is negative, the CBS must make significant purchases in the market just to maintain stable NIR levels. The valuation effect reduces the dollar value of stable reserves in other currencies, as the dollar appreciates. These measures are considered macro-critical, because they are essential to the sustainability of the off-shore global business services sector, which accounts for 4 percent of GDP. Page 14 were adopted in early May; further efforts, including capacity building and rigorous evaluation of new investments, are needed to contain the risks from the sector. It is proposed that the end- October benchmark on a macroprudential framework be revised to accommodate the need for legal changes. Other benchmarks have been met or are on track to be met.