PROMOTING GROWTH Generating sustained and inclusive growth in the Seychelles will require mitigating structural disadvantages stemming from geography and size. In this context, discussions on the structural reform agenda focused on three priority objectives: (i) sustaining inclusive growth; (ii) enhancing quality of fiscal policy; and (iii) improved oversight and efficiency for SOEs (Tables 8 and 9 for Structural Benchmarks). Buttressing the foundations for sustained and inclusive growth While social outcomes are favorable, inequality appears to be high. Spending on health, education and social programs account for one-third of government expenditure, allowing for free access to primary, secondary and most tertiary education, as well as to healthcare; as a result, literacy rates are very high and rates of maternal and infant mortality very low. Yet despite very low Page 18 unemployment levels (below 5 percent), income inequality is high. However, non-Seychellois workers fill many skilled and professional jobs, suggesting a skills mismatch despite high literacy. Progress in reducing inequality will require fundamental economic and educational reforms to support broader-based economic growth over the medium term. In the meantime, it is important to safeguard against measures that restrict non-Seychellois workers from providing services necessary to ensure competitiveness. To sustain growth and distribute its benefits more broadly, Seychelles needs to strengthen the drivers for private sector-led growth . The recently adopted Medium-Term National Development Strategy (MTNDS) identified the priorities for medium-term growth, including most notably governance, the environment, and energy. The tourism sector has driven growth historically, yet Seychelles’ small size and higher-end market niche limit the potential for expansion through increasing the number and density of hotels. Medium-term structural reforms need to focus on higher value-added tourism activities, more diversification of source markets, and broader, competitive air transport connections, including direct links to Europe and China where profitable. To help make growth more inclusive (Annex 6), the tourism sector could have more linkages to the local economy, including for example promoting guesthouses and other tourist services provided by local SMEs (Annex 5), and the generous tax incentives for investment in the industry should be reviewed. Sectoral diversification beyond tourism depends critically on improving the business climate. Progress in this area is lagging—Seychelles’ ranking in the World Bank’s doing business indicators was 85th (up only two places from 2014) (Text Figure 3). Businesses complain that they are held back by the high cost of electricity, which results in part from cross-subsidies that the government plans to reduce over the next 8-10 years. Staff encouraged the authorities to look for ways to accelerate the reduction in cross-subsidies. In addition, staff stressed that successfully expanding the global business services sector as planned will depend on strengthening the governance of the sector, ensuring that it is brought into conformity with international norms. Some large infrastructure projects, for example in the port, could boost growth sustainably, provided they are carefully planned and financed; staff stressed that Public Private Partnerships need to minimize risks to the public balance sheet. In the port, reducing restrictive practices to enhance competition (cabinet approval of a strategy, SB, end-May 2015) would also boost activity and support increased fishing activity—part of the “Blue Economy” that is integral to the MTNDS. Staff welcomed a focus on entrepreneurship and small and medium sized enterprises as a means to promote the private sector and improve income distribution; however, they cautioned that support should concentrate on removing the key impediments to The authorities highlighted that social outcomes are better than one would expect at this high level of inequality. Starting a BusinessDealing with Construction PermitsGetting ElectricityRegistering Property Getting Credit Protecting Minority InvestorsPaying Taxes Trading Across BordersEnforcing ContractsResolving Insolvency Text Figure3. Seychelles Doing Business Indicators Source: World Bank Doing Business Indicators 2015Source: World Bank Doing Business Indicators 2015 Page 19 establishing new businesses, such as financial literacy and red tape, rather than providing tax incentives that could distort behavior and erode the revenue base. The authorities agreed on the need to improve the business climate. A new Ministry of Entrepreneurship Development and Business Innovation is considering measures to support new enterprises, including working with other departments and the private sector to overcome hurdles to establish new businesses, and refocusing the government’s SME loan guarantee scheme. The authorities acknowledged that the price of electricity was an issue but highlighted the potential distributional impact of speeding up the planned rebalancing. They also highlighted that in March 2015 Seychelles completed the WTO ratification process and has become its 161 st member, which should support policy stability and access to foreign markets. Concerning on Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), the authorities were working with the African Development Bank and other partners to formulate a policy, which would ensure transparency and accountability in taking any risks on the public balance sheet. Improving access to finance is a key goal for robust and inclusive growth, motivating the authorities’ Financial Sector Development Implementation Plan (FSDIP). Approved by cabinet last year (SB, end-October 2014), the plan was developed with World Bank support. Its most macroeconomically important elements are enhancing the legal and supervisory frameworks for financial institutions (banks, nonbank financial institutions, offshore banks, and other offshore financial services) and fostering capital market development. Other important elements of the FSDIP include developing financial infrastructure, in particular the payments and credit information systems, and improving access to credit for SMEs and households. Staff and the authorities agreed on the need to maintain momentum in implementation. The authorities are in discussions with partners, including the IMF, on accessing technical support for this effort. Staff and the authorities agreed that improving the quality of public finances and spending will be vital in the context of continued debt reduction and expenditure restraint. Public financial management reforms are advancing well (Annex 5); following the adoption of a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (SB, end-September 2014), the next step is to adopt a Medium- Term Budget Framework, which sets ministerial budgets in line with MTNDS’ priorities. The extension of Program Performance Based Budgeting (PPBB) will promote more cost-effective spending and medium-term planning. While a priority for reform and growth, public investment spending still suffers from chronic under-execution of capital expenditure, despite the recent introduction of a Public Sector Investment Plan. A new Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment will provide an assessment of progress since the 2011 assessment and suggest areas for improvement. Over the medium term, public spending will also have to adjust to face new challenges. Healthcare, for example, will have to shift towards addressing diseases of affluence and an ageing population, at the same time as education needs to refocus on the serious skills mismatch. Notwithstanding progress on SOE reform, further action is needed to contain fiscal risks, ensure efficiency, and protect the role of private business Although the PEMC regularly receives The PSIP does not include some large infrastructure projects that may be needed over the medium term (notably the rehabilitation and extension of the main port). Page 20 data on SOEs’ financial performance, its role could be strengthened by enhancing its capacity to analyze data and audit SOE governance (SB, end-June 2016). The authorities have approved plans to strengthen oversight, including of new investment plans (SB, end-March 2015). However, fiscal risks are rising as key SOEs expand their activities: Seychelles Trading Company (STC) is expanding into a new larger retail outlet; Air Seychelles has added new destinations despite large operating losses; and Seychelles Public Transport Corporation (SPTC) recorded a loss last year despite its government subsidy. Staff stressed that the role of the state holding company, Société Seychelloise d’Investissement (SSI), should focus on government oversight and not the creation of new sources of risk . The SSI was established to amalgamate commercial public enterprises in order to provide more effective oversight. In addition, the authorities are considering a new investment mandate for SSI proposed by its management, relying on dividends and leveraging its balance sheet. Staff recommended that the mandate be limited to clear instances of market failure or public goods in short supply, with careful vetting of proposed investments. Staff noted that unnecessary expansion by SOEs into commercial ventures had led to major financial losses in the past and contended that the private sector was better placed to engage in such activities. Continued improvements in the governance of SSI are also important in the view of staff, particularly strengthening the independence of its board from the management of its component companies. The authorities acknowledged the need for careful oversight of the SOE sector. They pointed to the enhanced role of PEMC, and the progress made in establishing the division of labor between the SSI and PEMC. In the case of Air Seychelles, they have worked with the management to establish a clear plan to return the airline to profitability without budgetary support over three years, including clear milestones by which progress could be assessed. They agreed that any public support should be transparently budgeted, accommodated within the agreed medium-term fiscal balances, and subject to review in the event that the milestones were not met. However, given Seychelles’ dependence on tourism, they saw a strategic need for a strong state-owned company in preventing over-reliance on foreign carriers. In light of the country’s small size and the relatively-undeveloped private sector, they also saw a need for government to play a large role in developing the economy, overcoming weaknesses in competition and scale. However, the authorities agreed to work with the World Bank and IMF in defining the SSI’s new mandate, which they stressed was not designed to compete with the private sector.