Fiscal policy: Stay the course on debt reduction while improving the quality of spending The 2015 budget target of a 3.7 percent of GDP primary surplus remains appropriate and attainable. Spending plans maintain stable domestically-financed investment, relative to GDP, thanks in part to restrained current spending. Revenues are projected to fall relative to GDP as the overperformance in 2014 due to strong imports is not expected to be repeated; tax policy has remained largely unchanged, apart from some increases in fees and excises. The depreciation of the Euro also poses some risks to revenues as hotel yields come under pressure in rupee terms, though this should be offset by the impact of some reduced Euro-denominated government spending. The authorities’ medium term goal of reducing public debt below 50 percent of GDP by end-2018 provides a strong anchor for macroeconomic policy. Last year’s depreciation will require a slight increase in the primary surplus path relative to the program request to preserve the debt dynamics (Annex 1). Fiscal discipline is essential to further reduce vulnerabilities, as well as supporting monetary and exchange rate policy in the context of a floating exchange rate in a small open economy (one of the smallest in the world with a floating exchange rate). The tax system has been successfully overhauled since the crisis, and the tax take is high relative to comparators (Text Figure 1). Overall, these reforms, most notably the introduction of a VAT and a flat-rate personal income tax, succeeded in generating revenue with less distortions. However, business tax collections have been disappointing, falling from 6.9 percent of GDP in 2009 to 4.2 percent last year: the authorities are increasing tax audits (SB, end-September 2015) to help assess the causes. Staff suggested that the authorities reassess the need for investment incentives in the tourism sector. Accession to the WTO in April will result in relatively minor changes to the overall tax regime, and there will be little immediate impact on revenues. Staff noted that the progress made on the quality of expenditures in the immediate post-crisis period has come under some pressure as a result of wage growth. Primary current spending was 10 percent of GDP lower in 2013 than in the pre-crisis period. Government wages reached their nadir relative to GDP in 2010, falling to 5.9 percent of GDP, less than half their pre-crisis w z il I ll f B B li z L V G K tt N ji C V B V nu G ll I K ã é B C Text Figure 1. Tax Revenue in Seychelles and selected comparators (As a percent of GDP) Page 15 level. Since then however, wages have risen again to 7 percent of GDP—or just under 9 percent if wages of workers in government agencies are included. In the context of the debt reduction goal and no major gains expected in revenues, staff highlighted that any further increase in the public wage to GDP ratio risks crowding out investment spending or other current spending priorities, as well as potentially weakening competitiveness. The authorities reiterated their commitment to the debt reduction goal. On revenues, they noted the efforts they were making to audit large businesses, as well as recent initiatives introduced to improve compliance and collect tax arrears. However, while they accepted the need for restraint on current expenditures, they also noted that expenditure on public sector wages as a percent of GDP remained relatively low in Seychelles compared to other small island states, and they stressed that growth prospects depended importantly on investments in education. Staff agreed with the need for a high quality and adequately staffed educational system but suggested further efficiencies could be sought across public sector, for example by more efficient use of personnel or greater use of technology. Monetary, financial and exchange rate policies: Further reinforce foundations for stability Monetary policy should continue to remain tight to contain potential inflationary pressures and strong private sector credit growth. By the third quarter of 2015, the pass-through of exchange rate depreciation is expected to have largely dissipated, and private sector credit growth should settle into a more sustainable pace (10-to-15 percent range). The CBS consequently decided to tighten the reserve money targets for the second quarter. The tight monetary stance will also be conducive for market conditions for foreign exchange purchases, although active sterilization policies will be needed to avoid volatility in monetary conditions and interest rates. While the monetary policy framework has improved, staff and the authorities agreed that further strengthening in liquidity management is warranted . The immediate problems experienced in the last quarter of 2014 were corrected in the first quarter of 2015 through improved coordination with the Treasury, which agreed to provide the amounts of T-bills deemed necessary by the CBS for monetary sterilization, and quarterly average of daily reserve money moved back into the target corridor. The CBS has also moved back to quantity-based deposit auctions. In the context of an evolving monetary policy framework and a shallow financial sector, some initial difficulties are to be expected, and the IMF’s Monetary and Capital Markets department (MCM) is providing ongoing technical assistance (TA), particularly in liquidity management. The CBS is working to establish an effective macroprudential framework to broaden the tools available to detect and contain risks in the financial sector Overall, financial soundness There was a significant reclassification for the 2015 budget as a result of the creation of the Healthcare Agency: costs equivalent to 2 percent of GDP that would have been classified as salaries and goods and services were reclassified as transfers. Transfers to SOEs are not rising in 2015, beyond a previously planned transfer to Air Seychelles. The World Bank’s Public Expenditure Review Policy Note on the education sector in 2012 found that salary costs accounted for over 90 percent of all education costs, leaving little for other vital spending such as learning materials. A February MCM TA mission focused on plans to develop the macroprudential framework and stress tests. Page 16 indicators remain strong; although the recent rapid private sector credit growth has reduced some capital adequacy ratios, they remain well above minimum levels. Discussions did not reveal any reports of weakening lending standards, some of the increase in private sector credit was a revaluation of foreign exchange denominated debt, and private sector credit as a proportion of GDP was only returning to previous levels (Text Figure 2). Nevertheless, given the pace of growth, asset quality merits careful monitoring, especially if it does not moderate as planned. With TA from MCM, the CBS is working to enhance its capacity to assess and monitor systemic risk, as well as to develop appropriate capital-based, liquidity, and sectoral policy tools. They also intend to establish a Financial Stability Committee that encompasses all supervisory agencies. Pending necessary legal changes, an interim committee will be established using executive authority (SB, end-October 2015). With advice from MCM, the CBS is also working to draw on the lessons from BMIO to strengthen the frameworks for offshore banking supervision and bank resolution. The flexible exchange rate facilitated Seychelles’s adjustment to a volatile external environment in 2014 and 2015, but the small size of the market contributed to the occasional emergence of backlogs in clearing transactions . As balance of payments pressures developed in August 2014, backlogs materialized and then the Rupee began to depreciate. Small backlogs occurred sporadically thereafter, especially when a large market player would decline to execute a transaction – presumably out of fear of moving the rate more than desired or hoping for interventions from the government or the CBS (there were no exchange restrictions causing the backlogs). Market actors fear that the small size of the foreign exchange market, combined with a shallow and concentrated financial system, can leave the market prone to large swings. Over time, as it became clear that the authorities were unwilling to intervene to stop an orderly adjustment of exchange rate to fundamentals, the backlog cleared and the exchange rate eventually stabilized. Moreover, the exchange rate has demonstrated two-way flexibility, with the large depreciation in August-October of 2014 followed by a partial recovery since then. The exchange rate now appears broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals (Box 2 and Annex 4). Staff and the authorities agreed on the need to allow market forces to play their role in equilibrating demand for foreign exchange. Throughout the depreciation episode, staff and the authorities concurred on the need to intervene only in case of excess volatility. In addition, there was agreement that reserves remain broadly adequate (given Seychelles’ vulnerabilities, the levels of coverage exceeds adequacy according to standard metrics, Box 2 and Annex 4). There was also The valuation impact on nominal credit growth is estimated to have contributed 2 to 4½ percentage points of the 25 percent increase in nominal credit to the private sector (given that the data for domestic bank lending in foreign currency are not broken down into their US dollar and Euro components, only a range estimate can be given). The uptick in reserve import coverage in 2014 is due to a transitory fall in imports during 2015 that is expected to unwind in future years, as oil prices rebound and the tight monetary policy stance is relaxed. Similarly, the temporary dip in projected reserve coverage in 2016 reflects a transitory increase in imports in 2017 related to large FDI projects. Text Figure 2. Credit to the Private Sector Page 17 agreement on the need to continue gradual accumulation on an opportunistic basis (i.e., when market conditions are propitious) over the medium-term to maintain coverage. Under the terms of Seychelles’ public debt restructuring, external debt service will rise by 1½ percentage points of GDP over the next two years. Making this debt service will require significant purchases in the market, supported by macroeconomic discipline. Box 2. External Stability Strengthening Despite Continuing Vulnerabilities The immediate risks to external stability appear contained. The level of reserves exceeds all metrics for adequacy by a comfortable margin, marking a steady improvement in comparison to the post-crisis years (Annex 4). Reserves are sufficient to cover more than four months of imports and exceed the amount of external public and private short-term debt. Nevertheless, continuing efforts to build the stock of external reserves will be necessary over the medium term in order to preserve adequacy, in light of the intrinsic vulnerabilities of the economy and expected increase in debt service payments. Seychelles remains competitive in tourism, its main export. Its share in world tourism arrivals has been growing gradually over time. Improving the business climate and continuing the marketing efforts to promote Seychelles’ brand globally can sustain competitiveness and bring additional benefits to the tourism sector and the economy. The two-way flexibility in the exchange over the past year has proven helpful in adjusting to external shocks while avoiding the need for excessive fiscal adjustments. While the exchange rate assessment pointed to some potential overvaluation in 2014, the real depreciation in the latter part of the year and the subsequent sharp consolidation of the current account deficit suggests that the real exchange rate now appears to be broadly in line with fundamentals (Text Table). Box Table. Estimated REER Misalignment Overvaluation (+); undervaluation (-) Macroeconomic Balance Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate External Sustainability