Singapore’s economy continues to perform well . Growth recovered to 3.9 percent in 2013, from 2.5 percent in 2012 (Figure 1). Net exports accounted for almost half of the growth, while private and public consumption contributed the other half. Following two years of strong growth, private investment retreated somewhat. The acceleration of growth, alongside the policy(cid:173)induced slowing inflow of foreign workers, pushed the unemployment rate to a multiyear low. Growth decelerated in the first two quarters of 2014 (with seasonally(cid:173)adjusted annualized Page 5 growth rates of 1.8 and 0.1 percent, respectively), underscoring Singapore’s strong correlation with advanced economies’ mixed performance, and possibly reflecting transitional effects on consumption and investment related to the restructuring of the economy. A rising trade surplus pushed up the surplus on the current account to 18.3 percent of GDP in 2013, from 17.5 percent of GDP in 2012 (Appendix II). Inflation has decelerated and core inflation remains contained . A series of targeted, escalating macroprudential policies (MaPs) contributed to cool the housing and car permit markets (see Box 3 of the Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation). This helped lower headline inflation to 2.4 percent in 2013, from 4.6 percent in 2012. However, core inflation, while still contained at 2.2 percent in July (y/y), has edged up from last year reflecting accumulating wage pressures, despite some offset from relatively benign import prices. The impact of the United States’ ongoing exit from unconventional monetary policy (UMP) has been limited . Singapore’s financial markets have so far absorbed bouts of volatility associated with expectations of U.S. tapering and the spike in global risk aversion early this year with limited impact. This partly reflects Singapore’s relatively small external portfolio liabilities. Since the initial “tapering announcement” in May 2013, the nominal U.S. dollar/Singapore dollar exchange rate has moved in a narrow range, displaying less volatility than the other ASEAN(cid:173)5 currencies. While the Straits Times stock market index went down by 14 percent, the losses are now down to 3 percent. At 2.3 percent, the ten year government bond yield is now about 70 basis points higher (Figure 2). The credit cycle continues to mature . Private credit growth to residents is decelerating following four years of strong growth (Table 3, Figure 3). Housing loan growth moderated aided by the June 2013 launch of the new total debt servicing ratio framework (TDSR) and the expectation of higher interest rates in the medium term. Property prices have leveled off and housing transactions moderated. The nonperforming loan ratio of domestic banks remained stable at about 1 percent (Table 7). Page 6