The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) has kept its moderately tight monetary policy stance of gradual nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) appreciation unchanged since April 2012 . While the specific parameters of the basket-band-crawl framework are not made public, staff estimates that the NEER band is appreciating at an annual rate of 2½ percent and has a width of about ±2 percent. The NEER is now estimated to be around the midpoint of the band. Staff observes that in the case of Singapore estimating the output gap and its impact on inflation has been made harder by the varying rates of inflow of foreign workers which have acted to buffer the output gap, both in upturns and in downturns, and limit its impact on wages and inflation. In light of this, and given that Singapore’s very open economy is commonly subjected to a multitude of external shocks, the authorities’ medium-term orientation to their price stabilization objective is appropriate: the exchange rate is allowed to move within the band without frequent adjustments to the parameters of the exchange rate based monetary policy. MAS’s current moderately contractionary monetary policy stance remains appropriate to contain demand pressures in the context of a positive output gap and improving external demand while facilitating relative price adjustment as the economy reduces its labor intensity. The gradual appreciation path will also help anchor inflation expectations. The authorities’ track record with operating the exchange rate based monetary policy, both in good and in bad times, indicates that the policy framework is robust and flexible enough to deal effectively with crises as well as tapering(cid:173)related volatility. However, a challenge may arise owing to the need to maintain a tight monetary policy stance and potential continued downward pressure on the exchange rate associated with the ongoing gradual normalization of monetary policy in the United States. Through uncovered interest parity, depreciation pressures could also compound the effect of higher U.S. interest rates on domestic interest rates, raising debt servicing costs of the household and corporate sectors and putting downward pressure on the housing market. Singapore’s external position is assessed to be substantially stronger than what is consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies but the current account surplus is projected to moderate over the medium term . In addition to the current account and the REER gaps, the external sector assessment is based on Singapore’s foreign asset and liability position, capital and financial account flows and their trajectories as well as reserve adequacy considerations (Appendix II). Despite a significant narrowing of the current account balance and a Page 9 REER appreciation of 13 percent since 2010; at 18.3 percent of GDP in 2013, the current account appears to be 2 8 percent of GDP stronger, and the real effective exchange 4−16 percent weaker than what is consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies. The quantitative assessment takes into account the results from different standard models and their potential limitations and caveats . Reflecting high levels of past current account balances, Singapore has a very large positive NIIP position and the composition of its external balance sheet does not pose a major source of risk. Singapore’s NIIP position is expected to increase over time, based on declining but still sizable current account balances that are projected in the medium-term. The financial account deficit is mainly driven by official sector flows, reflecting the reinvestment abroad of income from large foreign assets and public sector savings, which offset sizable net positive FDI inflows. The financial account is expected to remain in deficit as long as income from net foreign assets is reinvested abroad. Finally, international reserves, at 93 percent of GDP, are assessed to be adequate for precautionary purposes. Going forward, staff projects the current account to moderate further, facilitated by increased public spending, including on social safety nets, a more even distribution of income across generations through transfers to the elderly, and the planned slower absorption of foreign workers. In the absence of such policy measures, higher-than-norm current account balances would persist in the medium to long term, reinforcing these past trends, and lead to further accumulation of net foreign assets. The authorities were confident that the economy and financial markets would be resilient to an orderly UMP exit . The UMP exit follows a period of unprecedented monetary stimulus and could therefore give rise to bouts of volatility. The authorities noted that there have been earlier episodes of rising U.S. interest rates where Singapore was able to maintain a degree of monetary policy independence, aided by the strong underlying balance of payments position. They raised concerns over the reclassification of their external position to be “substantially stronger” than what is consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies . While appreciating the need for consistency across countries the authorities were troubled by the inconsistent assessment for Singapore over time. They noted that the estimates of the current account gaps have changed from year to year. Furthermore, the change in Singapore’s external position from “stronger”, last year, to ”substantially stronger” this year belies the fact that over a longer period of time, external balances are correcting toward the equilibrium. For example, the current account surplus has trended down from 24 percent of GDP in 2010 while the REER has appreciated significantly since 2010. The increase in the current account surplus in 2013 reflected the timing of lumpy transportation equipment imports. This was a one(cid:173)off that would correct itself. Demographic developments, increased healthcare spending, and Singapore is a very open economy and an international financial center that has a large positive net international investment position (NIIP), very high per capita income and is aging at a very high speed. These nonstandard factors make Singapore an outlier; and the quantitative assessments of its current account and REER difficult and subject to a wide range of uncertainty. Page 10 investments in labor-saving technologies would narrow the current account surplus over the medium term.