The 2013 FSAP update noted that Singapore’s financial regulation and supervision is among the best globally and overall compliance with supervisory standards is high Singaporean banks already meet key Basel III targets for 2015, and they should have no difficulty meeting the 10.5 percent target for 2019 required by MAS for domestic systemic banks’ Tier 1 capital ratio plus conservation buffer—which is tighter than the Basel III target. MAS’s recently outlined new liquidity framework is in line with Basel recommendations and banks are already very close to meeting the 2019 target for the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR, 100 percent). Staff notes good progress in implementing the key FSAP recommendations targeted for the short term, while steps to implement the medium-term recommendations are being considered by the authorities (Appendix III). In particular, in view of rising household and corporate indebtedness, MAS introduced a multiyear onsite credit inspection program for major banks, and will continue to perform credit and thematic reviews for all banks as appropriate. Singapore is seeing a welcome deceleration of credit growth to residents, amid a tightening of system-wide liquidity and helped by the active use of MaPs Meanwhile, loans to larger businesses and nonresidents have continued to expand rapidly driven in part by rising loans to China. A further gradual and orderly tightening of credit conditions with the UMP exit should also limit the further buildup of household and corporate indebtedness. The authorities should remain vigilant on banks’ credit quality, building on their strong track record of hands(cid:173)on banking supervision. The current macroprudential policies should be maintained to promote household deleveraging . Staff estimates that these macroprudential policies have helped to curb the excessive increase of house prices (Box 1). Household’s balance sheets are strong in the aggregate; but there are pockets of risks. The recent broadening of the exemptions under the total debt servicing ratio framework (TDSR) and loan tenure rules for refinancing housing loans contracted earlier is appropriate to allow overleveraged households to negotiate a restructuring of their debt burden. Although house price declines can have important wealth During 2011−13, credit growth remained above standard thresholds used to identify build up of risks. For instance, the increase in the credit-to-GDP ratio (in the range of 8 – 15 percentage points since 2011), and the estimated deviation of the credit-to-GDP ratio from its trend (around 13.5 percentage points in 2013) both exceeded commonly(cid:173)used thresholds (3 and 10 percentage points, respectively) for excessive credit growth and related risks. Page 11 effects, risks from interest rate increases and unemployment shocks are more pertinent for Singapore. Staff advises to maintain the current MaPs to promote household deleveraging. In addition, as recommended by the FSAP, the authorities should continue their efforts to collect granular data on household balance sheets, strengthen credit bureau practices, and continue education of over(cid:173)indebted households about managing their debt prudently. With a large supply of new housing set to come on the market in the near term, a further price easing resulting in an undershooting of historical trends seems likely in the near term. In case of signs of excessive house price declines, staff recommends considering a relaxation of stamp duties as this can support demand for real estate without loosening banks’ lending standards, while maintaining prudentially appropriate levels for more structural measures. In the aggregate, the leverage of publicly–listed corporations has remained relatively low despite rising corporate sector indebtedness . This may reflect robust earnings performance and higher retained earnings. Financially stronger firms may have taken advantage of favorable market conditions to borrow and held on to the proceeds. Lending to SMEs, accounting for 21.6 percent of loans to domestic corporates, is subject to strong underwriting standards, highly collateralized, and has a lower NPL ratio than that for the overall corporate sector. Nevertheless, the risks from the gradual normalization of interest rates on the corporate sector and SMEs in particular call for continued vigilance, including in bank supervision. Based on a sample of publicly-listed Singaporean nonfinancial corporates, about 17 percent of total debt resides with companies with a leverage ratio above 2 as of end(cid:173)2013 and about 21 percent of total debt resides with companies with an interest coverage ratio of less than 2, but given the high level of overall corporate debt, these warrant close monitoring. A cross-country study based on end(cid:173)2012 data in the April 2014 Asia and Pacific Regional Economic Outlook found that the shares of debt owed by firms with a high leverage ratio and a low interest coverage ratio in Singapore are among the lowest in advanced and emerging Asia. Page 12 Singapore’s status as an important financial center and host to large G(cid:173)SIFIs creates potential for spillovers from global or regional financial shocks . Singapore’s financial sector is very large relative to its own economy, increasing the size of potential spillovers into Singapore (Box 2). As a regional financial center, Singapore also plays an important role in the transmission of external shocks to the region. Growing cross(cid:173)border exposures of domestic banks in the region, including in China, have also increased these spillover risks. A resilient domestic banking sector and strong regulatory and supervisory frameworks are critical not only for domestic financial stability but also to limit spillovers to the rest of the region. For instance, when deleveraging European banks reduced trade financing activity in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, Singapore’s domestic banks provided stability and increased their market share, along with banks from Japan and Australia. In addition, MAS recently proposed a stronger regulatory framework for domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs) , which should help reduce risks of further propagation of external financial shocks. Spillover risks underscore the importance of strong liquidity management . Singaporean banks’ reliance on the foreign currency swap market poses risks because this market can seize up during periods of severe financial stress. Foreign currency liquidity remains low, with the non(cid:173)Singapore dollar loan-to-deposit ratio at a multi(cid:173)year high of 128 percent as of September 2013 and a further rise through the first quarter of 2014. In light of this, the continued monitoring of banks’ foreign currency liquidity management is a priority, and staff welcomes MAS’s encouragement to banks to step up efforts to increase U.S. dollar deposit taking and issuing U.S. dollar debt to finance their U.S. dollar lending. In addition, considering difficulties in raising stable U.S. dollar funding, the authorities are encouraged to make banks develop contingency plans for low foreign currency swap market liquidity. Efforts to strengthen the AML/CFT framework should continue . The reputational risks from opaque ownership structures in the offshore wealth management sector that can allow it to be used to harbor or as a conduit for illicit assets should not be underestimated. In particular, any change in perceptions about Singapore’s good reputation could have adverse effects on the industry. In light of this, effective implementation of and compliance with the evolving international AML standards, particularly relating to transparency of companies and trusts, and enhancing cooperation with other jurisdictions is important. Staff notes that Singapore made the evasion certain foreign taxes a predicate crime for money laundering in July 2013. Singapore’s next AML/CFT assessment by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is scheduled for 2015. Cross-border loans to China are mainly trade bills (65 percent) and interbank loans (25 percent) and make up about 12 percent and 8 percent of total loans for domestic and foreign banks, respectively. The proposed D-SIB framework includes higher loss absorbency, LCR, recovery and resolution planning, risk disclosure and effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting requirements. In addition, foreign bank branches with a significant retail presence would be required to locally incorporate their retail operations. The authorities decided not to introduce a separate USD LCR due to the inefficiencies this would entail for international banking groups. Page 13 Singapore’s financial sector is in a strong position thanks to continuous improvements in the regulatory and supervisory framework . The industry-wide stress test conducted by MAS shows that banks are resilient to a broad array of adverse macroeconomic shocks, reflecting their strong starting positions. In the experience of the authorities, the foreign currency swap market is relatively deep and it did not seize up during the global financial crisis. The country’s strong official reserve position would only be used in case of an extreme stress event and not to provide support to individual banks. AML/CFT policies and issues are taken very seriously . Financial Institutions (FIs) are subject to a comprehensive AML/CFT regulatory regime, which includes customer due diligence, ongoing account monitoring and suspicious transaction reporting requirements. FIs have also undertaken a critical tax(cid:173)risk review of their existing accounts to assess the tax legitimacy of assets booked. Legislative changes made in 2013, and the findings of the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes mean that Singapore’s exchange of information regime is in line with the internationally-agreed standard, that ownership and identity information is available for all types of companies, partnerships and trusts, and that overall compliance with filing and reporting obligations is very high.