Despite uncertainties in domestic and external environment, growth is expected to average 2.9 percent in 2015 . The uncertain external environment and the ongoing transition to the new growth model could continue to weigh somewhat on private consumption and investment. However, several factors should support a broad-based recovery in domestic demand. These include the loosening of the monetary policy stance in January, a supportive fiscal policy stance, lower energy prices, the temporary pause in the hike of foreign worker levies announced in the 2015 budget, and the projected gradual recovery in external demand. These factors are expected to offset the drag from the continued softness in the housing market and an expected increase in interest rates. Headline and core inflation are expected to average 0 and 1 percent in 2015, respectively, before both rising to 1.8 percent in 2016 on recovering energy and commodity prices. The medium-term outlook will be characterized by lower growth rates. Restrictive policies on foreign workers and rapid population aging will lower the rate of labor force growth, slowing economic growth to about 3 percent over the medium-term (Appendix V). The economic restructuring is expected to ultimately raise capital-labor ratios and productivity growth but is Businesses in Singapore pay a monthly levy for hiring foreign workers that varies by sectors and skill levels of workers. The authorities had announced a gradual increase in foreign worker levies, starting in 2010. In the 2015 budget, the authorities announced that the scheduled levy increase in 2015 will be deferred by one to two years depending on the sector. -30-25-20-15-10-50510IDNMYSPHLSGPTHAJPNCHN Taper Tantrum: May 22-August 2013 Taper halt/ease: September 2013-August 2014 New US$ strength: September 2014-March 2015Sources: Bloomberg LP; and IMF staff calculations. 1/A positive value denotes an appreciation against the US$. Nominal Bilateral Exchange Rates Since May 2013 (U.S. dollars per unit of national currency, percent change) 1/ Page 13 subject to transitional costs in the near-term. The magnitude of these transitional costs, and the speed with which long-term gains in investment and productivity are realized, will have an important bearing on potential growth and inflation. The authorities are implementing several programs to actively support investment, the adoption of more advanced production technologies and processes by firms, and the upgrading of skills by Singaporeans. There are some positive signs, including improvements in some productivity indicators and increases in the number of new firms being created, but many companies are also facing margin compressions and difficulties filling vacancies in the meantime. These signs probably understate the extent of quality upgrading in the economy (for example, capturing the effects of the information technology revolution in national accounts is notoriously difficult. Fiscal policy will play an important role in Singapore’s medium term growth performance. The authorities’ plans to invest in productivity-enhancing infrastructure, including in support of education and healthcare, and to maintain Singapore’s leading role as a transportation and logistics hub, should help underpin medium-term productivity and growth. Finally, as a highly open economy with strong trade and financial linkages with the ASEAN region and beyond, regional and global conditions will also play an important role in shaping Singapore’s growth trajectory. Risks to the baseline projections are tilted to the downside As a city state with a very open economy, Singapore is exposed to external shocks. Accordingly, a protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies is an important short-term risk. Side effects from surges in financial volatility and persistent U.S. dollar strength and asynchronous monetary policies in the advanced economies (Box 2), as well as the growth slowdown and financial risks in China, could also have an important impact. Were these risks to be realized, their effects could be amplified by the elevated indebtedness of the domestic household and corporate sectors. Delays in generating significant investment and productivity gains as part of the economic restructuring is another risk. Principal risks, their transmission mechanisms, and recommended policy actions are summarized in the Risk Assessment Matrix (Appendix I). Singapore’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals—skillful and responsive macroeconomic management, a substantially strong external position, adequate level of foreign reserves, large fiscal buffers and strong bank balance sheets— could help absorb shocks and facilitate an effective countercyclical policy response. Authorities’ Views The authorities are confident in the strength of the Singaporean economy and see short-term risks as manageable. For the rest of the year, a firmer recovery in the U.S., Europe and Japan will provide support for the externally-oriented sectors. However, the extent of this uplift may be partially offset by other global developments, including the slowdown in China, tighter financial conditions and potential capital reversals associated with the normalization of U.S interest rates, corporate realignments in the IT industry, and lingering weakness in the oil-related transport See, for example, Dale W. Jorgenson, “Innovation and Productivity Growth,” T.W Schultz Lecture, American Journal of Agricultural Economics 93(2): 276–296. The impact of a growth slowdown in China can be significant. For instance, estimates in IMF WP/14/52 based on a panel regression model suggest that a 1 percentage point decline in growth in China can reduce growth in Singapore by 0.36 percentage points. Page 14 engineering sector. Meanwhile, the domestically-oriented industries will be bolstered by firm demand and temporary respite from the deferment in the hikes of foreign worker levies. The authorities agreed with staff that key risks in the near-term are related to the growth prospects in advanced economies and key emerging markets. The authorities noted the sensitivity of Singapore’s growth to developments in China, through both direct and indirect links. They are confident that Singapore can handle the increased volatility associated with monetary policy normalization in the U.S. given their ample policy buffers and track record of strong macroeconomic management.