The moderation of credit growth to both residents and nonresidents during the past year is welcome. It has been supported by the active use of macroprudential policies. More recently, moderation of credit growth to nonresidents also reflects a narrowing of interest rate differentials vis-a-vis China, which has led to a weakening of demand for investment and trade credits. The increase in domestic interest rates observed of late and the expected further upward adjustment in interest rates reflecting the gradual normalization of monetary policy in the U.S. should help contain household and corporate indebtedness and remove the onus from macroprudential policy to reduce systemic financial risks in slowing credit growth. Some progress has been made in reducing foreign currency liquidity risk . The risk posed by the high non-Singapore dollar loan-to-deposit ratio has been reduced thanks to declining Page 19 credit growth and to banks’ efforts to raise more stable funding through issuance of medium- and long-term bonds and attracting foreign currency deposits. In particular, local banks brought down their loan-to-deposit ratio below 100 percent both in domestic currency and in U.S. dollar terms, thereby reducing the reliance on short-term wholesale funding and foreign currency swaps to hedge currency risk. In light of foreign banks’ structural reliance on intra-group funding, more tailored measures of foreign currency liquidity risk are desirable. In this regard, staff welcomes the continued monitoring of banks’ foreign currency liquidity management through stress tests and the recent phasing in of Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) to the local banks, including reporting of LCRs for significant foreign currencies. In addition, the application of LCRs, from 2016, to the domestic systemically important foreign banks’ operations in Singapore and subsidiarization of their operations in Singapore will be a significant step forward. Staff recommends that MAS encourage banks to publicly disclose LCRs to encourage careful liquidity risk management and ensure that banks voluntarily hold adequate volumes of liquid assets. The planned implementation of Basel III Net Stable Funding Ratio requirements from January 2018 should complement the framework. A further measured decline in residential real estate prices seems likely. The large supply of new homes coming on the market in the next two years should alleviate supply pressures and the expected increase in interest rates will reduce demand, helping moderate prices and increasing affordability. Price adjustments to date have been modest and gradual, and robust demand for new housing projects suggests that the risk of disorderly adjustment in house prices is low. Therefore, core macroprudential measures such as the TDSR, ceilings on loan-to-value ratios and loan tenure limits should be maintained to prevent a buildup of excessive leverage that could lead to systemic risks. Other measures, for example stamp duties, could be relaxed to arrest potential adverse feedback loops between economic activity and financial conditions, without loosening banks’ lending standards. But this should only be done in case of signs of excessive house price declines, associated with clear evidence of a tightening of financial conditions. Household leverage remains elevated, and risks from interest rate increases remain pertinent . Nevertheless, household balance sheets remain strong in aggregate. While there are Singapore Dollar LTD Non-Singapore $ LTD Total LTD Loan to Deposit (LTD) Ratios: Total Banking System (In percent)Source: Monetary Authority of Singapore. Private residential price growth (right scale) HDB price growth (right scale) Private residential price index HDB resale price index Singapore: House Price Index (1998=100 (left scale); and q/q change in percent, right scale) Sources: CEIC Data Co., Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations. Page 20 pockets of risks, MAS estimates that the additional debt service burden would generally be manageable, even in a scenario in which interest rates increase rapidly above historical norms. In addition, risks from banks’ exposures to housing- related debt appear limited given that unemployment remains low, most properties are owner-occupied, and the high down payments mandated by tight loan-to-value limits. Preemptive prudential measures to discourage additional lending to over-indebted individuals would help address pockets of risks. In this regard, staff welcomes the phasing in of a limit on unsecured credits to individuals from June 2015. Efforts aimed at assisting overextended individuals should continue, including through assistance with debt restructuring and financial education. Corporate sector indebtedness and leverage have risen since the global financial crisis, but companies’ debt servicing capacity remains high. Most publicly listed companies maintain high interest coverage ratios and appear able to withstand interest rate and earnings shocks. Nevertheless, the high level of overall corporate debt (about 75 percent of GDP) warrants caution. Loans to SMEs, representing about 20 percent of domestic corporate loans, are highly collateralized and subject to strong underwriting standards, with NPL ratios falling below 1 percent. Staff welcomes MAS’ close monitoring of financial sector risks related to the corporate sector, including through stress tests of listed companies’ balance sheets and surveys of banks’ exposure to SMEs. In anticipation of the expected interest rate normalization and the effects of the restructuring on corporate profitability, it is important for bank supervisors to remain vigilant in monitoring risks. Singapore continues to maintain high regulatory and supervisory standards. Stringent capital requirements, above Basel minimum norms, and Basel III LCR requirements have been phased in smoothly since January 2015. Staff observed important progress in implementing the 2013 FSAP recommendations (Appendix III). Among others, the collection of granular debt data for individuals has been enhanced, supporting the enhancements made to the unsecured credit rules. MAS is working with D-SIBs and the Singapore Exchange (SGX) to enhance recovery and resolution arrangements. Staff welcomes the planned strengthening of the recovery and resolution framework and encourages even closer coordination with other jurisdictions to facilitate cross-border resolutions of global banks and further strengthening the resolution framework to enhance MAS’ operational independence. Efforts to bring the AML/CFT framework in line with international standards and demonstrate effective cooperation with foreign counterparts, particularly on tax matters, should continue. The authorities have implemented several actions in recent years to mitigate risks. For example, MAS estimates that households’ monthly debt repayment could increase by 8–9 percent of their income, should mortgage rates rise by 300 bps. Private sector credit Household debt (right scale)Sources: Monetary Authority of Singapore; and Haver Analytics. Private Sector Credit and Household Debt (In percent of GDP) Page 21 More recently, measures to prevent misuse of ownership structures were strengthened, by imposing customer due diligence requirements on agents who help third parties (including foreigners) set up Singapore companies, and by elaborating on such requirements for other regulated entities. The framework’s tax coverage has been broadened and is aimed at making it harder to launder evaded foreign taxes in Singapore. Singapore should continue efforts to demonstrate effective cooperation with its foreign counterparts. Other recent changes include requiring regulated entities to undertake comprehensive ML/TF risk assessments and increase scrutiny of cross-border transfers. Further steps are planned for emerging risks posed by virtual currencies. The Financial Action Task Force and the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering will jointly assess Singapore’s AML/CFT regime in 2015, including how effective it is. The authorities were confident that the financial system remains resilient to the turn in the financial cycle. They emphasized their commitment to proactive financial sector surveillance and continued improvements in their supervision and regulation framework to address tail risks and pockets of vulnerabilities. A significant rise in interest rates could cause vulnerabilities among pockets of overextended households but with little systemic implications. The authorities also noted that there are limits to matching loans and deposits in each foreign currency, especially in a financial center that intermediates funding to the region. In their view, LCR requirements in all currency and in domestic currency are hence appropriate tools to avoid a build-up of domestic liquidity risks while ensuring efficiency in banks’ funding structure. Comprehensive and graduated macroprudential policies have been effective in supporting a soft-landing of the property market boom. Macroprudential policy measures in Singapore are targeted to specific risks, and multi-pronged to ensure effectiveness and efficiency (see Box 1 of last year’s Article IV Staff Report). The authorities are committed to closely monitoring the impact and effectiveness of various prudential measures, and stand ready to recalibrate when deemed appropriate. AML/CFT policies and issues are taken very seriously and are being further strengthened . The authorities emphasized their track record in strengthening the compliance of their AML/CFT regulatory regime in line with international standards. They also noted that financial institutions in Singapore are subject to a comprehensive AML/CFT regulatory regime, which includes customer due diligence, ongoing account monitoring and suspicious transaction reporting requirements. Legislative changes made in 2013, and the findings of the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes mean that Singapore’s exchange of information regime is in line with the internationally-agreed standard, that ownership and identity information is available for all types of companies, partnerships and trusts, and that overall compliance with filing and reporting obligations is very high. Page 22