In January, in response to a decline in expected inflation and a more uncertain outlook for growth, MAS loosened its policy stance by reducing the pace of appreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) band. The MAS announcement, outside the biannual April-October cycle, lowered appreciation expectations of the Singapore dollar and led to an uptick in short-term interbank interest rates. The monetary policy stance before the January move had been in place since April 2012, during which a positive output gap had gradually closed and inflation had come down from relatively high levels. The January move constitutes the first off-cycle monetary policy decision since 2001. MAS stayed pat in its April meeting judging current monetary policy settings appropriate for achieving medium-term price stability. The specific parameters of the basket-band-crawl framework are not made public. However, following the recently announced policy change, staff estimates that the NEER band is now appreciating at an annual rate of 1 percent, down from about 2 percent before January, and has a width of about ±2 percent. The current monetary policy setting is appropriate. The benign near to medium-term inflation outlook and a closed output gap justify the relative easing of monetary policy The MAS publishes weekly data on the NEER but it does not reveal the weights of individual currencies in the basket. ULC Wages Core inflation Core Inflation, ULC, and Wages (Year-on-year percent change) Source: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations. Page 15 (Appendix IV). Near term inflation risks are circumscribed by the large and sustained oil price decline and the ongoing gradual decline in house prices and their second-round effects. Interestingly, labor cost increases in 2014 were lower than previously anticipated on the back of heightened uncertainty about external demand and domestic growth prospects. With pass-through of cost pressures relatively benign, inflation risks contained, and the balance of risks for external demand tilted to the downside, monetary policy can afford to be less restrictive. In the medium term, with the projected increase in U.S. policy rates, Singapore’s interest rates are also expected to increase, contributing to a market-driven tightening of monetary conditions. Risks to inflation are related to developments in external demand interacting with the ongoing economic restructuring. If external demand does not pick up as expected, it could put further pressure on profit margins, as firms are not able to pass-through costs. This could lead to a hollowing out in certain sectors, a rise in unemployment and deflationary pressures. On the other hand, a stronger than expected pick-up in external demand could lead to an uptick in inflation and labor costs if firms try to defend their profit margins. The authorities are encouraged to use the flexibility intrinsic in Singapore’s basket- band-crawl monetary framework to allow the exchange rate to respond within the band to minor, temporary shocks. They could recalibrate band parameters on more rare occasions when significant and sustained increase in real and financial volatility warrant reparameterization (recentering, widening) of the band. The uncertainty associated with asynchronous monetary policies in advanced economies has increased the risk of higher interest rate and exchange rate volatility . This will pose challenges for monetary policy in Singapore and elsewhere. The authorities could widen the policy band in case of a significant and sustained increase in volatility; however, the flexibility offered by a wider band should be weighed against the reduced controllability of the monetary policy stance. The authorities can also use FX intervention at both ends of the band, given their comfortable reserve position. The current monetary policy framework serves Singapore well but rising domestic leverage and heightened global interest rate and exchange rate volatility warrant heightened A standard Taylor rule with policy inertia and the short-term interest rate replaced by NEER appreciation as the policy instrument explains the change in the NEER well. The estimated policy rule predicts a slowdown in NEER appreciation in 2015 mainly reflecting the expected decline in inflation. The oil price shock will have large but temporary effects on inflation but could also restrain pass-through of labor costs in some energy-intensive sectors. Under Singapore’s exchange-rate-based monetary policy framework, the policy loosening through a smaller targeted appreciation of the NEER band can lead to higher short-term domestic interest rates. For example, the January 2015 monetary policy easing has led to lower expected appreciation of the Singapore dollar, feeding into higher short-term interest rates. REER (y/y percent change) Real Interest Rate (RIR) (3-month Sibor) MCI: REER + RIR MCI: REER * 1.75 +RIR Monetary Conditions Index (MCI) Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and IMF staff calculations. Note: One MCI has equal weights, the other has a commonly used higher weight for the REER reflecting Singapore's openness. Tightening of monetary conditions Loosening Page 16 vigilance in assessing the balance of forces between the interest rate and exchange rate channels of monetary policy and in the calibration of the monetary policy framework: The authorities’ track record operating the exchange rate-based monetary policy, both in good and in bad times, demonstrates that the policy framework is robust and flexible enough to deal effectively with bouts of volatility. The large share of imported goods in the consumption basket and the importance of externally-oriented sectors in the economy make the exchange rate the dominant channel of monetary policy in Singapore. Nevertheless, leverage in the economy is high and the expected increase in interest rates going forward can have larger effects on demand than historically observed, mainly by restraining consumption growth for leveraged households and investment growth in interest-sensitive sectors. Accordingly, the interest rate channel could provide a larger offset to exchange rate action, requiring stronger adjustment in the NEER band to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. The authorities are encouraged to monitor the balance sheets of households and firms and incorporate the implications of the expected rise in interest rates, potential asset price adjustments, and the financial cycle in their calibration of monetary policy, taking into account a higher sensitivity of economic activity to interest rates. The current biannual frequency of policy meetings provides a good balance between the need to orient monetary policy to medium term price stability while allowing flexibility for rare off- cycle policy moves. Given the divergence of advanced economies’ monetary policies, the biannual policy meeting framework could be subject to more tests going forward. More frequent policy meetings are one option, but this could run counter to the longer-term orientation of monetary policy. On balance, the flexibility afforded by the exchange rate band and the track record (only two off-cycle moves in 15 years) suggest that biannual policy meetings constitute an appropriate frequency. Singapore’s external position is assessed to be substantially stronger than consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies, although the current account surplus is projected to moderate over the medium term . The assessment for 2014 and the size of the imbalance are subject to a wide range of uncertainty reflecting Singapore’s highly open economy and unique position as a global trading and financial hub. Since 2010, the current account has narrowed by about 4.6 percentage points of GDP and the REER has appreciated by about 13 percent. Nevertheless, at 19.1 percent of GDP in 2014, the current account is 2 8 percent of GDP larger than the norm (Appendix II). Importantly, Singapore’s openness and financial center status, Staff’s empirical analysis suggests that the real exchange rate indeed has a stronger effect on growth than the real interest rate in Singapore. Leverage is also found to have a significant negative effect on growth. Staff also included interaction terms in the analysis with a view to examining the effects of leverage on the relative strengths of the two channels of monetary policy. The negative impact of interest rates on growth does indeed increase with leverage, but this effect seems to be driven by events surrounding the Asian financial crisis. Leverage is at an all time high at present, and the heightened sensitivity of output to interest rates may be subject to threshold effects not adequately captured in the sample. Staff is working on incorporating the interaction between leverage and interest rates in the presence of threshold effects. Its judgment of rising risks due to the interaction of prospectively higher interest rates and domestic leverage are at this point driven by theoretical considerations. Page 17 together with its very high per-capita income, rapid aging and defined-contribution pension system are non-standard factors that make Singapore an outlier in international comparisons of external positions, making a quantitative assessment of its current account unusually difficult. Consistent with the authorities’ policies, several factors are expected to contribute to a moderation of the current account surplus over the medium term. These include the drawdown of accumulated pension savings in response to aging and additional government spending to strengthen health care infrastructure and make the distribution of consumption within and across generations more even. The changing growth model, with a much smaller absorption of foreign workers than in the past, is also expected to reduce the current account surplus in the near-to medium-term, by leading to real exchange rate appreciation and to productivity gains in non-traded sectors. Developments in late-2014 and early-2015, including the decline in the energy import bill, are expected to have a modest impact on the external position . Singapore is a net oil importer, with a net oil trade balance of -5.6 percent of GDP in 2013. The recent oil price decline triggered a significant first-round increase in the oil trade balance at end-2014 and so far in 2015. However, the overall current account gain from the oil shock is expected to be smaller once one takes into account the high imported petroleum product content in Singapore’s exports of petrochemicals and other oil intensive products and services (Box 1). In addition, sectors with strong links to investment in the global oil market, such as the marine and offshore industries, are expected to see their exports fall, especially as a large component of the oil price decline seems to be long- term in nature. Taking into account these factors, lower oil prices are expected to raise the current account by about 1.5 percent of GDP in 2015. A weaker outlook for external demand and more accommodative fiscal policies are expected to reduce the current account, partially offsetting the oil-related gain. The recent easing of monetary policy is not expected to materially affect the external balance. Overall, the current account is expected to increase by 1–1.5 percent of GDP in International reserves are adequate for precautionary purposes. While Singapore’s position as a financial center warrants high reserve buffers, current levels appear adequate and there is no clear case for further reserve accumulation for precautionary purposes. The decline in Singapore’s official reserves (by about 10.6 percent or US$29.6 billion during June 2014-March 2015) reflects valuation changes. Official reserves cover about 25 percent of short-term external debt as of end-2014. Although this appears to be relatively low, it reflects the sizable short-term liabilities of Singapore’s international banking system. These liabilities are concentrated in foreign banks operating in Singapore and are largely covered by banks’ short-term external financial assets. Singapore’s reserves-to-GDP ratio is also larger than in most other financial centers, but this may reflect in part that most other financial centers are located in reserve-currency issuing countries or in countries that are members of currency unions. Page 18 The authorities thought the assessment of monetary policy was useful and balanced. They noted that the monetary policy stance is related to the position and slope of the NEER band, as opposed to the NEER movements within the band. The authorities also emphasized that interest rates are factored in their calibration of monetary policy as part of their general equilibrium approach to monetary policy. They agreed that there is considerable uncertainty about the effects of rising interest rates, as the economy exits a prolonged period of very low interest rates with significantly higher leverage. They take into account this uncertainty by assuming a conservative, higher sensitivity in their calibration of policies. The authorities also agreed that divergent monetary policies in advanced economies can create volatility and risks in currency markets. They also argued, however, that a scenario where all advanced economies tightened policies at the same time could be more challenging for emerging markets and for Singapore; in their view, while actions in the U.S. have a larger effect, policy accommodation in Japan and the euro zone are providing a welcome offset. The authorities did not agree with the characterization of Singapore’s external position as substantially stronger than warranted by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies . In their view, the assessment does not fully capture Singapore’s unique features. In particular, the large current account surplus reflects the country’s position as a global financial center, trading and production hub, and its city state geography. It is not the result of “inappropriate policies” and the real exchange rate in an economy as open as Singapore reflects developments in relative prices and costs. They emphasized the unique setup whereby the exchange rate is in fact used as an instrument to achieve internal balance objectives, which would be compromised if it were used to directly target the external balance. The authorities also highlighted the need for the external sector assessment to focus on longer term considerations related to consumption smoothing over a life-cycle, preserving intergenerational equity and sustainability, rather than near- or medium-term notions of “equilibrium”. The authorities expect the current account surplus to decline over time as population aging takes hold, lowering saving rates, and the size of government rises to deal with rising old-age dependency ratios and upgrading of infrastructure.