Singapore’s economy continues to perform well in 2014–15 but activity has been impacted by reduced reliance on foreign workers, the slow global recovery, and the turning of credit and housing cycles . The moderation in growth from 4.4 percent in 2013 to 2.9 percent in 2014 partially reflects the transition to the lower trend growth rate dictated by reduced contribution from labor supply. Cyclical factors reflecting a slow and uncertain global recovery and the turning of credit and housing cycles have also played a role. In 2014, consumption growth slowed down considerably and gross fixed investment contributed negatively to growth, held back by the uncertain economic outlook and its impact on investor confidence (Figure 1). Growth in the first quarter of 2015 was robust at 3.2 percent (q/q) in annualized seasonally-adjusted terms, following a strong fourth quarter in 2014, with both consumption and investment showing signs of modest pick-up. Private sector credit growth slowed to 4.6 percent in April 2015 (y/y), the slowest pace in five years. House prices have continued to decline modestly and are below their peaks by 9 percent and 6 percent in the public resale and private market segments as of the first quarter of 2015, respectively. The pace of house price decline has been slower over the past 7 quarters, suggesting that policy actions such as the introduction of the total debt service ratio (TDSR) framework in mid- 2013 have helped engineer the soft landing targeted by policy makers. Inflation has declined significantly on the back of a steep decline in oil prices and softer housing and car permit prices, while a tight labor market has not so far translated into inflation pressures . Headline inflation fell to -0.3 percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2015, down from an average of 1 percent in 2014, and 2.4 percent in 2013. Core inflation also eased, to 1.1 percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2015 (Figure 1). The labor market has remained strong and unemployment has declined below 2 percent. A remarkable increase in the hiring of resident workers has pushed the labor force participation ratio to a new record high. Pass-through of rising unit labor costs partly driven by wage increases has been smaller than expected amid weak demand and uncertain business outlook, contributing to subdued inflation. The current account surplus increased in 2014, reflecting low import demand and lower energy prices, while exports have been restrained. v F b v F b Food Clothing and Footwear Housing & Utilities Houshold Durables & Services Health Care Transport Communication Education Others CPI (Percent change) Contribution to CPI Growth (In percent, year-on-year) Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations IDN PHL SGP THA MYS Export Performance (Index, 2006=100, 3mma, s.a.) Sources: Haver Analytics;and IMF staff calcuilations. Page 12 The current account surplus rose to 19.1 percent in 2014, up by 1.2 percentage points relative to 2013, driven by both the goods and the services balance. The trade balance improved significantly in the first quarter of 2015, reflecting mainly the impact of the oil price shock. Singapore’s exports have been relatively weak, due to the slow pace of global economic recovery, as well as supply-side constraints. The overall balance of payments surplus narrowed in 2014 and recorded a deficit in the first quarter of 2015, amid higher net outflows in the financial account. Singapore’s financial markets have so far been resilient to the volatility associated with diverging global monetary conditions. The Singapore dollar depreciated by about 10 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar between end- August 2014 and mid-March 2015. Singapore dollar’s decline was related to the broad-based strength of the U.S. dollar which affected currencies across the board and also to expectations of further easing after the change in the monetary policy stance in January. During mid-March and end-May the Singapore dollar has appreciated by about 3 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. The stock market has performed well over the past year and in early-2015, reaching a peak in April.