The near-term outlook for growth is favorable but inflation will likely drift up Growth is expected to moderate to around 3 percent during 2014 2015, narrowing the positive output gap . Growth impetus from recovering demand in advanced economies is likely to be offset by the ongoing real appreciation and the gradual tightening in global monetary conditions. Meanwhile, the planned further slowing inflow of foreign workers, as part of the ongoing economic restructuring, will moderate potential growth and lower competitiveness. The positive output gap and labor market tightness are putting upward pressure on wages and prices , resulting in the projected temporary pickup in core inflation to around 2.4 percent during 2014−15. The higher wages and possible shortage of labor, driven by slower additional inflow of foreign workers as part of the ongoing economic restructuring, would help incentivize firms to invest in labor-saving technologies and therefore raise labor productivity; and facilitate a reallocation of economic activity toward less labor intensive and higher value(cid:173)added sectors. The medium-term outlook will be shaped by the success of the ongoing economic restructuring program and policy responses to the rapid pace of population aging . Potential GDP growth is projected to slow in the next few years on slower labor force expansion, and then recover gradually as faster labor productivity growth takes hold through capital deepening and total factor productivity growth, reaching about 3¼ percent in the medium term—well below the pace during 2000−08. Tighter labor supply due to slowing inflow of foreign workers in the near term and population aging in the medium term will boost wages. With productivity gains unlikely to fully compensate, core inflation will increase temporarily and—together with continued nominal appreciation—push up the REER, dampening export growth. Supported by a 1−2 percentage points of GDP increase in social and infrastructure spending, the more appreciated REER is expected to rebalance growth toward domestic demand. Accordingly, the current account surplus is projected to narrow gradually by about 3¾ percent of GDP to around 14½ percent of GDP over the medium term. The baseline projections are subject to a variety of risks . As a very open city(cid:173)state, Singapore’s economy is particularly exposed to external risks (Figure 6). In addition to risks related to external demand shocks, including owing to the continued buildup and eventual unwinding of excess capacity in China, it could also be affected by an abrupt surge in global financial market volatility as investors reassess underlying risks, and geopolitical risks. Singapore’s strong Page 7 macroeconomic fundamentals—a very strong external position, adequate level of foreign reserves, significant fiscal buffers and strong bank balance sheets—could help absorb shocks and facilitate a countercyclical policy response. On the domestic front, the wide(cid:173)ranging structural reforms the government is implementing could set the stage for a new era of sustainable growth over the medium term (upside risk). However, achieving productivity improvements is unpredictable in terms of timing and magnitude. The resulting downside risk could be mitigated by carefully calibrating the pace of implementation of labor-market tightening measures while affirming the medium-term targets and objectives. Delays in implementing Anti(cid:173)Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) standards may adversely affect reputation and the wealth management sector. Key risks, their transmission mechanisms, and recommended policy actions are summarized in the Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM, Appendix I). The authorities focus was squarely on the implementation of their medium(cid:173)term economic restructuring plan . Labor productivity growth had generally been weak since 2010 though it had improved in recent quarters. While noting that the restructuring could entail transition costs that could hold back growth temporarily, the authorities remained firmly committed to the medium(cid:173)term restructuring objectives and noted the fiscal incentives that are being provided to enterprises to adopt labor(cid:173)saving technologies and to help them weather the transition. The authorities observed that a further pickup in G(cid:173)3 demand could push core inflation beyond their comfort zone. In that case, they would consider recalibrating macroeconomic policies as part of the normal decision making processes. However, the authorities would be more guarded in reconsidering the implementation pace of the restructuring plans. The authorities were confident that the economy would be able to withstand the impact of the key external risks highlighted above . As a very open economy, Singapore has been confronted with frequent external shocks. The authorities noted the potential indirect income multiplier effects from shocks to Singapore’s trading partners. They noted that financial buffers are robust owing to the continuous efforts to strengthen the supervisory and regulatory frameworks. Balance sheets of the corporate and household sectors are strong. While a significant rise in interest rates could cause vulnerabilities among pockets of overextended households and therefore have social costs, this would have little systemic implications. Page 8 POLICY DISCUSSIONS