The shift to a growth model that relies less on foreign workers has unleashed a multi- year economic restructuring process that is multi-dimensional and transformative. Policies focus, inter alia, on upgrading worker skills and investing in capital, broadly construed to include tangible and intangible forms (organizational capital and business processes). Tighter limits on foreign workers have led to a permanent increase in real wages relative to the cost of capital in Singapore. This has raised firms’ long-term desired capital-labor ratio and should translate into increased investment as the restructuring matures (Appendix V). Staff welcomes policy measures, such as investment tax credits, that encourage capital accumulation. Temporary wage subsidies are also useful, by helping to moderate the increase in the relative price of labor and by smoothing firms’ transition to the new economic structure. These measures should be subject to sunset clauses as planned to avoid distortions in the long run. However, the restructuring has also compressed firms’ profits in the short run and lowered potential growth to a level consistent with Singapore’s physical limits, leading to a weakening of investment during the initial phases of restructuring. Staff expects that private investment will rebound over time as firms react to higher wages and to government incentives by adjusting capital spending to reach their new higher optimum capital intensity levels. Progress with the economic restructuring requires careful monitoring and a flexible policy approach to reach its medium-term goals. more restrictive foreign worker policy has contributed to a tightening of the labor market, as exemplified by the recent increase in the ratio of vacancies to unemployment. Higher participation rates of older workers and workers with relatively low skills can help explain the decline in labor productivity. The looming full implementation of sectoral foreign worker quotas (or Dependency Ratio Ceilings, DRCs) in the services sector on July 1, 2015, could cause additional pressures in the coming months if firms need to release foreign workers to meet their DRCs. While tighter foreign worker quotas can incentivize V Overall Unemployment Rate Beveridge Curve for Singapore (In percent)Source: Ministry of Manpower, Singapore. Net Hiring by Residential Status (Annual net change in employment, in thousands) Residents ForeignersSources: Singapore, Ministry of Manpower; and IMF staff calculations. Page 25 firms to invest in labor-saving technologies and processes, it can also have a bearing on firms’ ability to flexibly adjust and organize their labor forces and reduce incentives to invest due to compressed profits. Economic restructuring also entail risks, including higher than expected transitional costs (for instance a sharp increase in frictional unemployment, hallowing out in some sectors) with more long-term effects on growth and potential delays in achieving productivity gains. In such situations, a recalibration of the DRCs would be called for. Targeted fiscal support to businesses is being provided through grants and tax credits, to facilitate the restructuring. Staff welcomes the flexibility demonstrated recently in the calibration of foreign worker levies. Additional measures could support firms if activity falls or productivity does not pick up. The rising trend in public spending on health, education and infrastructure is expected to provide a supporting environment to increase productivity. The 2015 budget continues to further the authorities’ goal of restructuring Singapore’s economy and facilitating the country’s next phase of development . Accordingly, the budget emphasizes long-term investment to develop human, physical and organizational capital, including infrastructure, and encourages businesses to innovate and internationalize. It also sharpens incentives for individuals and businesses to invest for the future and improve productivity. Restructuring is taking place while Singapore is operating at full employment, making it harder to force productivity improvements. In addition, changes in investment plans dictated by the tight labor market and incentives to invest and innovate take several years to complete. The addition of older individuals to the workforce is good from an inclusion and long-term structural points of view. However, this increase in workforce can hold back productivity growth in the transition. The tight foreign and local labor market has incentivized firms to invest in capital and reorganize their businesses to use less labor. For instance, the take-up rate under the Productivity and Innovation Credit scheme has increased from 33 percent of active companies in 2011 to 46 percent in 2014. The pause in raising foreign worker levies for the manufacturing and services sectors does not alter the government’s structural targets. The final tightening in quotas for the services sector is still set for July 2015, when the DRCs become applicable to companies’ entire workforces.