The overarching objectives of fiscal policy have been to support economic growth and efficiency while ensuring long-term sustainability of the public finances. The small size of government and low rates of taxation in Singapore have supported the strong business climate and contributed to high rates of economic growth. Sustained over-performance on the conservative fiscal rule, which requires a balanced budget over the political term of the government, has over time resulted in the buildup of large fiscal reserves. These savings now allow the government to meet expanding spending needs to maintain Singapore’s logistics edge through additional infrastructure investments and to meet the needs of its aging society. Going forward, the continued medium-term orientation of fiscal policy and the modest strengthening of collective responsibility will serve current and future generations of Singaporeans well . The FY2015/16 budget underscores the government’s focus on boosting productivity, raising inclusiveness and reducing inequality, and managing the impact of the sharp increase in the old-age dependency ratio. Staff takes note of the government’s well-articulated plans to raise social and infrastructure spending over the next five years, which will result in a modest increase in the size of government spending of about one-two percentage points of GDP. Planned higher outlays on healthcare, education and training, public transport and airport expansion, and domestic security serve clear public policy purposes. Building on Singapore’s strong track record of high-quality government spending, they can be expected to strengthen the social and economic foundation of Singapore, improve the prospects for potential output, and support external adjustment. Staff welcomes steps taken in the FY2015/16 budget to reduce income inequality, which continue in the direction of government policies in recent years . The increase by two percentage points in the marginal personal income tax rate for the highest income bracket and the quarterly cash transfers to elderly with income in the lowest 30 percent (“Silver Support”) will contribute to reducing intra- and inter-generational inequality. The inclusion of Temasek in the “Net Investment Returns” framework could also help promote a more equitable inter-generational distribution of income. Singapore’s fiscal reserves are held and managed by the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC), MAS and Temasek. Under the “Net Investment Returns framework”, spending is capped at 50 percent of the expected long-term real returns on the fiscal reserves held by the GIC and MAS only. Temasek’s net portfolio is 223 billion Singapore dollars, with a geographic allocation tilted towards Singapore and other Asia. 10121416IVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVI07200820092010201120122013201415 Singapore: Fiscal Developments (4-quarter rolling sums, in percent of GDP) Total spending Operating spending Development spending Balance Total revenueSource: EconomicSurvey of Singapore, Ministry of Trade and Industry.Note: Revenue excludes interest and investment income. Page 23 The fiscal impulse, projected at 1.6 percent of GDP in FY2015/16, is opportune (Table 5). While recognizing the medium-term orientation of fiscal policy, staff notes the insurance value of a somewhat expansionary near term fiscal stance, which is warranted by the higher downside risks to the external outlook and the prospective tightening of domestic credit conditions. There is scope to enhance the clarity and transparency of the fiscal accounts . The policy debate in Singapore centers on the need for fiscal policy to continue being sustainable and to become fairer and more inclusive both within and across generations. It is also framed by the requirements of the fiscal rule, which limits the drawdown of accumulated government assets. Within this framework, there is scope to provide more clarity of the coverage and meaning of the reported fiscal balance. Several items, including the government’s investment income and intra- government transfers via special funds and programs and land sales, require adjustments to be made to the fiscal balance to obtain a macroeconomically relevant measure of the fiscal position. While the presentation of the fiscal accounts in the annual budget is anchored in the Constitution, fiscal policy discussions could be enriched further by supplementing the budget presentation with an alternative based on the overall fiscal balance in line with Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) 2001. This would clarify the additions to the government’s fiscal reserves (held at the MAS, GIC, and Temasek) implied by the budget. In doing so, it would help reveal the budget’s implications for fiscal sustainability and evolution of fiscal reserves. The authorities highlighted the medium-term orientation of the budget and their commitment to make greater use of fiscal policy to improve inclusiveness while remaining true to the primacy of personal and family responsibility. Recent measures to assist elderly individuals earning lower incomes reflect the authorities’ belief that government has a role to support social mobility and take care of the elderly as the size and structure of Singaporean families change. Recent policies should be seen as an effort to provide help to people to take care of themselves without weakening private initiative and without undermining personal and family responsibility. Singapore supports a system of “sustainable inclusivity” where the government provides active support for personal responsibility. Singapore’s fiscal balances are presented in line with the requirements of the Constitution. Multiple presentations of the budget document would lead to confusion and possible misinterpretation of fiscal spending permissible under the Constitution. The general government finance data that follows the GFSM format are made available in the Yearbook of Statistics. All revenue data, including government land sales and investment income, are also included in the Budget documents, allowing analysts to make the necessary adjustments to the headline budget figures. The Ministry of Finance has also been publishing the fiscal impulse, based on a commonly accepted methodology, as part of the Budget documents. There is no ideal method of presentation that will satisfy both the need to correctly reflect the level of government spending permissible under the Constitution, and to facilitate analysis and cross-country comparisons. Page 24 Budget over performance does not reflect a systematic bias toward fiscal surpluses The Ministry of Finance aims to be as accurate as possible during budget planning. In any given year, revenues could deviate from the budgeted figures, and there is no deliberate or consistent conservatism embedded in projections. The revenue over-performance in recent years was due to unexpectedly buoyant demand for real estate and vehicles.