After a substantial narrowing of fiscal imbalances through 2013 to exit the EU’s Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP), fiscal consolidation progress has petered out. While economic conditions could argue for a supportive fiscal stance, other factors and especially the need for policy maneuver under FRA debt brakes point to the need for fiscal adjustment over the medium term. Broadening the tax base, enhancing revenue collection, and achieving spending efficiencies would help secure fiscal adjustment while funding key priorities and allowing for lower taxes on factors of production. Institutional and structural factors point to the need for resuming fiscal consolidation After four year of consolidation through 2013, which culminated in EDP exit, fiscal policy has been broadly neutral or even somewhat expansionary, with the deficit remaining between 2½ and 3 percent of GDP. Still high unemployment, large infrastructure needs, and subdued inflation could argue for a supportive fiscal stance, and borrowing conditions are favorable. However, the negative output gap is closing rapidly. In addition, for Slovakia, a prudent public debt ratio is likely to be lower than the current level (Box 4). Moreover, to allow fiscal policy to play a counter-cyclical role— crucial for a small open economy in a monetary union—a debt ratio safely below binding FRA debt brakes is necessary, and the debt brakes will begin falling in 2018, eroding already narrow fiscal space. Finally, lower debt is warranted in light of long-term fiscal challenges from one of the steepest population aging rates in Europe—challenges that have been aggravated by repeated opening of the private pension pillar. Page 17 Box 4. Should The Fiscal Responsibility Act Be Reformed? To shore up budget credibility, Slovakia adopted the FRA in 2011 . The framework includes rules to strengthen budget discipline, enhance accountability, and foster transparency. Does the FRA provide a good fiscal rule? In principle, debt rules can help improve countries’ fiscal discipline. However, they may heighten pro- cyclicality and hamper the quality of fiscal adjustment when sanctions are substantial, as is the case for the FRA. In order to allow automatic stabilizers to operate and avoid pro-cyclical sanctions, debt levels need to be kept well below the thresholds. Fiscal Responsibility Act Are FRA debt brakes reasonable? Unfortunately, there is no clear-cut answer. Empirical evidence shows that the relationship between debt and growth may be non-linear, suggesting country-specific thresholds beyond which negative effects kick in. For Slovakia, which lacks independent monetary policy as a euro area member but also shares some characteristics of an emerging economy, a prudent public debt ratio is likely to be below 50 percent of GDP. Two additional considerations support this view: (i) despite one of the lowest debt-to-GDP ratios in the EU and very narrow interest spreads, interest payments absorb about 5 percent of total revenue, which is broadly in line with the EU average and reflects a relatively low level of revenue-to-GDP; (ii) given limited absorption capacity of domestic markets, the share of government debt held by non-residents has steadily risen, thereby increasing vulnerability to sudden stops. Should the debt brakes be on a gross or a net basis? In principle, gross debt should be tracked separately from government assets since sharp swings in prices can distort underlying debt developments. Nonetheless, defining debt brakes on a gross basis may unduly constrain a country’s debt management. ____________________ For more detailed analysis, see related Selected Issues Paper. until 2017from 2027 onwards50% - 53%40% - 43%The Ministry of Finance sends a letter to the Parliament explaining the reasons for breaching the debt threshold and indicating measures for its reduction.53% - 55%43% - 45%The government submits to the Parliament a proposal of measures for debt reduction and the wages of government members are frozen to the previous fiscal year level.55% - 57%45% - 47%The Ministry of Finance reduces current year state budget expenditure by 3 percent (with specified exemptions such as interest payments, EU funds, co-financing and EU budget contributions) while restrictions apply to the release of funds from the reserves of the government and the Prime Minister. If the debt level exceeds this threshold for consecutive years, the reduction happens only in the first year. In addition, the government must submit to the parliament a general government budget for the subsequent year that does not increase the nominal expenditure level (with previously mentioned specified exemptions); it applies to local governments as well. 57% - 60%47% - 50%The government should submit to the Parliament a balanced (or in surplus) general government budget; it applies also to local governments.> 60%> 50%The government asks the parliament for a vote of confidence.Debt level 1/Action(in percent of GDP)1/ Starting in 2018, the debt ceilings will be gradually reduced by one percentage point of GDP each year to reach 40-50 percent of GDP by 2027.Source: Constitutional Act of December 8, 2011 on Fiscal Responsibility. Page 18 The 2016–18 budget plan sets ambitious fiscal targets to achieve a sharp adjustment and will be challenging to implement. The government targets deficits of 1.9 percent of GDP in 2016 and 0.4 percent of GDP in 2017 (thereby reaching the EU medium-term objective (MTO) of a structural deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP), and overall balance in 2018. The 2016 budget contains a number of deficit-increasing measures as part of social packages such as a reduction of the VAT rate on basic foodstuffs from 20 to 10 percent, gas price reimbursements for households, wage increases for some public sector employees and healthcare staff, and increases in maternity benefits and childcare allowances. Given that offsetting spending cuts, largely in government consumption, have not been specified in great detail, staff’s baseline estimate is for a 2016 deficit of around 2.2 percent of GDP. Further negative risks stem from a possible third social package (to be specified in December and implemented if the current governing party remains in power), potential additional EU funds corrections, or other outlays (e.g., there is significant interest in a PPP road project which could entail initial costs). Under staff’s no-policy change baseline scenario (measures to meet the 2017 and 2018 targets are still to be specified and thus are not reflected), the deficit would fall below 2 percent of GDP and the debt-to-GDP ratio would drop below 50 percent by 2020. A fiscal adjustment path broadly in line with EU requirements (0.5 percent of GDP annual improvement in the structural balance), and hence smoother than the one envisaged by the authorities, could be preferable in that it would have a lower impact on near-term growth while still putting the debt ratio on a safe downward trend, though this would imply postponing MTO achievement by two years. Sources: Slovak Ministry of Finance and IMF staff projections. The analysis is based on the IMF macroeconomic framework, which differs from that of the authorities. High-quality and growth-friendly fiscal consolidation would call for: Enhancing tax compliance . Slovakia has one of the largest VAT gaps in Europe and corporate income tax (CIT) compliance could also be strengthened. Building on good VAT collection progress in recent years, a one percentage point improvement in the effective VAT rate could yield 0.5 percent of GDP. It will be important to minimize risks from the reduced VAT rate on basic foodstuffs. As part of efforts to strengthen tax administration, plans to merge the tax, customs, and social security agencies should be sped up. Auth.objective 0.5 struct.adj. General Government Overall Balance 0.5 struct.adj. Auth.objective FRA threshold General Government Gross Debt Baseline Auth.objective 0.5 struct.adj. Real GDP Growth Page 19 Broadening the tax base . The government has adopted measures to fight CIT base erosion and profit shifting, but other areas should also be considered. Slovakia now collects little from a relatively regressive property tax based on square meters, and should accelerate the introduction of a market-value-based property tax; this could yield about 1 percent of GDP in revenue and would be more equitable and less harmful to growth than other taxes. Environmental taxation is also low compared to peers and could yield up to 2½ percent of GDP over the medium-term, according to EC estimates. Targeted measures could mitigate potential social concerns from tax regime changes. Rebalancing the tax mix. Slovakia’s current tax structure is distortive, with a comparatively high reliance on social security contributions (SSCs). The average tax wedge as well as the SSC share is higher in Slovakia than the OECD average. Although the CIT rate compares favorably with other OECD countries, it is the highest among the Visegrad countries. To preserve competitiveness and foster job creation, Slovakia should shift from labor and corporate taxes toward the less distortive revenue sources mentioned above. Improving spending efficiency. Public expenditure remains relatively low compared to peers, and its structure is rather rigid; compensation of employees, interest payments, social benefits, and subsidies account for over 70 percent of total outlays. Consequently, cutting spending appears challenging. Nonetheless, beyond the ongoing initiative to make the government more efficient (ESO program), there is scope for expenditure rationalization, especially in the health sector, where the comparatively high level of spending does not translate into positive health outcomes. A comprehensive review of social benefits, where there is scope for better targeting, could also yield savings. in percent of total revenue (RHS) in percent of GDP (LHS) Social Benefits (2013-14 average) Source: Eurostat. Employer SSCs Employee SScs Income taxes Tax wedge (RHS) Average Tax Wedge -Breakdown (single person and 0 children, in percent)Source: OECD. OECD avg. AUT BEL CZEDEUDNKESPESTFINFRAGBRGRCHUNIRLITALUXNLDPOLPRTSVKSVNSWE x Gross National Income Per Capita (Thous.PPS) Tax on Property and Income Level (in percent of GDP and in purchasing-power standards)Sources: AMECO and OECD. Page 20 Funding priorities. The above-mentioned measures could secure needed fiscal adjustment while still funding key spending priorities. In particular, Slovakia’s low level and quality of capital infrastructure call for additional public investment, which could be supported by better implementation of EU funds, including through preparation of projects for the 2014–20 programming period. Reducing state ownership . Even after full privatization of Slovak Telekom, state ownership remains sizeable with (direct or indirect) participation in a number of companies, mainly in the energy sector. Reducing state shareholdings would help lower debt in a growth-friendly way. Modifications could make the FRA a more growth-friendly fiscal discipline tool. More gradual adjustment under the FRA would lessen potential pro-cyclicality, escape clauses could be better tailored to the size and nature of shocks Slovakia might face (e.g., it could take a 2009-size growth shock to trigger flexibility), and there might be less of a bias toward expenditure cuts. Although a prudent debt ratio should be maintained, keeping the FRA debt thresholds at the current levels would help preserve limited fiscal space. Netting out cash balances from government debt could facilitate debt management, for example through cash buffers or pre-financing when market conditions are favorable, but should be backed up by clear cash management guidelines. General government In percentIn percentIntermediateCompensationGross capitalSocialOtherexpenditure by functionof GDPof totalconsumptionof employeesformationbenefits Total40.6100.013.220.08.246.511.9 General public services4.811.722.626.34.71.643.7Defence1.43.338.852.11.77.40.0Public order and safety3.27.921.956.312.57.81.0Economic affairs3.89.421.512.432.65.826.9Environment protection0.92.332.510.821.70.035.6Housing and community amenities0.92.124.30.043.912.121.4Health7.418.22.02.71.092.91.4Recreation, culture and religion1.33.226.823.219.00.030.2Education4.611.320.858.09.73.27.9Social protection12.530.62.25.20.689.42.6Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations.< --- In percent of total expenditure in each category --->1/ Red cell indicates a value above the average of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. General Government Expenditure by Function, 2010-13 EE DD EU Funds: Per-Capita Allocation (in euros) DD Sources: European Commission; Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Funds Absorption Rate, Cohesion Policy 2007-2013 (in percent of the total) Page 21 Authorities’ views The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to sustainable public finances while improving living standards Budget . The authorities are confident that improvements in tax compliance and expenditure savings, mainly in healthcare and public administration, will achieve the 2016 fiscal target. Moreover, early next year the government plans to start a major spending review program based on value-for-money analysis. The authorities underscored the results achieved so far in fighting tax evasion and fraud, especially regarding the VAT. In 2016, with a view to improving VAT collection efficiency, the so-called reverse-charge mechanism will be introduced for the construction sector, which has one of the highest VAT gaps. The government has also added 30 measures to its action plan to combat tax fraud aimed at enhancing collection. Market-based real estate tax . Implementing a market-based real estate tax will take time. The government is preparing reforms to upgrade the cadastre and to collect property transaction prices, which have not been available since the transaction tax was abolished in 2004. FRA reform . The benefits of reforms such as netting out cash balances were acknowledged, but amending the FRA is unlikely in the near term.