Growth is expected to gather momentum, driven by new automotive investment Growth should accelerate from 3.4 percent this year to 3.6 percent in 2016 (closing the output gap), and will be a little more than 3 percent over the longer term, generally in line with potential growth. Despite lower public investment as EU funds drawings return to more normal levels, accommodative monetary and credit conditions, weaker oil prices, and tightening capacity utilization should support private investment. In addition, a fourth carmaker (Jaguar Land Rover) plans to invest almost 2 percent of GDP over 2016–17 in a new plant that would raise car production by one-third, boosting net exports from 2018. Finally, improving labor market conditions and real wage growth are likely to foster private consumption. A number of buffers help counter vulnerabilities, primarily to external shocks (Risk Assessment Matrix, Annex I). A sound and liquid banking sector, low private sector leverage, and limited public debt bolster resilience to shocks. If, however, growth were to falter among key trading partners such as Germany—whether due to weakness in the euro area itself, a slowdown in China or other emerging market economies, or tensions in Russia and Ukraine—Slovakia’s important export sector would be affected, lowering growth and leading to an increase in the public debt ratio. On the domestic side, rapid household credit growth could lead to financial sector risks, while high long-term unemployment could erode human capital, undermine growth, and exacerbate demographic challenges. The consequences of Volkswagen’s emissions scandal remain uncertain but they represent an important downside risk given substantial operations in Slovakia (Box 2). Page 10 Box 1. External Assessment Slovakia’s real exchange rate appears broadly in line with fundamentals . The EBA-Lite current account model suggests a marginal undervaluation of the real effective exchange rate (REER) (4 percent). In contrast, the EBA-Lite REER model seems a poor fit for Slovakia—the panel estimations on which it is based do not capture the dynamics of a catching-up economy—and points to a large overvaluation (about 30 percent) despite solid trade surpluses and growing export market shares. More tailored REER analysis using a panel of peer transition economies confirms limited undervaluation (7 percent). Analysis suggests Slovakia’s policies are generally appropriate . The small policy gap from the EBA-Lite model (0.7 percent) indicates that Slovakia’s fiscal, external and financial policies are close to equilibrium, but the model estimates a current account norm of negative 2.5 percent of GDP. The actual current account is broadly in balance, but the large negative errors and omissions, possibly reflecting an overstatement of export prices, may blur the real picture. While the norm might be consistent with Slovakia still catching up with more advanced economies, a current account deficit would imply growing stress on the country’s net international investment and debt positions, and hence on its external financing requirements—a risk flagged in the public sector debt sustainability analysis. Capital and financial account. The downward trend in FDI inflows is estimated to have bottomed out in 2015, with a recovery projected in 2016–17, reflecting the planned investment of a fourth car maker. After a period of exceptionally large inflows, portfolio investment declined in 2014–15, partly due to lower net borrowing from abroad by the government. Net flows are projected to gradually converge to balance. Foreign asset and liability position . External debt is forecast to reach 93 percent of GDP in 2015, while the net international investment position would stabilize at negative 70 percent. External vulnerabilities are mitigated by the long maturities of external debt and the large share of FDI among liabilities. Small current account surpluses are nonetheless appropriate in the medium term given the negative net international investment position. Actual Fitted NormSource: IMF staff. Current Account Summary Table CA-Actual-0.5%CA-Fitted-1.9%CA-Norm-2.6%Residual1.4% CA-Gap2.1% Policy gap0.7%Elasticity-0.59 Real Exchange Rate Gap-3.6% Cyclical Contributions-0.1%Cyclically adjusted CA-0.4%Cyclically adjusted CA Norm-2.5% Direct inv. Portfolio inv. Financial deriv. Other inv. Reserve assets Total Net International Investment Position (quarterly data; in percent of GDP) External debt General government Monetary authorities Intercompany lending Banks Other sectors External Debt (quarterly data; in percent of GDP) Sources: Eurostat; NBS; and IMF staff calculations. Page 11 Box 2. Slovakia’s Automotive Sector and Trade Profile The automotive sector plays a crucial role in Slovakia’s economy. The automotive sector grew out of large FDI inflows, attracted by competitive labor costs and a strategic location in the EU and at the heart of Europe. The adoption of the euro in 2009 reduced exchange rate risk, thus providing an additional incentive. The automotive industry accounts for 43 percent of Slovakia’s total industrial production, and world market shares for Slovak vehicles have grown in recent years. The three car producers (Volkswagen, PSA Peugeot- Citroën, and Kia) employ 80,000 workers; taking into account suppliers boosts auto industry employment to 200,000 (about 9 percent of total employment). In 2014, car production was just under 1 million vehicles, making Slovakia the world’s largest per capita car producer. Volkswagen accounts for about 40 percent of automobile production, while PSA Peugeot-Citroën and Kia have a share of 30 percent each. The core automotive industry generates 17 percent of Slovakia’s gross value added, while suppliers account for an additional 22 percent, suggesting potentially significant spillovers within the economy. Slovakia’s trade is concentrated among relatively few countries. Five countries account for about 50 percent of total nominal exports: Germany (22 percent), Czech Republic (13 percent), Poland (8 percent), Austria and Hungary (6 percent each). Similar concentration can be observed on the import side with Germany ranking first (15 percent), followed by the Czech Republic (10 percent), and China (8 percent). If only the car industry is considered, almost all exports are shipped to Europe, with some re-routed to Asia and other markets via Germany. However, as an example, Slovakia’s share of domestic value added consumed by China remains relatively low (around 2 percent). Participation in global value chains (GVCs) has fostered convergence, but it also poses risks. Specialization in more downstream stages of GVCs and in a few specific industries makes Slovakia vulnerable to global market conditions. For instance, it is estimated that a 10 percent fall in car exports would shave 0.3-0.7 percentage points from GDP growth. Strong cost competition from neighboring countries adds to the challenges. To reduce risks, Slovakia might try to move up GVCs while also seeking gradually to diversify its production and trade partners, including by encouraging FDI from other countries and in other sectors. To this end, improving the business environment, fostering R&D through greater development of clusters, and upgrading skills and physical infrastructure are essential, while improving labor market efficiency (both in terms of flexibility and mobility) would help the economy adjust more rapidly to external shocks. SVKCZEKORDEUJAPSVNHUNBELESPCANGBR Car Production (per thousand people)Sources: Oica; WDI; and IMF staff calculation2014 6810121416DEUGBRFRACHNUSAITARUSESPAUTNLD Car Exports: Top 10 Partners (yearly data; in percent of total car exports) Sources: ITC and IMF staff calculation Page 12 Box 2. Slovakia’s Automotive Sector and Trade Profile (continued) 1/ Bubble size is proportional to export value in US dollars (thousands). _________________________________________ Additional background can be found in: “ German-Central European Supply Chain-Cluster Report,” IMF Country Report No. 13/263, August 2013. There are as yet no signs of broad changes in economic policy direction ahead of March 2016 parliamentary elections, although relatively modest “social packages” of spending and tax measures have been introduced. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed on the outlook and risks . They expect similarly solid growth through the medium term, but treat the Jaguar Land Rover investment as a further upside risk in their autumn forecasts, and foresee a somewhat faster decline in unemployment. They agree on the real exchange rate being in line with fundamentals. Direct spillovers from a slowdown in China or other emerging markets would likely be small, but indirect effects via major trading partners could be more sizeable. While acknowledging risks associated with the Volkswagen emissions scandal, high productivity at the company’s relatively new Slovak plants is viewed as an important mitigating factor. The NBS stands ready to tighten macroprudential policies if needed (see below). The authorities viewed the EU quota system as unworkable given migrants’ strong desire to reach wealthier destination countries, but have provided temporary housing to migrants awaiting asylum processing in Austria.