Policies need to focus on reducing vulnerabilities and boosting potential growth. The authorities took steps to address the crisis in 2013, but policy implementation slowed in 2014. The bank recapitalization (largely undertaken in 2013) and transfer of some NPLs to the BAMC during 2014 reduced uncertainty in the financial sector, but NPLs are still high. The reform of the insolvency regime in 2013 put in place conditions to facilitate corporate-debt restructuring; however, restructurings have just begun, and the sustainability of some restructured loans appears questionable. The authorities took measures to consolidate the public finances during 2013–14, including through steps to reform the pension system, but the quality of fiscal adjustment weakened considerably in 2014. Finally, although the authorities have announced plans for a substantial privatization effort, only three small privatizations have been completed to date. The slow pace of reform implementation reflects, partly, the high political uncertainty during 2014. Page 10 Reigniting the reform momentum is essential to mitigate still high risks and support sustainable growth. Despite the policy actions taken so far, the balance sheets of banks, corporations, and the state remain vulnerable and deeply interlinked. Without continued reforms to restructure the banks and the corporate sector, strengthen their governance, and significantly reduce the role of the state in the economy, more losses could materialize, risking renewed financial stress. These reforms and associated confidence effects could also help facilitate the transmission of monetary policy and alleviate deflation risks. In addition, maintaining fiscal sustainability requires a credible fiscal consolidation strategy underpinned by structural reforms, including of the pension system. Finally, further structural reforms of labor markets and the business environment are needed to support corporate-sector restructuring, and diversify the sources of growth to strengthen the economy’s resilience against external shocks.