Slovenia is slowly emerging from a deep crisis.... Real GDP and Real Credit (y-o-y percent change) Slovenia experienced a deep crisis, which culminated in a bank bailout in late 2013 After being hit hard by the global crisis in 2009 through external trade and financing channels, the economy experienced a modest recovery in 2010–11, only to fall back into recession in 2012. Domestic imbalances were largely at play in the relapse, with mounting losses in the highly-leveraged corporate sector leading to rising non-performing loans (NPLs) and a sharp contraction in credit, further fuelling the renewed recession. This raised concerns about the magnitude of bank losses and the sovereign’s ability to address them. The state managed to maintain market access after providing substantial support to the banks in 2013 following a bank asset-quality review and transferring part of their NPLs to the state-owned asset-management company (BAMC). Source: Haver Analytics. Real credit Real GDP Slovenia Cyprus Lithuania Real GDP (Index, 2008:Q2 = 100) While growth has resumed, output remains below pre-crisis levels. Economic activity expanded by 2.6 percent (year-on-year) in the first three quarters of 2014, and high-frequency indicators point to continued improvement in the fourth quarter (Figure 1). The recovery has been driven largely by exports and EU-funded public investment. Private consumption is also showing signs of revival, as household balance sheets are relatively strong and confidence, employment, and real wages are gradually rebounding (Figure 2). Private investment, however, remains weak, given that many firms are burdened with high debt (Figure 3). In all, output remains some 8 percent below its pre-crisis peak—among the largest crisis-related losses in the region—and unemployment is still high, at 9½ percent (with youth unemployment at 16½ percent). Inflation fell sharply in 2014, driven by food and energy prices, averaging 0.2 percent. Sources: Haver Analytics and WEO. EA Portugal Greece Latvia The current account remains in surplus (Figure 4). The positive balance reached 5.6 percent of GDP in the first three quarters of 2014, slightly below its level over the same period in 2013. This reflects export growth of 6 percent over this period, on the back of improving cost competitiveness. Imports continued to increase, but at a slower pace than exports, leading to a widening of the trade surplus to 8.4 percent of GDP. The income balance, however, registered a deficit, due to higher interest payments on external public debt. In the financial account, large inflows associated with external government-bond issuances were more than offset by repayments of Page 6 external liabilities by the banking sector. The net international position was negative 38 percent of GDP at end-June 2014, with external liabilities largely dominated by government and corporate debt. The cumulative general-government cash deficit reached 5.3 percent of GDP at end- September (Figure 5). Net of bank-related costs and extra-budgetary funds, the deficit was 3.7 percent of GDP, significantly lower than a year ago (4.9 percent), but still above the 2014 budget target (2.9 percent). The underperformance was due to both higher-than-planned spending on subsidies to some public enterprises and increased absorption of EU funds supporting public investment and to lower tax revenues—mainly as a result of the rejection by the Constitutional Court of the new real-estate tax—which were only partially compensated by one-off non–tax revenues (cell- phone license sales, exceptional SOE dividends, and central bank profit transfers) and tighter spending on goods and services. Relative to 2013, revenues were 6 percent higher, but spending (net of bank costs) was also 4.6 percent higher. Taking advantage of falling yields (Figure 6), the government pre-financed part of 2015 fiscal needs. Public debt was 78.3 percent of GPD at end-June. The situation in the banking sector has improved over the last year (Figure 7). Its core tier 1 (CT1) capital ratio stands at 15.3 percent after the recapitalization of four banks in 2013—two of which are being wound down—a fifth partly in 2013 and partly in 2014, and a sixth in 2014 (at a total cost of about 10 percent of GDP for the state). The ECB’s recent comprehensive assessment (CA) identified only small additional capital needs for the two largest banks (€65.3 million), which will be covered by profits realized in 2014. After falling by about 6 percent in 2013, deposits increased by 10.8 percent in the first eleven months of 2014 (excluding intra-bank deposits), of which 4.2 and 11.4 percent for household and corporate deposits, respectively. Banks used liquidity, including from recapitalization and sales of assets to the BAMC, to repay debt on the wholesale markets and LTRO liabilities to the ECB and were able to maintain comfortable liquidity buffers through 2014. Nevertheless, non-performing loans (NPLs) remain high, hampering credit. System- wide NPLs stood at 13.2 percent of total loans at end-October (and reportedly at 17.5 percent if restructured loans are included), even after gross transfers to the BAMC (of about € 5 billion). Corporate NPLs reached close to 20 percent, while household NPLs remained low, at 5.5 percent. Provisioning of NPLs stands at about 60 percent. Credit growth declined by close to 7 percent during December 2013-November 2014 (net of transfers to the BAMC). Corporate loans fell by around 10 percent, reflecting the sector’s focus on reducing existing debt, the ability of creditworthy firms to borrow from abroad, but also banks’ reluctance to lend, given still tight credit standards. Household loans fell by 1½ percent, although housing loans have recorded small positive growth. A new government took office in September . The last three years have been marred by high political instability, with two early elections called and four governments sworn in. The previous government fell in April 2014 due to internal turmoil, but early elections took place only in September, contributing to delays in policy implementation. The current center-left governing coalition, comprised of the recently established party of Prime Minister Miro Cerar, the Social Democrats, and the Pensioners’ Party, has broadly endorsed the previous government’s reform agenda. It holds a narrow majority in Parliament, and its public support has been eroding recently. Page 7