Corporate restructuring and improved governance are needed to boost investment and growth High corporate sector indebtedness and weak governance weigh on growth. Although the corporate debt-to-equity ratio has fallen in recent years, it remains higher than its pre-crisis average and the level of peers. Deleveraging will continue to hamper investment and employment, unless corporate restructuring effectively lowers debt and/or equity increases. But restructurings have been limited so far, and the sustainability of some bank-led multilateral restructuring agreements is questionable, reflecting strong vested interests and bottlenecks in the implementation of the new insolvency legal framework (Box 1). Moreover, prospects for increasing firm equity are dim, given a shallow equity market, limited domestic liquidity, and Slovenia’s poor record in attracting FDI. Weak corporate governance compounds the sector’s problems, with prevalent direct and indirect state control and complex corporate structures distorting decision-making and hampering efficiency. D G m v D Leverage in 2008 and investment decline, IRL ESP GRC EST SVK AUT BEL FRA FIN SVN ITA DEU w b Corporate leverage (percent) Sources: ECB and Eurostat. Public Ownership Index 1/ w G v g F y b p h z C F y m G h g b m x b p k v m g B y g H p k m D m g K U Sources: OECD. 1/ Index of state ownership in large companies, 6 highest, 0 lowest. See Zakharova, Dalgic, and Lombardo, 2014, "Reviving Credit Growth for Strong and Sustainable Recovery," The Journal of Money and Banking of Slovenia Banking Association, vol. 63, No. 11, November 2014. Page 14 Box 1. Corporate Debt Restructuring 2014 (Jan-Oct) (RHS) (LHS) (LHS) Compulsory Settlements (LHS) Source: Ministry of Justice. Corporate Bankruptcies Simplified Compulsory Settlements Pre-insolvency restructuring proceedings Reorganization and Restructuring Procedures (count) BAMC : As of end-September 2014, it received 616 corporate NPLs, with a gross value of Corporate restructuring has begun, but is proceeding only slowly . Following the 2013 reform of the insolvency framework, creditors and debtors have more options to address corporate indebtedness. As a result, during 2013–14, about 30 compulsory settlements were completed per year. Simplified compulsory settlements also increased from 10 in 2013 to 90 in 2014. And in 2014, some 8 pre-insolvency restructuring proceedings were concluded for the first time in Slovenia. By comparison, corporate bankruptcy procedures remain widespread, amounting to close to 1000 per year in 2013–14, double their level in 2012. For large corporates, restructurings are occurring through two main channels: €3.5 billion, for which BAMC paid €1.5 billion in bonds (reflected in public debt). Of these, a sixth was assessed as potentially viable and is being restructured, while the rest is in recovery proceedings. Of the restructuring cases, fifteen cases (about €1 billion gross value) are reportedly completed or at an advanced stage. A third of these are being dealt with through compulsory settlement and a few through preventive restructuring. In other cases, orderly bankruptcy proceedings were required to separate viable from non-viable operations, with the viable part successfully leased to investors. The BAMC has also been working with the banks on voluntary MRAs (see below). It recovered €94 million from sales of non- viable NPLs received so far, most of which had already been in bankruptcy proceedings. restructuring guidelines on the basis of key principles, including: (i) keeping the restructuring voluntary; (ii) applying to debtors with more than one financial creditor; (iii) assigning a lead bank to coordinate all creditors; and (iv) a commitment by creditors to allow for a standstill pending the restructuring negotiations. So far, 36 MRAs have been initiated, of which 30 were concluded. The 36 MRAs represent gross exposures of €2 billion, or about a fifth of excessive leverage in the economy. Of the total cases, 6 involve compulsory settlements and 4 are preventive restructurings under the new legal framework. Negotiations are often complex, involving multiple creditors (9 banks, on average, although in some cases, 15 or more banks were involved). The BAMC has been involved in 16 of the MRAs, of which 4 have included debt-to-equity swaps (representing 10 percent of all MRAs). The sustainability of some corporate restructurings under MRAs is questionable. The vast majority (90 percent) of bank-led restructurings under MRAs involve a re-profiling of debt, rather than representing a reduction of corporates’ debt burden relative to their capacity to generate income. In fact, in a third of the signed agreements, additional financing or guarantees were provided by the banks. And a third of concluded agreements are being renegotiated. Bank-led Multilateral Restructuring Agreements (MRAs): These are based on agreed ______________________________ Excessive leverage is debt in excess of debt-to-EBITDA ratios of 5. See Jože P. Damijan, “Corporate financial soundness and its impact on firm performance: Implications for corporate debt restructuring in Slovenia.” Page 15 The BAMC should play a leading role in corporate restructuring . International evidence suggests that asset-management companies (AMCs) can effectively centralize and coordinate the workout of distressed debt, as they can achieve economies of scale, unify workout practices, break corporate-bank links, and concentrate the ownership of collateral, thus enhancing leverage over debtors. Successful cases highlight the vital role of a strong legal framework, independence from political interference, and professional and highly skilled management and staff. Maintaining these conditions in place, in particular safeguarding BAMC’s independence from political interference, is essential to achieve sustainable debt-restructuring solutions and maximize taxpayer returns. Indeed, BAMC has started to show results (Box 1) and its efforts will need to accelerate. The operational effectiveness of the insolvency framework should be increased . The recent reform of the framework has brought it closer in line with international best practice. Although some legal weaknesses remain, given frequent changes to the law in recent years, further modifications would be unwelcome at this point, as maintaining a stable and predictable framework is key to fostering debt-restructuring agreements The authorities should focus on strengthening the implementation of existing tools, which are hampered by capacity constraints and other operational bottlenecks (see Selected Issues Paper “Legal and Institutional Challenges in Corporate Insolvency ”). The capacity of the judiciary and the professionalism of bankruptcy administrators should be enhanced, including through adequate appointment and remuneration systems and proper supervision and accountability. The corporate-insolvency framework should also be supported by a more efficient mortgage-enforcement regime, which would facilitate credit and help underpin debt- restructuring efforts. Finally, the authorities could consider tax measures to incentivize debt restructuring and, over the medium term, could consider simplifying and further strengthening the legal framework. Corporate governance needs to be strengthened . To facilitate corporate restructuring and attract much needed equity, corporate governance standards should be brought in line with best practice by enhancing the accountability of directors, the protection of investor rights, and auditing and reporting standards and practices. The authorities should also ensure that the recently- established Slovenia Sovereign Holding Company (SSH) remains professional and independent and maintains an appropriate governance framework ensuring management of state assets on commercial criteria, with clear objectives and accountability. The authorities should step up privatization efforts . Slovenia has been slow to privatize compared to its peers, which has contributed to governance problems and led to inefficiencies. Well- designed and implemented privatization can bring in fresh capital, including FDI, and related technological and managerial know-how, fostering competition and leading to better quality at lower prices. It can also help reduce public debt. The authorities should thus intensify efforts to divest the remaining twelve companies slated for sale, while avoiding fire sales. A few early and successful sales Such cases include the Finnish and Swedish AMCs established in the early 1990s. See Klingebiel , Daniela. The use of asset management companies in the resolution of banking crises: cross-country experience . No. 2284. World Bank, Financial Sector Strategy and Policy Group, 2000. Page 16 (such as of the telecom company and NKBM, expected this year) can send a strong signal to the markets about Slovenia’s commitment to privatization and openness to FDI. The strategy for remaining state assets should be finalized, with the aim to divest all non-strategic ones. The authorities concurred that reducing corporate debt overhang is a priority . They agreed that the BAMC can play a key role, but noted that its independence also comes with obligations to maintain transparency and accountability. In this regard, they suggested that remuneration may need to be lowered and governance changed to achieve balance in its board (now majority foreign). The authorities saw positively the reformed insolvency framework, which is facilitating MRAs, but agreed that capacity bottlenecks need to be addressed. They reiterated their commitment to privatize companies slated for sale, formulate a strategy for other state-owned assets, and ensure an independent professional board of the SSH.