Slovenia remains in deep recession. Around the period of euro adoption in 2007, Slovenia experienced an externally-financed construction and investment boom that masked pre- existing structural weaknesses. The global financial crisis caused a sudden stop in external financing and a sharp drop in GDP. After a brief stabilization in 2010, the recession resumed in 2011 and the economy now has contracted for eight consecutive quarters. While a sharp contraction in investment was the main driver of the downturn in the early stages, consumption— hitherto buffered by healthy household balance sheets—also started to decline from 2012, weighed down by deep fiscal cuts, stagnant wages, and growing uncertainty. In all, real GDP has fallen by 11 percent from its pre-crisis peak through mid-2013, the largest output loss among the euro area members after Greece. Interlinked problems in the banking and corporate sectors are at the core of Slovenia’s difficulties. The sudden stop in external financing brought to the surface pervasive bank and corporate governance shortcomings. The combination of an overly indebted corporate sector and weak banks has limited credit availability and precipitated a vicious circle of deepening recession, mounting bankruptcies, rising NPLs, and further deleveraging. Public debt has been increasing rapidly. Before the global financial crisis public debt was low (22 percent of GDP) and the fiscal position close to balance, but the prolonged recession and the burden of supporting the state-owned banks have since put public finances under considerable strain. Public debt has more than doubled since 2008, reaching 55 percent of GDP by end-2012, and is set to increase sharply after bank restructuring. The deficit is slated to exceed 4 percent of GDP in 2013 (excluding bank support costs), despite a significant fiscal consolidation over the last three years. Reflecting in part concerns about the fiscal impact of bank restructuring, government bond yields reached about 2 percentage points higher than in similarly-rated Spain and Italy, posing a challenge for debt sustainability, before moderating to about 1¼ percent above Spain and Italy after the announcement of bank asset quality review results in December. In mid- November, the authorities made a €1.5 billion private placement of a 3-year euro bond, at a spread of 465 basis points above German paper. The current account has moved into a substantial surplus, although largely through import compression. The current account surplus rose by 3 percentage points in 2012 to 3.3 percent of GDP on a fall in imports of goods and services of 4.7 percent and largely flat exports. In 2013 H1, in contrast, the import contraction eased to around 1 percent (y-o-y) while exports of goods and services rebounded 2 percent (y-o-y). Improving competitiveness has contributed, with ULCs down 6 percent in 2013 Q2 from their peak one year earlier (Box 1). Page 6 Box 1. Slovenian Competitiveness Turns Slovenia’s competitiveness has improved over the last year. The real exchange rate depreciated modestly this year as unit labor costs turned down. The loss in export market share documented in last year’s report appears to have bottomed out and is recovering, with stronger export growth occurring in markets outside the E.U. The real exchange rate is close to equilibrium with different CGER methodologies showing deviations of less than 5 percent (Table). The bulk of the improvement in the current account, to around 6 percent of GDP this year, has been cyclical, but estimates of the underlying current account now stands significantly above the current account norm based on fundamentals, indicating that structural factors are playing a role. Slovenia’s net International Investment Position stood at negative 45 percent at end 2012, but should narrow over the medium term with the current account surplus and external deleveraging. Slovenia: Equilibrium Exchange Rates CGER Methodology Macroeconomic Balance Equilibrium Exchange Rate External sustainability The improvement in competitiveness reflects the fall in unit labor costs (ULC) of around 6 percent from its level one year earlier (Figure) . This has reversed some of the rise in real ULCs relative to the EU countries (Figure). ULC gains reflect productivity growth that can be attributed largely to reductions in employment in the private and tradeable goods sector with declining wages playing a role only in the public sector (Figure). Productivity gains from labor shedding have helped maintain competitiveness but are not sustainable, and future gains will need to come increasingly from productivity enhancing investment. The authorities are taking actions to address bank weaknesses. On December 12, 2013, the authorities announced the results of independent AQR and ST and are SVN: Real ULC EA: Real ULC SVN: Labor productivity (per hour worked) EA: Labor productivity (per hour worked) Slovenia: ULC and Productivity relative to the E.U. (Index, 2008 = 100)Source: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. (minus) Employment Real output Productivity Slovenia:Productivity (log difference, peak to trough) 10Q110Q311Q111Q312Q112Q313Q1 Slovenia:Unit Labor Cost (2008 = 100) Source: Ministryof Finance Slovenia. Page 7 proceeding with banks’ recapitalization (see paragraph 18). The authorities are also transferring some impaired assets to the BAMC. The government also has made some progress on other reforms but political situation remains complicated. In the spring, parliament passed laws making referenda more difficult to call (the ease of calling referenda to block reforms was perceived as an important institutional problem) and introduced a (structurally) balanced budget rule in the constitution. Since the summer, the parliament approved key laws on corporate insolvency, bank resolution, and state holding company. Despite this important institutional progress, tough discussions on banks and the 2014 budget highlighted tensions within the government coalition.