Bank balance sheets continue to deteriorate . Bank assets shrunk 6.3 percent last year and a further 3.4 percent in the first eight months of 2013. The loan-to-deposit ratio of domestic banks stands at around 110 percent and that of foreign subsidiaries at 171 percent, down from peaks of 138 and 267 percent, respectively. The three state-owned banks (NLB, NKBM, and Actual Potential Potential versus actual growth (Percent) Page 10 Abanka), which accounted for 42 percent of the assets of the system at end-2012 remain under severe stress. Furthermore, two distressed small banks accounting for 4.5 percent of total assets were intervened by the Bank of Slovenia in September 2013, and are being wound down. Banks replaced lost foreign private financing with ECB sources. After repayments to wholesale financial markets equal to about 10 percent of GDP in 2012, banks’ reliance on foreign bank financing declined from 25 percent of liabilities in 2009 to 15 percent in March 2013; in particular, foreign subsidiaries reduced their share from 49 to 30 percent in the same period. To make up for part of the financing shortfall, banks have taken Eurosystem LTROs for about €4 billion in December 2011 and March 2012, making Slovenia one of the heaviest users of LTROs relative to bank assets. NPLs swelled. NPLs (inclusive of guarantees) increased from about 13 percent of all loans at end-2011 to 20.9 percent by end-October 2013. At end-August 2013, the ratio at the three state-owned banks stood at 24.5 percent, with the NPL ratio for corporates reaching 38.3 percent. In contrast, foreign banks appear to be relatively more sound, with NPL ratios about half those of the three state-owned banks. NPLs are highly concentrated in large corporate debtors, with the 40 largest loans accounting for 34 percent of NPLs and an additional 200 or so loans accounting for another 33 percent. Households have low indebtedness. Restructuring of over-indebted corporates (possibly representing “ever-greening”) accounts for more than half of all new loans (and 64 percent in the three state-owned banks). State-owned banks are being recapitalized after undergoing a comprehensive AQR and ST. Under the aegis of EBA, ECB and EC, the authorities had foreign consultants carry out a comprehensive AQR and ST of eight banks, three of which are the largest and state-owned— NLB, NKBM and Abanka. Based on the outcome of this exercise, these banks are being recapitalized in the amount of €3.7 billion. Of this amount, the authorities have injected €3 billion in cash and marketable instruments, with the remainder coming from bailing-in junior debt and adjusting risk weighted assets (Box 3). After the AQR and recapitalization, the Tier 1 capital ratio is projected to be 15.0 percent for NLB, 16.8 percent per NKBM, and 9 percent for Abanka. Total assets Loans to non-banking sector Liabilities to non-banking sectorSource: Bank of Slovenia. Market Share of the Three Largest Banks (Percent) GermanyFranceBelgiumIrelandItalySpainSloveniaPortugal LTRO MRO ELA ECB Lending to Credit Institution by Country, September 2013 (Percent of Banking System Assets) Source: Central Banks. Page 11 Box 3. Asset Quality Review, Stress Tests, and Recapitalization Slovenia undertook a comprehensive AQR and ST exercise on its banks . The AQR covered eight banks, which comprise 70 percent of the system in terms of assets, and included verification of data completeness and integrity, a review of individual loans and collateral valuations, and an assessment of the adequacy of impairments and provisions. Based on the AQR data, the bank balance sheets were tested to assess the adequacy of capital in an adverse macroeconomic scenario, which involves a decline in real GDP of 9.5 percent over three years, as well as a 27 percent drop in average real estate prices, a 25 percent drop in equity prices, and a rise in bond yields to 8.5 percent. The AQR and the ST were carried out by independent consultants (Deloitte, Ernst & Young, and Oliver Wyman) and overseen by a committee comprising the Bank of Slovenia and the Ministry of Finance, with the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the European Banking Authority as observers. The results were announced on December 12, 2013. The exercise found that the eight banks covered would need €4.8 billion in additional capital to withstand the adverse macroeconomic scenario. Of this, the three state-owned banks require €3.7 billion, the two private domestic banks €0.7 billion and three subsidiaries of foreign banks €0.4 billion. The authorities have moved to address these capital needs. The three state-owned banks are being recapitalized through a combination of cash (€2.1 billion), marketable government bonds (€0.9 billion), bail- in of subordinated bondholders (€0.4 billion), and lower capital requirements thanks to a reduction in risk- weighted assets following the transfer of some NPLs to the BAMC (€0.3 billion). The two private domestic banks and the three foreign-owned subsidiaries, which are currently in compliance with Bank of Slovenia capital requirements, would be given until June 2014 to increase their capital to the level suggested by the ST results. If this proves infeasible, the government will provide the requisite capital backstops. In parallel, the authorities announced a capitalization of the two small banks that are in the process of being wound down, and of the BAMC. In addition and within the restructuring programs agreed with the EC’s Directorate General of Competition (DG Comp) for state aid, the three large state-owned banks are transferring €4.6 billion in assets to the BAMC, which is paying €1.6 billion for them. The price is being approved by DG Comp and reflects the long term economic value as mandated by EU rules. Even after the transfer to BAMC, NPLs will remain high. Concurrent with the recapitalization, the authorities are transferring about €4.6 billion of impaired loans (at a price of €1.6 billion) from the three state-owned banks to the BAMC. This transfer will not affect the capitalization ratio given the consistency with the AQR. The transfer, however, will only bring the NPL ratio down to just over 12 percent in 2014, which is still much higher than the 4-5 percent pre-crisis levels. Crucially, the transfer does not include most of the loans to corporates that have been restructured by rolling over principal and a portion of interest due. Staff discussed several actions to strengthen the financial system Dealing with impaired assets. The recent AQR and ST and the subsequent recapitalization of the three state-owned banks are welcome steps. However, at about 12 percent the NPLs ratio in public banks remains too high; even if adequately provisioned, a large share of NPLs can create perverse incentives, especially in public banks. A thorough clean-up of bank balance sheets is essential, and a greater share of impaired assets should be transferred to the BAMC, starting with larger corporates. The transfer Page 12 should be as comprehensive as possible to reduce uncertainty, restore the banks’ financial viability, and reduce their incentives for evergreening. BAMC. The BAMC will mitigate creditor coordination problems and reduce the capital needs in the banks by allowing a decline in their risk weighted assets (Box 4). The BAMC can also facilitate corporate restructuring, with the goal of maximizing recovery value. BAMC’s independence is essential to achieve these goals. The BAMC should use the cash from asset sales to pay down its outstanding debt according to a cash protocol. Bank governance and risk management. Governance and risk management practices should be strengthened to address endemic connected lending and lax risk controls, especially for state-owned banks. Strong private ownership would be helpful in curbing political interference. Bank resolution. The authorities’ approach to the recent liquidation of two small banks has highlighted shortcomings of the resolution framework. The authorities bailed out all creditors (except junior debt), including fiduciary accounts and liabilities that might belong to non-performing debtors. The fiscal burden will turn out to be higher because impaired assets and liabilities are not being netted out by client. While the authorities acted to safeguard financial stability, a concern which staff shares, the approach is problematic in terms of incentives and costs to the state. The authorities issued guarantees of about 3 percent of GDP, and estimate net resolution costs at about 1¼ percent of GDP for these two small banks accounting for 4.5 percent of the system. Future resolutions should aim at bailing-out only insured deposits and should net out assets and liabilities by client. Bank consolidation. Bank consolidation will likely be an important element in the authorities’ resolution toolkit. Mergers should be private-sector driven but not leave banks with unqualified owners unable to keep banks well-capitalized in the face of ongoing asset quality deterioration. The authorities have made good progress in implementing other FSAP recommendations, especially in expanding the toolkit to safeguard financial stability, guard banks’ investments and investments in banks, qualify bank officials and protect bank supervisors (Box 5). Page 13 Box 4. The BAMC In late 2012, the authorities created the BAMC as a public agency , which is subject to oversight by the Court of Audit (supreme audit institution) and the parliament. The BAMC is governed by a board where the majority consists of well-known foreign experts; its purchases and business plans are approved by the Slovenian government. By statute, the BAMC can issue up to €4 billion of government-guaranteed bonds (about 11 percent of GDP) to acquire bank impaired assets, restructure corporates or recapitalize banks. With prior authorization by the EC, the BAMC is buying from the three major state-owned banks about €4.6 billion of impaired assets; these assets are regarded as "non-core" and include mostly bankrupt financial holding and construction sector companies. The BAMC is paying only €1.6 billion for these impaired assets; the acquisition price follows the EC's State Aid Guidelines of the “real long-term value” and is cleared by the EC's DG Comp. The BAMC has the legal instruments and the power to seek a quick resolution of impaired assets, be it by restructuring the corporate (when it holds more than 50 percent of the credits) or by liquidating it and selling its collateral and assets. Bankruptcy procedures where the BAMC is involved are to be concluded within six months. The BAMC has the option of acquiring credits of impaired creditors from other banks to facilitate corporate restructuring, but has to purchase those credits at market prices to avoid providing state aid. A second wave of transfers is possible. The authorities may evaluate with EC's DG COMP whether a second wave of impaired assets transfer is warranted to ease the burden on the three state-owned banks, and will proceed accordingly. The BAMC is to be wound down after five years, with the remaining assets to be transferred to the Slovenia Sovereign Holding (SSH) company. Measures are being taken to ensure a strong financial position of the BAMC. While public debt increases when the BAMC’s bonds are issued, this debt should be partially repaid with the proceeds from the liquidation of assets, including the privatization of corporations that end up in the BAMC’s portfolio. The Anticorruption Commission and the authorities are defining processes and operational principles that are highly transparent, while preserving the operational independence and confidentiality of the agency; these principles should be in place by the time of the first transfers. The authorities have also increased the capital of the BAMC by €200 million, which satisfies the entity’s cash flow needs while limiting the burden on the government's cash position. The authorities would like to extend the life of BAMC to ten years or more. While the details are not clear, two additional changes include allowing private investment in the capital of the BAMC, and relaxing the BAMC's obligation to sell at least 10 percent of its holdings every year. Although private investors have indicated interest in buying blocks of assets, the authorities regard the 10 percent rule as a fire-sale rule that fails to maximize the value for Slovenian taxpayers. Page 14 Box 5. FSAP Follow-Up The authorities are making progress in implementing the recommendations of the 2012 FSAP, including through an AQR and ST that will lead to recapitalization of some banks. In late 2012 the authorities revamped the Bank of Slovenia's (BoS) legislative framework (Banking Law, approved by Parliament in November) , introducing the following main changes: Financial system stability : BoS now has powers over extraordinary receivership, sale of all of a bank’s shares, mandating and carrying out increases in share capital, and transfers of the total or a partial share of a bank’s assets and liabilities. Investments in banks : BoS must give its prior consent to any purchase of a qualifying holding in a bank, and BoS to be notified of any significant changes in ownership that could influence the assessment of the appropriateness of a qualifying holder. Violators (banks and individuals) are subject to repeated fines. This injuction also covers investments by Slovenian banks in financial sector entities in other EU Member States and third countries. Oversight of bank investments : BoS now has the legal power to request from corporations in which a bank acquires a qualifying holding a report outlining risks incurred by the bank. Qualification of bank officials and limits to bank decisions : BoS may disqualify a person from holding office as a member of a supervisory board, if they have breached their obligations as a member of a supervisory board. Protection of bank supervisors : BoS supervisors are now protected from civil and criminal law suits, provided their actions were lawful and conducted with expert diligence. In the future regulations will follow the Basel internal ratings based (IRB) approach definition of default to assess impairments and provisioning. The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s recommendations and said that they will assess the need for additional transfers once the first round is complete. Authorities stressed they are recapitalizing the banks as per the recommendations of the AQR and ST exercise, and are transferring some impaired assets to BAMC in line with the restructuring plans agreed with the EC. They also noted that governance in the banks will be addressed also via privatization. Staff reiterated that recapitalization is a first step to restructure financial and corporate sectors, and warned against complacency after a successful recapitalization.