Slovenia is in a good position to exit the EC’s Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) in The budget deficit reached 2.9 percent of GDP in ESA terms in 2015, below the EDP threshold of 3 percent of GDP. The budget outturn in cash terms (3.3 percent of GDP) was consistent with a structural primary adjustment of ½ percent of GDP. Higher-than-budgeted corporate income tax receipts, reflecting improved firm profitability, boosted tax revenue. On the spending side, below- budget expenditure on pensions and goods and services helped offset overruns in the public sector wage bill and subsidies (Figure 6). Expenditure on refugees had a negligible impact on the fiscal outturn. Nonetheless, public debt increased to over 83 percent of GDP at end-2015, in part because the Treasury prefinanced some of its 2016 needs. Policy discussions covered the near-term fiscal stance and fiscal policy requirements for the medium-to-long term. With risks to this year’s fiscal outcome broadly contained, the discussions focused on the appropriate pace and composition of medium-term consolidation to reduce public debt relative to GDP and offset the impact of demographic trends on public finances. The authorities’ targeted fiscal stance for 2016 is broadly appropriate. The approved budget envisages a general government deficit of 2.2 percent of GDP (cash terms), which would be consistent with a reduction of 0.8 percent of GDP in the structural primary deficit, slightly above the staff-recommended 0.6 percent of GDP. This, combined with drawing down part of the Treasury’s large cash balance, would reduce the debt ratio to below 81 percent by end-year. With the output gap expected to close next year, staff viewed such pace of consolidation as broadly appropriate from a cyclical perspective, and in line with medium-term requirements. The budget is, however, subject to certain risks. The 2016 budget is anchored by a one-year public sector wage agreement and measures to improve VAT collection. The wage bill is Page 17 under strong pressure as the temporary wage restraints introduced during the crisis are being unwound, and the authorities already estimate that the budgeted amount will be exceeded. Moreover, staff assessed that budget revenue could fall short of the target by some ¼ percent of GDP as the expected yield from measures to improve tax collections appears optimistic. The authorities were, however, confident that the budget has sufficient margins to offset small slippages, and noted that the budgetary framework compels line ministries to offset any wage bill overruns by cuts in their other spending. In the medium-to-long term, Slovenia is facing significant fiscal challenges. Expiration of one-off measures put in place during the crisis and adverse demographic trends will strongly pressure public finances. The wage bill will start rising relative to GDP in the absence of policies to put wages and employment on a permanently sustainable basis. In addition, pension spending is projected to resume its steady upward path once the temporary effect of the 2013 reform on the retiree inflows lapses and pension indexation based on wage/price growth resumes. Health care and long-term care spending will also come under pressure. Finally, as EMU interest rates begin to return toward historic levels, the interest bill will start to rise if public debt does not come under control. In the absence of further policy measures, staff projects that debt dynamics will become unsustainable. Under staff’s baseline projections, after a brief lull as the government draws down its cash buffer, the debt-to-GDP ratio would resume its upward path, exceeding 87 percent by 2021. Over the longer term, demographic trends and the interest bill on the ever-rising debt would drive fiscal dynamics, as Slovenia faces the most serious aging problem in the EU. Absent reforms to pensions and other age-sensitive spending, the debt ratio would follow an unsustainable path, exceeding 240 percent by 2060 (in the unlikely event that financing were to remain available). To reduce medium-term fiscal risks and boost credibility, staff argued for a comprehensive medium-term consolidation strategy . The authorities took a step in this direction in 2015 with the passage of a fiscal rule that sets a medium-term budget target of a zero structural deficit. With a closed output gap from 2017 on, the next several years are indeed the right time to Structural budget balance Baseline Adjustment Pension balance (baseline) Sources: Authorities; IMF staff calculations Debt ratio Baseline Adjustment Sources: Authorities; IMF staff calculations. Page 18 rebuild fiscal buffers. However, staff estimates that substantial additional policy measures, amounting to about 3 percent of GDP, will be needed to achieve the targeted balance. Staff recommended a continued gradual pace of adjustment, with annual improvements of 0.6 percent of GDP in the structural primary balance until the overall structural balance reaches zero (text table). Subsequently maintaining the structural balance at this level would bring public debt below 60 percent of GDP by 2026 under the staff’s baseline forecast. This front-loaded approach would allow some relaxation of the fiscal stance later, when the ageing problem is sharpest, keeping the debt ratio below 60 percent (charts above). Policy action in several areas is needed to support consolidation. The authorities are aiming for a multi-year wage agreement with public sector unions that would allow wage bill growth to lag nominal GDP growth by 1.7 percentage points per year. Staff agreed that this would be an important consolidation step and recommended that the agreement also cover rationalization in public employment to lend credibility to the agreed targets. Staff pointed out, however, that additional measures would be needed to achieve the necessary medium-term consolidation. In particular, staff suggested focusing on structural fiscal reforms in expenditure areas where Slovenia had been spending more than its peers without achieving better outcomes: Pensions , by indexing pensions to inflation only, abolishing the pension bonus and pensioners’ preferential tax treatment, and, once the retirement age reaches 65 as planned, continuing its increase to 67 and then linking it to life expectancy. Part of the savings should be directed to support low-income pensioners through the social assistance system; Education spending , by raising pupil-teacher ratios, shifting resources from areas with declining school population to those with expanding ones, and better means-testing financial support for tertiary students; Health care spending , by increasing reliance on primary care, introducing service-based copayments, and linking payments for treatments to their demonstrated clinical and cost effectiveness. In both health and education, the ultimate aim would be to close half of the gap to the OECD country efficiency frontier by 2021. Cumulative Revenue Real estate tax0.8 Expenditure Wage bill 1/0.2 Health care 2/ 3/0.5 Education 2/ 0.6 Pensions0.8 Transfers and subsidies0.2 Total Savings3.1 Source: Staff calculations.1/ Wage agreement in first half of 2016 3/ Reform implemented in 2018. Potential Fiscal Savings by 2021 (in percentage points of GDP) 2/ By closing ½ of the gap from the efficiency frontier of OECD countries. Medium-term Budget Targets, Cash Basis (Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2015201620172018201920202021Headline balance Staff projections (baseline)-3.3-2.5-2.7-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.3Staff recommendations 1/-3.3-2.4-1.1-0.6-0.3-0.10.1 Structural balance Staff projections (baseline)-2.2-1.6-2.5-2.8-3.0-3.3-3.4Staff recommendations-2.2-1.4-0.7-0.30.00.00.0 Structural primary balance Staff projections (baseline)0.61.00.10.0-0.1-0.2-0.3Staff recommendations0.61.21.82.42.82.82.8 Public debt Staff projections (baseline)83.280.481.683.184.485.887.1Staff recommendations 1/83.280.380.279.778.576.875.0 1/ Reflects the effect of staff recommendations on the output gap. Sources: Authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Page 19 Transfers and subsidies , by more rigorous means testing of household income support programs and rationalization of subsidies to enterprises which have tended to exceed budget allocations in recent years. The composition of such an expenditure-reduction package would substantially mitigate the contractionary effect of lower spending on economic activity. In particular, health and education savings derive from efficiency gains, and as such should preserve the level of provided services while releasing resources for use elsewhere in the economy. As regards pensions, raising the retirement age could boost current consumption, while lowering retirement income relative to the returns from working should limit early retirement and boost the labor force. Finally, to the extent that these expenditure savings create room for front-loading high-multiplier public investment (see ¶29), the growth impact of the consolidation would be further mitigated. On the revenue side , staff urged the introduction of a modern, broad-based property tax, in line with Fund technical assistance recommendations, by January 1, 2017. Given its non-distortionary nature, and that property in Slovenia is taxed well below that in comparator countries, staff argued that the aim of the new tax should be to increase substantially property tax revenue in the medium term. In addition, staff supported the authorities’ intention to shift the burden of taxes away from labor, as this would appropriately reduce labor costs and support employment growth. The resulting revenue loss should be offset by raising excise taxes on fuel given the current low energy prices, and tightening transfer pricing rules to raise corporate income tax receipts. Fiscal adjustment via structural, rather than one-off, measures is critical to strengthen credibility . By providing confidence about the ultimate objectives of fiscal policy, a credible medium-term consolidation plan could give the authorities additional flexibility for discretionary measures in case economic developments turn out worse than projected. In particular, provided the overall fiscal consolidation effort is underpinned by credible reforms, the authorities could consider front-loading capital spending, including through acceleration of EU-funded projects. Front-loading capital spending would be justified given the currently low level of government borrowing costs (Figure 7), and the temporary interest savings brought by the ECB’s QE ( Selected Issues , ECB Quantitative Easing: Implications for Fiscal Policy). The authorities agreed on the need for substantial fiscal consolidation over the medium term and broadly shared staff’s suggestions on areas ripe for reform. They were disposed to underpinning medium-term consolidation by structural fiscal reforms, as this would improve budget implementation and allow them to address unforeseen shocks without damaging credibility. In this context, they agreed that the expenditure areas suggested by staff needed to be addressed, particularly pension spending in view of Slovenia’s demographics, but cautioned that building consensus for specific reform measures would take time. On wages, they noted that the negotiations would be difficult as civil servants’ labor union expectations are high. On health, the government has completed a number of expenditure analyses and plans to prepare legislation in 2016 to reform the system. Page 20