RISKS Strong demand in trading partners and large European Union structural fund transfers buoyed growth in 2014–15, but the outlook is less reassuring . Rising exports, a spike in public investment financed by EU funds (chart), and an employment-driven pick-up in private consumption propelled annual GDP growth to about 3 percent over the last two years (Figures 1 and 2). Headline inflation is negative so far this year, but should gradually converge to the currently positive, if low, core inflation rate once the effect of depressed oil prices dissipates. The high weight of energy prices in Slovenia’s HICP relative to other euro area members has magnified the effects of the decline in global energy prices on inflation. However, to date, these effects have been mainly benign, buttressing consumption growth and competitiveness. While exports and private consumption should continue to be supportive of growth, public investment is likely to fall significantly this year and remain low going forward as EU structural funds are reduced. As a result, staff projects GDP growth to decelerate to about 2 percent this year and next. Over the medium term, private investment, employment, and productivity would likely grow only modestly under current policies (charts), limiting potential growth to about 1½ percent, a rate insufficient to narrow the gap in per capita incomes between Slovenia and the richer parts of the EU. Slovenia’s external position is generally strong, but vulnerabilities remain (Annex I). At 7¼ percent of GDP in 2015, the current account surplus is stronger than can be explained by fundamentals and desirable policies. As the estimated policy gap is small (see Table A2), factors outside the Fund’s EBA current account model (e.g. deeper integration in the German supply chain Private investment to GDP TFP growth (RHS) Private Investment and TFP Growth Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. EU-Financed Investment, ESA Definition Sources: Ministry of Finance, and IMF staff estimates. Page 11 and still lackluster domestic demand) appear to have contributed to the large surplus. Falling commodity prices and unit labor costs have also supported a widening trade surplus in the last two years. The surplus is expected to drop to around 4 percent of GDP by 2021 as domestic demand gradually recovers. In contrast with the current account approach, the IMF’s real effective exchange rate (REER) method suggests the REER is broadly in line with fundamentals. This assessment is consistent with a large estimated current account gap given that the external surplus has a large temporary component caused by lackluster demand, rather than a change in prices. On the negative side, Slovenia’s net international investment position (IIP) was still relatively weak at -38 percent of GDP at end-2015, with gross IIP liabilities at 143 percent of GDP, including gross external debt at 116 percent of GDP (mainly because of external public debt and corporate liabilities). The short-term outlook is broadly balanced, while medium-term prospects are subject to downside risks (See Risk Assessment Matrix, Annex II) Externally, a global slowdown would adversely affect exports, a key engine for growth. On the upside, the favorable momentum created by robust import demand in trading partners (Germany, Austria) may persist for longer than anticipated. Internally, failure to complete the cleanup of company balance sheets is a risk to private investment and thus actual and potential growth in the medium term. Furthermore, it will keep firms and banks vulnerable to growth shocks, with the attendant risks to bank profitability and capital. Also, deflation expectations could become entrenched if core inflation turns negative, creating problems for indebted companies and the budget. Moreover, the high and rising public debt burden leaves Slovenia vulnerable to funding shocks in the medium term (Annexes V and VI). Staff’s projections are broadly consistent with those of the authorities’ forecasting arm (IMAD). IMAD forecasts a slightly lower growth and inflation than staff in 2016 and a stronger rebound in 2017, largely based on differing assumptions regarding the path of investment. The authorities agreed that the current account surplus is larger than one would expect for a country like Slovenia, and that surpluses should begin to decline as consumption and investment strengthen. The lower inflation in Slovenia than in the euro area on average and the decline in ULCs in recent years led the authorities to believe that Slovenia would remain competitive and that the real exchange rate appears to be in line with fundamentals. The authorities broadly agreed on the main risks identified by staff. In particular, they pointed to direct and indirect external risks to growth stemming from potential adverse developments in emerging markets such as Russia and China. The authorities were relatively sanguine about risks to Slovenia stemming from global financial volatility in both the short and medium term, noting the stabilizing role of the ECB policies in this respect. J D J D J D J REER-HCPI REER-ULC Real Effective Exchange Rates (index, 2005 = 100) Sources:Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Page 12