Despite the deep recession, the authorities achieved major fiscal consolidation during 2011–12. Staff estimates an improvement in the structural primary balance of some 3 percent of GDP during this period. The adjustment was broadly balanced between revenue increases and expenditure reductions, the latter including wage cuts and sharp reductions in public investment. The authorities target a general government deficit below 3 percent of GDP by 2015 and a balanced budget in structural terms by 2017 . This is consistent with the recent two-year extension of the corresponding deadline under the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). In line with these objectives, the original 2013 budget aimed at expenditure-based consolidation, supported by cuts in public wages and public consumption. In the event, the budget had to be revisited in mid-2013, owing to slippages in first-quarter indirect tax collections (later reversed), higher-than-budgeted increases in the interest bill and, especially, large shortfalls in corporate income tax collections. In their revised Stability Programme (SP), the authorities announced an ambitious set of additional measures covering the second half of 2013 and 2014 (see Table), exceeding 3 percent of GDP on a cumulative basis. The planned additional adjustment for 2013 was broadly balanced between revenue and expenditure, while that for 2014 was heavily tilted toward revenue because of an envisaged increase in personal income tax rates–although the authorities hoped to be able to avoid these if a new wage agreement could be reached that generated the required savings. The supplementary budget for 2014 confirms the deficit target of the revised SP but is substantially weaker in terms of concrete supporting measures. The budget, approved by parliament mid-November, still targets the 2014 deficit at 3½ percent of GDP (excluding bank restructuring and recapitalization costs), in line with EDP requirements. However, key measures are missing in the revised SP—including the increase in personal income tax rates and in social security contributions (or an equivalent reduction in the wage bill), which were expected to yield around 1 percent of GDP. Instead, the supplementary budget relies on across-the-board cuts in Page 19 the expenditure on goods and services by line ministries (11 percent year-on-year)—which are not supported by reforms—and in subsidies (12 percent year-on-year), without specifying which subsidies are to be reduced. On the revenue side, the authorities adopted a broad-based property tax increase expected to yield about ¾ percent of GDP, while also counting on uncertain revenue gains from stronger tax collection enforcement (¼ percent of GDP), including tighter limits on cash transactions, stronger reporting requirements on offshore holdings, and enhanced cross-checking of income declarations against household assets. Staff expressed concern about the quality of fiscal measures underpinning the budget and called for additional measures. While endorsing the property tax increase, staff was skeptical about the across-the-board expenditure cuts and large revenue yields from administrative improvements. In addition, domestic courts have mandated restitutions against a partial retroactive wage freeze imposed in early 2012 and European Courts have mandated payments of certain social benefits to residents of Slovenia who had not obtained Slovenian citizenship in 1991—neither of these payments are accounted for in the budget. These one-off items could increase the 2014 deficit by an additional 0.2 percent of GDP, and possibly more if they are relatively frontloaded. In sum, staff estimates an overall shortfall relative to the authorities’ target of some 1 percent of GDP. As the bulk of concrete measures already taken related to the revenue side of the budget, there was a compelling case to focus the needed corrective measures on expenditure: staff recommended more ambitious public employment reduction, better targeting of social transfers, and specific cuts in transfers and subsidies. The authorities recognized the risks, but pointed out that any shortfall could be made up during the year. They argued that expenditure controls have improved considerably, rendering across-the board cuts more effective than in the past; yet they acknowledged that cuts of the magnitude budgeted entailed considerable risk. Furthermore, they thought that recent tax administration reforms constituted substantial improvements and viewed the expected revenue gains as moderate, but agreed that there were some risks. Overall, they thought that the fiscal risks could be addressed in the course of the year. Staff cautioned that significant delays in adopting offsetting measures would narrow available options, with public investment once again the most likely victim. Over the medium term and with unchanged policies, public debt will continue to increase rapidly. The recent rising trend in the debt ratio is set to continue in the near term, as the effects of persistent recession are compounded by the fiscal cost of bank restructuring, bringing the projected debt ratio to a little under 80 percent of GDP by end-2014. Thereafter, the debt ratio would reach some 85 percent over the medium term. The public debt sustainability analysis (DSA) confirms that public debt has entered knife-edge territory, with sensitivity analysis pointing to the risk of explosive debt dynamics under plausible shocks. Further gradual fiscal adjustment is needed to restore debt sustainability. To reverse the adverse debt dynamics and contain fiscal risks, fiscal consolidation would need to continue over the medium term, but the needed adjustment would be moderate. An improvement in the structural primary balance of ¾ percent of GDP per year during 2015–16 to a primary surplus of Page 20 some 3½ percent of GDP over the medium term should put the debt ratio on a steady downward path after 2015. These estimates assume that the fiscal costs of bank recapitalization remain at the level indicated by the AQR; should additional recapitalization prove necessary, faster adjustment would be called for. Maintaining this primary surplus over time would require continued consolidation efforts, however, since a rising interest bill, a reversal of the recent sharp cuts in public investment, and mounting pension expenditures imply a substantial underlying deterioration that would have to be offset by further spending cuts or revenue increases. Staff argued that measures to contain the wage bill and reform social benefits, and a broadening of the corporate income tax base, would be useful to get the debt dynamics under control. In addition, further difficult but critical reforms are necessary to contain the rising costs of the pension system in the medium term (Box 8). The authorities broadly agreed on the needed pace of consolidation, but noted that it may have to be reassessed in the context of bank and corporate restructuring. They noted that another round of pension reform was under preparation, and could be implemented after the 2014–15 suspension of pension indexation expires. Box 8. Pension Trends and Reform Slovenia’s pension system is facing adverse demographic trends. In recent years, the fertility rate remained below replacement and life expectancy improved markedly closing the gap with the EU, while the old-age dependency ratio increased. As a result, pension expenditure as a ratio to GDP has been rising rapidly. Demographic Trends, Slovenia and the European Union, 2002-11 The 2012 pension reform started addressing these challenges. The reform gradually increases the statutory age to 65 with a minimum 15-year contribution period; tightens conditions for early retirement by raising the age for early pensions to 60 with a minimum of 40 years of pensionable service; reduces the replacement rate by expanding the assessment base to 28 consecutive years with the highest earnings; and introduces a more price- based indexation formula. Even so, the reform is insufficient to put the system on a solid financial footing. The pace of increase in the retirement age is too slow, while replacement rates and early retirement and indexation rules remained generous. Consequently, the pension outlays will continue rising relative to GDP, even with the 2014–15 indexation freeze. Pension spending is projected to reach 13 percent of GDP by 2018, up from 11¾ percent in 2012, and 10 percent in 2008. Life expectancy at birth (years) EU-27 Fertility rate EU-27 Slovenia's repalcement rate (1980) Old-age-dependency ratio (percent) EU-27 Pension Expenditure: Reform and Indexation Measures, Source: Eurostat. (Percent of GDP) Pre-reform Post reform without freeze Post reform with freeze 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Therefore a further reform of the pension system is needed. The next reform should focus on gradually increasing the statutory retirement age to 67, maintaining life expectancy at retirement constant, shortening the gap between statutory and early retirement ages, reducing the length of noncontributory service period counting as service time, revising the accrual schedule to reward longer service time, and reducing the replacement rates. Finally, putting a greater weight on prices, rather than wages in the indexation of pensions could help keep costs down in the near term. Source: IMF staff estimates. Page 21