GDP growth is projected to pick up in the medium term. Benefitting from investments by Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) and Volkswagen (VW), real GDP growth is projected to peak at 3.9 percent č í š Page 14 in 2019 and settle at around 3½ percent thereafter. The new automotive investments are expected to increase Slovakia’s car production by 40 percent in the medium term. The current account surplus is expected to rise after the import-intensive initial phase of these investments. Reflecting strong growth and current account surpluses, external debt is projected to decline to 74 percent of GDP by 2022. Inflation is projected to reach 2 percent at the end of the medium term, reflecting higher energy prices and strong household consumption. Developments in Europe and key export markets constitute the main external risks (Box 2). Slovakia has strong real and financial links with a small number of central and western European countries. In addition, its export structure is highly concentrated, with transport and machinery products accounting for more than half of exports (Annex II). The United Kingdom’s exit from the EU poses large uncertainties and risks of negative spillovers from lower growth in key trading partners. Europe’s political calendar, with elections in the Netherlands, France, and Germany in 2017, adds to this uncertainty. Moderate public indebtedness and low financing needs along with strong external fundamentals provide some cushion against possible external shocks. The rapid growth of credit to households is a potential domestic risk, particularly if the labor market falters following a negative external shock. The authorities broadly concurred with staff’s economic outlook and risks . They foresee more robust medium-term growth with an acceleration in 2018 and 2019. The authorities agreed that the main risks arise from developments in key trading partners in Europe. They also saw increasing protectionism and uncertainties related to the new US administration as risks. They viewed spillovers from Brexit as likely to be contained. Any major distress in European banks as well as a possible rise in geopolitical tensions in the region pose downside risks affecting Slovakia gd tt ’ tt ii iii Y illi nnu www Page 15 indirectly through their impact on major trading partners. The authorities agreed that the real exchange rate is in line with economic fundamentals. Source of Risks Likelihood Time Horizon Impact Policy Response Box 2. Risk Assessment Matrix Weaker-than-expected global growth, including significant slowdown in EMs and structurally weak growth in key advanced countries l a b o G l Retreat from cross- border integration, policy and geopolitical uncertainties, including those related to post- Brexit arrangements and upcoming elections in Europe Medium /High Short to Medium /High Medium Term Weaker EM/China growth would be primarily felt indirectly, to the extent key trading partners are affected. Exports and growth would be strongly hit by a slowdown in Europe, especially Germany. Debt ceilings could be breached in the event of a large adverse growth shock. Weaker growth and higher unemployment would worsen banks’ assets qualities. Medium-term: Diversify export destinations, increase high value-added exports. Near-term: Create fiscal space through efficiency-based consolidation, broadening of the tax base, and keeping debt limits at their current levels (see discussion in Section B). Improve labor market and business environment to boost productivity and potential output (see discussion in Section C). Draw on banks’ capital buffers. Medium /High Short to Medium Term Medium/High Slovakia’s exports and growth could be negatively affected by rising protectionism. Medium-term: Diversify exports products and destination, and increase value added in exports. Direct links to the UK are Near-term: Create fiscal space through limited, but potential negative spillovers could materialize. efficiency-based consolidation, broadening of the tax base and keeping the debt ceiling at their current levels. Improve labor market and business environment to attract new and more diversified FDI. Continue to monitor financial developments. Use active debt management to pre- finance fiscal needs. Financial conditions Significant further strengthening of the US dollar and/or higher rates European bank distress Medium /High Short Low Term A depreciation of the euro could positively impact exports and the external debt A possible distress in European banks may indirectly affect growth via spillovers from trading partners. l a c o L Property market downturn in the event of a worsening economic situation Low Medium Medium Term Weakening of banks’ balance Use macro-prudential toolkit and closely sheets supervise lending practices. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Page 16