Better asset quality and governance are keys to strengthening the health of the banking sector Banks’ weak asset quality and governance impede their ability to support the economy . The high level of NPLs—three to four times as high as pre-crisis levels system-wise, and even more at state-owned banks—is a drag on banks’ cash flow and profitability, limiting their capacity to generate credit. Indeed, close to half of new lending reportedly financed NPL restructurings, most of which represented an extension of maturities of large and connected clients, with a third of restructured loans already under renegotiation (Box 1). In addition, as the state now owns more than 60 percent of the banking sector, the risk of political interference in lending decisions remains substantial. Although the authorities have committed to privatize the state-owned banks, the process could be prolonged, given strong vested interests. Moreover, another bank is still in need of capital, while the merger of two banks and resolution another two are yet to be finalized. Arrears of more than 90 days as a proportion of banks' classified claims by bank group (Percent) Small domestic banks Banks under majority foreign ownership Large public banks Total Ownership Structure of the Banking Sector (in terms of equity) (Percent) Central government Other domestic entities Non-residents non-residents (over 50% control) non-residents (under 50% control) Source: 2014 Financial Stability Report, Bank of Slovenia. Page 11 Banks need to address their NPLs decisively . A two-pronged strategy can help maximize effectiveness: For large corporate NPLs —which are highly concentrated, with 50 corporates accounting for a third of total NPLs —transferring all large exposures to the BAMC would help offload NPLs from banks’ balance sheets. In line with current restructuring plans, only about half of corporate NPLs were transferred to the BAMC, suggesting further room to do so. While more transfers will likely result in a higher public debt in the short run, BAMC’s centralization of the workout process and its longer time horizon can help maximize returns for the taxpayer and lead to a reduction in debt in the long run, while allowing banks to focus on new lending to the economy rather than on caretaking of existing exposures. Using the recent bank asset-quality reviews as a valuation basis for the transfers can help ensure banks’ capital neutrality, although approvals from the European Commission would still be required and may take time. If large corporate NPLs are maintained on banks’ books, all available legal tools should be used to achieve efficient and sustainable loan restructuring agreements with viable companies, including through debt-to-equity swaps. The Central Bank of Slovenia (BoS) should closely monitor banks’ operational capacity and progress toward reducing corporate NPLs against set targets, including through a framework assessing the sustainability of restructurings. SME NPLs —which represent about 40 percent of corporate NPLs—need to be dealt with through the banks’ internal restructuring units, given the large number of clients involved. However, only a few SME restructurings have reportedly taken place to date. With SMEs playing a key role in the economy (representing 63 percent of value added and 73 percent of employment in the business sector), addressing the indebtedness of a critical mass of SMEs can help lay the foundation of a more robust and sustained recovery. To do so, the BoS will need to enhance its supervisory tools, such as by developing a framework for voluntary negotiations including simplified debt- restructuring options (differentiated based on a few criteria, such as size, indebtedness and ability to generate cash-flow), which could be used by banks readily, while remaining within provisioning margins. Care needs to be taken to minimize incentives for strategic default and to ensure that both creditors and debtors have adequate incentives to negotiate and to take advantage of potentially mutually beneficial outcomes, including by strengthening the implementation of the insolvency regime (see below). BoS should set ambitious SME restructuring targets and monitor progress against them. Bank governance should be strengthened, and the state’s role in credit intermediation curtailed . Lax governance and pervasive connected lending were at the root of the recent banking crisis and resulted in large fiscal costs. To avoid further taxpayer costs, state-owned banks should be Bank of Slovenia, 2014 Financial Stability Review, Box 6.4. According to the European Commission’s “2014 SBA Fact Sheet.” Evidence suggests that countries with a higher prevalence of SMEs tended to recover more slowly from the global crisis (see IMF WP/14/98). Page 12 insulated from political pressures and/or interference. All state-owned banks should thus be privatized as soon as possible. In particular, the authorities need to make good on their commitment to privatize the second largest bank (NKBM) in 2015, and sell in full (rather than only in part) the largest bank (NLB); given that a partial privatization of the latter had already been tried in the past and proved inadequate to ensure either proper governance or capitalization, this should be avoided. The authorities need to add the other state-owned banks (after completing planned mergers) to the privatization list. In the meantime, a governance relationship framework between the banks and the relevant state agency (as the shareholder) should be put in place ensuring these banks’ independent management, including appropriate operational performance targets and transparent and strong accountability. Even after privatization, maintaining adequate bank governance is essential to safeguarding financial stability. The bank recapitalization and restructuring process needs to be finalized. The authorities have granted a new extension (to mid-2015) to one of the banks identified as undercapitalized in late 2013, following remedial measures taken in the interim to minimize the identified shortfall. To safeguard financial stability, they will need to closely monitor the bank’s efforts to raise capital and stand ready to address any remaining shortfalls in a transparent manner, while minimizing fiscal costs. Moreover, the wind-down procedures for the two banks intervened in September 2013 need to be completed as soon as possible. Mergers of smaller nationalized banks can help attract strategic investors, but care should be taken to prevent concentration and enhance competition. Finally, banks should be encouraged to focus on core lending activities, including by continuing to divest non-core operations and selling corporate-equity stakes in due course. The authorities need to continue to improve the monitoring and management of macro-financial risks . With the Single-Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) now in effect, supervision is expected to be strengthened as standards are brought in line with international best practice. In particular, resolution mechanisms need to be aligned with the new pan-European framework and the BoS’s operational capacity strengthened to enable it to intervene and resolve banks promptly. In addition, the authorities should speed up implementation of a centralized-credit registry, especially given the widespread practice of firms to borrow from multiple banks. The BoS should also develop a comprehensive system to monitor connected lending, which has been pervasive in the past. Finally, the authorities should review the various administrative and macro-prudential tools introduced during the crisis, whose usefulness appears limited. In particular, there seems to be scope to eliminate the deposit-rate cap and to simplify the complex loan-to-deposit growth instrument, as well as to consider introducing a cap on loan-to-value ratios on all assets, including those purchased through leveraged buy-outs, to prevent overleveraging in the future. The authorities agreed that addressing NPLs and strengthening governance are key priorities. They saw that results from restructuring efforts are starting to materialize and expected An example is Ireland’s Relationship Framework between state-owned banks and the Ministry of Finance. See Box 6.1 of the 2014 Financial Stability Review by the Bank of Slovenia. Page 13 NPLs to gradually decline as a result. They concurred with the need to monitor progress in this regard, and noted that proposed innovations in the supervisory toolkit may need to be discussed and agreed with the SSM. The authorities considered that additional transfers to BAMC are not needed, as BAMC was seen to hold a critical mass of exposures, and any other transfers could add to the short- run debt level and take substantial time due to the need to secure approvals from the European Commission. While they agreed that bank governance should be strengthened and reiterated their commitment to sell NKBM bank in 2015, they intend to maintain a blocking minority stake in NLB. The authorities aimed to complete remaining bank recapitalization and restructuring processes this year. They expressed a slight preference for maintaining existing administrative and macro-prudential tools.