Despite slower growth in 2013, substantial fiscal adjustment was achieved and brought the budget deficit below the threshold for exiting the EU’s EDP. To achieve further gradual deficit reduction and move toward the EU medium-term objective, a focus on the revenue side would be appropriate, but a debt brake under Slovakia’s own FRA instead mandates a more expenditure-based approach. Implementing spending measures of the required magnitude is likely to be difficult, and it will therefore be important to continue to strengthen revenue collection to sustain medium-term adjustment and make room for priority budget items. Sizeable fiscal adjustment has allowed Slovakia to exit the EDP . Since 2009, the budget deficit has been reduced by about 5 percentage points to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2013—just below Page 17 the threshold for exiting the EU’s EDP. Over the period 2010–13 the annual average fiscal effort reached 1.5 percent of GDP, well above the average fiscal effort of at least 1 percent of GDP called for by the EU, and was largely pro-cyclical. From a macroeconomic perspective, gradual adjustment with emphasis on correcting revenue underperformance would be advisable . Slovakia has an output gap, subdued inflation, and important spending needs (e.g., to address high unemployment and infrastructure gaps). Public debt has been easily financed and would stabilize at around 60 percent of GDP with little additional action. Against this background, a gradual adjustment path toward the EU medium-term objective (MTO) of a structural deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP would be reasonable—with the target preferably being met in 2018, rather than 2017 as envisaged—and would put debt-to-GDP on a downward path. With both revenue and expenditure well below averages for the EU and CE3 neighbors, adjustment should focus largely on revenue measures. EU and domestic fiscal frameworks, however, require faster fiscal adjustment, largely (in the latter case) through expenditure cuts . Given the cyclical position of the economy, EU commitments would require a positive structural adjustment of at least 0.1 percent of GDP this year. However, achieving the EU MTO in 2017 would call for much larger consolidation efforts in the following years. Slovakia’s domestic FRA is more restrictive and emphasizes spending reductions now. Breaching the 55 percent of GDP debt threshold in 2013 mandates a 3 percentage point cut in general government expenditure in 2014 (excluding debt service payments, EU funds and co- financing, EU budget contributions, transfers to the Social Insurance Agency and natural disaster spending) amounting to 0.4 percent of GDP and submission of a budget that freezes spending (with the same exemptions) in subsequent years as long as debt remains above 55 percent of GDP. Compared to a no-policy change scenario, staff estimate that implementation of the FRA would result in 2015 growth being lower by 0.3 percentage points (i.e., 2.7 versus 3.0 percent). Crossing the next debt threshold at 57 percent of GDP would require submission of a balanced budget and potentially sharp adjustment with more negative growth effects. For 2014, additional measures should yield a deficit similar to last year with the impact of the FRA limited due to contingency buffers The estimate assumes fiscal multipliers of 0.3 in year one, and 0.1 in year two. Source:Eurostat. SVKCE3EASVKCE3EA010 5060Total revenueTotal expenditure General Government Total Revenue & Expenditure, 2010-13 (In percent of GDP, average) Page 18 Given an expected widening of the deficit in the absence of policy changes, partly due to past reliance on temporary approaches, the 2014 budget contained measures of about 1 percent of GDP, intended to deliver a deficit of 2.6 percent of GDP. A little more than half of the savings would come from public wages and other spending, with much of the rest from continuation of a special levy on regulated industries and a minimum lump-sum corporate income tax (partially offset by reducing the corporate tax rate from 23 percent to 22 percent). Roughly half of the measures in the 2014 budget are one-off or temporary items. An adverse determination by Eurostat on carryover of dividends from 2013 into 2014 created a revenue shortfall (0.5 percent of GDP). Stronger-than-budgeted taxes, especially VAT, and the mandatory expenditure cuts triggered by the domestic debt brake could address much of the shortfall. The budget and growth impact of the FRA is limited in 2014 since much of the required spending reduction can be met by unwinding budgeted but unallocated outlays. Staff see risks in containing spending, especially on the public wage bill given past overruns. There are also risks from one-off special levy revenue associated with still-to-be-determined changes in the ownership structure of a gas company. Staff estimate a 2014 deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP. Debt is expected to remain just above 55 percent of GDP, assuming some drawdown of healthy accumulated cash reserves, and that the government is successful in restructuring the oil agency (EOSA) to reverse the contribution to debt in 2013. Medium-term government consolidation efforts would focus on reducing spending Consistent with the FRA’s emphasis on expenditure cuts, the government’s medium-term budget plan targets much lower outlays (a drop of about 4 percentage points of GDP from 2014 to 2017) to achieve a 2017 headline deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP and meet the MTO. While the government’s Stability Program identifies some revenue measures—sustaining improvements in VAT collection and small amounts from withholding taxes for doctors, expanded use of electronic cash registers, and more effective social contributions collections—the majority of adjustment would come from spending cuts, largely unidentified, although the ongoing streamlining of public administration through the ESO initiative would yield some savings. Under the authorities’ medium-term plan, debt would remain above the 55 percent of GDP debt threshold through 2015 before falling, although the share held by non-residents (more than 50 percent) would remain somewhat high. Expenditure-based adjustment will be difficult and could put pressure on priority outlays. Staff’s forecast assumes that the constitutional level FRA is implemented through spending cuts applied proportionally across expenditure, recent improvements in revenue and especially VAT collection are sustained, and cash reserves are kept constant in nominal terms after 2014. The debt- The government’s Stability Program (http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2014/sp2014_slovakia_en.pdf.) provides additional detail on the 2014 budget and medium-term fiscal plans. The third chapter of the Selected Issues ( An Overview of the Slovak Economy through the Lenses of the National Financial Accounts) provides additional information on changes in assets and liabilities of the government and other sectors. Page 19 to-GDP ratio would remain above 55 percent through 2015, thus requiring submission of budgets with spending freezes in 2015 and 2016, although the privatization of Slovak Telekom (more below) represents a positive risk. Debt would not cross the 57 percent of GDP threshold requiring submission of a balanced budget. Deficits would be broadly in line with the authorities’ targets and the MTO would be achieved before 2017, but the implicit structural adjustment in 2015–16 would amount to almost 1 percent of GDP per year. Challenges in controlling the public wage bill and substantial cuts to investment spending in recent years, as well as the need to fund priority items to address unemployment and regional disparities (e.g., investing in infrastructure and reducing the tax wedge), suggest reliance on spending cuts could be difficult to sustain and undesirable in terms of key objectives. As an example of the potentially limited appetite for spending cuts, in late June the Prime Minister announced plans for €250 million (0.3 percent of GDP) in new spending and tax breaks. Against this background, strengthening revenue collection should be a priority Improving tax collection . Sustaining and making further improvements to address low VAT efficiency is essential, as is strengthening tax collection and reducing evasion and fraud more broadly. Implementation of a comprehensive 50-point action plan is intended to address concerns and efforts have focused in particular on VAT control statements. Estimates suggest improving VAT efficiency by 1 percentage point could lift revenue by about 0.5 percent of GDP. Staff stressed the benefits of maintaining the current VAT rate of 20 percent (it was to fall to 19 percent in 2015 given a 2013 deficit below 3 percent of GDP); doing so would yield about 0.3 percent of GDP. Merging tax, customs, and social contribution collections, which is taking some time, could reduce administrative costs and help combat evasion and fraud. Market value-based real estate tax . Real estate taxation, based on square meters, yields about 0.4 percent of GDP, more than 1 percentage point lower than the EU average. A property value-based real estate tax could yield substantial revenue and would be more equitable and less distortive than other taxes in terms of effects on growth. Support for low-income households could mitigate potential social concerns. Other options could help alleviate pressure on expenditure. Privatization would lower debt in a growth-friendly way and help avoid the FRA’s spending constraints. The government’s decision to sell its 49 percent stake in Slovak Telekom could yield about 1 percent of GDP, potentially lowering debt below 55 percent of GDP and avoiding an additional year’s spending freeze. More generally, privatization of still sizeable state ownership could have potential benefits in terms of debt, the budget, and capital market development. The AUT BEL CZE DNK EST FIN FRADEU GRCHUN IRL ITALUXNLDPOLPRT SVKSVN ESPSWE GBR x ( i f ) GDP per capita (US dollars, thousands) Source: OECD. Taxes on Property Page 20 recent increase of the state role in a key energy company runs in the opposite direction, however, and could imply fiscal costs if, as indicated in the Prime Minister’s June announcement, energy price increases are not passed on or are lowered. EU Funds . Slovakia lags many other EU countries in its EU Funds execution rate (about 46 percent of the 2007–13 allocation remains available until 2015, equivalent to about 7 percent of GDP). Improving procurement procedures and other steps could facilitate priority outlays since use of EU Funds and co-financing is exempted from FRA spending cuts and freezes. Spending efficiency. Beyond the broader ESO initiative, compared to peers, healthcare outlays remain inefficient relative to outcomes and could offer room for savings or better care without adding to costs. Over time, refinement of the fiscal framework might be considered. Having the FRA on top of evolving EU fiscal rules has created a complicated framework with some undesirable effects, as described above. The credibility costs of modifying the framework the first time it becomes binding would argue against adjusting the FRA now, but in the future the government might consider whether there is scope to make the FRA less biased toward expenditure cuts and less pro- cyclical, for instance by considering a smoother adjustment path, or even whether the FRA is still needed given European commitments. If retained, the framework also might be more reflective of debt vulnerabilities; for example, accumulation of cash balances (pre-funding) increases gross debt but reduces short-term rollover risks. In addition, contingency provisions might be considered to address changes in EU statistical definitions such as what is included in the general government. Further pension reforms would strengthen long-term finances. Reforms in 2012 significantly improved long-term sustainability of the pension system by linking the retirement age with demographic trends, changing pension indexation, and capping the accrual of pension benefits for higher earners. Nonetheless, a long-term financing gap persists. Linking pension calculations to a sustainability factor and shortening the transition period to a higher retirement age could help address the long-term gap. Authorities’ views The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to responsible fiscal policy while promoting economic growth and improving living standards Fiscal policies. The substantial adjustment achieved to enable EDP exit demonstrates the Households Non-financial corporations General government Commercial banks Non residents Ownership of the Nonfinancial Corporate Sector (In percent of total shares and other equity) Page 21 government’s ability to meet fiscal targets. The authorities concurred on the need to enhance revenue collection and in July the parliament approved an amendment to keep the VAT rate unchanged. They underscored results achieved so far in fighting tax evasion and fraud. Control statements and an IT system to allow real-time cross-checking of VAT declarations have been introduced, and roughly half of the measures in their action plan to reduce tax evasion and fraud have been implemented. Regarding property taxes, the authorities are considering options, including differentiated rates under the current system, but indicated that a new system cannot be in place earlier than 2016. They consider prospects good for a relatively rapid sale of shares in Slovak Telekom and a yield of about 1 percent of GDP realistic, but downplayed further privatization opportunities. The authorities saw limited vulnerability from non-resident holdings of government debt, which are mainly long-term investors, but do not plan further increases in the share. FRA. Changes to the FRA are not envisioned in the near term, although potential challenges under the framework were acknowledged. Taking advantage of favorable market conditions for pre-funding is not possible, spending priorities could be difficult to pursue (e.g., salary increases for teachers could be constrained by binding FRA limits on local governments), and changes in EU statistical definitions could affect fiscal policy. Pensions. A sustainability factor in the calculation of pension benefits may be considered, but the authorities do not see raising the retirement age more quickly as desirable given relatively low life expectancy.