An overleveraged corporate sector is thwarting economic recovery. Slovenian corporates are among the most highly leveraged in the euro area, mainly because of a lack of equity: the corporate debt to GDP ratio is about the euro area average. This is a legacy of the boom years, when bank financing was plentiful, enabling companies to expand beyond their core areas, engage in acquisitions, and invest heavily in risky projects without putting up their own money. The sudden stop in capital flows and the ensuing recession stopped credit availability, weakened cash flows, and exposed significant weaknesses in corporate management and governance. The average interest bill to earnings ratio has reached 90 percent, pushing into the Page 15 red companies that might be viable with lower debt. Credit availability and pricing has worsened as banks deleverage (Box 6). Box 6. Corporate Sector Performance Corporate sector performance worsened significantly in the post crisis period. Profits declined significantly after the global financial crisis, from both operations and financial investments. The biggest reversal of profit was in the services sector, while the construction sector also fell into aggregate loss- making. While there is some improvement from the 2010 trough in aggregate profitability, profits are still close to historical lows. Debt overhang is a considerable burden. Corporates are overleveraged, both relative to their euro area peers and historical trends, mainly due to a lack of equity; corporate debt to GDP is below the euro area average. The debt-to- equity ratio has moderated from 165 percent in 2009 to 135 percent in 2012, but the ratio remains comparatively high, and is a constraint on investment. Bank of Slovenia’s microeconometric analysis finds a significant negative link between leverage and firm performance in both pre-crisis and post-crisis periods, which suggests that the overleveraging is not simply a consequence of the economic shock, but also an explanatory factor for underperformance of the economy. Many corporates have unsustainable debt servicing levels. Firms with earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) less than the interest bill account for 16 percent of employment. At current levels of earnings and interest costs, many firms will either need to have their debt restructured, or squeeze investment and cut employment to make repayments and reduce their debt burden. Profitability is better and debt service more manageable in exporters, industrial firms, and foreign- owned firms. Domestically-oriented firms, especially construction and financial services companies (diversified holding companies that grew fast in the pre-crisis period), have greater debt servicing problems, reflecting their higher leverage ratios. 1/Unsustainable debt is defined as earnings before interest and taxes below the interest expense.Source: Bank of Slovenia. Share of Employment in Firms with Unsustainable Debt 1/ (Percent) losses profits net profit Source:Bank of Slovenia Corporate Profits (Percent of GDP) G R C I T A S V N P R T I R L D E U E S P F I N C Z E P O L A U T S V K E S T F R A H U N B E L Corporate Leverage, 2012 1/ (Percent) Source: OECD.1/ Defined as total liabilities over equity in non-financial corporates. Page 16 Addressing corporate distress requires a multi-pronged approach Equity injections. Equity in most corporates is limited, and owners have been unable or unwilling to inject equity in these companies. Diluting their investments or writing them off may be needed as a precondition to bring in new investors with equity and for effective debt restructuring. Barriers to entry should be removed to support the contribution of foreign equity to the corporate restructuring process. Government funds should not be used as a source of equity owing to the fiscal consequences. Debt restructuring. Viable companies should seek debt reduction from their creditors, use debt-equity swaps, sell assets, and spin off non-core businesses. Banks as equity holders. State-owned banks have ended up owning shares in some corporates, including supermarket chains, breweries, sparkling water companies, ski resorts, hotels, and newspapers. Should there be debt to equity swaps, banks (and the BAMC) may further increase their shares in restructured firms. A prudent enforcement of mark-to-market and existing limits on connected lending is necessary. Reducing state involvement and improving corporate governance. The state owns and controls substantial sections of the economy through an elaborate (and often nontransparent) holding structure. The European Commission (2013) estimates at least 11 percent of employment is in enterprises directly or indirectly owned by the state, including the banks. Using a broader definition, Ogorvec and Verbic (2011) estimate one third of assets in the economy can be traced to the state. The state can divest its holdings through privatization and strengthen corporate governance by encouraging the consolidation and simplification of ownership structures. Unified, independent, and professional management of state holdings is key in this respect. From protecting the (past) owners to protecting (efficient) companies. The existing legal framework has proved overly protective of shareholders, allowing them to block or delay restructuring, and made creditor coordination difficult. Bankruptcy cases take an estimated three years on average to close. To address this issue, the authorities have EBIT to interest expenses Exporters 1/ Non-exporters 1/ 1/ Exporters are defined as firmswith net foreign sales greater than 25%.Source: Bank of Slovenia EBIT to interest expenses Foreign-owned firms Domestic firms 1/ Exporters are defined as firmswith net foreign sales greater than 25%.Source: Bank of Slovenia Page 17 proposed an amendment to the insolvency law, which was voted into law by parliament (Box 7). Box 7. Reforming the Corporate Insolvency Regime The corporate insolvency regime has been impeding restructuring of firms. Weaknesses included an ineffective rehabilitation procedure that provides excessive protection to existing shareholders and excludes secured creditors. The rigid procedural requirements in the rehabilitation process also discouraged efficient debt workouts (e.g. creditors need to pay at least 50 percent over a four year period). The authorities drafted an amendment to the insolvency law with Fund staff Technical Assistance to help bring the insolvency regime into line with international best practices. The overarching goal is to facilitate the restructuring of viable companies. The key features of the amendment are as follows: A simplified pre-insolvency procedure for large and medium-sized firms to restructure financial claims (including secured claims) more efficiently and speedily, which includes a stay and majority voting; An enhanced compulsory settlement (CS) with:  Increased control of the CS proceeding by financial creditors, including the ability to initiate proceedings, to introduce a CS plan that takes precedence over the debtor’s plan, and to take management control;  An absolute priority rule to ensure that if equity in the debtor is zero, debtor equity will be eliminated (effectively preventing existing owners from blocking the restructuring process);  Corporate restructuring features, including debt-for-equity swaps and corporate spin-offs to facilitate viable firms continuing as a going concern;  Secured creditors are included in CS and can pool collateral under a CS plan;  The write-down of collateral to market value with a corresponding conversion of the now unsecured portions of collateralized loans into unsecured claims is permitted; and  The possibility that requisite majorities of creditors can agree to reduce principal on unsecured debt, and to extend maturity and/or to reduce the interest rate for both secured and unsecured debt. The bankruptcy and liquidation of non-viable corporates (i.e., that cannot be relaunched in the CS stage) remains unchanged by the amendment. The amendment significantly improves the corporate insolvency regime and, if properly implemented, can facilitate the rehabilitation of viable firms. The amendment addresses the immediate challenges facing Slovenia within its current institutional capacity and focuses on financial claims and does not address inter- company claims. Enhancing institutional capacity through the training of judges and insolvency administrators, and introducing proper incentives for stakeholders, would support the successful implementation of the amendment. The authorities agreed that the corporate sector is a barrier to recovery and an underlying cause of the banking sector troubles. To address this, they drafted an amendment to the insolvency law. They also stressed limited credit availability as a major concern for corporates and are increasing resources to the development bank SID and the Slovene enterprise fund, and considering state equity injections. Staff argued the limited fiscal space should not be Page 18 used for shoring up corporations and urged reconsidering a planned transfer to SID of seed money for lending programs. In staff’s view, only a decisive retrenchment of the state from the financial and corporate sector will bring a lasting solution.