... and the growth outlook remains subdued and vulnerable to risks. The recovery is projected to be gradual. It faces headwinds from necessary fiscal consolidation and the corporate sector’s need to restructure and reduce its debt. Growth is thus expected to moderate to just under 2 percent in 2015 after reaching an estimated 2½ percent in 2014. Lower oil and commodity prices and a weaker euro this year are expected to support exports and private consumption, while public investment should continue to expand. Private investment is projected to stay subdued, as financing conditions will take time to normalize. Inflation is projected to decline to slightly below zero in 2015, given lower expected energy and commodity prices. Unemployment is set to fall gradually over the medium term. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2014-2020 Real GDP (percent change) Unemployment rate (ILO, percent) Consumer price inflation Current account balance Sources: Slovenian authorities; and IMF staff calculations and projections. 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 est. projections Potential growth remains weak. Staff estimates the output gap to have declined to 2.3 percent for 2014 and expects it to close by 2017. These estimates, however, are subject to high uncertainty, especially given the structural break experienced during the crisis. Potential growth is estimated to reach about 1¾ over the medium term, significantly lower than the pre-crisis average of 3¾ percent. This reflects low capital accumulation, as deleveraging continues and some of the stock was rendered obsolete by the crisis, high structural unemployment eroding human capital, and continued weak TFP trends. By 2020, investment as a share of GDP is projected to remain some 8 percent below its pre-crisis peak, and living standards would only just have returned to pre-crisis levels. The general government deficit (in cash terms, and excluding extra-budgetary entities) is estimated at 6 percent of GDP in 2014 . On the basis of end-October 2014 fiscal data, the deficit net of bank-support costs (two bank recapitalizations and repayment of ELA for the banks being wound down) is estimated at 3.7 percent of GDP in 2014. The authorities only implemented about a fifth of the original measures envisaged, relied on one-off measures, and increased public investment spending substantially. As a result, the structural primary balance is estimated to have deteriorated by ½ percent of GDP in 2014. Page 8 Public debt sustainability remains highly vulnerable to shocks (Annex I) . On the basis of current policies, the gross debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to continue to gradually increase to just under 90 percent by the end of the decade, raising sustainability concerns. Moreover, public debt dynamics are highly vulnerable to shocks. In particular, the materialization of half of outstanding government guarantees or a prolonged deflation shock could bring debt above 100 percent of GDP by 2019, while a combined growth-primary fiscal balance shock could increase it even further, to close to 115 percent of GDP. A macro-financial shock combining both a deep recession and a renewal of corporate and bank stress (with a fiscal cost similar to that of the recent crisis) would result in an explosive debt path, highlighting the importance of resolute policies to address remaining bank and corporate vulnerabilities. Baseline Government guarantees shock Deflation shock Macro-financial shock Combined Macro-Fiscal Shock Public Debt (percent of GDP) Slovenia’s external position is assessed as sustainable. With the current account expected to stay in surplus over the medium term, external debt is projected to decline to just under 95 percent of GDP by 2020, as private sector deleveraging more than offsets the increase in public sector debt. As a result, the international investment position is expected to reach balance from a deficit of about 38 percent of GDP in 2014. Still, external debt dynamics remain vulnerable to shocks, such as a sharp slowdown in growth or a deterioration in the current account (Annex II). Staff’s assessment does not point to competitiveness problems, suggesting that the current account and the real exchange rate are broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies (Annex III) Risks remain tilted to the downside (Annex IV). While immediate domestic risks have been mitigated by the recent bank recapitalization and the government’s pre-financing of 2015 external-amortization needs, this could reduce the perceived urgency of reforms, increasing risks of a re-emergence of financial stress in the medium term. Moreover, failure to credibly consolidate the public finances could lead to higher borrowing costs—which could also be affected by renewed stress elsewhere in the euro-area—jeopardizing debt sustainability. The real debt burdens of both the public and private sectors could be exacerbated if deflation persists. The ECB’s recent quantitative easing measures are welcome, although they are expected to have only a limited effect on credit growth, given weak demand; while exports could benefit from a weak euro and financing conditions for the government could ease, this may also diminish incentives for reform. On the external front, a more pronounced slowdown in the euro-area or an intensification of geopolitical tensions around Ukraine, could weigh on exports. The authorities shared staff’s views on the outlook, but saw lower risks. The official growth forecast has been revised upward for 2014–16 on account of the stronger-than-anticipated momentum. In its December forecast update, the Institute for Macroeconomic Analysis and Development (IMAD) foresees growth at 2 percent in 2015 and 1.7 in 2016. The authorities estimated a somewhat lower fiscal deficit outturn for 2014 and the medium term, which was seen to enable stabilization of the debt level at a lower level than that projected by staff. They shared staff’s Page 9 assessment of external stability. While they agreed that external risks to the outlook remain elevated, they considered that domestic risks are on the upside as a result of reform implementation.