Growth is strengthening and labor market conditions are improving. Nonetheless, high unemployment, especially long-term and among youth and women, as well as sharp regional differences remain key challenges. Spurring job-rich growth in lagging regions while addressing labor market exclusion and long-term demographic challenges calls for a comprehensive approach focused on accelerating infrastructure investment, lowering the tax wedge, orienting education toward workforce requirements, strengthening active labor market policies (ALMPs), and improving the business climate. VehiclesElectrical equipmentMachineryMineral fuelsIron and steelPlastics articlesRubber articles Articles of iron or steelFurnitureFootwearAluminium articles Paper articles Wood articles Optica apparatusMiscellaneous articles of base metal nnu h b ee  World market share of Slovakia, 2014 (in percent) Sources: ITC and IMF staff estimates. Size of national supply and international demand for products exported by Slovakia in 2014 VehiclesElectrical equipmentMachineryMineral fuels Iron and steel Plastics articlesRubber articles Articles of iron or steel Furniture FootwearAluminium articles Paper articles Wood articles Optica apparatus nnu h b ee Annual increase of Slovakia share in world exports between 2010-2014 (in percent) Winners in growing sectorsLosers in declining sectors Winners in declining sectors Sources: ITC and IMF staff estimates. Losers in growing sectors Growth of national supply and international demand for products exported by Slovakia in 2014 Page 13 Strong exports have powered Slovakia’s economy, but left some regions behind. Despite Slovakia’s rapid economic convergence, regional disparities in terms of income and employment remain among the largest in the EU. Jobs are mostly created in the wealthiest regions, especially in or near Bratislava, where unemployment is low. Poor infrastructure discourages investment and job creation in less dynamic areas, and regional disparities are aggravated by low labor mobility, owing in part to high home-ownership and underdeveloped rental markets. The labor market is recovering, but subsets of the labor force face particular challenges, thereby depressing potential growth . About two- thirds of jobless are long-term unemployed, with a large share concentrated in eastern and southern regions. Youth unemployment, albeit declining, remains near 25 percent (Box 3). Slovakia compares unfavorably with European peers in terms of women’s labor force participation and the gender pay gap. In addition, a disproportionate share of the Roma community is unemployed or inactive. Persistent unemployment and inactivity erodes skills and lowers participation, compounding adverse demographics and holding back potential growth. Spurring job-rich growth in lagging regions while addressing longer-term labor market and demographic challenges calls for a comprehensive approach Enhancing transportation infrastructure and strengthening the business climate (e.g., improvements to the legal and procurement systems to address governance weaknesses) could encourage investment in weaker regions, and together with reforms to promote rental housing (e.g., phasing out support for home ownership, expanding means-tested rental housing allowances, and easing regulations that discourage property owners from renting), could promote labor mobility. EE Source: OECD. Working Age Population (in percent of total population) Unemployment rate Bratislava West Slovakia Central Slovakia East Slovakia Beveridge Curve by Region (2008-2014) BratislavaWest SlovakiaCentral SlovakiaEast Slovakia Per Capita Income (in purchasing power standard, in percent of EU average) Source: Regional Statistical Office. Page 14 Box 3. Tackling High Youth Unemployment in Slovakia Youth unemployment remains a key concern amidst improving labor market conditions. Even though overall unemployment is falling toward the EU average, more than two-thirds of the young population remains excluded from the job market, with the share of young people not in education, employment, or training high relative to EU peers. This suggests that for the young, skill mismatches and a poor school-to-work transition may exacerbate broader labor market challenges (e.g., a high tax wedge), and not getting off to a good career start can have a lasting impact on individuals (e.g., diminished skills and attachment to the workforce) and potential growth of the economy. Economic disincentives help explain high youth unemployment in Slovakia. While growth has a powerful effect—indeed, youth unemployment in Slovakia has clearly fallen as growth has picked up in recent years—panel- based and country-specific analysis also highlight the labor tax wedge, which has increased over the past ten years, as an important factor contributing to youth unemployment in Slovakia. The gross replacement rate (GRR) also stands out and may reflect similar effects to the extent that high social contributions push up the GRR. These results reinforce the general arguments for reducing the relatively high tax wedge for low- income and low-skill workers. Better education and training initiatives should help address specific challenges faced by new workforce entrants. Legislation has sought to improve exchanges between schools and employers, including to tailor curriculums and vocational training to business needs, and importantly, a dual system for vocational education and practical training was launched in September 2015. EU-funded schemes have also helped create temporarily subsidized jobs for 700 young job-seekers (slightly more than 1.2 percent of total youth unemployment). ____________________ See also Banerji, Angana, Sergejs Saksonovs, Huidan Lin, and Rodolphe Blavy, 2014, “Youth Unemployment in Advanced Economies in Europe: Searching for Solutions,” IMF Staff Discussion Note No. 14/11, December (https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2014/sdn1411.pdf). European Commission, 2015, “Study on the Effects and Incidence of Labour Taxation,” Taxation Papers, WP No. 56 (http://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/common/publications/services_papers/working_papers/index_en.htm). Source: OECD. Young People Not in Education, Employment or Training (in percent of total young population)2013 ss v x dg j b v Marginal Effect of Labor Market Characteristics on Youth Unemployment Level (coefficient value, percentage points) 1/ Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff estimates. Results based on country-specific regressions. 1/ Boxplots include the mean (black dot), the 25th and 75th percentiles (grey box, with the change of shade indicating the median), and the maximum and minimum (whiskers). The separate markers show the results for Slovakia (red dot = significant) and (red, empty dot = insignificant). Results for employment protection of temporary workers; total ALMP expenditure per unemployed; and ALMP spending on training, per unemployed were excluded for presentational clarity. Page 15 Lowering the labor tax wedge , especially for low- wage or part-time workers, would foster labor force participation and help reduce disincentives to hiring. In this spirit, the reduction in the health contribution allowance to offset the impact of the minimum wage increase in early 2015 was welcome. Strengthening education and training would allay skill shortages, which are becoming more binding. Effective implementation of the recently launched dual vocational education system is essential to help meet labor market needs. Efforts to improve elementary and s econdary education, especially for marginalized populations such as Roma where integration needs are substantial, should also be a high priority. Comparatively low levels of active labor market policy (ALMP) spending should be raised and sustained , and the planned evaluation of the various ALMPs should be completed to help maximize effectiveness. Additional and more affordable childcare could improve female labor force participation. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that regional disparities, skill mismatches, and especially high long-term unemployment, which can erode skills and undermine potential growth, are key challenges. The government is taking or considering action in a number of areas: Infrastructure and regional disparities. Stepped-up use of EU Funds is helping improve infrastructure and some incentives are being offered for investment in weaker regions. Initiatives to promote growth of the very limited rental housing market may be considered in the context of a third social package. Education and training. Financial incentives are being used to align better education and training with labor market needs; the recently launched dual system for vocational education will be scaled up in future years, and new curricula more relevant for potential jobs are being prepared; and temporary subsidies are being provided for jobs for unemployed young people. Efforts are also being made to support integration of marginalized communities. Public Employment Service (PES) and ALMPs . The government is committed to reform the PES and improve ALMP effectiveness. Steps have been taken to realize synergies through centralization of PES activities and reallocation of employees toward high need areas to strengthen the quality and efficiency of services. Reforms are to be implemented by 2020. Labor taxes. In November 2013, the government introduced a twelve month exemption from social security contributions for long-term unemployed returning to work. In January 2015, a reduction in health contributions for low-paid workers was adopted, which helped offset the PP LL Source: OECD. Tax Wedge (in percent of labor cost) Page 16 impact of an increase in the minimum wage. The authorities felt both measures have supported the recent labor market upswing. Female labor force participation. Kindergarten capacity is being expanded and the childcare allowance has been increased modestly. The authorities, however, cautioned that cultural and other non-economic factors meant near-term progress was likely to be limited in areas such as labor mobility, female labor force participation, and integration of marginalized groups. The government outlined a broad strategy to improve the business climate. Initiatives are underway to assist development of start-ups, including a streamlined process for registration of public companies. Steps have been taken to strengthen contract enforcement through establishment of electronic registries of insolvent entities and disqualified persons. Use of an electronic marketplace for selected public procurements is now mandatory, as is disclosure of beneficial owners for companies interested in public procurement. A number of amendments have been passed to speed up the judicial process and promote court specialization.