Growth has returned, but crisis legacies continue to weigh on Slovenia’s economy . In the boom years prior to the 2008 global crisis, state banks imprudently engaged in risky lending. When the crisis hit, banks access to external funding was abruptly cut. Moreover, Slovenia’s highly leveraged corporations found it difficult to service their debts. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) accumulated on bank books, credit contracted, investment fell sharply, and bank losses mounted. These effects led to a second recession and a banking and sovereign debt crisis in 2012–13. The authorities subsequently recapitalized major state-owned banks and moved some of their NPLs to a bank asset management company (BAMC). The bank recapitalization, alongside restored sovereign market access, stabilized the financial system and enabled an economic recovery. However, still debt-laden company balance sheets, particularly in the SME sector, coupled with extensive state ownership of inefficient firms, limit growth opportunities. As a result, Slovenia’s GDP and employment remain below pre-global crisis levels. This performance is in sharp contrast with the country’s Central European peers, whose economic recoveries have generally been much stronger (chart). E GDP Total GFCF Non-govt GFCF Real GDP and investment (Index, 2004 = 100) Czech Republic Hungary Poland Slovakia Non-Financial Corporate Debt to Equity Real GDP (Index, 2008=100) SVN CZE HUN POL SVK Sources: Haver; IMF staff calculations Employment (Index, 2008=100) SVN CZE HUN POL SVK Sources: Haver; IMF staff calculations Page 10 Significant structural reforms are needed to realize Slovenia’s growth potential, but political tensions and coalition discussions may affect their pace and ambition. Polls record declining public support for the governing coalition as tensions over refugees and other non-economic matters have flared. In addition, coalition partners have yet to formulate a common approach to important reforms. These developments create uncertainties about the speed and scope of further action on fiscal and structural priorities (See Annex III for an assessment of implementation of prior staff reform recommendations).