Jeopardizing Stability Background The banking sector remains stable but profitability has declined. The share of non- performing loans, at 4.6 percent, is moderate relative to those of Euro Area (EA) peers. The capital adequacy ratio has remained broadly stable and well above the regulatory minimum with capital nnu Page 22 mostly being Tier 1 (Table 5). Banking sector profitability has declined since mid-2015, driven by a sharp contraction in the net interest margin as well as contributions to regulatory fees. The authorities decided to prolong the special levy on financial institutions at 0.2 percent until 2020, contrary to the previously announced reduction to 0.1 percent once cumulative total receipts reach €750 million (receipts exceeded €600 million euros in mid-2016). However, there are vulnerabilities arising from the very high exposure to the real estate sector. The real estate sector now accounts for over half of total private sector loans. Strong household credit growth has been funded by domestic deposits and mostly reflects financial deepening starting from a low base. However, household indebtedness is now one of the highest among central and eastern European peers. In addition, the underlying quality of the loan portfolio shows some signs of weakening, with an elevated concentration of new loans that have a loan-to-value (LTV) ratio around 90 percent. The share of non-performing loans (NPLs) for consumer loans increased from 7.1 percent in December 2015 to 8.6 percent in December 2016 despite favorable economic conditions and low interest rates. Interest rates on over 80 percent of new mortgage loans are fixed for less than five years with a significant share having 2–3 years until the interest rate reset. These factors make banks vulnerable to interest rate increases and to a slowdown in economic activity. Slovakia’s banking system also has the most pronounced asset liability mismatch in the EA . This reflects a high reliance on short-term deposits for funding (more than 50 percent of liabilities) coupled with rapid growth in mortgage lending. The propensity to hold sight deposits has been exacerbated in recent years by low interest rates on term deposits in the wake of ECB quantitative easing and by the limited size of capital markets. The authorities have undertaken micro-prudential measures (such as a minimum liquidity coverage ratio), and are phasing in further measures (such as a net stable funding ratio) to address liquidity risks. X LL illi Page 23 Source: Haver. The authorities have stepped up macro-prudential measures since 2014 to preserve lending standards and increase buffers. Following the implementation of the Housing Loan Act (HLA) in March 2016, the NBS has a mandate to issue binding decrees imposing limits on debt service to income (DSTI) and LTV ratios which are set to further tighten in 2017. The amendment to the Consumer Credit Act that entered into force on January 1, 2017 introduces an obligation to verify the debt servicing capacity and income of consumer loan applicants, and a maturity limit for consumer loans as is the case for housing loans. Also, as of January 1, the O-SII buffer was increased to 2 percent and the systemic risk buffer to 1 percent for selected banks. In light of a strong positive credit-to-GDP gap relative to its long-term steady state and developments in the property market, the NBS decided to raise countercyclical buffer (CCB) from zero to 0.5 percent beginning August 1, 2017. Banking sector legislation in Slovakia is fully harmonized, and supervision closely coordinated with the Single Supervisory Mechanism. Non-bank loans have remained stable accounting for roughly one-fifth of the volume of consumer loans . The NBS acquired responsibility for supervising non-banks in 2015, along with increased supervisory powers in the area of consumer financial protection. The introduction of a regulatory cap on interest rates has led to a sharp drop in annual percentage rates charged by non-banks, and has been partially responsible for a lengthening of the average terms and maturities of non-bank loans. While the interest rate cap has adversely affected non-bank profitability, it has also slowed the pace of new lending by non-banks and enhanced the stability of the sector. Z AA > Y EE Page 24 Harmonization of regulation and supervision for banks and non-banks will contribute to financial stability, and reduce risks in the non-bank sector. Discussion Staff discussed the effectiveness of macro-prudential measures. Measures implemented so far have had a limited impact on credit growth as banks rely on loan volume growth for profitability in a low-interest rate environment. With the current capital levels well above the minimum regulatory requirement, the increase in the CCB rate is likely to have limited impact on banks’ lending behavior. While NBS’s recent decision to expedite transposition of new EU directives would equalize the operating environment for bank and non-bank lenders, it may not materially slow rapid credit growth. Staff advised the authorities to consider the following additional measures: Credit risk weights for real-estate loans, which are now standardized at 35 percent, should be increased for riskier subcomponents. In line with the latest Basel proposals, one option would be to impose higher risk weights on mortgage loans with LTV ratios over 80 percent or on mortgage loans for investment properties. Further lowering of the LTV ratio limit, which is among the highest in the EA, would allow Slovakia to curtail the sharp increase in recent quarters in new loans with excessively high LTVs. Removing preferential treatment of capital gains from housing investment and linking real- estate taxation to the market value of the property will curb demand for real estate and add to fiscal revenues. At the same time, lowering the bank tax to 0.1 percent as originally planned would help relieve pressures on bank’s profitability. The authorities shared staff’s views on credit risks that would stem from a possible economic slowdown. The authorities underscored that, despite rapid growth in recent years, default rates in the housing portfolio of banks remained very low. In their view, the focus should be on the countercyclical buffer and tighter lending standards, rather than risk weights. While they recognized that the LTV ratio on new loans remains high, they also noted that obligatory amortization for all loans in Slovakia causes LTVs to drop rapidly over the lifespan of the loan. The authorities share staff’s concern about rising default rates in the consumer credit market despite the favorable macroeconomic environment. The authorities believe that the deterioration in the credit In Slovakia, unlike in other EU countries there are no interest-only loans or loans with deferred payments which would have prevented such a rapid drop in LTV ratios. 020406080100120MaltaHungaryCyprusSwedenPolandNorwayLithuaniaLatviaIrelandEstoniaFinland Denmark SlovakiaCzechNetherlands Maximum Loan-to-Value Ratios, Mortgages (Percent) Source: ESRB. Page 25 quality of consumer loans is mainly related to lending standards. They are in the process of drafting secondary legislation related to lending standards.