Activity is picking up amid a more favorable outlook . Growth is projected to accelerate to 2.4 percent in 2014 and to 3 percent over the next few years, despite fiscal headwinds. The forecast reflects an improving external environment as well as more balanced growth as confidence, investment, and employment improve, enabling domestic demand to replace net exports as the main driver of growth. Medium-term potential growth is estimated at around 2½ percent, largely reflecting continued improvements in total factor productivity. As domestic demand strengthens and energy prices rebound, headline inflation is projected to edge up in the second half of 2014 but remain subdued over the forecast period. The trade and current account balances will remain in surplus, reflecting some further gain in export market shares. Unemployment is expected to fall gradually, owing to higher employment and a decline in the working-age population, but to stay near 12 percent in the medium term. Slovakia faces positive and negative risks (Annex I, Risk Assessment Matrix). On the upside, market sentiment and conditions in key trading partners are improving, and ECB easing could provide further support. Additional positive impulses could come from residential and other infrastructure investment, as well as greater absorption of EU funds. Negative spillovers could come from prolonged low-growth/low-inflation in Europe given the importance of trade and FDI to Slovakia. Slower growth would place public debt on an upward trajectory and operation of debt brakes could make fiscal policy more pro-cyclical. In terms of prices, additional downward pressure could come from further appreciation of the euro as a result of either improving euro area prospects (although this could also help boost confidence and domestic demand) or safe haven capital inflows should global financial market volatility resume. Analysis of the impact of shocks is considered in the second chapter of the Selected Issues ( Evolution of Drivers of the Business Cycle in Slovakia). SVKPOLHUNCZESVKPOLHUNCZE02 1214ExportsImports Russia Ukraine Source: Direction of Trade Statistics. Exports and Imports from Russia and Ukraine (In percent of total exports/imports) Page 11 Potential escalation of tensions between Russia and Ukraine might affect Slovakia given high dependence on Russian energy, although Slovakia has sufficient reserves to withstand a short- lived interruption of gas supply. Exports to Russia are 2 percent of GDP, whereas trade and financial links with Ukraine are negligible. Risks would rise if Germany and the euro area were significantly affected. With relatively low levels of public and private debt, declining government financing needs, and healthy cash balances, bouts of financial market volatility would likely have limited impact. On the domestic side, prolonged high unemployment could inhibit a recovery in domestic demand and lead to lower growth, both in the near-term and in the longer-term as the erosion of human capital could damage potential output. Policies should be geared toward sustaining growth and supporting domestic demand. With external surpluses and falling debt levels projected over the medium term, but domestic demand only recently starting to rebound amid very high unemployment, policy efforts should seek to encourage investment and job creation. This could be supported by structural policies to unlock growth, moderately paced fiscal adjustment focused on enhanced revenue collection to fund key priorities, as well as steps to facilitate access to credit, especially for small firms. Authorities’ views The authorities and staff generally agreed on the outlook and risks . The latest government forecasts are similar to staff projections, although somewhat more optimistic for 2015 growth, even as fiscal adjustment continues. They agreed on the importance of strengthening domestic demand and foresaw somewhat greater reductions in unemployment. The authorities concurred on the above-mentioned risks, although a long-lasting interruption of gas supply by Russia was viewed as unlikely. While banks in Slovakia are considered robust, the authorities flagged the possibility of broader market volatility if stress tests reveal capital deficiencies elsewhere in Europe.