After slowing, growth is set to pick up again (Figure 1 and Table 1). Slovakia has enjoyed one of the fastest recoveries from the 2009 crisis among EU countries, benefiting from investment and competitiveness that spurred export growth. As economic activity in Germany and the euro area slowed in 2012–13, however, the Slovak economy lost momentum, with growth bottoming out in mid-2013 and domestic demand depressed. Investment picked up strongly at end-2013, and private consumption rose sharply in Q1 2014, reflecting higher real wages. Headline inflation has declined sharply, reflecting lackluster domestic demand, weak commodity prices, and euro appreciation . Domestic demand has acted as a drag on growth and core inflation, reflecting weak investment and stagnant private consumption. The impact of declining energy prices and abating pressure from food prices has been compounded by euro appreciation and Czech koruna depreciation, which have lowered import prices. Producer price inflation has been negative since mid-2013 while headline inflation moved into negative territory in the first months of 2014. SVK GDP SVK Export DEU GDP DEU Export Sources: Haver and IMF staff calculations. Export and GDP Growth Rates in Slovakia and Germany (year-on-year percentage change) Page 6 Unemployment remained well above the EU average (Figure 2). Employment contracted in 2013, but with the working-age population also declining, the unemployment rate stabilized at around 14 percent. Youth unemployment is near 33 percent and long-term unemployment represents more than two-thirds of the total, reflecting structural challenges. Regional disparities are great, with joblessness much higher in central and eastern Slovakia. There was, however, an encouraging uptick in employment in early 2014. Moderate wage increases and robust productivity translated into subdued unit labor cost growth. Fiscal consolidation continued but debt brakes started to bite (Figure 3, Tables 2–3, and Annex III). The general government deficit declined to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2013 (against a target of 2.9 percent of GDP), enabling exit from the EU’s Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). Deficit reduction, while substantial, was achieved partly through low-quality and temporary measures such as under-spending EU funds, significant cuts in capital outlays especially by local governments, and allowing a shift of pension assets from the fully funded second pillar to the public first pillar scheme, which offset wage bill and other expenditure overruns. Explicit one-off measures in 2013 totaled 0.3 percent of GDP while savings from lower co-financing on EU Funds—by delaying potentially useful projects—totaled 0.4 percent of GDP. Welcome improvements in VAT collection—Slovakia’s VAT efficiency has been among the lowest in the EU—started materializing late in 2013 and yielded about 0.4 percent of GDP. The recent inclusion of the railway company in the general government per a determination by Eurostat also contributed to the better-than-budgeted outturn. General government debt rose above a debt brake threshold of 55 percent of GDP in 2013, partly reflecting Eurostat classification of the newly-created Emergency Oil Stocks Agency (EOSA) as a public unit. Under the national Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA), breaching this debt threshold triggers some expenditure cuts during 2014 and the submission of a 2015 budget that freezes much spending at 2014 budgeted levels. HICP (LHS) Producer Price Index Import price: unit value index Exchange rates and import prices (quarterly data; year-on-year percentage changes) Sources: Eurostat, Haver, and IMF staff calculations Domestic Demand Employment Economic Sentiment (avg.=100; RHS) Domestic Demand Factors (quarterly data; year-on-year percentage change) Page 7 Box 1. Slovak Republic: Ten Years in the EU EU membership catalyzed a remarkable turnaround for the Slovak Republic . The Velvet Revolution in 1989 led to a peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia, but the new Slovak Republic lagged its Czech neighbor in terms of income level, starting near that of Hungary and Poland and well below the EU average. Relatively strong growth early in the transition slowed progressively and eventually stalled, as had the EU accession process. The election of a reform-minded government in 1998 with an ambitious agenda helped restart EU talks, and Slovakia was able to join the first wave of eastern EU enlargement on May 1, 2004. Slovakia took an additional step toward further European integration by adopting the euro in January 2009. EU accession has fostered a rapid catch-up in income . Slovakia’s per-capita income climbed to roughly 75 percent of the EU average in 2012 from less than half in the mid-1990s, outpacing Poland and Hungary and closing much of the gap with the Czech Republic. Output growth accelerated significantly in the post- accession years, averaging 7.2 percent in 2004–08. After a contraction in 2009, reflecting the large international trade collapse, economic activity rebounded to a more moderate average growth rate of 2.5 percent in 2010–13. While Slovakia and its neighbors all benefited from sharp increases in FDI, Slovakia also enjoyed high total factor productivity growth. With substantial investment in export industries (especially autos and electronics) following accession, net exports became a key driver of Slovak growth, particularly after 2009, resulting in a current account surplus in 2012–13, following years of deficits due in part to capital goods imports. CZE HUN Per-Capita GDP in Purchasing Power Standards (In percent of EU average) Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff calculations. Slovak Republic: GDP Growth (In percent) SVKCZEHUNPOL Labor Capital TFP Output Sources: Eurostat, OECD and IMF staff calculations. Growth Breakdown: Supply Side (Contributions to growth, in percent) SVKCZEHUNPOL Consumption Investment Net exports Output Growth Breakdown: Demand Side (Contributions to growth, in percent) Page 8 Box 1. Slovak Republic: Ten Years in the EU (concluded) Integration into the world economy has deepened substantially . Since the mid-1990s, the degree of openness of the economy, as measured by the sum of exports and imports of goods as a percent of GDP, has risen sharply to about 170 percent in 2013, and Slovakia’s export market share in the European Union has tripled. This expansion was supported by significant inflows of foreign direct investment and went hand-in-hand with growing participation of the Slovak economy in global value chains (GVCs), especially in the auto industry. The significant benefits of EU membership have not addressed unemployment or been shared uniformly. Very high unemployment during the transition period fell significantly until the 2009 downturn when joblessness rose again, and now remains well above peers. Striking differences among regions persist in terms of per-capita income and unemployment. These differences are partly the legacy of historical and geographical conditions, but also reflect investment and growth patterns from the recent past. While outward migration expanded to new destinations after EU accession (e.g., the United Kingdom), much of this reversed in the wake of the crisis with the exception of Austria. The first chapter of the Selected Issues ( Ten Years on from EU Accession) provides a fuller discussion. Market conditions remain favorable . The government had secured more than 65 percent of its 2014 financing needs by early June, maintains large cash balances (6 percent of GDP at end- 2013), and has tapped new markets while extending the average maturity of debt. Strong demand from non-resident investors more than offset some divestment by domestic banks, which hold a high share of government bonds to total assets among euro area banks. Bond and CDS spreads remain low and rating agencies have upgraded outlooks to stable. Robust exports continued to support Slovakia’s external position (Figures 4–5 and Table 5). Strong competitiveness prompted additional gains in export market shares, consolidating CZE HUN Unemployment in CEE-4 Bratislava Trnava Trenèín Nitra Žilina Banská Bystrica Prešov Košice Regional Per-Capita Income (In purchasing power standards; in percent of EU average)Sources: Eurostat, Haver, Slovak Regional Statistics Database,and IMF staff calculations. SVK 1998SVK 2012 CZE 1998 CZE 2012HUN 1998HUN 2012 POL 1998 POL 2012010203040 k Total Imports and Exports of Goods and Services Openess to Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Sources: OECD, WEO and IMF staff calculations Page 9 trade and current account surpluses. However, the country’s negative net investment position deteriorated marginally and gross external debt rose (Annex IV), mainly reflecting an increase in the share of non-resident holdings of government debt (now more than 50 percent) as part of the authorities’ strategy to reduce risks by diversifying the investor base. The external position is broadly consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings (Box 2). Box 2. Slovak Republic: Competitiveness Current account. The current account remained in surplus in 2013, at around 2 percent of GDP. A decomposition of current account drivers shows that cyclical factors explain much but not all of the recent improvement. There is some uncertainty, however, over balance of payments statistics in light of large errors and omissions and anecdotal accounts of “branding,” potentially involving overstatement of export prices. Real effective exchange rate (REER). A CGER-like methodology using a large panel of heterogeneous countries provides a mixed assessment of Slovakia’s REER. While the current account approaches (macroeconomic balance (MB) and external sustainability) point to an undervaluation of about 2.5 to 9 percent in 2013, the equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER) approach suggests an overvaluation of almost 40 percent. A closer look at CGER-like estimates shows the long-run equilibrium exchange rates to be nearly constant over time, which seems unlikely for fast-changing economies such as Slovakia. More tailored analysis using panels of transition economies suggests that Slovakia’s REER is broadly in line with fundamentals. Over time, policies targeted at boosting domestic demand and employment would be expected to narrow the small degree of real exchange rate undervaluation found under some approaches. Capital and financial account . FDI inflows to Slovakia declined in 2013, but are expected to pick up again in 2014. Large portfolio inflows in 2012 and 2013 reflect the strategy of the Slovak government to mitigate risks by diversifying the investor base while also extending maturities and lowering funding costs. Overall, capital flows are expected to remain generally stable although, as noted above, large errors and omissions complicate the assessment somewhat. Foreign asset and liability position . External debt rose to a still manageable 83 percent of GDP and the net international investment position (NIIP) deteriorated in 2013, but at negative 66 percent is in line with peers in Central Europe. Despite the weakening NIIP, external vulnerabilities are mitigated by the large share of FDI among liabilities and by recent increases in portfolio liabilities being due mostly to government debt with long maturities. Staff consider the moderate current account surpluses projected over the medium term, even while allowing room for the policies noted above to support domestic demand and reduce high unemployment, as consistent with lowering external debt,. The second chapter of the Selected Issues ( Evolution of Drivers of the Business Cycle in Slovakia) considers the structural and cyclical components of external surpluses. The banking sector remains sound while lending increased marginally (Figure 7 and Table 6). Household borrowing, mainly for housing, continued to grow at around 11 percent, while corporate lending turned just positive, but only due to large transactions of two state-owned REER (actual) MB (OLS) ERER (OLS) ERER (CGER) ERER (C3) Sources: WEO and IMF staff calculations. Slovak Republic: REER Assessments (Index , 2005 = 100) Page 10 enterprises. Average LTV ratios remain around 70 percent and average property prices have been flat or slightly falling, but loans with higher LTVs have become more common, reflecting stronger competition among lenders. Robust net interest margins supported profitability, despite the impact of the bank levy. Although impaired loans to the corporate sector edged up, nonperforming loans (NPLs) are low and well provisioned. Banks continue to enjoy stable domestic funding and further strengthened their capital buffers.