Trade and financial integration have placed Slovakia among Europe’s fastest growing economies, helping rapidly close much of the gap with European income levels. Unemployment is very high, however, and large regional disparities persist. Steps to encourage investment in lagging regions as well as to improve labor market functioning and enhance skills would help boost employment and strengthen domestic demand, while preserving the competitiveness that has underpinned Slovakia’s export success. Slovakia’s export-led growth model has been successful but challenges remain Investment and exports by high-productivity multinational firms, especially around Bratislava and focused on automobile and electronics assembly, have been critical to the country’s relatively strong Page 12 growth and provide high-quality jobs, but also make Slovakia more subject to global market conditions. At the other end of the spectrum, there are many SMEs, but they are often very small and have limited innovation capacity. Growth has been driven by capital accumulation funded mainly though FDI, and increases in total factor productivity. The labor income share, as measured by real unit labor costs, has been on a downward trend amid cost competition from neighboring countries. Regional differences are large . Behind rapid catching-up with EU income levels are sizeable differences among regions, with those outside Bratislava having lower per-capita income, lower productivity, significant innovation performance gaps, higher unemployment, and limited job opportunities (Box 3). Low mobility, reflecting high home-ownership and an underdeveloped rental market, as well as skill mismatches hamper labor market adjustment, and this is compounded by poor infrastructure and business climate challenges that inhibit investment and job creation in weaker regions. Slovakia suffers from very high unemployment, especially long-term and among youth. Despite the economic rebound in the aftermath of the 2009 crisis, unemployment remains elevated as productivity has improved, but at the expense of employment. The crisis has exacerbated persistent long-term unemployment and aggravated youth unemployment, which has nearly doubled. Joblessness is more acute in the eastern and central parts of the country where there are limited vacancies. The high unemployment rates in these regions may even understate the challenge given marginal participation in the labor market by the Roma population (only 20 percent of Roma men and less than 10 percent of Roma women, according to a World Bank estimate). Wide-ranging policy actions are needed to unlock the potential of the Slovak economy. Given limited vacancies in weaker regions, it is especially important to encourage Policy Advice on the Integration of Roma in the Slovak Republic , (World Bank, 2012) (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/09/16791578/diagnostics-policy-advice-integration-roma-slovak- republic-vol-1-2-main-report). Slovak Republic Region of Bratislava West Central East Sources: Haver and Regional Statistics Database. Slovak Republic: Regional Per-capita Income (Purchasing power standards; in percent of EA average) Slovak Republic Region of Bratislava West Central East Source: Regional Statistics Database. Slovak Republic: Regional Unemployment Rate (In percent) Page 13 investment and job creation. These efforts should be complemented by actions to reduce financial disincentives to working and hiring, enhance skills, and facilitate the transition from school to work as well as from unemployment back to the workforce. Over the medium term, action in these areas could also help Slovakia move up global value chains and diversify its production structure, thereby improving resiliency to external shocks. Policy and budget priorities should seek to: Improve infrastructure . With few unfilled jobs in high unemployment areas, strengthening infrastructure, especially highways such as the main east-west route where faster progress is needed, is critical to opening up investment opportunities and fostering job creation in lagging regions. Increased absorption of EU funds in this area and more efficient procurement practices could help. Facilitating access to rental housing would also enhance labor mobility and regional integration. Strengthen the business climate (Figure 6). Slovakia’s regulatory burden compares unfavorably with other EU countries and regional peers. In addition, corruption challenges are perceived as widespread and have involved EU Funds. Strengthening contract enforcement (e.g., to address payment delays that particularly affect small firms), improving administrative procedures and public procurement, as well as enhancing the legal system and strengthening anti-corruption efforts would create more favorable conditions for doing business. Firms would also benefit from lower energy costs, which are among the highest in the EU. Reducing regulation in professional services and retail trade would foster competition with benefits for consumers. Maintain labor market flexibility . Slovakia’s employment protection legislation, even after the unwinding of some 2011 reforms, appears broadly in line with that of peers. However, the decision taken in early 2014 to allow extension of collective bargaining agreements to most employers in a sector introduces rigidity that could discourage hiring and hinder adaption to wide regional differences. Consideration should be given to re-introducing the previous arrangement that allowed firms to opt out of collective bargaining agreements (e.g., Germany See Annex on Slovakia to the EU Anti-Corruption Report (2014) (http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/what-we- do/policies/organized-crime-and-human-trafficking/corruption/anti-corruption-report/index_en.htm). Burden of Government Regulation (1 = burdensome; 7 = not burdensome) 2013-14 EU simple avg. Source: World Economic Forum. Irregular Payments and Bribes (1 = very common; 7 = never occurs) 2013-14 EU simple avg. Page 14 and Italy allow opt-outs) or increasing the threshold number of employees at which collective agreements would be extended to firms. Also, setting different minimum wages across regions would better reflect widely varying labor market conditions. Plans for a uniform minimum wage rise could increase challenges to securing employment for some workers. Box 3. Slovak Republic: Regional Disparities Regional disparities are among the highest in the EU. The gap between the region with the lowest unemployment (Bratislava) and the highest (east Slovakia) is the fifth largest in the EU, with only Spain, Italy, Belgium, and Greece recording wider differences. In terms of regional dispersion of per- capita GDP, only Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania show greater disparities. More comprehensive indicators, such as the EU regional competitiveness index, which covers a wide range of issues (e.g., innovation, quality of institutions, infrastructure, health and human capital), show a similar picture. Only France, Romania and Greece show as large a gap between the capital and the second most competitive region. Lack of job opportunities is a main cause of regional differences. Beveridge curves show very low vacancy rates in most parts of the country, while in Bratislava the curve is steep, indicating that unemployment could be even lower if vacancies were filled. Unemployment rate Bratislava West Slovakia Central Slovakia East Slovakia Source:s Regional Statistical Office and IMF staff calculations. Beveridge Curve by Region (In percent) DNK IRL NLDAUTROMPOLHUNCZEBGRDEUSVKGRCBELITAESP d i s s i ( ) Unemployment dispersion (percentage points, 2013) Regional disparities in GDP and unemployment Source: Eurostat. Source: EU Regional Competitiveness Index, 2013. Regional Competitiveness Index, 2013 Region Member State Capital Region EE AA Page 15 Lower labor taxes and improve incentives. Reducing the high tax wedge that makes it unattractive for firms to hire and for people with low skill levels to work should be a high priority in the budget (¶22). Incentives under the benefit structure might be improved (e.g., consideration might be given to tapering general social benefits over time while continuing to provide some benefits when beginning work). Improve the quality of education and training Deteriorating PISA scores have highlighted educational challenges. Consistent with OECD recommendations, strengthening the quality of teachers would be appropriate, while vocational training efforts should seek to improve curricula to better match workforce needs and create an effective dual system of vocational training based on close cooperation with businesses to ensure substantial practical experience in workplaces. Strengthen active labor market policies (ALMPs) ALMP spending, which compares unfavorably with that in other EU countries, should be raised and its effectiveness improved through more tailored activation incentives and services as well as increasing the share of spending allocated to training. The envisaged reform of the Public Employment Service (PES) should be accelerated and its resources increased. Recent initiatives to focus on youth unemployment might be complemented by greater attention to the long- term unemployed and marginalized groups. Authorities’ views Supporting growth and reducing unemployment are top government priorities. number of steps have been taken or are planned: Infrastructure. Efforts are ongoing, especially highway construction, although technical challenges (e.g., building tunnels) are among the complicating factors. Reforms intended to improve procurement practices have been approved. Slovak Republic: Fostering an Inclusive Job-Rich Recovery (OECD, 2013) (http://www.oecd.org/slovakia/BrochureSlovakRepublicapril2013.pdf) SVKPeer countries (avg.)1/ 2009 reading 2012 reading 2009 mathematics 2012 mathematics 2009 science 2012 science Sources: OECD; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Peer countries are Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. Student Performance (PISA mean score) Total Tax Wedge, 2013 (In percent of labor costs)OECD averageSource: OECD Page 16 Business climate. The government has passed a resolution on improving the business environment and has focused initially on facilitating payment of taxes and cross-border trade (e.g., through simplified customs procedures). A major reform is underway to streamline public administration and improve service efficiency (the ESO initiative). In addition, the time for incorporation and granting a trade license has been shortened, and the government intends to lower relevant fees. Education. Teacher salaries were raised in 2013 and remain a high priority to attract well- qualified instructors, testing is being strengthened to track school quality, and a new higher education act is being drafted with a view toward strengthening universities and creating a closer connection with the private sector. A new vocational educational and training act also is being prepared to introduce formally a dual system involving workplace experience. Pre-school education capacities are being enhanced. ALMPs and incentives to work. Less effective ALMP programs have been eliminated and emphasis on educational programs and counseling has been increased. One-year relief for firms from social and health contributions for hiring the long-term unemployed was introduced. Creation of new jobs for people under 29 years of age is being subsidized using European Social Funds. The government is considering gradually reducing social benefits after hiring, to increase disposable income for new hires. Also, the authorities intend to decrease significantly health contributions for low-income workers. PES reforms are underway to create a three-pillar system (information counseling services, professional services, and data centralization) by 2020. Measures to increase Roma inclusion are being implemented. On the other hand, the authorities did not expect recent changes to the Labor Code and the extension of collective agreements to have adverse effects on employment. Regional differentiation of the minimum wage is not viewed as a feasible option, especially in a relatively small country. The government intends to increase the minimum wage, but expects the impact on wage costs for low- income workers to be offset by the decrease in health contributions.