Fiscal consolidation underpinned by structural reforms is key to ensuring debt sustainability 2015 Fiscal Measures (in percent of GDP) Yield (authorities) Spending measures Revenue measures Tax student work Tax fin. serv. Environmental tax Increased collection efficiency The authorities are planning additional measures this year. The authorities’ revised budget, to be adopted in February, includes additional measures aiming at reducing the overall deficit (ESA2010 terms) below the EDP target of 3 percent of GDP while protecting public investment. Staff has a somewhat more conservative estimate of potential savings from the measures, as some have been diluted since being proposed, while others do not appear well specified. On this basis, but also given the expiry of one-offs from 2014, staff projects a general government deficit (cash terms, not including broader public sector entities) of 4 percent of GDP in 2015. Depending on cash-accrual adjustments and developments in the broader public sector, there is a risk that the authorities’ EDP target (ESA2010 terms) may not be achieved, which could jeopardize policy credibility. Public sector wage cuts Cuts goods&serv spending Pension bonus and insurance Cuts in subsidies Cuts in capital spending Yield (staff) Total measures o/w permanent Sources: MoF and staff estimates. Without further structural fiscal adjustment, both the medium-term objective of a balanced budget and debt sustainability would be jeopardized . On the basis of current policies, staff projects about 3¾ percent of GDP in further measures will be required to reach a balanced budget in the medium term, as committed to under the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). Moreover, without further adjustment, debt is projected to increase to close to 90 percent of GDP by 2020, raising sustainability concerns. Vulnerabilities also arise from large maturities (some 12 percent of GDP) coming due in 2016 and sizeable government guarantees (18 percent of GDP), which are concentrated in a few public entities. Finally, population aging will boost pension costs beyond 2020; left unaddressed, they would lead to an explosive debt path. Page 17 Fiscal indicators (percent of GDP) General government balance Net of bank restructuring Overall structural balance Primary balance Structural primary balance Public debt General government balance Net of bank restructuring Overall structural balance Primary balance Structural primary balance Public debt Sources: Slovenian authorities, and IMF staff estimates. Baseline Staff-recommended scenario To enhance the durability of the adjustment, the authorities could target a somewhat more ambitious structural improvement in 2015. Structural measures of around 1.2 percent of GDP—corresponding to an improvement in the structural balance of about 1 percent of GDP—can help strike a balance between short-run cyclical and long-run sustainability concerns. This would imply replacing some ½ percent of GDP of proposed temporary measures with permanent ones. Measures could include better targeting of social transfers and subsidies to ensure that those most vulnerable are protected, while reducing abuse in the system. Indeed, the crisis has led to an increase in the risk of social exclusion relative to the pre-crisis period. The authorities could also consider reducing the tax preferential treatment for pensions and the pensioner-specific social benefits (while ensuring that low-income pensioners are adequately covered by the safety net), which would also help mitigate long-run population aging costs. Plans to protect public investment through absorption of EU funds should be maintained, as they are supportive of growth. The deficit reduction needed to put debt on a sustained downward path should be undertaken gradually to help minimize risks to the recovery while ensuring policy credibility An adjustment of ¾ percent of GDP per year over 2016–19 would be required to reach structural balance (and an overall primary surplus of around 3.3 percent of GDP) by 2019. This would bring debt down to around 77 percent of GDP by 2020, close to the 2013 level, but still more than three times its pre-crisis level. On the revenue side : Redesigning and adopting a real-estate tax next year in line with the constitution would not only help boost revenues, but would also promote social and inter- generational equity by ensuring an adequate sharing of the tax burden based on wealth. Broader tax reforms could help to address the erosion in the tax base by revisiting income tax exemptions as the economy recovers and remove tax distortions favoring debt over equity financing. On the spending side : The authorities should pursue further pension reforms, including the measures noted in ¶19, as well as moving to indexation of benefits to prices and reducing See IMAD “Slovenian Economic Mirror,” October 2014, No. 10, Vol XX. Page 18 remaining incentives for early retirement (see Selected Issues Paper “ Social Spending Reform and Fiscal Savings in Slovenia ”). Early adoption can help to minimize costs. Furthermore, the planned health expenditure review is an opportunity to modernize the sector and achieve efficiency savings. More broadly, a public administration review and reform could help reduce inefficiencies and costs while maintaining the quality of public services. Putting in place a system of monitoring government guarantees that is integrated into the overall debt-management strategy can help reduce fiscal risks. Fiscal credibility would also be enhanced by implementing a fiscal rule . The authorities have drafted legislation implementing the new EU fiscal framework by introducing expenditure ceilings consistent with the EU’s minimum recommended structural adjustment of ½ percent per year, while providing flexibility in exceptional circumstances, and setting up an independent Fiscal Council. As noted above, they should aim for a more ambitious medium-term structural adjustment to reach the medium-term objective in a well-specified and realistic timeframe. This is a key to enhancing predictability and safeguarding the credibility of fiscal policy and debt sustainability. Specification of automatic corrective mechanisms to deal with unforeseen deviations and with large shocks impacting the fiscal accounts would also help. The authorities had a more sanguine view of short and medium-term fiscal prospects They were confident that the new fiscal measures (which they estimate to have a higher yield than staff expects), together with large and positive cash-accrual adjustments and substantially improved financial outturns of extra-budgetary entities would be sufficient to attain the 2015 EDP target. Moreover, they considered that a pace of fiscal adjustment of ½ percent of GDP per year would be appropriate from a cyclical perspective, while being sufficient to meet their SGP targets in the medium term. They agreed that further adjustment should be supported by structural reforms, but did not see an urgency to implement the real-estate tax and pension reforms.