Pressures Background The 2017–19 medium-term budget sets an ambitious fiscal consolidation path . The government targets an overall deficit of 1.3 percent of GDP in 2017, and a balanced budget by 2019. The consolidation is entirely on the expenditure side as overall revenues are projected to decline in percent of GDP due to lower grants and others revenues despite a set of measures yielding small gains. On the expenditure side, declining unemployment and recent pension reforms are projected to contain growth in social spending. The authorities also project a further decline in capital spending based on lower EU funds absorption which is the main financing source of public investment. Recent policy efforts have targeted improvement of revenue and expenditure efficiencies. Measures targeting tax fraud and non-compliance have reduced the VAT gap, but at 48 percent, the efficiency gap (mostly concentrated in construction, trade and transportation sectors) is high relative to that of EU peers. The efficiency is also low for the CIT and, possibly, for the mineral oils excise tax, where the effective tax rate remains low compared to its pre-crisis level. On the expenditure side, the Slovak authorities initiated in 2015 a rolling series of thematic expenditure reviews called the “Value for Money” program, which are planned over a four-year period and cover one-quarter of central government spending each year. The first set of reviews, covering health, transport and IT spending, identified measures for cost savings of around 9–10 percent in the areas of health and IT spending (about 0.2 percent of GDP annually each). The authorities have launched the next set of reviews in the areas of education, social benefits and the environment. The idea behind this program is to identify opportunities to increase resource efficiency and in turn reallocate savings within each ministry, rather than to reduce total expenditure. nu nu nu oo nn nn illi nu Page 17 With moderate public debt, and a current account surplus, Slovakia would appear to have adequate fiscal space, but there are also significant spending needs in the medium term. Slovakia’s road infrastructure, which is sub-par relative to its peers, hampers connectivity across and within regions, fostering regional disparities and labor market segmentation. In addition to the resources currently available for transportation investment from EU funds (3.6 billion euro or 4 percent of GDP for the 2014–2020 programming period), the authorities estimate additional infrastructure investment needs to be around 6–8 percent of GDP. However, the limited capacity to spend the sizable EU funds already allocated for infrastructure call for caution in increasing domestically-financed infrastructure spending before further improving the public investment management framework (see paragraph 18). In addition, the authorities anticipate a need for higher domestic outlays in the long run and especially for the period when Slovakia may not have access to EU funding. A significant increase in education spending is also likely needed to improve the quality of education, which shows deficiencies with respect to OECD and EU peers, and enhance labor skills which, in a growing number of cases, do not meet employers’ needs. Staff deems crafting a comprehensive plan to address these weaknesses a priority, and higher spending should only commence once such a plan is put in place. In addition, Slovakia is also set to experience an increase in aging-related social spending. The authorities undertook significant pension reforms in 2012 that include linking the Z X = 18Public educationinfrastructureRoads per capitaPublic healthinfrastructure(Secondary teachersper 1000 people)(Km per 1000 people)(Hospital beds per1000 people) Measures of Infrastructure Access (Most recent year) Slovak Republic CE3 European Union Advanced Economies Source: IMF staff calculations. Sep-08Sep-09Sep-10Sep-11Sep-12Sep-13Sep-14Sep-15Sep-16 Value added Mineral oil (RHS) Effective Tax Rates (Percent, 4-quarter moving average) Source: Ministry of Finance, Slovak Republic. Page 18 retirement age to life expectancy, unifying male/female retirement age by 2022, and indexing benefits to price increases only. Benefiting from these reforms, pension spending is projected to decline until 2035 but rise thereafter. Taking into account both pension and health and long-term care spending, a cumulative increase in aging-related public expenditure of 21.5 percent by 2060 (about 4 percent of GDP) is projected under the baseline scenario. A higher increase is possible if TFP grows at the rate of historical average or slows down further due to workforce aging and if the authorities reopen Pillar II, which the authorities have done four times. Each reopening has increased the future obligations of Pillar I as participants left Pillar II without penalty and are entitled to full benefits under the Pillar I system. Such openings in the future pose risks to rising spending from Pillar I. Discussion In light of the strong economic momentum and significant long-term needs, staff supports the authorities’ objective to achieve a balanced budget by 2019. However, in the context of wage pressures due a tight labor market, and recent trends in social spending, See Slovakia’s Pension and Health Spending: Managing Risks , Selected Issues Paper for more details on these alternative scenarios. TFP Scenario: Change in PE/GDP (Cumulative percentage point change) TFP lower by 0.20 p.a. TFP lower by 0.25 p.a. TFP lower by 0.30 p.a. Source: IMF staff estimations. ill II mm nu nu mm mm & mm Page 19 staff’s baseline projects a more moderate consolidation with the headline fiscal balance reaching - 1.8 percent of GDP in 2017 and -0.7 of GDP in 2019. With a closed output gap, capacity utilization at its pre-crisis high, a tightening labor market, strong credit growth and anticipated large FDI inflows in the medium-term, the proposed efficiency-driven consolidation would not significantly affect growth negatively (text table). On the other hand, fiscal consolidation will help create room for aging-related and future infrastructure spending. To reach a balanced budget in 2019 as intended by the authorities, staff recommends the following measures to improve revenue and expenditure efficiency: Increased tax efficiency. Further efforts to increase Slovakia’s VAT efficiency to the EU average (54 percent) could produce an additional 0.9 percent of GDP in revenues. The authorities’ adoption of 30 additional measures in 2015 encompassing both legal and administrative actions is encouraging and should be complemented by a clear compliance strategy. The establishment of a well-defined corporate income tax base and targeting compliance efforts on the economic sectors with highest evasion rates would further support revenue gains. Savings from expenditure efficiency . Staff supports the authorities’ “value for money” initiative as a useful initial step to pave the way to a comprehensive spending review. Savings identified through current and future reviews should, at least in part, be used to support the consolidation effort rather than being fully reallocated for spending within the same sector. Establishing clear procedures to support the oversight mandate of the implementation unit, ensuring integration of the measures into the budget, and effective cooperation between ministries are needed to ensure delivery of the identified fiscal savings. In line with past policy advice (Box 3), staff sees the importance of preserving public investment and financing it by raising new revenues through broadening the tax base There is scope for additional revenues (up to 2 percent of GDP) from reforms to the following taxes: (i) residential property tax, which is levied on surface area as opposed to market valuation; (ii) capital gains tax, which is set to zero for any transaction made after five years of ownership, including the sale of bequeathed properties; and (iii) environmental taxes, where Slovakia has the third-lowest tax collection in the EU. Increasing collections from the property tax, which is widely regarded as an efficient and equitable means of raising revenue with limited adverse effects on economic growth, will create room for higher public investment provided improvements are realized in project preparation and public procurement. This could have a net positive impact on growth in the near- term and raise potential growth in the medium term. The authorities’ emphasis on infrastructure projects under the 2014–20 EU funds programming period is appropriate . Priorities include completion of the D1 motorway connecting Bratislava and Kosice as well as improving connectivity within regions. Slovakia receives sizable EU funds (a cumulative 15 percent of GDP between 2007 and 2015) but the allocation does not materially address regional differences. For example, while about one third of EU funds are allocated to transport infrastructure, the share going to Eastern and Central Slovakia remains similar to that dedicated to Bratislava and the West, regions that already enjoy much better infrastructure. This inefficiency is partly created by last-minute, lumpy absorption in favor of shovel-ready projects. Besides strategic selection to improve connectivity, staff’s analysis shows that achieving better Page 20 outcomes under the 2014–2020 programming period would require improving expertise and capacity, lowering corruption and preventing frequent changes in legislation, and increasing transparency and competition in public procurement. Discussions with the private sector and other stakeholders also pointed to a widespread perception of weak procurement processes and a lack of transparency in project selection. The authorities reiterated their commitment to achieving a balanced budget by 2019. They expressed their commitment to contain the increase in social spending below that of nominal GDP growth and considered the approved medium-term budget envelope to incorporate reasonably high public wage growth. The authorities are currently contemplating revisions to the Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA) to incorporate experience from its practical application so far, to allow for increased infrastructure spending and to introduce other changes such as linking the sanction brackets to net public debt rather than gross public debt. While full details of the proposed changes are not yet available, staff supports the netting out of cash balances from the headline debt indicator, to allow for more flexible debt management and further lowering of debt service costs. Staff also recommends keeping the debt limits and brakes at their current levels, and advises that they not be modified to accommodate any specific type of investment, including infrastructure investment. Exempting certain categories of expenditure from counting towards the debt ceiling could create perverse incentives, reduce the effectiveness of the budget as a means of assessing relative efficiencies and resolving competing priorities, and undermine the effectiveness of the debt limit in ensuring fiscal sustainability (which is indeed the objective of the FRA in the first place). See EU Funds: Enhancing Absorption to Reduce Regional Disparities Selected Issues Paper. The FRA has four escape clauses: (i) a major recession (a decline in GDP growth rates of at least 12 percentage points over two fiscal years), (ii) a banking sector crisis, (iii) a natural disaster, and (iv) commitments arising from international treaties exceeding three percent of GDP. As discussed in SM/16/13, these existing clauses could benefit from some fine-tuning to reflect the size and nature of shocks faced by Slovakia. BratislavaWestern SlovakiaCentral SlovakiaEastern Slovakia Allocations, 2014 1/ (Percent of total EU allocations) Sources: European Commission; and IMF Staff calculations. 1/The European Commission allocates funds to EU member countries. National authorities are responsible for projects implementation. Funds that are not drawn within the pertinent deadlines are, generally, lost for recipients. illi mm mm Page 21 Staff highlighted potential savings from implementing further parametric pension reforms. These include linking the retirement age more closely to life expectancy, changing the valorization formula, and moving the calculation of contribution base to an annual level. The authorities agreed that changing the valorization formula (indexation of accrued pension benefits) could yield signficant savings, but highlighted the need to balance this reform with pension adequacy concerns. They also saw scope for increasing the equity and amount of social contributions by changing to an annual assessment base rather than a monthly one. Staff also urged the authorities to avoid reopening Pillar II. More generally, the authorities acknowledged both upside and downside risks to the baseline pension expenditure forecast and viewed overall fiscal consolidation as the first best approach to prepare for aging pressures. Staff also highilighted the need for continued efforts to centralize health procurement and restructure the hospital system to yield savings. The track record of the Slovak Republic on implementation of Fund advice is somewhat mixed. Box 3. Implementation of IMF Policy Advice On fiscal policy, the authorities and staff have been in broad agreement on medium-term objectives but differed in their views on the optimal fiscal strategy for achieving those objectives. A tight fiscal stance favored by the authorities is partly motivated by Slovakia’s small size, low debt absorption capacity by domestic residents, and the difficulties faced by Euro area countries with high debt. Staff and the authorities have agreed on the need for fiscal consolidation through greater tax and spending efficiency. More meaningful changes to tax policy, such as for property taxation, have been politically challenging to implement. Fiscal consolidation has largely relied on ad-hoc measures and, more recently, on lower capital spending. On micro- and macro-prudential measures to mitigate the risks from rapid credit growth, staff and the authorities have been closely aligned. Consistent with staff advice, authorities have taken important steps to preserve the credit quality, and create buffers in the financial system. The authorities, however, have decided to not lower the special levy on financial institutions as originally planned despite staff’s recommendations.