Growth is strengthening, driven by domestic demand (Figure 1 and Table 1). A dynamic export sector made Slovakia one of the fastest growing economies in Europe after the crisis, and domestic demand has now picked up. A concerted push to spend expiring EU funds has boosted public investment, while accommodative ECB policies and improving lending conditions have supported a recovery in private investment. Job creation and real wage growth have fueled private consumption. Export growth remains strong, but imports have risen even faster. The labor market is on the mend (Figure 2). Job creation has accelerated and unemployment has fallen, but regional disparities remain large, and skills shortages are starting to put pressure on wages. Youth and long-term unemployment, albeit declining, remain high, and women’s labor force participation continues to be low. Inflation remains weak . Headline inflation has been marginally negative, reflecting weak food prices and declining administered energy prices, while core inflation has hovered just below 0.5 percent. Inflation expectations, however, remain well-anchored, and prices are forecast to rise as the output gap closes. Risks from deflation remain low due to robust wage growth and limited leverage. The 2015 fiscal target is likely to be missed by a small amount (Figure 3, Tables 2–3). Solid GDP growth and tax administration improvements have boosted revenue, and interest costs remain low amidst ECB quantitative easing (QE). Nonetheless, the budget deficit is likely to overshoot the 2015 target (2.5 percent of GDP) by a small amount (0.2 percent of GDP) owing to spending overruns for wages, intermediate consumption, and healthcare, as well as sizeable EU funds corrections. With the sale of state shares in Slovak Telekom in May (about 1 percent of GDP), government debt is expected to decline to around 53 percent of GDP, keeping it just below strict Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA) debt brakes. Amid favorable market conditions, the authorities have further lengthened the maturity of public debt, although the share of non-resident holdings remains relatively high (Annex III). Labor Shortage Indicator (Balance of firms indicating labor shortage as a factor limitingproduction; in percent)Source: Haver. SVK CE3 1/ Euro area Source: Haver.1/ CE3 comprises the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. Real Output Growth Page 9 The external position is broadly in line with fundamentals (Figures 4–6, Table 4, Box 1, and Annex IV). With solid export performance, Slovakia’s market shares have continued to rise, but buoyant domestic demand has boosted imports. The narrowing of the trade surplus has moved the current account into a small deficit. External debt, which rose in recent years partly due to increases in non-resident holdings of government debt, has stabilized. Overall, the real exchange rate is assessed to be broadly in line with fundamentals. Household credit growth remains brisk despite macroprudential measures (Figure 7 and Table 5). Recent macroprudential recommendations by the National Bank of Slovakia (NBS) have not slowed household credit growth, which is expanding by about 12 percent year-on-year, although household debt remains low compared to peers. Corporate loans have picked up as lending standards and interest rates have eased. Non-performing loans (NPLs) have increased in line with total loan growth, leaving the low NPL ratio roughly stable; impaired assets are well- provisioned on average. Bank profitability and capital buffers remain sound. The recent migration crisis has had limited impact on Slovakia. Relatively few refugees have passed through or stayed in the country, perhaps reflecting low per-capita income and benefits compared to other EU destinations. Nonetheless, the authorities have objected strongly to the EU quota system, which would place around 1,000 migrants in the country. Slovakia has allocated resources to help secure the EU’s external border and provide aid to refugees abroad.