Repair of bank balance sheets continues, but credit extension remains dormant and bank profitability is low . Capital ratios of most banks appear adequate following the 2013–14 recapitalizations (table below and Box 1). NPLs are still above the EU average but have fallen significantly, dropping to 9.7 percent of total loans in January 2016. However, the three largest domestic banks, which are fully state-owned, still face elevated NPL ratios (table). Banks are highly liquid, and the loan to deposit ratio is low at 81 percent (Figure 4), but domestic bank lending to the corporate sector contracted 10 percent y-o-y in 2015. Looking ahead, credit is expected to grow only gradually, and a large volume of high-yielding debt securities held by banks are set to roll over at much lower rates. Bank profitability turned positive in 2015, but remains low. With the net interest margin lower, interest income fell further in 2015. Low lending volumes, coupled with narrow interest margins, put pressure on bank profitability, posing a risk to bank capital and thus financial stability should adverse economic shocks materialize. This figure is based on the IMF’s definition of NPLs (loan service overdue more than 90 days over total gross loans). The EBA definition, which expands the numerator to include loans likely to become non-performing, and the denominator by including most bank financial assets, would add about 1½ percentage points to the NPL ratio. The sale of NKBM was completed on April 21, 2016. Bank credit to the less-indebted household sector has turned slightly positive, driven by housing loans. NLB23.325.122.616.5100Abanka 10.211.322.915.2100NKBM9.510.028.133.7100 Sources: Annual Reports and Slovenian Sovereign Holding.1/ All figures reported at bank level.2/ As reported by the banks. NPLs include exposures more than 90 days overdue and those rated D and E, if not already included. As such, these ratios are not comparable to the system-wide NPL ratios published by the BOS.3/ Merged by acquision with Banka Celje in October 2015. Major State-Owned Commercial Banks (as of December 2015) 1/ Assets (% banking sector)Deposits(% total system nonbank liabilities) CARNPLs 2/ (% gross loans) State Share (% equity) Page 13 The continued contraction in bank credit to the corporate sector reflects a mix of demand and supply side factors. The contraction, despite a significant drop in lending rates, reflects a combination of still high company debt burdens and sluggish credit demand (Figure 5 and Selected Issues , Corporate Financial Health and Investment). NPLs to non-financial corporations (NFCs), especially to SMEs, remain high (€2.1 billion at end-2015, or 5.4 percent of GDP, of which €1.5 billion is to SMEs). EU state-aid requirements on minimum returns on equity for intervened banks may also be playing a role in limiting new lending by these banks. Moreover, healthier NFCs in manufacturing and wholesale/retail trade are increasingly relying on retained earnings and external borrowing, the stock of which comprised 27 percent of total outstanding NFC borrowing at end-2015, an increase of 7.5 percentage points since end–2008. On the supply side, bank lending standards did not tighten in 2015 and are being loosened in early 2016 (chart below). Despite recent deleveraging, SMEs remain over-indebted and unable to adequately service their liabilities. While recent Master Restructuring Agreements (MRAs) have reduced excess debt and NPLs of large corporations, staff analysis indicates that in 2014 the bulk of the medium, small, and micro firms—a sector that accounted for 60 percent of investment in the economy— remained indebted above the point where debt adversely affects their investment ( Selected Issues Corporate Financial Health and Investment). The guidelines for SME NPL resolution prepared by the Bank Association and the Bank of Slovenia (BoS) provide a welcome framework for restructuring the debt of viable companies . By extending helpful methodological advice to both banks and borrowers, the guidelines can significantly speed up the process and raise the frequency of successful restructurings of NPLs to SMEs. Staff pointed out that to incentivize the banks to resolve NPLs promptly, firm supervisory oversight on the implementation of the banks' NPL reduction plans should be maintained. Moreover, existing measures such as time-bound write-off requirements The required minimum return on equity for new loans is 7–10 percent depending on the bank and the length of time in state hands after the recapitalization. Change in Commercial Bank Credit Standards 1/ (Diffusion index -relative to prior period) GER ITL SVN Source: ECB BLS. 1/ The differencebetween the percentage of banks that tightened and those that loosened credit standards in the previous quarter, with bank responses weighted for degree of response, e.g., increase considerably, increase somewhat, no change, decrease somewhat, and decrease considerably. T g h g Loosening Up to 1 million euros Over 1 million euros Bank Lending Rates for New NFC Loans 1/ (Percent)Source: Haver Analytics.1/Floating and up to 1 year initial rate fixation. Page 14 (with the attendant provisioning) for uncollectible loans and nonaccrual of interest for loans past a set delinquency threshold should be strictly enforced. A centralized framework to sell NPLs to other investors would help as well. Staff pressed for renewed government and BoS support for the previously planned privately-funded entity (SPV) to bundle and sell non-performing SME loans. This could help resolve NPLs more quickly, either through their restructuring or through starting insolvency of unviable firms that would return resources such as pledged collateral to economic circulation. By selling adequately provisioned loans, the banks would also improve their risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio, creating scope for new lending. Proper allocation of credit and adaptation of banks’ business models to the new environment are critical to preserve the recently established financial stability. Staff emphasized that credit extension should reflect commercially-driven arms-length transactions between banks, including state-owned ones, and their clients. A return to pre-crisis lending practices governed in part by noneconomic factors could easily lead to a resurgence of NPLs in a few years. Moreover, to sustain adequate profitability in the current environment and prevent erosion of their capital in case of adverse shocks, banks need to proactively and substantially reconsider their cost structures and revenue sources. The ongoing bank consolidation and exit might support these efforts. In particular, two large banks have merged in 2015, two foreign-owned banks are looking to exit the market, and two small banks are being wound down. Timely and well-designed bank privatization is important to ensure strong corporate governance and reduce public debt. The sale of the third-largest bank (NKBM) was completed in April 2016 and the start of the privatization process for NLB, the largest bank, is welcome. However, in staff’s view, the chosen privatization model for NLB—an initial public offering on a stock market, with the state retaining the largest stake—is unlikely to attract strategic investors that would want to manage and develop the institution based on sound commercial principles. Staff urged the authorities to consider the benefits of a tender for the controlling stake, to actively market the bank to strategic investors, and to reconsider plans to prevent any investor from acquiring more than the state’s designated share stake (25 percent plus 1 share). In addition, the process should ensure that potential shareholders above the relevant threshold are fit and proper. As for the second-largest bank, Abanka, staff saw a case for accelerating its privatization relative to the current deadline (July 2019) to move to a fully competitive banking market as soon as possible and recoup more quickly the government’s investment in Abanka. Staff also advised putting in place a framework to ensure that state-owned banks are managed on commercial principles until they are sold. As a member of the Eurosystem the Bank of Slovenia follows the ECB regulations and the main banks are supervised under the SSM. In addition, NPL reporting is being brought in line with EBA regulations. Page 15 The BAMC continued to evolve in its first full year of operation, though its independence is a concern. Of the roughly 570 claims in its portfolio, the BAMC is restructuring 107 debtors and plans to sell the other claims. The asset recovery is proceeding somewhat slowly, and the BAMC had to resort to a €200 million bank loan and funds from its recapitalization in 2015 in addition to proceeds from its asset sales to repay a €502 million note in December 2015. The parliament recently extended the BAMC’s term to 2022 from 2017. Following dismissal of three non-executive directors in June 2015, the government also dismissed the CEO and the chairman of the board in October over a controversial pay dispute. Staff expressed concern about these developments, as they create the perception of government interference with BAMC’s operational work. Staff underscored that the operational independence of the BAMC is key for its ability to successfully dispose of its assets . Recent legal arrangements that call for non-interference of the state in the BAMC’s case work should be respected and the vacant seat in its supervisory board should be filled by a competent and independent professional. Progress with asset sales and corporate restructurings should not be slowed by the recent extension of the BAMC period of operation to 2022. To facilitate restructuring operations, staff recommended that the BAMC acquire at a fair price all large bank exposures to debtors on whom it already holds a claim. The BAMC’s mandate to maximize value from asset sales should ensure that any related increase in public debt is offset over the medium term. Bank regulation and supervision is being aligned with EU standards . Slovenia has established a Financial Stability Board for macroprudential supervision, chaired by the BoS. Moreover, the BoS introduced two new macro prudential measures––a countercyclical capital buffer and a capital buffer for systemically important institutions (SIIs). The countercyclical capital buffer requirement became effective on January 1, 2016, at a rate of zero. With capitalization appearing adequate and with the recognition that there were very limited risks of banks engaging in excessive lending, SIIs were granted a transition period until January 1, 2019, to meet their new capital buffer requirement, which ranges from 0.25–1.00 percent. The size of both capital buffers was determined according to European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) guidelines. The authorities assessed the banking system as stable and stated that they would privatize the three large state-owned banks in accordance with Slovenia’s EU commitments. They noted the system is well capitalized, liquid, and showing improving, albeit low, profitability. Nevertheless, the authorities agreed with staff that there are potential risks with respect to the The BAMC is meeting its statutory requirement of cashing at least 10 percent of its assets per year. Another €500 million note matures in December 2016, and two more notes for a cumulative €551 million in December 2017. 020406080100120020406080100120Jun-14Jan-15Mar-15Jun-15 BAMC Progress in Restructuring of Portfolio Companies (Number of cases; bar heights equal total cases) Study Negotiation Execution Exited process Closed Source: BAMC unaduited half-year report 2015. Page 16 sustainability of banks’ business models and further pressure on profits. They observed that the NPL legacy, particularly in the SME segment, is still a drag on the income capacity of banks and that SME over-indebtedness does depress private investment. The authorities expect implementation of the recently issued guidelines on SME restructuring (see ¶12) to improve banks’ capacity to reduce NPLs and resume lending to the SME sector. The authorities noted that the Slovenian Sovereign Holding (SSH), the entity tasked with bank privatization, is reviewing the best method for privatization of NLB and will make a recommendation to the government in the coming months. The authorities also appreciated the benefits of an SPV for reducing NPLs to SMEs and an independent BAMC. However, they saw political difficulties in supporting the creation of such an SPV at present, as the government would not want to be associated with the collection practices of the NPL buyers. Instead, they argued that the technical platform for bundling and packaging NPLs would be created by the BAMC and situated as a separate company, which sellers and buyers of NPLs could use on a case by case basis. Staff noted that a centralized SPV would provide better synergies and economies of scale. In addition, an arrangement involving an entity outside the SPV may raise transaction costs and thus fail to attract the interest of private investors.