Broad-based economic growth continues. After picking up in 2015, thanks to the exceptionally high absorption of EU funds at the end of the 2007– 2013 programming period, real GDP growth is projected to moderate in 2016 but remain robust at 3.3 percent. Growth continues to benefit from an improving labor market, low inflation and strong household credit growth. Headline inflation has been negative since 2014, while core inflation has hovered around zero (Figure 1, Table 1). The output gap is now closed. Steady growth in employment has brought the unemployment rate below its pre-crisis level (Figure 2). While high structural unemployment and a segregated labor market has kept the overall unemployment rate elevated, there are clear signs of labor market tightening. Real wage growth recently surpassed productivity growth and the number of firms indicating labor shortages as a factor limiting production is now back to its pre-crisis level. Labor shortage is particularly acute for skilled workers in the manufacturing sector. The headline fiscal deficit improved to 2 percent of GDP in 2016 . The consolidation of 0.7 percent of GDP was largely driven by a sharp drop in capital spending reflecting the end of the EU programming period but also lower interest payments and goods and services spending (Table 2B). On the revenue side, an improving labor market, some efficiency gains, and legislative changes boosted tax revenues and social contributions, but a sharp drop in EU funds resulted in a decline in overall revenues. The cyclically-adjusted structural fiscal balance also improved in 2016 after remaining broadly neutral in recent years. Sovereign risk spreads remain historically low and were largely unaffected by both Brexit and the emerging market sell-off that followed the US elections (Figure 3). Private sector credit growth has been among the highest in the EU (text chart). Falling interest rates on mortgage loans, the robust labor market recovery, and legislative changes imposing limits on early mortgage repayment fees have sustained double-digit growth in household credit, which now accounts for about two-thirds of the outstanding private sector credit stock Services Industry Construction Total Average from 2007 Perceived Labor Shortages (Percent of respondents)Sources: European Commission; and NBS. Debt Overall balance (RHS) Cyclically adjusted structural balance (RHS) General Government Balances (Percent of GDP)Sources: Slovak Republic authorities; and IMF staff projections. Page 13 (Figure 4). House prices have increased in some regions but remain below their pre-crisis levels. The rate of growth of credit to nonfinancial corporations (NFC), at 6 percent, is one of the highest in EU countries. In 2016, NFC credit experienced more broad-based growth with some easing in credit conditions. External sector developments have been favorable and are in line with fundamentals (Annex II). Export volume has nearly doubled since the post-crisis dip, reflecting rising market shares in the EU (Figure 5). Robust exports, together with low oil prices, have generated trade surpluses since 2012, albeit with some recent weakening. The current account in 2016 is estimated to have recorded a surplus of 0.9 percent of GDP, owing to lower imports linked to the slowdown in EU funds related investments. The external stability assessment shows the external position to be broadly in line with fundamentals. Given the likely negative impact of population aging on the fiscal balance, a small current account surplus seems prudent. External debt, which is denominated in euros and mostly composed of long-term general government bonds, declined to slightly below 85 percent of GDP in 2016 (Table 4).