The near-term economic outlook is difficult. Poor asset quality and funding problems in the banks, debt overhang in the corporate sector, and large fiscal consolidation needs (including owing to the need to recapitalize banks) cloud the near-term horizon. Staff forecasts that the economy will continue to shrink in 2013 by 1.7 percent and—despite the expected recovery in the euro area—by a further 1.1 percent in 2014. The consensus and government growth forecasts range between 0 and -1 percent for 2014. The medium-term outlook depends upon the euro area recovery and the strength of domestic policies. Staff projects growth to turn positive in 2015, led by exports benefitting from stronger euro area demand. Later, with healthier balance sheets and improved credit conditions, fixed investment and private consumption could sustain the recovery, closing the output gap by 2018. However, the recovery is contingent on strong policies in strengthening banks and cleaning their balance sheets, corporate restructuring, and creating an investment- friendly business climate (Box 2). Downside risks are large, especially if bank balance sheets are not cleaned adequately. The authorities’ response to the recent AQR and ST addressed the immediate market concerns about bank capital adequacy. However, the ECB comprehensive risk assessment expected in the fall of 2014 could show additional capital shortfalls, owing to possible differences in methodology, hurdle rate, and the change in coverage (along NLB and NKBM, the SID, Slovenia’s development bank, will be covered for the first time). Slovenia’s financing needs are substantial, and could be difficult to fund at affordable rates with an incomplete cleaning of domestic banks’ balance sheets. Insufficient resolution of large and rising NPLs would prolong bank distress, despite the recapitalization. Also, ever-greened loans in bank balance sheets would require additional provisioning and damage future bank profitability. These loans would also crowd out the flow of credit to viable firms. This would deepen bank deleveraging and prolong the recession (see RAM). Banks will remain fragile unless the overleveraged corporate sector is also restructured. Without this, the bank recapitalization will be only an expensive stop-gap solution with prolonged corporate weaknesses gradually eroding restored bank capital buffers. Insufficient corporate deleveraging and governance reform would exacerbate the risk that viable but overleveraged companies would fail to revive, prolonging the recession. Fiscal consolidation measures could fall short of what is needed for debt stabilization. Reliance on large across–the–board expenditure cuts and possibly optimistic assumptions about yields from tax enforcement increase the risk that the deficit could be much larger than targeted. Contingency measures could partly compensate but there is a risk of doing too little, too late. Spending overruns, revenue shortfalls, an additional bank recapitalization, or materialization of other contingent liabilities could push public debt to a non-sustainable path. Page 9 External risks derive largely from the re-emergence of euro area financial stress and slower European growth. While Slovenian banks have already gone through a significant deleveraging in recent years, a failure of euro area countries to deliver on policy commitments or a negative result from the euro area AQR and ST could curtail the foreign bank credit on which export-oriented Slovenian firms rely. Slower euro area growth would undermine Slovenia’s growth prospects and worsen its public debt dynamics. Possible outward spillovers are limited to countries where subsidiaries of Slovenian banks are present, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia. The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s outlook and the assessment of risks. Official forecasts for 2014 growth are moderately better than staff’s, but the authorities agreed that the risks to forecasts are to the downside. They broadly concurred with the classification of risks as in the RAM, but stressed that Slovenia is committed to the prompt implementation of the policy agenda so domestic risks are limited. Box 2. Potential Output and Growth Prospects Staff estimates that the output gap is around 4 percent of potential GDP . The large current account reversal underway suggests that staff estimates are on the conservative side. The current account balance is swinging to an estimated surplus of 6.8 percent this year from 0.4 percent in 2011, with only a moderate improvement in competitiveness. However, growth will not come back rapidly. Production function methods indicate that potential output is shrinking at a rate of ½ to 1 percent annually, and that the output gap could be closed with several years of 1 to 2 percent growth. While such statistical methods are on the whole backward-looking, staff judges that growth is unlikely to rebound quickly in the current environment with the banks under severe stress. Looking ahead, potential growth will depend upon many factors, including policy reforms. The potential growth rate of the economy depends on (i) how quickly the much needed bank and corporate restructuring is carried out, (ii) whether structural policies lead to a more growth-friendly business environment, and (iii) the extent to which growth prospects for the broader euro area improve.