Growth Background Doing Business 2012 (Ranking) The Solomon Islands continues to face development challenges . In addition to issues common to many Pacific Islands—including geographic dispersion of the population and young institutions—Solomon Islands is still affected by the memory of violence in the early 2000s. Infrastructure needs are large, particularly with regard to energy supply, transportation, and telecommunications (Box 1). Funds to address these challenges depend on tax revenue from a few natural-resource-based industries and donor support, both of which are likely to diminish. In the meantime, considerable nickel deposits remain untapped pending resolution of a license dispute between two foreign firms and clarity on the mining tax and land access regimes. The plans for an underwater telecommunication cable have suffered delays. In addition, the authorities are reviewing the National Transport Fund (NTF) established in 2010, which has not met expectations of boosting public investment because of weak implementation capacity. Solomon Islands has achieved significant improvements in the business climate, but it still ranks considerably lower than its peers in Source: World Bank, 2014 Doing Business Report. Solomon Islands Pacific Islands (average) C f d B C x y P f y G B v P y v y P B v d h w d C G m P Page 14 access to electricity and ease of registering property. Progress toward meeting Millennium Development Goals has been limited in recent years. In response to these challenges, the government has formulated a wide-ranging National Development Strategy (NDS) for 2011-20. Launched in 2011 with the overarching focus on building better lives for all Solomon Islanders, the NDS has eight objectives: alleviating poverty; supporting the vulnerable; ensuring universal access to quality health care; ensuring universal access to quality education; increasing economic growth, employment, and incomes; developing physical infrastructure and utilities; responding to climate change and managing the environment; and improving governance and order. A 2013 NDS Performance Report indicates that while progress has been made toward achieving these objectives, it has been uneven across categories and generally slower than desired. The authorities have submitted the NDS and the 2013 Performance Report to the IMF Executive Board as an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP). Solomon Islands: Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Progress Assessment 2011 Assessment 2013 MDG 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Halve between 1990 and 2015 the proportion of people whose income is less than US$1 per day. MDG 2. Achieve universal primary education. Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed MDG 3. Promote gender equality and empowerment. Eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education. Off track Off track MDG 4. Reduce child (under 5-year) mortality by two thirds. Off track MDG 5. Improve maternal health. Reduce maternal mortality by three quarters. Off track MDG 6. Reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria and TB. Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed MDG 7. Ensure environmental sustainability. Integrate principles of sustainable development into country policies. Notes: The Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat assesses progress toward MDGs based on the following classification: (1) "Off Track" indicates insufficient progress; (2) "Mixed" indicates uneven and/or inconsistent progress; and (3) "On track" indicates good progress. Source: 2011 and 2013 MDG Tracking Reports, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. Off track Off track These indicators should be used with caution, however, given their subjective interpretation, limited coverage of business constraints, and relatively small number of informants as noted in a World Bank evaluation. Page 15 Box 1. Infrastructure Needs in the Solomon Islands Infrastructure needs are large in Solomon Islands. Given the remoteness of the country and the dispersion of its population, adequate transportation and communication are indispensable. However, the main airport struggles to meet International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards, limiting its commercial viability and the Solomon Islands’ connectivity with the rest of the world. Domestic aviation uses small, inefficient planes, as larger ones cannot be handled by provincial airstrips. Internal shipping service relies on a small fleet of 20 to 50 year old ships. Maritime infrastructure is often damaged or defunct. Roads are in poor condition. Information and communication technology infrastructure as well as penetration are among the poorest in the region. Electricity provision is limited, and most rural communities rely on traditional fuels, such as wood. The supply of water and sanitation are also key challenges, with no access to piped water for 75 percent of rural households. On top of that, the Solomon Islands would need significant investments to mitigate the risk of natural disasters and consequences of climate change. Infrastructure Indicators Paved roads Electricity generation Electricity generation capacity Improved water Telephone source lines Mobile cellular subscriptions Internet users (% of network) (KWh per capita) (KW per capita) (% of population with access) (per 100 people) (per 100 people) (per 100 people) Solomon Islands PICs (Median) Others small states (Median) LICs (Median) Emerging markets (Median) Sources: World Bank, WDI; U.S. Energy Information Agency; National Statistics Office of Solomon Islands; and IMF staff estimates. Funding for infrastructure projects is not assured . Development expenditure has been fairly high in recent years, but it is shrinking as donor support is phased down. Domestically funded expenditures may not be able to offset fully the decline in grants. Moreover, the quality of government-funded development expenditure can improve. Solomon Islands: Development Expenditure (Percent of GDP) Grant financed Domestically financed 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Page 16 Staff Views The authorities should focus on key areas of infrastructure development and diversifying the sources of growth. Particular emphasis should be put on reliable access to power, telecommunications, and transportation. The key to building much needed infrastructure is stronger implementation capacity, reliable funding, and clear procedures for determining the use of communal land. The governance and implementation capacity of the National Transport Fund should be improved. Resolving the licensing dispute, clarifying land use rights, and establishing a transparent mineral taxation regime would open the door for the exploitation of Solomon Islands’ massive nickel resources. Infrastructure development would spur tourism, fishing, and manufacturing. Clearer land use rights and measures to promote financial sector development would improve access to finance, which is key for private sector development and financial inclusion. The Solomon Islands would benefit from a well-articulated development plan in the context of a comprehensive Poverty Reduction Strategy. The objectives stated in the NDS are well aligned with the country’s needs and aspirations. Achieving these goals requires a detailed implementation plan. The preparation of a Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) would help channel efforts towards more inclusive growth. Authorities Views The authorities stressed that infrastructure development is a key focus area for them. comprehensive Medium-Term Development Plan is being formulated. Several major projects are under consideration. An alternative route for the underwater cable is being sought to overcome the delay. After the review, steps will be taken to improve the operation of the NTF. The authorities viewed broad development as key for poverty reduction since poverty is widespread and reflects mostly the generally low level of income in the country rather than problems specific to certain population groups. Nonetheless, they expressed concern about the effort needed to produce a PRS, given capacity constraints, and suggested that, to address poverty, the PRS would largely be built on existing inputs, such as the National Development Strategy, Medium-Term Development Plan, and the Household Income and Expenditure Survey.