Background The under-execution of development spending led to a significant budget surplus. In the first six months of 2013, compared with the same period in 2012, total revenue fell by 1.2 percentage points of GDP (tax and non-tax revenue fell by 0.4 and 0.8 percent of GDP, respectively), reflecting the economic slowdown and the adverse terms-of-trade shocks, in particular a decline in logging output and prices (logging tax revenue fell by 0.3 percent of GDP). In addition, grants from development partners fell by 0.3 percent of GDP. At the same time, the development budget was under-executed, in part because of the introduction of a new chart of accounts, which led to delays in the implementation of development projects. The under-execution of development programs, together with slower implementation of recurrent budget, more than offset the reduction in revenues and grants. Consequently, the fiscal balance rose to 5 percent of annual GDP in the first half of 2013 (compared to a surplus of 4.3 percent in the same period in 2012). Nonetheless, weak commitment controls and rising spending pressures on selected programs led to the approval of a supplementary budget in October 2013 . In net terms, the supplementary budget authorizes an unfunded spending increase amounting to over 2 percent of GDP, a large portion of which is allocated to the education sector, mostly at the tertiary level. A matter of concern is the fact that the budget ceilings for scholarships were breached by a large margin and arrears emerged in the payment of scholarships for students, including those studying abroad. The decentralized system of approving scholarships led to a rapid increase in spending in this area. Spending pressures are expected to be very high in the rest of 2013. The authorities expect development expenditures to recover in the last months of 2013 as the improvements in the information systems and training on the new chart of accounts begin to materialize. At the same time, total revenues for 2013 are expected to be 0.5 percent of GDP lower than envisaged during the first review. These challenges could result in a fiscal deficit for the year, unless decisive actions are taken. However, the authorities have committed to implementing the supplementary budget within the original expenditure envelope. In this context, staff projects the overall fiscal surplus to be 0.3 percent of GDP in 2013, one half of a percentage point lower than in the program and down from 4 percent of GDP in 2012. Solomon Islands: Fiscal Balance, 2009-17 (In percent of GDP) Revenue excluding grants Recurrent expenditure Development expenditure (loan funded) Noncommodity balance Grants Development expenditure (gov. funded) Overall balance Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. The Cabinet approved a prudent draft budget for 2014. The authorities have indicated their intent to submit to Parliament a balanced cash budget, or a small surplus when amortization is excluded. Tax collections are forecast to decline by 0.6 percent of GDP, mostly owing to lower logging revenue. Recurrent donor support is expected to decline by 1.2 percent of GDP. Both Page 8 recurrent and development expenditure are lower as shares of GDP in line with the the projections for total revenue and grants. Health and education will be the largest components of recurrent expenditure. The budgeted development expenditure would allow infrastructure maintenance, new capital expenditure, and ongoing funding of development projects carried over from previous years. The authorities’ estimates imply a fiscal surplus of about 1 percent of GDP in 2014 under the GFSM definition. Staff projects somewhat lower donor support, which is expected to lead to a smaller fiscal surplus in 2014, in the order of 0.3 percent of GDP. Fiscal reforms are advancing, even though some have experienced delays. The recent approval of the PFMA by Parliament is an important achievement of the authorities. In addition, the government has strengthened the tax exemptions regime. However, as noted above, while there has been progress with other structural reforms, there have also been some significant delays owing to the priority given to the PFMA as well as capacity constraints. The government is committed to reducing the burden of public debt guided by the principles established under the Honiara Club Agreement and the Debt Management Strategy. It will continue reforms aimed at strengthening the debt management framework. Staff Views The Solomon Islands faces a moderate risk of debt distress . The Joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) Update indicates that under the baseline scenario all external public and publicly-guaranteed (PPG) debt will remain below policy-relevant thresholds. However, the thresholds may be breached in case of shocks to net non-debt-creating flows and financing terms. This underscores the importance of maintaining fiscal buffers to confine the risk of debt distress. Maintaining policy buffers requires a sustained push for fiscal discipline and careful management of the budget Unfunded recurrent expenditures in the supplementary budget will put pressure on the execution of other programs. The overcommitment in spending in the supplementary budget is largely a result of weak fiscal management, especially the lack of financial and policy oversight over tertiary education, which threatens to erode confidence in economic policies. The unfunded expenditures, if not addressed appropriately, would jeopardize program targets. Staff urged the authorities to reduce the planned level of new spending and other expenditures in the supplementary budget to fit within the orginal spending envelope agreed in the program. The mission also encouraged the authorities to commit to a prudent budget in 2014, consistent with program objectives, while protecting spending on health and primary education. The quality of public expenditure needs to be safeguarded to make sure priority spending is not crowded out . The timely implementation of the PFMA is critical for achieveing this objective, including with the issuance of relevant implementing regulations. In addition, two areas require particular attention: Constituency development funds . The authorities should review the merits of channeling an increasingly large share of public resources through the funds controlled directly by Parliamentarians. In addition, there is a need to improve transparency and accountability in the use of these funds. Adequate implementing regulations for the Constituency Development Page 9 Funds Act (CDFA) are needed to ensure continued confidence in economic policies, including by development partners. The audit of 2012 constituency fund spending, which is very advanced, should be finished and published in a timely manner. Tertiary scholarships . Significant challenges have emerged with the management of tertiary scholarships for students both in the country and abroad. Inadequate record keeping and the approval of scholarships outside established channels have led to the rapid increase in these expenditures and the emergence of arrears in the payment of university fees and stipends. Tertiary scholarship expenditures are now crowding out other priority spending, including on primary education. Staff stressed the need to strengthen the eligibility criteria for tertiary scholarships, apply international best practices of public finance in this program, and find an appropriate balance between various levels of education. The mission urged the authorities to redouble efforts to implement their fiscal reform agenda in the coming months, before the electoral cycle reduces the reform momentum. Staff and the authorities discussed ways in which the IMF can support these efforts, including by providing technical advice on the implementing regulations of the CDFA. Authorities’ Views The authorities, who have a track record of fiscal discipline, committed to addressing fiscal slippages . They said that they will implement the 2013 supplementary budget within the original spending envelope, by scaling back new spending and reallocating other spending. The authorities also noted their efforts to strengthen tax compliance, including with the recent addition of staff to the Internal Revenue Division and the Customs Office. In the 2014 budget, the authorities stressed that they are targeting a cash balance , and recognized the challenge of achieving the right balance between recurrent and development expenditures. To this effect, they noted that the budget will protect spending on primary education and health, which will remain at least at the same level as in 2013. The authorities also stressed that they will continue to exercise prudence in borrowing, while tapping concessional loans to finance high-priority development projects. The authorities are taking steps to improve the transparency and accountability of constituency funds and tertiary scholarship awards. They are working on the implementing regulations for the CDFA, in consultation with development partners and other stakeholders, and expect to put them in place before the end of 2013 (December 2013 benchmark). The authorities plan to publish the Auditor General’s audit of 2012 constituency fund spending when it is completed (proposed benchmark for March 2014). The government will seek Cabinet’s approval of revamped policies for tertiary scholarships (proposed benchmark for end-January 2014), including better commmitment controls and improved accountability and transparence, so that they can be in place and effective for the next school year. The authorities will also review education policies, in consultation with development partners and other stakeholders, including to ensure an adequate balance of spending between primary and tertiary education (proposed benchmark for March 2014). The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to fiscal reforms. They noted that getting approval of the PFMA absorbed a considerable amount of scarce resources and emphasized that delays in other legislation were due to capacity constraints. The authorities are working with development partners to alleviate critical bottlenecks and have proposed a well-thought out revised Page 10 timetable for key legislation. Draft changes to the tax system to allow for a mining regime are currently being vetted by the Attorney General’s Chambers. The authorities will obtain Cabinet’s approval of this legislation by end-January 2014 (proposed benchmark) and submit it to Parliament by end-March 2014 (proposed benchmark). The draft Customs and Excise law is currently being updated to reflect the recently adopted and strengthened exemptions policy, and will be submitted to Parliament by end-June 2014 (proposed benchmark). In addition, the PFMA contains fiscal responsibility provisions that require the publication of a series of new fiscal documents, starting in 2014. As a first step, the authorities will produce a Final Budget Outcome Report by end-April 2014 (proposed benchmark). To improve public debt management, the authorities will submit to Cabinet the onlending and guarantees instructions by end-February 2014 (proposed benchmark).