Despite progress, the domestic financial sector remains underdeveloped, and the reach of financial service providers has been limited . According to a comprehensive index of financial development constructed by staff—applying a methodology pioneered by Č ihák and others (2012)— that combines indicators of financial depth, access, and efficiency for financial institutions and markets Solomon Islands has lagged small states peers in financial development (but not other low-income- countries). According to staff’s newly constructed index, Solomon Islands lags most peers in financial development… …including in accessing the banking system Caribbean Small States LICs Financial Development Index (Index) Solomon Islands Small states Other PICs 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013 Source: IMF staff estimates, based on the methodology in SDN/15/08 (Table A1), and Č ihák and others (2012). Bank Deposits as a Percentage of GDP, 2015 (In percent) LICs Solomon Islands Other PICs Small states Source: Finstats Database. Caribbean Small States Page 28 The limited size of commercial bank deposits relative to GDP also places Solomon Islands among the most underbanked countries of small states. Other measures of financial inclusion also point to limited access to financial services (Figure 2). The financial sector has a simple structure but is beset with inefficiencies . These reflect the small domestic market, inadequate infrastructure, the difficulty of securing collateral due to communal land ownership, and generally high transaction costs. Interest rate spreads have long been the highest among small states in the Pacific. The financial sector consists of two major foreign commercial banks, one domestic bank, a non-bank financial institution), and a saving and retirement fund—NPF, a systemically important financial institution with a large share of its assets held as deposits in the banking system. The impact of de-risking on costs of sending remittances has started to emerge with a few small money transfer operators having ceased operations. However, the impact of these closures is not as large as in other Pacific Islands. The CBSI has been proactive in promoting financial inclusion . In 2014, together with commercial banks, the CBSI introduced mobile banking services to deepen financial access in geographically dispersed and r e m ote areas, making Solomon Islands a leader in mobile banking services among Pacific small states, with mobile banking well positioned to leapfrog conventional banking in providing financial services. The government’s national financial incl u s i on target for 2015 of opening 70,000 new bank accounts was met ahead of time, as was the subsequently revised target of 160,000. In February 2016, the National Financial Taskforce, chaired by the Governor of the CBSI, endorsed Solomon Islands’ National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) for 2016–20. The strategy will introduce new financial inclusion targets for the upcoming years and promote higher usage of financial service s While credit has grown by double digits since 2013 (Table 4), the financial sector indicators remain sound. The thinness of the domestic financial sector has resulted in occasional volatility in indicators of bank asset quality. The non- performing loans (NPL) ratio, however, moderated to 4.1 percent at the end of 2015, below its 5½ percent long-term average, after temporarily spiking in the second quarter. The domestic financial sector has undergone significant consolidation. In October 2015, Earnings and profitability Return on average assets Return on average equity Net interest income to gross income Noninterest expenses to gross income Capital adequacy Regulated capital to risk-weighted assets Nonperforming loans, net of provisions to capital Liquidity Liquid assets to total assets (liquid asset ratio) Core liquid assets to short-term liabilities Solomon Islands: Core Financial Soundness Indicators, 2012-15 Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Commercial banks only, at end-period. Asset quality Nonperforming loans to total gross loans Mar Jun Sep Dec The NPF mandate allows a 70:30 split between domestic and foreign investments. Less than 10 percent of its portfolio is invested abroad, and more than 20 percent of its investments are in the form of domestic cash and fixed-term deposits. Staff estimates NPF domestic cash and deposits to account for around one-fifth of total outstanding deposits held by commercial banks in 2015. Page 29 the CBSI approved the plans of the Australian bank, Westpac, to sell its Solomon Islands operations to the PNG Bank South Pacific (BSP). As a result, the total number of banks is reduced from four to three. The increase in BSP’s market share has significantly increased market concentration in the banking sector as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), from an average of 30 percent to 40 percent, with 100 percent being a monopoly. Further financial development could generate large cumulative growth returns. Financial Development Effect on Growth ) ( w f f E LICs average Other Small States average Morocco Poland Ireland Papua New Guinea Vanuatu Maldives Solomon Islands Samoa Tonga Kiribati Financial Development Index United States Japan Source: IMF staff estimates, based on the methodology in SDN/15/08 (Table A1), and Č ihák and others (2012). …would gain from further financial deepening. Caribbean small states Pacific small states Other small states Staff’s Views Efforts to increase financial development and inclusion to promote growth are important and will need to be balanced against the need to maintain financial stability . Staff estimates show that the potential positive effect on growth of further financial development is substantial, even when compared to other small states. However, while an increase in access to financial services can support growth, promote inclusion, and reduce inequality, a rapid rise in access to credit unaccompanied by adequate strengthening in financial supervision can undermine financial stability. Solomon Islands, like many other Pacific Islands… Financial Depth and Economic Development P G ) U f ( Solomon Islands All countries Small states Pacific small states Credit to private sector (percent of GDP) Source: World Bank Group, World Development Indicators. P G ) U f ( Average of small states Micronesia TLS Tonga Fiji Samoa Solomon Islands Credit to private sector (percent of GDP) While mortgage financing and consumption loans have been the main drivers of credit growth, risks to banks appear to be contained . Most loans to households are secured either by housing, movable assets or retirement savings at the NPF. While personal loans have continued to be the single biggest driver of loan growth throughout 2015, at the aggregate level, their importance has HHI is defined as the sum of squared market shares of individual banks. It ranges from 1/n, where n is the total number of banks, to one (or 100 percent) and tends to zero as the market approaches perfect competition. In the case of Solomon Islands, market shares are calculated in three ways: using deposits, loans, and assets. Page 30 steadily declined as more new credit is being channeled to other productive economic sectors, helping curb the growth of banks’ exposure to households. Mortgage financing has been partly driven by migration to Honiara from the outer provinces. However, borrowers’ pledge of their retirement savings at the NPF is a source of concern. While personal loans continue to be the main driver of credit growth, its importance has declined… Solomon Islands: Contributions to Credit Growth by Sector (In percentage points) Personal loans Manufacturing Forestry Communication Other Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands, IMF staff calculations …and the bulk of personal loans has pivoted away from consumption credit towards mortgage financing. Solomon Islands: Contribution to Personal Loans Growth (In percentage points) Housing Land Consumption/Other Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands, IMF staff calculations HHI (loans, LHS) HHI (assets, LHS) Interest rate spreads (RHS) HHI (deposits, LHS) The impact of banking sector consolidation will be relatively small as spread is driven by structural impediments Solomon Islands: Banking Sector Concentration Indicator (Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI); percent) The impact of the recent banking sector consolidation on interest rate spreads is expected to be relatively small amid widespread structural impediments. Even before the banking consolidation, interest rate spreads have remained relatively sticky. According to staff estimates, the recent increase in market concentration will raise spreads by 70-90 basis points. To reduce the cost of financing for borrowers—and support the broader financial inclusion agenda ― concerted efforts are needed to address longstanding structural issues including high transaction costs due to the infrastructure gap and limited availability of collateral due to communal land ownership. The proposed land reform under the MTDP is a key step in this context. The financial sector reform agenda continues to be critical for inclusive growth. Efforts should continue towards introducing a new Credit Unions Act and a new Financial Institutions Act to promote financial sector stability and development. The new National Provident Fund bill should be introduced promptly to improve the NPF governance and investment framework, and safeguard retirement savings. These reforms could also help reduce the excess liquidity in the financial system as Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands, IMF staff calculations Note: The HHI is calculated based on market shares in loans, deposits, or assets. U.S. Federal Trade Commission High Market Concentration Threshold (LHS) C k H BSP's takeover of Westpac Entry of Pan Oceanic Bank Based on Jamaludin, Klyuev, and Serechetapongse in IMF WP/15/96. Page 31 the NPF could channel funds currently kept in low-yield domestic deposits into assets with higher rates of return. Equally important is the proposal to reduce the portion of retirement savings that could be used as collateral against personal loans, which will help safeguard retirement savings. The NPF should also regularly conduct actuarial assessments to gauge and ensure the sustainability of the pension system. See Box 1 for further financial sector reforms. The CBSI has established good practices in financial transparency and accountability with the financial statements prepared and audited in accordance with international standards published on the CBSI website . A new law for the CBSI, enacted in 2012, provides adequate financial and legal autonomy. Improvements are needed in oversight by the Audit Committee with the addition of a financial expert. Strengthening staff capacity in the internal audit function is needed for the development of a risk-based audit function. Authorities’ Views The authorities agree on the importance of balancing financial inclusion against financial stability. They reiterated that financial inclusion is at the top of the government development agenda. They pointed out that credit access remains low, with only 3.8 percent of adults currently with formal or informal credit accounts, and that the NFIS only targets a modest 10 percent of adults having access to credit by 2020. Any negative impact of the recent banking sector consolidation will be limited as the high spread in interest rate is caused by structural factors. Moreover, product substitutability among banks will ensure that interest rates remain competitive. The authorities agree on the need for a new National Provident Fund Act that will help improve the long-term financial viability and reduce the financial risks of the NPF. The Ministry of Finance is currently preparing a policy paper to seek Cabinet approval of drafting instructions for a new NPF bill (paragraph 19, MEFP). The authorities have also endorsed the recommendations of the last IMF safeguard assessment (paragraph 20 of the MEFP).