Anchor Background Bank credit continues to recover after the sluggish pace recorded in the last few years The expansion is particularly rapid in loans to households as well as to the retail, wholesale, and telecommunication sectors. Reflecting stronger credit growth, an increase in outstanding sterilization bills of the Central Bank of Solomon Island’s ( Bokolo bills), and slower growth in deposits, excess reserves in the banking system have declined from last year’s level but remain substantial. Solomon Islands: Holdings of Bokolo Bills, Sep. 2011–13 (In millions of Solomon Islands dollars) Commercial banks Insurance companies Solomon Islands: Bank Loans and Deposits (In thousands of Solomon Islands dollars) Loans to the private sector (LHS) Total deposits (LHS) Loan-to-deposit ratio (RHS) Loan-to-total assets ratio (RHS) Source: Central Bank of Solomon Islands. Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and IMF staff estimates. The Solomon Islands dollar was broadly stable against the U.S. dollar. The exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar appreciated gradually over the first nine months of 2013, and then bounced close to the beginning-of-year parity. Fluctuations against the Australian dollar were considerably more pronounced, with the Solomon Islands dollar appreciating by as much as 15 percent by end- August and then reversing its course and unwinding about half of the appreciation by mid-November. Nominal Exchange Rate (Solomon Islands Dollars per Foreign Currency Unit) Against USD Against AUD y v Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates. v v y y Page 11 The central bank is gaining experience with the transition to a basket peg. The CBSI announced a move from a U.S. dollar peg to an invoice-based basket peg in October 2012. The idea of the peg is to set the bilateral SI$/USD exchange rate in such a way as to maintain the value of the basket constant. However, in practice, to avoid excessive fluctuations, the bilateral rate is not allowed to deviate by more than one percent in either direction from a pre-set “base” rate. If following the basket requires a larger shift against the U.S. dollar, the Solomon Islands dollar remains at the floor or at the ceiling of the band until the movements in the basket reverse their course or until the base rate is adjusted, as happened in June 2013. As a result, the range of fluctuations in the bilateral exchange rate against the U.S. dollar has been small. Staff Views Excess liquidity does not appear to be feeding inflationary pressures at the moment, but credit growth has picked up and the authorities should remain vigilant . The monetary transmission mechanism remains weak (Appendix II). The stock of outstanding central bank ( Bokolo ) bills is less than half of the banks’ free reserves, and a major expansion might be costly. While the exchange rate peg plays an important anchoring role, the central bank should be open to using all instruments at its disposal, including the cash reserve requirement, to mop up liquidity and tighten monetary policy should credit growth become excessive and inflation pick up. The Solomon Islands dollar appears moderately overvalued . While estimating real exchange rate norms is inherently challenging, all three CGER methods suggest varying degrees of overvaluation (Appendix III). This reflects the considerable appreciation of the Solomon Islands dollar in real terms over the last two years and the projected deterioration in the current account balance over the medium term. At the same time, a large portion of the current account deficits is expected to be covered by FDI. An adequate reserve cushion (see Appendix IV) and the expected availability of near-term financing afford time to correct overvaluation by developing new sources of exports and by increasing productivity through stronger business environment, better infrastructure, and higher educational attainment. The central bank should follow the currency basket more closely by gradually widening the operational band and re-centering the band to the ceiling or floor periodically. Staff and the authorities reviewed the operational implementation of the basket peg regime and discussed ways of improving it. While the narrow band to which the authorities had restricted movements in the SI$/USD exchange rate has played a useful role while the CBSI gains experience with the new regime, over time the band should be broadened and adjusted to allow the benefits of a basket peg (including greater stability vis-à-vis the Australian dollar) to be enjoyed more fully, and to help economic agents get accustomed to greater variability in the SI$/USD exchange rate. Authorities Views The authorities broadly agreed with staff analysis . They highlighted the role of the currency peg in keeping imported inflation low and noted that high overall inflation was caused mainly by domestic supply shocks. At the same time, they expressed their concern with inflation being persistently higher than in most other Pacific Island countries. The authorities emphasized that Bokolo bills remain their most flexible tool of monetary policy, and they continue to develop this instrument including by introducing new maturities—which they also view as important for financial Page 12 market development. At the same time, raising the cash reserve requirement is an option if monetary conditions need to be tightened sharply. They agreed that the real exchange rate is stronger than historical averages, which suggests some degree of overvaluation. However, given that most consumer goods and many inputs into production are imported, the authorities would not view a weaker currency favorably.