Economic performance weakened in the first half of 2013 Growth has slowed. In the first half of the year, output of most agricultural commodities declined owing to unfavorable weather conditions and lower export prices, while gold production fell due to refurbishment of the gold mine. Logging activity was volatile, but on average lower than last year. Inflation accelerated earlier in the year but has stabilized at around 6 percent (year-on-year) since mid-2013. The increase was driven primarily by domestic food prices while imported inflation was low on account of tame global commodity prices. A current account deficit of 2 percent of annual GDP emerged due to adverse terms-of-trade developments (lower prices of logs and gold) as well as gold mine reconstruction. However, net international reserves (NIR) held up due to sizeable foreign direct investment (FDI). Production of Selected Commodities (Index 2012 average = 100; 3-month moving average) Cocoa Logs and timber Gold Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and IMF, staff estimates. Terms of Trade (Index 2000=100; Export deflator / Import deflator) Source: IMF staff estimates. The outlook is subdued, while risks are tilted to the downside. Some rebound is under way in the second half of the year, partly due to the recovery of gold output, which will carry over to the next year. Real GDP is projected to expand by 2.9 percent for 2013 as a whole and by 4 percent in 2014—down from 4.9 percent in 2012. In the medium term, growth is expected to be moderate at 3½–4 percent, with gold output increasing marginally and logging production declining due to stock depletion. In this context, the current account is expected to go down from near balance in 2012 to a deficit of 4.2 percent in 2013 and weaken further going forward. In addition to the factors mentioned above, the decline is driven by diminishing donor support, return of the gold mine to profitability, and several investment projects with large import content. The outlook is subject to a variety of downside external risks (Appendix I), including a slowdown in emerging or advanced economies leading to lower external demand or prices of exports; an oil price shock; and a sharper- than-expected curtailment of foreign grants. On the other hand, the decline in logging output may Prior to the mission, the National Statistical Office released a new set of national accounts, which implied downward revisions to earlier growth estimates in 2011 and 2012 (from 10.7 percent and 4.9 percent to 6.4 percent and 2.6 percent, respectively). This report presents numbers based on the earlier estimates since they formed the basis for discussions and their use did not have a material impact on the analysis which is largely forward-looking. Page 6 not materialize as fast as envisaged. The authorities broadly agreed with the outlook and the characterization of risks.