Background The financial system is sound, although financial depth is limited . Banks are adequately capitalized, highly liquid, and profitable. After declining for several years, nonperforming loans as a share of total loans have stayed between 3.5 and 4 percent since end-2012. At the same time, the ratio of credit to GDP rose to 17 percent by mid-2013, which is still only about half of the average for Pacific Island countries. Impediments to credit expansion include weak investor protection, an unclear property rights regime, and a shortage of investable projects. Under pressure from environmentalists, a foreign bank has announced that it will no longer provide banking services to logging firms. The authorities are concerned about the impact of that move on the logging industry. To facilitate the introduction of alternative sources of financing and banking services, Parliament has approved a law authorizing the central bank to issue interim banking licenses. One such license has already been granted, but the CBSI has prohibited the applicant from carrying out traditional banking operations until the full license is given. Financial sector reforms are advancing . Consultations with stakeholders on a new NPF Act have been completed, and the law is about to be drafted with the goal of submitting it to Parliament by June 2014. The CBSI is advancing in the preparation of a new Credit Unions Act (CUA). The authorities are also working on a revised Financial Institutions Act (FIA) that would promote financial sector stability and development and have proposed a structural benchmark on Cabinet approval of drafting instructions for the Act by June 2014. Solomon Islands: Core Financial Soundness Indicators 1/ Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Capital adequacy Regulated capital to risk-weighted assets Nonperforming loans, net of provisions to capital Jun Sep Asset quality Nonperforming loans to total gross loans Earnings and profitability Return on average assets Return on average equity Net interest income to gross income Noninterest expenses to gross income Liquidity Liquid assets to total assets (liquid asset ratio) Liquid assets to short-term liabilities Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Commercial banks only, at end-period. Page 13 Staff Views The authorities should continue pressing ahead with financial sector development. It is essential to revise the NPF Act promptly in order to strengthen the NPF’s investment regime, improve its governance, and safeguard retirement savings. Regarding the interim banking license, CBSI has appropriately limited the new entity’s activities to setting up shop rather than conducting banking operations until they have completed the due dilligence of the firm. A comprehensive revision of the FIA will help improve banking sector stability and facilitate its development. Authorities Views The authorities highlighted progress made in advancing financial legislation despite capacity constraints . The direction of changes to the NPF Act has been approved by the Cabinet and discussed with stakeholders. Delays relative to the program schedule were caused by capacity constraints in the drafting of legislation, and the authorities have proposed to move the benchmark on submitting the Act to Parliament to June 2014. Work on the CUA, FIA, and a new payments system law is ongoing. With respect to the interim banking license, the authorities pointed out that the period provided by the current law for considering a full license application is insufficient for reviewing new entities. Hence, the interim license gives the central bank more time to examine the applicant, while not allowing the firms to carry out banking operations until the review is completed safeguards financial stability.