Program performance has been satisfactory overall, with all continuous and end-June 2013 PCs met and a key reform accomplished ahead of time, but some reforms experienced significant delays PCs and ITs were met . The June 2013 PCs on net credit to the government (NCG), net domestic assets of the central bank (NDA), the cash balance of the central government (CBCG), and the NIR were all met, the first three with large margins; moreover, the indicative targets for these for September 2013 were also met, as were the IT on health and education spending and the continuous PCs on external debt. The authorities are on track to meet the end-December PCs, except for NCG, where lower-than-programmed revenue (reflecting slower growth in early 2013 and the weaker terms-of-trade) is expected to lead to a small drawdown of government deposits. The authorities have requested a modification of this PC, and staff supports it on account that it is small and would accommodate automatic stabilizers to lower revenues. Mixed progress with structural agenda . A key pillar in the design of stronger fiscal institutions, the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), was sent to Parliament (October 2013 benchmark) and approved in October 2013. In addition, the instructions for state enterprise borrowing have been submitted to the Cabinet (June 2013 benchmark) and a new tax exemption regime was approved (originally a component of the new Customs and Excise Law benchmark). However, a number of other reforms experienced delays, and thus the related program benchmarks were not met. These include obtaining the Cabinet’s approval to changes in the tax system to allow for a mining regime (June 2013 benchmark) and then submitting the changes to Parliament (November 2013 benchmark); submitting to Parliament a revised National Provident Fund (NPF) Act (October 2013 benchmark); and the publication of the Auditor General’s audits of 2012 constituency funds (November 2013 benchmark). Revised reform agenda . The main reason behind the delays in reforms is capacity constraint, which was recently exacerbated by the heavy workload required to get the PFMA approved. A key bottleneck is the office in charge of vetting and drafting legislation, the Attorney General’s Chambers, which is insufficiently staffed in view of the heavy legislative agenda. Staff held discussions on a revised timetable with all parties involved and additional donor support was obtained to address the bottleneck. As a result of these discussions, and in view of the authorities’ commitment to these reforms, staff supports the authorities’ request in the attached Letter of Intent for revised test dates for the missed structural benchmarks. “Public Finance Management Act” is the title of the “Public Finance Act” referred to in the structural benchmark. Page 7