Monetary policy has been very accommodative in an effort to support growth —as shown by a number of indicators—high levels of bank liquidity and the very low interest rates on Bokolo bills. Credit growth reached 19 percent in November (y/y) driven by loans to households, including consumption and mortgages; and lending for investment in manufacturing and communication; and logging sector. Nonetheless, relative to GDP, credit remains at about 20 percent, much lower than in other Pacific islands and small states. Credit growth has partly fed into higher imports. Staff’s econometric analysis suggests a strong positive and statistically significant relationship between domestic credit and imports, after controlling for food and fuel prices. The monetary transmission mechanism remains weak amid high excess liquidity. The CBSI currently uses its own debt instruments—Bokolo bills—as a tool to manage banking sector liquidity but issuance has been sufficient to absorb only a portion of the excess liquidity in the system. Bokolo bill auctions were conducted on a fortnightly basis and the amount floated was kept at SI$355 million per auction throughout the year. While there was evidently an appetite for increased Bokolo bills from the commercial banks, particularly following the Solomon Islands: Monetary Conditions (In millions of Solomon Islands dollars) (In percent) Monetary policy remains accommodative given high excess reserves Commercial banks (LHS) Loan-to-deposits ratio (RHS) Insurance companies (LHS) Excess reserves (RHS) Source: Central Bank of Solomon Islands. Page 26 takeover of Westpac by Bank South Pacific (BSP), it was decided that any excess liquidity that the banks held should be directed to private sector lending. Efforts to promote interbank lending and the establishment of a repo facility were also explored. As for Treasury bills, which are also administered by the CBSI on behalf of the government, the cap on the outstanding stock remained at SI$40 million throughout 2015. The basket peg regime has worked more effectively since the removal of the operational 1 percent band around the exchange rate against the US dollar in September 2014, and the widening of the bid offer spread. The basket peg has allowed the SI dollar to weaken against the US dollar by 10 percent since then along with other currencies in the region. The Solomon Islands dollar appreciated by 12 percent against the Australian dollar over the same period, reflecting the strengthening of the US dollar against most currencies. In real effective terms, the exchange rate has been stable since the removal of the band (Box 3). Communication to the public on exchange rate policy has been strengthened by publishing the basket rate on the CBSI website. This has helped promote stability of the trade weighted index, despite some volatility. Since September 2014, the SI dollar has depreciated vis-à- vis the US$ and appreciated vis-à-vis the Australian $ The basket peg regime has worked well since the removal of the operational band but some volatility remains Staff Views Excess liquidity has not fed into higher inflation, but credit growth has picked up strongly over the past two years and the authorities should begin mopping up excess liquidity . Staff’s econometric analysis suggests that credit growth of 10 percent could increase inflation by 0.6 percentage point within a year. The CBSI could use the CRR (cash reserve requirement) ratio to manage bank liquidity, and treat the level of excess liquidity more explicitly as a quantitative target. While increasing the CRR alone will not be sufficient to mop up excess liquidity completely, in combination with reforming the NPF (see paragraph 51), it could help the CBSI gain traction in liquidity management. While the basket regime is working well, it can be made more flexible through a periodic review and adjustment of the appropriateness of level of the peg to ensure it remains supportive of competitiveness and economic growth. An assessment of external balance suggests that the Page 27 exchange rate may already be somewhat overvalued (Box 3). While more closely tracking the exchange rate basket has slowed down the erosion of competitiveness from the appreciation of the US dollar, it has not addressed the overvaluation of the exchange rate that was carried over from the previous regime (i.e., when the currency was closely pegged to the dollar). It will also not prevent future real appreciation, caused by underlying inflation differentials. To avoid this and correct for the overvaluation, the CBSI should periodically review the level of the exchange rate and adjust its level if necessary. With China being the most important export market, the authorities should consider including the renminbi in the basket. Authorities’ Views On monetary policy, with regard to using the CRR ratio as a tool to manage liquidity, the CBSI expressed concern that not all banks are in a position to shoulder the additional burden of a higher CRR. Technical assistance on how to conduct liquidity swaps is being provided by the Reserve Bank of Australia. On exchange rate policy, the CSBI noted that the effective implementation of the basket peg has allowed some flexibility to absorb external shocks, thus reducing the burden on monetary policy. The authorities noted that the rise in inflation was driven by the depreciation of the Solomon Islands dollar. They did not rule out devaluation in the future and indicated that they would monitor competitiveness indicators to identify situations where the strength of the exchange rate might be acting as a drag on growth. They also plan to keep the composition of the basket under review and consider later this year whether to include the renminbi in the basket.