satisfactory. All end-December 2014 PCs, end- March 2015 ITs, end-June 2015 PCs, and end- September 2015 ITs have been met by considerable margins. The exception is the Indicative Target (IT) on government-funded recurrent spending on health and education, which was narrowly missed at each test date due to a tighter procurement process by development partners. The forthcoming regulations under the Public Financial Management Act should help enhance government’s Foreign Exchange Reserves Indicators* Net International Reserves, end- of-year (US$ million) NIR in months of imports Cash balance (SI$ million) SIG Deposit Account Public debt (percent of GDP) *Reserves reported at program exchange rates. of which/ External debt (percent of GDP) Note: Key quantitative performance criteria from MEFP, Table 2. End- Fiscal Indicators End-2015 Summary of Program Performance Indicators End-2012 (ECF start) n.a. VECM analysis suggests that a one percentage point negative shock to China’s GDP growth causes Solomon Islands’ GDP to decline by 0.3 percentage point, causing a cumulative response of 1.8 percentage points over 10 quarters (Box 2). The Tina River Hydropower Plant project, earlier expected to have large positive spillovers in 2016, has been postponed to early 2017 and the timeline for the implementation of the submarine cable project is unclear. Page 14 procurement process. Net international reserves remain at comfortable levels. The cash balance for December 2015, although outside the monitoring of the program, stood at SI$694 million (3.2 months of recurrent spending). The government has also maintained cash reserves of the consolidated accounts at SI$140 million (0.7 month of recurrent spending) (Table 1 and MEFP Table 2). Structural reforms have continued in the context of the ECF arrangement and the program’s objectives have been achieved. As indicated in the MEFP, the authorities remain firmly committed to completing the reforms even after the ECF-supported program expires. The pace of the legislative process is proceeding steady, as the authorities’ commitment to tabling several bills at the next sitting of Parliament, even though continued capacity constraints in the Attorney General’s Chambers and the complexity of these legislations have slowed down the process. Implementation of benchmarks related to the new customs and excise bill (end-September 2015 benchmarks) is proceeding and the bill was approved by the cabinet in February, together with the Policy Paper on the Credit Union legislation (end September 2015 benchmark) which will be integrated into a draft bill (end September 2015 benchmark) already prepared with the TA support by the Asian Development Bank and will be vetted by the Attorney General once approved by cabinet. The recent approval by the cabinet signals the strong momentum for these bills to proceed to the next stage of the enactment process. Similarly, a policy paper for cabinet submission is being prepared for the National Provident Fund (NPF) bill. On education policies, progress in implementing the two benchmarks has been made. The rebalancing of spending away from tertiary education has been met in 2015. Policies on the award and continuation of tertiary scholarships have been tightened to achieve better targeting and contain costs. The government has identified problems with the quality and quantity of the teaching cadre that will require greater investment in tertiary teacher preparation programs to meet projected supply needs at the elementary/secondary level. Regarding the benchmark on implementing regulations of the Constituency Development Funds (CDF) Act, the authorities, in consultation with PFTAC, have proposed an alternative commitment to increase transparency and accountability in the use constituency funds: namely the implementation of procurement regulations under the Public Financial Management Act, which apply to all government procurements. Thereby the regulations of the CDF Act have been superseded by the enactment of the Public Financial Management Act. Steps have been already taken to improve the accountability and transparency of these funds through more disciplined procurement processes and the application of the PFM Financial Instructions. In staff’s assessment, this alternative commitment addresses issues of accountability and transparency, which was the intent of the original benchmark, and is an adequate substitute. The benchmark on the publication of the results of the audit reports on the use of spending of CDFs is close to being met. The audit reports have been completed by the Auditor General and will be submitted to Parliament at the next sitting before they are released to the public. The share of government-funded spending on tertiary education decreased from 33.3 percent in 2014 to 30.5 percent in 2015. Page 15 Box 1. Solomon Islands—Synergies Between the Structural Agenda under the ECF Arrangement and Macro-Financial Stability The structural reforms under the ECF arrangement have helped enhance macroeconomic and financial stability. Even where reforms are still in progress, the preparatory groundwork is continuing to support their implementation in due course. The new Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI) Act, by providing more independence to the Central Bank has helped maintain a sound fiscal position (December 2012 benchmark) and has strengthened the effectiveness of monetary policy. The benchmarks related to debt management strategy, including SOE borrowing policy, on-lending policy and guarantee policy have contributed to increase fiscal space. PFM reforms (the New Public Financial Management Act, budget strategy document, mid-year budget review and final budget outcome report, and multi-year fiscal framework) have helped strengthening fiscal institutions. Reforms that are still in progress are also important for financial and macro stability In anticipation of the new financial institutions Act—developing financial instruction was a June 2014 benchmark—the CBSI has already laid the groundwork and issued or endorsed several Prudential Guidelines in these areas. For example, in 2015 CBSI issued two Prudential Guidelines to banks on more disclosure on bank fees and charges levied on customers and a complaints management framework and procedures for banks for dealing with complaints from customers. The