Change Climate change and natural disasters are macrocritical in Solomon Islands . The combination of its location (along the ring of fire of the Pacific Rim) and its small size heightens its vulnerability to earthquakes, cyclones, tsunamis, and floods. The damage and losses related to flash floods in 2014 were estimated at 9 percent of GDP. Page 19 IMF staff analysis suggests that natural disasters in the Pacific have a negative impact on both short-term and potential growth. A natural disaster with damages and losses equivalent to 1 percent of GDP causes a drop in GDP averaging 0.3 percentage point in the year of the disaster. Given the large impact of the natural disasters, potential growth in Solomon Islands is estimated to be lower by 0.3 percentage point per year. In the context of the Medium-Term Development Plan, the authorities have designed several programs on both climate change mitigation and adaptation . The Ministry of Agriculture contributes to both these goals by shielding farmers from the impact of natural disasters and climate change; enhancing soil conservation and management; improving land fertility or using crops that are climate-change-proof; and enforcing the regulatory framework. The government is currently setting up a contingency fund for natural disasters. Solomon Islands is highly vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change according to different metrics Natural Disaster Risks - World Risk Index, 2014 (In percentage point) k k R R H H Solomon Islands Pacific island countries Small states (excl. PIC small states) Non-small states Caribbean small states Note: High value indicates high risk. Maximum risk country = 36 percentage points. Sources: Alliance Development Works, World Risk Report 2014 ; and IMF staff calculations. Probability of Occurrence of Natural Hazards (In percent) Fiji Vanuatu Solomon Islands Tonga Samoa Caribbean small states Micronesia Tuvalu Timor-Leste Kiribati Marshall Islands Palau Small PICs average 1/ During 1980-2014. Sources: Center for Research on Epidemiology for Disasters, International Disaster Database; IMF staff estimates. Staff’s Views Enhancing resilience to natural disasters and climate change entails a multi-pillar strategy at the national, regional, and multilateral levels . It also requires enhancing Solomon Islands’ risk- management capacity. The key pillars of disaster risk management, before the event, include: undertaking a risk assessment ; at the national level, building ex-ante resilience entails identifying risks and explicitly integrating them into the fiscal frameworks and budget planning. This should be achieved by incorporating the projected fiscal costs of climate change and natural disasters into annual budgets within a medium-term framework; providing self-insurance by building policy and financial buffers to enhance resilience to shocks. Although the current level of macroeconomic buffers is adequate, in recent budgets 0.1-0.25 percent of GDP were put aside for natural disasters purposes only. In addition to accumulating reserves and maintaining fiscal space (keeping debt low), buffers could be accumulated also in the National Transport Fund, a donor-financed infrastructure fund fully integrated in the budget; See “Enhancing Macroeconomic Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the Small States of the Pacific,” IMF WP/15/125, for the proposed multipillar policy framework discussed with the authorities. Page 20 reducing risks by enhancing preparedness, including by investing in “smart” infrastructure that can better cope with climate change and natural hazards and by enhancing debt-management capacity; transferring risk, either through catastrophic sovereign insurance or other newly created sub- regional schemes (i.e., “Emergency and Stabilization Fund for Melanesian Countries”). Multi-Pillar Framework: Strengthening Ex-Ante and Ex-Post Resilience Ex ante National Regional International Risk Assessment Assess vulnerability Incorporate disaster costs into national budget planning Self Insure Build buffers Enhance preparedness — Invest in smart infrastructure — Enhance debt management capacity k R Ex post Risk Reduction Risk Transfer Surveillance and Capacity Development — integrate fiscal costs into macro framework and the DSAs and enhance PFM systems Surveillance and Capacity Development — help calculate the efficiency of public investment; TA on debt management Regional pooling (e.g., Melanesian emergency stabilization fund) – Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot – International community (ex-ante pooling of global resources) Coping Emergency response and reconstruction Financial Support — Emergency liquidity support — Other bilateral or multilateral support Source: Cabezon, Hunter, Tumbarello, Washimi, Wu (2015), Enhancing Macroeconomic Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the Small States of the Pacific, IMF Working Paper 15/125. Green shows where the IMF plays a role. Ex-post disaster risk management includes strategies to manage the impact of a disaster and facilitate a rapid recovery. At the national level, the main actions include emergency response and reconstruction efforts. A sound reconstruction program should consist of measures to reduce such risks through resettlement away from the coastline, where feasible, and infrastructure investment. Reconstruction can serve to accelerate broader growth-enhancing structural reforms. Donor financing will remain important in enhancing the ability to cope as these countries are too small, and the costs too high, to be fully internalized by building buffers. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed with the multi-pillar approach proposed by staff. The government is currently setting up a contingency fund for natural disasters. It seeks to reduce risks by enhancing preparedness, including by investing in resilient infrastructure and by enhancing debt-management capacity. Regional solutions to transfer risks are also being considered. Solomon Islands decided to withdraw from the third and final pilot of the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance for the Pacific islands, a joint initiative led by the World Bank Group with financial support from Japan, because it did not qualify for payout during the 2014 floods as disbursements are linked to specific physical parameters (e.g. the wind speed triggering a cyclone) that were not triggered despite the massive floods. The authorities are Page 21 Budget Outturn Budget Est. Outturn Other revenue Grants Recurrent budget grants Development grants Expenditure Recurrent expenditure Total revenue and grants Total revenue Tax revenue Summary of Fiscal Accounts, 2014-15 (In percent of GDP) Income and profits Goods and services International trade and transactions considering whether to participate in the newly proposed Melanesian Emergency and Stabilization Fund (around US$500 million), covering not only natural disasters as well as also other macroeconomic shocks with balance-of-payment impact, and is meant to provide immediate liquidity ahead of support from the international financial institutions. B. Preserving Fiscal Space and Investing in Resilient Infrastructure by