Solomon Islands is a small island state and a low-income country that faces severe development challenges as well as great opportunities . Some challenges are common to other small Pacific island nations in fragile situations: vulnerability to external shocks, including terms of trade, natural disasters and climate change; poor infrastructure; high dependency on aid; a history of social unrest; and weak capacity. The population is geographically dispersed—with 80 percent living in rural areas. The economy has traditionally been supported by logging activity as well as agriculture. But with the forestry sector expected to decline over the medium and long term, new sources of growth and a more diversified economy are needed to keep living standards from falling. Tourism has enormous potential as well as its combined synergies with agriculture. Moving up the value chain in the fishery sector also has great potential. All this will require better infrastructure, improved public financial management (PFM), and a better business climate to attract much-needed FDI to finance development needs. External financing and technical assistance from development partners will continue to be important in meeting these challenges and tapping these opportunities. 2015¹ Policy buffers have been rebuilt Gross International Reserves (In months of next year's imports) Pacific Small States: Total Public Debt (In percent of GDP) The ECF-supported program has helped enhance resilience and strengthen institutions Solomon Islands has achieved remarkable gains in macroeconomic and financial stability with the help of structural reforms since the ECF arrangement started in December 2012 (see Box 1) Policy buffers have been rebuilt and are currently among the highest in the Pacific and among other small states. Leveraging on the achievements of two previous back-to-back IMF programs supported by Standby Credit Facility arrangements since 2010, the ECF arrangement has been instrumental in strengthening macroeconomic management capacity and institutions. Important reforms have been implemented: Public Financial Management (PFM) reforms (with a new Public Financial Management Act and the introduction of a multi-year budget framework; a new debt management framework to strengthen debt management capacity and sustainability); and financial sector reforms such as the new Central Bank of Solomon Islands Act to enhance Central Bank’s independence (MEFP, Table 1). These reforms have helped strengthen macroeconomic management. Despite the low access, the ECF-supported program has been instrumental in catalyzing donors support. The pace of reforms has slowed over the last year but progress has continued. Under the ruling coalition led by Prime Minister Sogavare, the policy focus has shifted to rural development and more recently, to anti-corruption. Given delays associated with the completion of the structural agenda for the fifth review and sixth reviews, the authorities have requested an extension of the ECF-supported program through end-March 2016 and that the fifth and sixth reviews be combined. Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ Estimates. V V K P j j INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 12 Sugar Fiji Root Crops Tonga Cocoa Palm Oil Solomon Islands Source: IMF staff estimates. 1/ September for Tonga. Agriculture Production (Year-on-year percent change) El Nino event in 1997/98 2010-14, average 2015¹ El Niño has already affected crop production… …and could further impact GDP growth in 2016 Growth remains solid despite natural disasters… The economy is estimated to have grown by 3¼ percent in 2015, led by logging activity, tuna processing, construction, and retail services . The country continues to be subject to natural disasters and climate and weather-related events: the impact of Cyclone Raquel and El Niño caused a reduction in agricultural output. Inflation has remained contained at 2.9 percent (year-on-year) in December, shifting from deflation early in the year. Inflationary pressures were driven by higher food prices owing to the depreciation of the Solomon Island dollar vis- à -vis the U.S. dollar and the effects of El Niño-related drought on the domestic food supply. After a strong recovery in the first half of 2015, donor support and FDI both weakened in the second half. Net international reserves remained flat at US$506 million at end-December 2015 relative to 2014 (US$496 million) equivalent to 9.8 months of imports (Table 1). Near-term prospects remain favorable. In 2016, growth is expected to stay solid, at 3 percent. Activity will be driven by investment in construction, communications, and manufacturing—owing to a new brewery and tobacco factory, and higher yields from increased tuna processing capacity. Because of the current economic slowdown in China, lower demand for logging exports is expected in the near term. The ongoing El Niño event—forecast to continue at least until the first half of 2016—will reduce fish catch as well as agricultural production. Inflation is expected to stabilize around 1.5-3 percent in the near term. Continued low fuel prices are also likely to support consumption and lower production costs. The current account deficit will widen slightly to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2016, but the external position should remain strong, with net international reserves projected at 9.6 months of imports. New sources of growth are needed in the medium term. With the continued fall in logging production, growth will need to be supported by increased productivity across a wide range of sectors, including agriculture, tuna processing, and tourism. Boosting the economy’s competitiveness by investing in infrastructure is also key to strengthening medium-term growth. The planned decline in aid from Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) which will be totally wound down by 2017, could pose additional medium-term challenges. Given the weaker prospects for mining activity and more frequent natural disasters, staff has lowered the countries’ potential growth from 4 to 3 percent. The current account deficit is expected to widen somewhat to support imports related to large infrastructure projects. Downside Scenario: Estimated Impact of Current El Niño Event on GDP Growth (In percentage points) Sources: IMF staff calculations. Based on methodology in IMF WP/12/154, WP/ 15/89, and WP/15/125; and an event analysis. Global/Regional Economy Spillovers from El Nino Effects on Agricultural Production Effects of Higher Likelihood of Natural Disasters associated with El Nino Vanuatu Fiji Kiribati Tonga Samoa Solomon Islands Page 13 …but headwinds are strong Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside . Weaker growth in emerging Asia—especially China—could worsen Solomon Islands’ growth prospects, including through lower-than-expected demand for log exports. The outlook for nickel mining continues to be clouded by protracted litigation; and the nascent bauxite sector is not expected to contribute to near-term growth despite the recent resolution of licensing disputes. El Niño will likely weigh on agriculture and fisheries. Long-standing plans for large infrastructure projects—the Tina River Hydropower Plant and submarine cable projects —could have stronger-than-expected positive spillovers, although their implementation could be delayed again. Authorities’ Views The authorities’ economic outlook is broadly consistent with that of the staff. They also see risks tilted to the downside and mainly external. Weakening growth in emerging Asia is a source of concern. Significant Risks, Skewed Somewhat to the Downside Likelihood Impact Upside Downside Persistently low oil prices boost domestic demand Reopening of Gold Ridge mine Positive larger-than-expected spillovers from large infrastructure projects Sharper-than-expected global growth slowdown Tighter or more volatile global financial conditions Sharp growth slowdown and financial risks in China – medium term El Niño undermines near-term growth – short term Medium Low Low Medium Medium Medium Low High Medium Medium High Medium Low High High Medium Program performance has been broadly