Background The 2017 fiscal framework is underpinned by stronger tax revenue mobilization (Text Table 2). Projections will continue to be based on a zero-cash balance and no accumulation of new domestic arrears (as required under the SMP). Revenue and grants are projected to reach 3.8 percent of GDP (up from 3 percent in 2016), coming mainly from new tax measures (Text Table 3). Expenditures will include delayed payments of 2016 wages and allowances, and more transfers to states to support regional development efforts. Revenue and grants. Tax revenue is projected to reach $127.7 million (2.0 percent of GDP), up from a projected $89 million (1.4 percent of GDP) for 2016. Underpinned by a Somalia’s macroeconomic and financial data are rudimentary, the economy remains highly fragile, and the entire economy is in need of rebuilding. As such, the authorities and staff agreed to focus the discussions on the near-term challenges. The 2017 projection is in line with the draft 2017 budget, which has yet to be endorsed by the Minister of Finance, approved by the Cabinet, and is expected to be adopted by the Parliament by March 2017. For the first three months of 2017, the authorities will operate on extended 2016 budget. Page 20 package of tax policy and tax administration measures agreed to with the authorities, the tax measures will generate $43.0 million. Grants projection is conservative and based on confirmed grants from traditional donors. Revenue from telecommunication sector (Text Table 3). The authorities aim to collect about $24.5 million in tax revenues from the telecommunication sector in 2017 (19.2 percent of tax revenue), up from the negotiated tax of $5.0 million collected in 2016. The projection comprises about $12–14 million from taxes on corporate profits and $10–12 million from sales taxes. Revenue from income taxes on telecom employees’ salaries is not accounted for at this point; but could also come on stream later in 2017, representing an upside potential to 2017 revenues (see Box 3). Additional revenue collection from the telecom sector could be achieved but will require significant improvements in revenue administration and tax collection, while improving security for telecom operators. Expenditure. Expenditure projection is aligned with revenue. It allows for a zero-cash balance and accommodates a buffer to absorb deferred payments of salaries from 2016 amounting to $22.9 million. The wage bill ($121.8 million) accounts for the full-year payment of civil servants and security forces and the salaries for the new Senate members. Increases for non-wage recurrent spending and investment will support the efforts to rebuild institutions and public infrastructure. Significant progress has been made toward rebuilding Somalia’s external debt statistics (Table 5a and 5b). With technical assistance (TA) from the African Development Bank (AfDB), the Debt Management Unit (DMU) has reconstituted the bulk of the country’s external debt database either lost or destroyed during the conflict. Based on information through-end October 2016, from more than two-thirds of Somalia's creditors, outstanding public debt was estimated to be over $5 billion (nearly 80 percent of GDP), of which $4.7 billion in arrears (74 percent of GDP). In 2016, the debt comprises multilateral creditors ($1.4 billion or 22.9 percent of GDP), Paris Club creditors ($2.3 billion or 36.6 percent of GDP), and some non- Paris Club creditors ($1.3 billion or 20.5 percent of GDP). Policy discussions To achieve the fiscal targets for 2017, the authorities agreed on the need for (1) strengthening fiscal discipline and improving budget execution; (2) implementing strong reform measures to tax law enforcement and improving revenue collection; and (3) following through with the expenditure prioritization rules. In this regard, they agreed to set a more realistic budget underpinned by a broader revenue base, conservative grants, and a prudent expenditure policy. Revenue windfalls (including additional grants for budgetary support) would Delayed payments that have lasted less than 90 days (hence, not considered as arrears under the SMP), and deferred to 2017. Page 21 be used to build up buffers (for contingent measures, including inflows of refugees) and pay down arrears. The authorities agreed that priorities should focus (MEFP, ¶12): On tax policy and reforms , the authorities and staff reached an understanding on the need to collect higher nominal revenues compared to those in 2016, with the ultimate goal of progressively restoring revenues-to-GDP to levels comparable to peer countries. The authorities intend to identify a set of realistic revenue measures that can replace negotiated tax arrangements, and anchor revenue collection to the tax base and economic performance. In this context, the authorities agreed to implement the revenue measures listed in Text Table 3 during 2017. On expenditure policy and reforms , the authorities are taking steps to enforce stronger fiscal discipline. These efforts include mainly cap on staff numbers set at the 2016 budget levels and a task force led by the Prime Minister to fully review the existing recruitment policies and examine the disparity between parliamentarian and civil service compensation levels. Also, to improve accountability and transparency, line ministries’ spending will be aligned with the budget and off-budget grants will be published in an addendum to the budget. The projection conservatively assumes a revenue-base of the telecommunication sector of $96 million. du + + und ’ ndu und il Y Page 22 Box 3. Somalia: Illustrating Potential Revenue from the Telecoms Sector Revenue from telecoms could be increased sharply . In the absence of formal taxation, the sector’s contribution to the budget amounts to about $5 million in negotiated monthly fees and taxes (about 5.6 percent of 2016 projected tax revenue). At the same time, the sector’s total annual revenues could amount to over $220 million according to the authorities (3.5 percent of projected 2016 GDP). Increased revenue generation would require more formal taxation and regulation, but also improved provision of public services to incentivize voluntary payment. For example, telecom companies currently provide their own security to guard their infrastructure. An expert’s report commissioned by the authorities estimated that annual revenue generation could range between $81 and $119 million (see Table). These estimates are based on a population size of 10 million and peer-group comparable rates of penetration and per capita revenues that suggest sector-wide annual revenues of around $220 million. The revenue estimate is based on several taxes and fees, including a corporate tax, payroll-tax, a value- added tax, and fees on licensing and spectrum access. Importantly, several revenue sources are excluded due to the nascent development of the sector and government institutions. These include mobile money service fees (important in Somalia), fees from fixed line and broad-band services, and rent on public land, and taxes on handsets, which could also represent future revenue measures. The authorities are targeting to collect about $24.5 million in taxes from the telecom sector, including $12–14 million from corporate profits and the rest from sales taxes. The authorities’ new revenue measures are based on an annual telecom sector revenue estimate of $96 million, a sales tax of 15 percent and implementation of the new measures by April 1, 2017. The 2017 Appropriations Bill will endorse the tax code rate for sales tax (15 percent) and income tax (6, 12, and 18 percent). In addition, eventual passage of the Information and Communication Technology Law would also permit additional revenue generation from the licensing of telecom firms and issuance of spectrum, which is currently severely under paid for in Somalia. __________________ Lange, Peter, “Telecommunications Contribution to Public Finances in Somalia”, ICT Regulatory Technical Assistance (January 2015). L H V L & V du pu L " mm bu ub nan " Page 23 The authorities recognized that Somalia’s fiscal policy framework needs to be strengthened considerably. To address the weak revenue base, volatile grants, and serious shortcoming in public financial management (PFM), they intend to implement a number of reform measures (MEFP, ¶13–15): Improving revenue administration and mobilization. The need to lift the FGS tax level is a high priority. The authorities are planning to introduce a modern system of taxpayer registration, strengthen audit and enforcement, while improving tax compliance. This also includes expanding the tax base, plans to harmonize customs’ entry point across the country, as well as Inland Revenue Department and Customs administration. Improving treasury management . This is critical for the effectiveness and credibility of the fiscal framework and the authorities will step up efforts to: (1) strengthen the TSA; (2) improve cash management; (3) operationalize the management of commitments and arrears; and (4) complete electronic payments. Strengthening fiscal federalism (Box 4). The authorities agreed to step up their efforts to improve the central-subnational fiscal coordination and achieve state-level consensus on issues related to fiscal federalism. They recognized that the slow progress on fiscal federalism undermines the FGS revenue stream and the country’s development process. They concurred that the near-term focus should be on issues related to revenue sharing and harmonizing the FGS and state PFM systems, including revenue policies and expenditure responsibilities. On debt policy, staff stressed the need to continue to refrain from external and domestic borrowing—including from the CBS—while re-establishing relationships with external creditors . In this regard, staff encouraged the authorities to continue strengthening the DMU’s capacity while completing the public debt statistics (with TA from the African Development Bank–AfDB). The authorities have reached out to external creditors and reconstituted about two-third of their external debt database. They have also initiated efforts to improve the DMU’s management and monitoring capacity (MEFP ¶25). This includes tax and non-tax administration and customs administration. The FGS’s tax level is among the lowest in the world (about 1.5-1.7 percent of GDP. The bulk of the FGS’s tax revenue comes from Mogadishu’s seaport (about 74 percent) and airport (12 percent), while corporations and others account for 2 percent and 12 percent, respectively. The authorities are preparing a request for training of the DMU’s staff on debt management and improving their understanding of CPIA, DeMPA, and PEFA ratings. Page 24 Box 4. Fiscal Federalism in Somalia: Challenges and Opportunities Fiscal federalism is a near-term concern for Somalia. It is a viable vehicle for nation building. The scope for fiscal federalism to help reducing poverty and addressing inequality in the distribution of resources is substantial. For example: the heavy dependence on trade taxes puts landlocked states and states without major ports at a disadvantage; less urbanized regions can raise comparatively less revenue from personal and business taxes; and areas more often subject to droughts are damaged by the volatility of trade in livestock, and suffer human losses that could be otherwise avoided. An effective system of fiscal federalism can help to address inter-regional inequity, avoid duplication in government intervention, and improve service delivery. However, the establishment of a federal system is facing significant challenges. Political. While a successful federal fiscal system in Somalia requires strong political support, the authorities still need to decide on whether the federal system will emphasize the role of the federal government or will give more relevance to local institutions. When the power to tax and spend is assigned to local authorities, actions can be better tailored to local needs, responsiveness and accountability can be strengthened. However, pre-existing differences across states can be difficult to resolve, unless states with more resources voluntarily agree to share them with less well-off states. A centralized federal system may be more efficient, and more effective in countries where capacity is low. If a well-designed transfer mechanism is in place, a centralized solution can also reduce inter-regional inequality through fiscal transfers. Economic. At present, the low tax base reflects the geography of the country, with each state collecting taxes within its geographic boundaries. Absent an overarching legal architecture, individual states have assumed full revenues as well as expenditures powers. And administrative systems and practices are at different stages of development, reflecting in part the security situation. The balkanization of the fiscal system represents a concrete risk, with harmful consequences such as heightening competition in revenues collection (e.g. from the ports); increasing domestic trade barriers; and eroding the premises of goodwill and trust upon which a successful federal system is built. The authorities need to move swiftly to establish a federal system. It is critical that agreements on the allocation of spending responsibilities, and the revenues authority between FGS and state governments are reached, as the state formation process progresses. The authorities should improve the central-subnational fiscal coordination. More specifically, this will include the development of the reporting framework between the central and subnational governments and the formalization and operationalization of the central- subnational dialogue on expenditure assignments and transfer options. Page 25