The authorities welcomed the focus on: (1) the revision of the NDP; (2) the impact of correspondent banking relationship (CBR) withdrawals and remittances; (3) how to absorb the return of Somali refugees from Kenya; and (4) ways to improve financial sector development and access to credit and to ensure the flow of remittances through MTBs. Background Fostering inclusive growth will require bolder action in priority areas. The key near- term actions in this area include: NDP and inclusive growth . In addition to the institutional and macroeconomic policies, it was agreed that, at current stage of development in Somalia, the NDP will underpin the FGS development strategy by laying out the foundations for sustained and inclusive growth and poverty reduction. The NDP will be critical for understanding the FGS development strategy and garnering development partners’ support. However, the authorities agreed with staff that the current draft has a number of shortcomings (MEFP ¶16 and Box 5), including: (1) sectoral consistency; (2) prioritization of development needs; (3) mapping of costing and financing; (4) a coherent safety net program; (5) a capacity development program; and (6) a financial sector development roadmap. Return of Somali refugees . This is adding another challenge with significant humanitarian consequences. Somalia is also dealing with more than 1.1 million internally-displaced people (due to persistent insecurity and drought), as well as large numbers of refugees, mainly from Yemen. Additionally, the planned closure of the largest Somali refugee camp in Kenya (currently home to about 425,000 people) in May 2017 (as announced by the Kenyan authorities) will be even more challenging for the FGS (Box 6). CBR withdrawals and remittances (Box 7). Remittances amounted to about 23 percent of GDP (average, 2013–15) and were, for the most part, received by about 40 percent of the Somali population. The MTBs, which represent more than 45 percent of all financial sector assets, channel inflows of remittances to the wider population. Although data are limited, anecdotal evidence suggests that the withdrawal of Somalia’s CBR could significantly disrupt The international community is preparing to provide strong support to Somalia through the NDP. In this context, with the collaboration of the World Bank and the FGS, the UN agencies have developed a number of Joint programs to support key institutions, and social and economic sectors under the UN Multi-Partner Trust Fund for Somalia. The repatriation could increase the number of skilled workers and small business entrepreneurs, thereby boosting the fishing, farming, and livestock sectors. Page 28 the country’s formal remittance inflows, as well as the balance sheets of MTBs. While no data were available, staff were informed that the cost of transferring funds to Somalia has increased. Box 5. National Development Plan, 2017–19 The authorities are finalizing a draft three-year National Development Plan (NDP). The NDP will replace the New Deal Compact which has served as the road map for peace and state building activities, and will serve as the new vehicle for boosting growth and reducing poverty for the period of 2017–19. The draft NDP covers several important areas. The NDP focuses on poverty reduction with the aim to comply with the interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and make progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It will also help enhance social cohesion and provide steps toward stronger federalism. It provides a comprehensive diagnose of the Somalia economic and social conditions and its broad objectives are well identified. In particular, the NDP intends to: (1) consolidate peace, security, and rule of law; (2) build institutions; (3) lay the groundwork for the foundation for rapid, inclusive and sustainable growth; and (4) restore and protect Somalia’s strategic infrastructure–transport, water, energy and sanitation. However, there are a number of challenges ahead of finalizing the NDP: On policy and strategy: (1) the vision and mission should be clearly stated to avoid clashing priorities among member states; (2) modalities of fiscal federalism still under discussion, the development needs of different states are still unclear; (3) ensure that the medium-term strategy is consistent with sectoral strategies; and, (4) ensure that the preparatory work is inclusive. On financing: The draft NDP lacks discussions on costing and sources of funding and the need to mobilize more tax revenue to support development and reduce heavy reliance on external grants. Stronger policy support for the NDP will be critical . The momentum for the finalization of the NDP should be maintained. The FGS is encouraged to increase consultation and engage in political buy-in for its development agenda. Efforts should be made toward building a peer review structure and generating international community support to ensure that the process is consistent with addressing poverty and the wider promotion of SDGs. The NDP should therefore target economic growth through mobilizing traditionally productive sectors and enhancing the private sector, while increasing the country’s fiscal capacity. With the weakness in data sources in Somalia, it will be important to set appropriate procedures to ensure assessment and monitoring of the NDP. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the CBR withdrawal is constraining financial inflows to NGOs operating in Somalia. In particular, regulatory pressure on some U.S. and U.K banks has led to termination of some CBRs with MTBs. Page 29 Box 6. Closure of Somali Refugees Camp in Kenya––Some Economic Implications The Kenyan authorities recently announced the planned closure of the Dabab camp, the country’s largest Somali refugee camp. The closure of the camp which was initially announced for November 2016, has now been delayed to May of 2017. The delay does not affect the agreement by a tripartite commission comprising the UNHCR, the governments of Kenya, and FGS to carry out the voluntary repatriation of some 425,000 Somali refugees over a five-year period. Under this agreement Somali asylum seeker will no longer automatically be granted refugee status. The closure of the Dabab camp will significantly affect the Somali economy: A number of non-government organizations raised concerns over downside risks, including an increased risk to security, as well as potential increases in unemployment and poverty. In particular, a number of returnees could be targeted as potential recruits by the militant jihadist group, Al-Shabaab, if the repatriation process is not carefully considered and executed. The returning population will put pressure on already scarce social services such as health, water, and education. Other risks associated with the returnees include a possible worsening conditions of the internally displaced population which will exacerbate the humanitarian needs. Some anecdotal views suggest that there are some advantages related to the returning refugees, specifically a potential boost in human capital. This includes the new skills that many of the returnees have acquired, as some were born and trained in Kenyan schools. The increasing number of newcomers will contribute to Somalia’s economic activity through self-employment, as some refugees ran small businesses inside their camps. With some of the refugees hailing from productive areas of Somalia, their return could spark the revival of the fishing and farming sectors. Those who have been historically nomadic, meanwhile, will be able to integrate back to their nomadic societies, helping to boost the livestock sector which is vital to Somalia’s economy. To address the refugees challenges ahead, greater coordination and stronger support will be needed. The Somali National Task Force on Repatriation estimated the Somali refugees’ repatriation cost at $200 million. Without the support of international donors, a sustainable and durable solution to this refugee crisis which could require some contingent fiscal costs for the FGS will not be manageable. The Somali government will need to strategically plan for the resettlement of refugees and displaced populations and to address this issue in its NDP. In order to embark on these actions, greater coordination with donors and stronger political support will be needed from all regional administrations to face the resettlement obligation in an unified manner. Page 30 Policy discussions The authorities intend to revise the NDP to address a number of weaknesses in the current version and continue to respond to the CBRs (MEFP ¶16 and Boxes 5, 6, and 7). NDP and inclusive growth . The authorities plan to revise the NDP and address identified weaknesses. In this context, they welcomed IMF support which will focus on: (1) the medium- term macroeconomic framework; (2) sectoral consistencies; (3) the costing and financing options of the NDP; and (4) institution and capacity development. They stressed that increasing attention will be paid to enhancing economic activity by: (1) strengthening financial sector reforms, including MTBs; (2) revising the NDP; and (3) improving the business environment to unlock private sector activities. Refugees. To mitigate the risks associated with the repatriation of refugees, including related humanitarian and contingent fiscal costs, the FGS has improved collaboration with donors and Somali states and regions, while designing a voluntary repatriation program which will be in the revised NDP. They are cognizant that political consensus and donor support will be critical for successfully returning this group of refugees in an orderly manner. CBR. The authorities stepped up efforts to improve access to the international financial system. In this context, while customer due diligence and third-party auditing of MTBs are appropriate, the authorities acknowledged the need to strengthen the CFT legal framework in line with the FATF standard and ensure that Somali financial institutions (including MTBs) adhere to and effectively implement the AML/CFT law and guidelines. In addition, they agreed that stronger collaboration between the FGS and the private sector, as well as international partners, would be critical. Given the size and forms of support from donors, the FGS’ main short-term concern is more humanitarian than fiscal costs. The Somali Ministry of Internal Security is drafting new CFT legislation. The FGS is also developing additional CFT procedures and guidelines with the support of the IMF and the U.S. Treasury Department TA. Page 31 Box 7. Remittances and Money Transfer Businesses The remittances of the Somali diaspora are large and significant. Official remittances from the Somali diaspora are estimated to be about $1.4 billion dollars per year (average, 2013–15) and could be even higher This represents about 23 percent of the country’s GDP and is the major funding source for both households and businesses. About 40 percent of Somalis rely on remittances for their daily needs. Remittances also play a key role in the financing of Somalia’s trade deficits. The absence of a functioning central bank has prompted remittance companies to work with little or no supervision from the authorities. The culture of non-regulation has made international banks handling transactions from Money Transfer Businesses (MTBs) uncomfortable due to risks and strong requirements by their governments to tighten regulations. Over the past two years, banks in Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States have closed the accounts of some Somali remittance companies, citing legal and regulatory weaknesses, as well as risks of money laundering with possible financing of terrorism. Additionally, the lack of a proper regulatory framework could increase risks to money transfers to Somalia. The inability to transfer money through the commercial banks will affect the transparency of such operations from one country to another with increasing risks of MTBs resorting to other underground systems. One of the major impacts of international banks suspending services to MTBs was the inability of individual account holders and aid agencies to send money, which reduced incomes in recipient households. According to some of the MTBs surveyed as part of an Oxfam report in the United States, this new regime of regulatory caution has led to reduced volume, a rising cost of transfers, and increased informality among the Somali remittances market. While no clear data provided by MTBs, fees and costs of transferring money have increased, as has physical transfer of cash remittances. Efforts are underway to improve the regulatory environment. An important step was achieved when the Somali parliament approved the AML/CFT law on December 26, 2015. Implementation of the new law should help in limiting the threat of CBR withdrawal and closure of the accounts of Somali remittance companies by global banks. In addition, customer due diligence will be improved by recent efforts to involve a ‘trusted third party agent’ with the assistance of the World Bank working with the CBS to monitor transaction flows and provide independent third party audits of MTBs. The authorities are also in the process of introducing new CFT legislation in line with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards. Policies to ensure a sustained inflows of remittances will be critical. A strong collaboration between the authorities and private sector—as well as with international partners in working toward more transparency, supervision, and regulation—will safeguard an uninterrupted flow of remittances, while restoring relationships with international banks that work with Somali MTBs. Fundamentally, the authorities need to continue to improve regulation and supervision of the financial system, which, as it develops, will also improve transparency. Page 32