The authorities and staff recognized that while currency reform is among the highest priorities for Somalia, rebuilding the capacity at the CBS and reviving the financial sector are equally critical. Background The authorities have recently reached a number of milestones in reform implementation (MEFP ¶7–8 and Box 1), particularly in the areas of: (1) CBS safeguards and governance; (2) currency reform; and (3) the financial sector. However, the near-term challenges ahead are daunting and include: CBS safeguards and governance On August 17, 2016, some high- and mid-level staff at the CBS substituted $530,000 with counterfeit currencies (about 5 percent of the total CBS cash in the vault). Following the incident, the authorities tightened their internal procedures. They adopted a number of measures, including removing the Director of Operations and two clerks from the cash operation department, appointing a new Director of Operations, tightening the vault operations procedure, and introducing a new layer of supervision at all times. The CBS continues to take measures to improve its financial reporting and accounting practice. Currency reform Preparations are proceeding steadily with tangible steps already taken. In particular, a fully-staffed cash management department has been reconstituted; a draft anti- counterfeit strategy has been prepared, and the Board of Directors attended a seminar regarding currency reform in May 2016. Financial sector The nascent financial sector is slowly being transformed (¶8) and important reforms have been implemented in the past two years (Box 1). However, significant challenges remain to reviving the financial sector, improving access to credit, and safeguarding the remittances inflows to Somalia. The authorities agreed with staff that the near-term key bottlenecks to financial development in Somalia include: (1) the absence of financial sector laws, including outdated contract and property laws; (2) a poor payment system and clearance house, and the absence of inter-banking system; (3) absence of a credit bureau and consumer protection laws; and (4) the absence of basic consistent CBS and commercial banks accounting and reporting, despite recent effort to improve financial reporting. This incident does not affect the Net Foreign Assets definition under the SMP (which excludes CBS cash in vault denominated in foreign currency). The authorities have also indicated that the incident will not bear any fiscal cost and will be reflected in the CBS financial statement as a capital loss. The CBS work with Somalia’s national security agencies and the criminal investigation on this issue is still ongoing. Page 26 Policy discussions Staff welcome the progress made in reform implementation while noting that the near-term challenges remain significant (MEFP ¶16). The near-term focus will be on: CBS safeguards and governance . To avoid a repeat of the theft incident in August, the authorities are accelerating the improvement of the CBS governance, transparency, and organizational guidelines. These efforts include internal auditing, risk management, compliance, and oversight. The authorities intend to build on recent achievements and to address the near-term reform agenda on CBS governance and accounting. A particular focus will be on establishing an Executive Committee and an Audit Committee. Currency reform . The authorities reaffirmed that credible and successful implementation of the currency reform hinges on careful preparation and planning. They outlined and discussed with staff a roadmap for the currency reform focusing on: (1) finalizing the counterfeit strategy; (2) deciding on the scope of exchange and conversion factors; (3) properly phasing in the legal framework; and (4) initiating the preparatory work for storage, distribution, and collection (including exploring alternative distribution channels, while closely considering the geographical distribution of the Somali people). The authorities stressed that for successful completion of the currency reform, adequate donor financing would be needed. Staff indicated that the IMF stands ready to continue providing the needed TA to ensure a successful launch of the new currency. The authorities agreed with staff that in near future, the CBS will need to decide on key macro-critical aspects, including: (1) the exchange rate regime to be adopted; (2) develop reserve management strategy; and (3) develop some monetary policy instruments. Financial sector reform . The authorities are determined to swiftly improve CBS and commercial bank accounting and reporting standards in line with the provision of international financial reporting standards (IFRS), while strengthening its oversight position to arrive at full banking legislation, regulation, and supervisory rules for licensed institutions (banking and non-banking), including enforcement capacity. In addition, they are contemplating the preparation of a roadmap to revive an inclusive financial sector by the end of April 2017. Staff indicated that the IMF stands ready to provide support as needed, including by sharing international experience and TA. The World Bank is providing support for the competitive hiring of skilled bankers, including work on pensions and severance packages. Page 27