Background The Somali authorities’ efforts to restore key economic and financial institutions are proceeding well . Capacity development activity has intensified in the past two years (Table 7 and Box 1). Somalia is among the largest beneficiaries of IMF TA which is funded from a multi- donor trust fund. The Somali authorities, however, noted that the needs for TA remain large and addressing them will be essential for a successful SMP. They indicated that an increase in the Fund’s TA to Somalia, in coordination with other TA providers, will significantly improve capacity, empower local staff, and strengthen program monitoring. The authorities recognized that governance is critical for institution building . In early 2014, they established the Financial Governance Committee (FGC) to advise the President of Somali on progress on PFM action plan including on public contracts, concessions, and procurement; and government assets recovery, as well as reforms at the CBS, and, recently, the monitoring of performance under the SMP. In addition, at more regional and sectoral levels, donors are supporting the “Strengthening Somali Governance” (SSG) project that focuses on three objectives: (1) improve the legislative, oversight, and representational functions of Somalia’s deliberative bodies; (2) improve the ability of targeted government institutions to carry out essential functions; and (3) increase citizen awareness of and engagement in government decision-making. Policy discussions The authorities and staff agreed that TA delivery should be intensified Authorities’ views. They recognized that TA delivery is helping to address weak capacity constraints, while supporting policymaking in Somalia (MEFP ¶20–22). However, to withstand the near-term development challenges ahead, they have requested new TA (Table 8). Staff comments. Staff indicated that the Fund TA will continue to be aligned with Somalia’s absorptive capacity, the authorities’ program priorities, and the SMP’s objectives, Staff argued that better coordination among the different TA providers to Somalia is needed, including a more concerted demand-approach to improve the effectiveness of TA delivery. In particular, drawing lessons from past experience and good practice, staff indicated that plans The FGC consists of senior national officials and international experts (including from IMF and the World Bank) and is chaired by the Minister of Finance. On PFM, the authorities have ensured that they will follow through the PFM TA guiding prioritization outlined in “Developing a PFM Reform Action Plan, 2016–2020” and endorsed by the FGS. Page 33 should be developed for each area of TA delivery and priorities should be identified and well sequenced over time, in collaboration with the IMF. The authorities are determined to improving governance and institutions (MEFP ¶17–19). They are planning to reorganize the MoF, Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MoPIC), and CBS, and strengthen key legislative and regulatory frameworks. This will include reorganizing and re-enforcing key economic units (e.g., the recently established domestic arrears management committee, national statistics, and debt management unit) and departments (e.g., Customs, Inland Revenue, and the Treasury departments). In this regard, with the passage of the 2017 Appropriation Bill which will endorse the tax code rate for income and sales taxes, the authorities intend to introduce a more transparent regulation at the telecommunication sector. The FGC will also continue to review large procurements and concessions. Following the approval of the SMP, the authorities established the SMP Monitoring Committee in July 2016 which has since produced monthly reports on progress under the program. Also progress at the CBS is underway (¶20–21). Efforts to improve governance will include the establishment of the anti-corruption commission. The authorities also intend to keep up progress recorded under the SSG, including the monthly monitoring meeting.