Performance under the SMP is broadly satisfactory. All the structural benchmarks (SBs) and six out of seven quantitative benchmarks (QBs) set for the first review were met. The authorities and staff agreed to introduce two new SBs. Going forward, a worse-than-anticipated security situation could slow program implementation, repeated delays of the electoral process could weaken donors’ support to the FGS, and fiscal risks, if realized, could be harmful in the absence of remedial measures. Staff support the authorities’ corrective measures to address missed target and contingent plans to mitigate risks. All SMP indicative quantitative targets for June 2016 (indicative targets) were met. On structural benchmarks, the only target for June (“The Minister of Finance to approve the 2016–20 public financial management (PFM) reform action plan”) was also met. Performance under the SMP through the end of September 2016 was broadly satisfactory. All the SBs and six out of seven QBs (set for the end of September 2016) for the first review were met (Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies or MEFP ¶7, MEFP Table 1 and 2). Due mainly to the delayed disbursement of budgetary grants by two bilateral donors, new estimated arrears of approximately $10 million were accumulated in payments of wages and allowances at the end of September, but were subsequently paid in full as part of donors’ grants was received. The authorities have also advanced the implementation of their structural reforms as spelled out in the MEFP ¶7 (bullets #3, 4, and 5). In addition, two out of three SBs set for December 2016 have been completed and one is in progress: (1) the issuance of commercial bank and MTB licenses now requires approval by the CBS Board of Directors; (2) a report on the process and design of an electronic payment system for the Somali National Army and Police with biometric screening capability is completed; and (3) the benchmark of achieving 100 percent of non-salary Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing reimbursement which has been delayed is expected to be completed by March 2017. A prime ministerial decree that requires all foreign grant agreements to be cosigned by the Minister of Finance (set for March 2017) has been completed. Moreover, an action plan to improve cash management, and a plan to modernize revenue and customs administration (both structural benchmarks for March 2017), are being developed. However, on data provision, the authorities agreed that while the business registry was technically completed (an SB set for the end of September 2016), to operationalize the process, the registry would need to be improved and consolidated. In addition, passage of the new Statistical Law would be critical. The SMP’s key policy objectives remain unchanged. Staff support the authorities’ corrective measures to address the missed QB. The authorities and staff also agreed to modify The law includes articles on statistical system, statistical confidentiality, cooperation between state agencies on data sharing. Page 16 the SB on CBS issuance of banknotes in light of the roadmap developed to launch the new currency. Also, two new SBs have been proposed in the areas of revenue measures and currency reform. Corrective measures to avoid new arrears. The QB on non-accumulation of new domestic arrears set for the end of September was missed.  In staff’s view, this constitutes a temporary slippage that does not jeopardize the successful implementation of the program. In the absence of a program adjustor for a shortfall in grants, staff support the authorities’ corrective measures to avoid new arrears and limit delayed payments.  Remedial measures include: (1) improve budget execution, through prioritizing the payment of salaries in December to Ministries, Departments, and Administrations (MDAs); (2) strict adherence to the new arrears management strategy; and (3) realistic revenue and grant forecasts and stronger resolve for improving domestic revenue mobilization, including greater enforcement of tax collections.  Delayed payments in Somalia have been a practice to manage liquidity. This has generally led to accumulation of arrears. In December, due to financing pressures in the lead up to the presidential elections and contingent spending, the authorities delayed November and December 2016 salary payments until early 2017. Staff expressed concern over such a practice and recommended that the deferred amount be included in the 2017 budget and paid fully to avoid new arrears. While the FGS cash flow situation came under pressure due to unplanned expenditures, staff noted that deferred payments have been the result of delays in grant disbursement, and weak revenue performance, as well as weak public financial management (that is, using deferred payments as a means to manage treasury cash flows). Staff recommended that improving treasury single account (TSA), cash management, and arrears management be made high priorities for the 2017 budget measures (¶18). Moreover, staff stressed that the authorities should also remain current on all future bills and adhere strictly to the sequestration provisions in the 2016 Appropriation Law.  In addition, further efforts to prevent new arrears and limit delayed payments include the effective start of the new payment process reforms and implementation of the commitment system roll-out (MEFP ¶12) in January 2017. This is a significant shift from the current practice—which is mainly based on manual payment processing—to a On security, arrears, and transfers to regions. The sequestration rule refers to expenditure payment prioritization. In the event that treasury cash/liquidity is not sufficient to make all payments, salaries, and other current and capital expenditure payments should be made before payments of arrears. The delay in implementation of the commitment system also affected the schedule of the new arrears management strategy. Page 17 realtime tracking of payment obligations of all line MDAs. Also, the authorities intend to further strengthen the TSA system by evaluating existing bank accounts which would result in closing non-critical accounts and consolidating the rest. Staff believe that the effectiveness of these measures will solidify efforts to avoid new arrears and limit delayed payments. New SB on revenue measures . A new SB on passing the 2017 Appropriation Bill has been introduced to endorse the tax code rate for income and sales taxes to help re-enforce the existing tax laws for income and sales taxes for telecommunications, electricity and water supply companies, as well as hotels (see ¶15 for more discussion). With the enforcement of this measure, staff believe that the projected revenue (¶17 and Text Table 3) can be achieved.  On the one hand, there is upside potential to the tax revenue measures resulting from the authorities’ plan to enforce a Cabinet resolution (passed in 2016) which imposes fees on the telecommunications sector. This could raise significant revenue (up to 10–12 percent of tax revenue). In addition, the FGS is expected to generate some fiscal savings from the implementation of the new payment process.  On the other hand, revenue collection efforts could be impacted by the weak security and governance conditions.  Should downside risks materialize, to keep the program on track, staff agreed with the authorities to consider the following measures: (1) cutting non-priority spending on goods and services; and (2) use any buffers arising from improved PFM to safeguard against revenue shortfall. Modification of SB on currency reform . The CBS has endorsed a new roadmap for currency reform (¶21 and Box 1) in which two QBs—a ceiling on issuance of banknotes other the SOS 1,000 and a ceiling on issuance of SOS banknotes that are not backed by foreign assets—are scheduled to be completed after July 2017 (that is, beyond the SMP period). The authorities and staff agreed to propose a new SB to (“finalize the anti-counterfeit strategy by the end of March 2017” ), which is part of the currency reform roadmap. At the time of the SMP approval, the authorities adopted a guiding principle for a currency reform roadmap involving two phases. In the first phase (spanned through mid-2017, that is during the SMP period), the CBS would issue new SOS 1,000 banknotes whose value would not exceed the U.S. dollar assets on the balance sheet of the CBS. During the second phase, the CBS would issue higher SOS banknote denominations. Significant progress has been made in drafting anti-counterfeit measures. For example, the CBS is in the process of finalizing regulation establishing a National Anti-Counterfeit Center. In addition, the CBS is drafting a MoU on cooperation between the CBS and the Somali police. Page 18 The authorities and staff discussed risks to the program, program prospects, and Somalia’s future engagement with the IMF. Risks. The authorities shared staff’s assessment that while the uncertainties outlined in ¶9 and Box 2 will continue to be risks to the program, the cabinet reshuffle following the presidential elections could also challenge the implementation of the program. They also acknowledged that in the absence of appropriate corrective measures, fiscal risks could be higher. The authorities are, however, cognizant that strong commitment to the program, and sustained and coordinated international support—including with regards to security, peace, and capacity building—would help mitigate risks. As the FGS fiscal stance depends largely on donor inflows, other risks include persistent delays and revisions in grant disbursements. These could lead to arrears accumulation or cash rationing. The authorities and staff agreed that the corrective measures discussed to avoid arrears and delay payments could help mitigate such a risk. The authorities further stressed that donors’ pledged grants disbursed on schedule would help avoid arrears and limit delayed payments. On the positive side, tax revenue collection could surprise on the upside (¶13). Program prospects. As the SMP will end in April 2017, discussions laid the groundwork for a successor SMP. The authorities and staff agreed to the measures for the fiscal and financial sectors outlined in ¶18 and MEFP ¶13; and ¶21 and MEFP ¶15, respectively. The repeated delays in the elections have affected the 2017 budget schedule (now expected to be approved by March 2017). Staff stressed that the completion of the second review hinges on the new authorities’ commitment to the implementation of policies agreed on and Somalia’s capacity to enforce existing laws, particularly on tax administration and tax collection. Lessons from this SMP and prioritization of the identified fiscal and financial sector measures will be discussed at the time of the second review. The second and final review of the SMP is expected to be completed by June 2017. Somalia’s future engagement with the IMF. While the authorities and some donors are pushing for a quicker move for IMF financing support, staff explained that only after establishing a strong economic track record (successfully completing this, and subsequent, SMPs) and the clearance of arrears to the Fund, will Somalia be eligible for an IMF Upper Credit Tranche (UCT) facility. The clearance of arrears will be an important part of normalizing relations with the international community and establishing a roadmap to debt sustainability. The process will involve: (1) establishing a track record of cooperation with the Fund on policies and payments, including in the context of SMPs; (2) reconciling external debt; (3) preparing a poverty reduction strategy; and (4) mobilizing donor resources to finance debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. Page 19