Somalia is a fragile state emerging from a protracted civil war. In 1991, the government was toppled by armed opposition groups, leading to implosion of the central government and devolution of power to administrative regions. In the 24 years since, the situation has been very difficult and volatile. A provisional constitution was adopted in August 2012 and a 275-member federal parliament was elected by 135 traditional elders from across Somalia. In September 2012, the parliament elected Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud as president, leading to formation of a government in October. Consistent with broad international support of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS), the IMF recognized the FGS on April 12, 2013. Institutions are very weak and lack of capacity impedes development. While work to establish a federal constitutional framework is underway, the regions are fairly independent. Nevertheless, donor initiatives to channel earmarked resources through FGS treasury systems are helping reduce regional autonomy. The government has a poverty reduction strategy, but in the absence of adequate domestic resources, poverty reduction efforts are being undertaken mainly through off-budget donor support. The Somali authorities have resumed active engagement with the Fund. Recognition of the FGS paved the way for staff to provide technical assistance (TA) and policy advice in key areas, including: (i) financial governance and accounting; (ii) currency reform; (iii) bank licensing and supervision; (iv) fiscal policy and budget preparation; and, (v) development of statistical systems. Reengagement has laid the groundwork for these discussions; milestones include: (i) national budget preparation; (ii) development of consumer price index, gross domestic product, and external sector data; and, (iii) preparation of the central bank balance sheet. While resources are available for TA and training, absorptive capacity and security issues are overarching constraints. Despite shortcomings in source data and coverage, core data were available for these discussions. Data deficiencies limited some standard elements of bilateral surveillance, such as medium-term projections, debt sustainability analysis, and an external stability assessment (Box 1). The 2012 interim constitution underpins efforts to introduce a modernized legal system. However, implementation of laws on a nationwide scale continues to meet formidable challenges. Staff from the African Development Bank, IMF, and World Bank have been providing assistance. A debt sustainability assessment and external stability analysis were not possible because of data weaknesses, including the need to validate some figures on non-Paris Club debt and collect information on individual loans. Page 11 Box 1. Technical Assistance by IMF Staff Staff TA aims to support building economic institutions and sound macroeconomic policies (see Table below and the Informational Annex for a list of individual TA missions) Somalia would benefit from TA in various areas. On February 6, 2015, the Fund launched the “Trust Fund for Capacity Development in Macroeconomic Policies and Statistics for Somalia,” to finance TA in: (i) developing macroeconomic frameworks and policies; (ii) establishing a functional central bank; (iii) modernizing tax and customs administration; (iv) strengthening public financial management; and, (v) improving statistics. The program coordinates activities with the authorities and other TA providers. Continued donor support will be critical for capacity building. TA Activities Department Activity FAD PFM reform Formulation of credible macro-fiscal policy objectives and aggregates Budget planning and preparation Expenditure control and cash management, including fiscal rules Budget accounting and reporting Application of international standards in budget management Modernization of chart of accounts Formulation and evaluation of tax policy and customs administration Fiscal descentralization and revenue sharing options Development of a framework for natural resource revenue management and taxation Development of long-term tax reform strategies for efficiency and equity Development of revenue raising measures legislated by the Parliament MCM STA LEG Central bank organization, governance and accounting Monetary and exchange operations and payment systems Banking legislation, regulation and supervision Currency reform Reserve management Asset recovery Development and dissemination of national accounts Development and dissemination of external accounts (BOP and IIP) Development and dissemination of price statistics and consumer price index Development and dissemination of monetary and financial accounts Development and dissemination of government finance statistics (GFS) Collection of external debt data Central bank legislation and by-laws Banking law and regulation Natural resources law and contracts Establishment of a legal department in the central bank The trust fund is a US$9.3 million multi-donor program covering 2014-17. Initial contributions were received from the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (US$3 million), Canada (US$2.5 million), and the UK (US$1 million). The trust fund can be renewed. As of end-May 2015, US$124,297 had been disbursed. TA has been delivered in key areas of IMF expertise, namely: (i) fiscal issues; (ii) the monetary and banking sector; (iii) statistical systems; and, (iv) legal issues. In the fiscal area, TA has addressed: (i) budget accounting and reporting; (ii) budget preparation and execution; and, (iii) tax policy and customs administration. In the money and banking sector, TA has focused on: (i) the organization and governance structure of the central bank and its accounting systems; and, (ii) and licensing procedures and supervision of financial institutions. Regarding statistical systems, TA has addressed development, compilation and publication of national accounts, external sector statistics, and prices statistics. In the legal area, TA has focused on: (i) reviewing the central bank law; (ii) establishing a legal department in the central bank; (iii) development of central bank by-laws and a code of ethics and conduct for the board; and, (iv) advice on banking legislation and regulations. In the period ahead, extensive TA is planned. In the fiscal area, TA will assist with: (i) preparation of the 2016 budget; (ii) tax policy; and, (iii) public financial management. In the monetary and banking sector, TA will support: (i) central bank governance; (ii) currency reform; and, (iii) bank licensing and supervision. TA for statistical systems will assist with: (i) balance of payments compilation; (ii) the consumer price index; and, (iii) monetary aggregates. Legal assistance will help with the preparation of central bank by-laws. TA has been delivered through different modalities. Staff has developed capacity building plans and is providing TA through deployment of advisors, staff-led missions, expert visits, and training. TA has built capacity and allowed staff to begin carrying out surveillance. TA has helped build capacity in key government institutions and allowed the authorities to provide basic data for surveillance. Page 12 While Somalia has been welcomed back as an active member of the Fund, it remains ineligible for financial assistance pending the clearance of its longstanding arrears . Arrears clearance will be an important part of normalizing relations with the international community and establishing a roadmap to debt sustainability. The process will involve: (i) establishing a track record of cooperation with the Fund on policies and payments, including in the context of a Staff Monitored Program; (ii) reconciling external debt; (iii) preparing a poverty reduction strategy; and, (iv) mobilizing donor resources to finance debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. As of end-May 2015, arrears to the IMF were US$328 million, while arrears to the World Bank and the African Development Bank (AfDB) were US$283 million and US$94 million, respectively. The political and security situation remains very challenging. Complex clan politics and high turnover in the members of the economic team have undermined policymaking and limited TA and surveillance effectiveness: since September 2013, there have been three central bank governors and three ministers of finance. A new government took office on February 18, 2015 and presidential elections are planned for September 2016. As a result of the civil war, all Somali state institutions are severely impaired. Improving governance in key state institutions is critical for progress on economic reconstruction and development. The FGS, working with the international community, has taken steps to improve governance based on the rule of law and the application of international good practices for fiscal and financial operations. IMF TA is largely devoted to enhancing governance in the ministry of finance and the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS). Rebuilding critical infrastructure and delivering basic social and economic services will be crucial for the new government to gain the trust of the Somali people, advance the process of national reconciliation, and to extend FGS authority over all parts of the country. Global and regional risks arise from slower global growth and spillovers from Middle East unrest . These risks could lower demand for exports, reduce donor support, decrease remittance inflows, and prompt an influx of refugees (see RAM). The policy response should be perseverance with the reform agenda in light of the highly constrained room for maneuver. Somalia-specific risks arise from tightening international regulatory and supervisory frameworks, insecurity, weak institutions, and the availability of data for economic management, as well as low revenue, lack of control over the national currency, and poorly developed financial system supervision. The protracted civil war has left institutions in disarray with few qualified staff. Capacity for data collection, compilation, analysis, and dissemination is limited. Poor revenue performance—against the backdrop of large expenditure commitments—is leading to further arrears accumulation. Credibility would be damaged if a currency reform were launched without adequate preparation. Delays in developing supervisory capacity could exacerbate problems linked to global de-risking, impeding remittances that support livelihoods. Page 13 Somalia: Risk Assessment Matrix Nature/Source of Main Threats Overall Level of Concern Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Global Risks Structurally weak growth in key advanced and emerging economies (the “new mediocre”) Heightened risk of fragmentation/state failure/security dislocation in the Middle East and some countries in Africa Country specific risks Tightening regulatory and supervisory frameworks in advanced and emerging markets Institutional risk Protracted insecurity, weak institutions, and poor data availability Fiscal risks Low revenue and weak expenditure control Failed currency reform The CBS launches a currency reform without adequate preparation Poor financial system supervision Lack of credible supervision and AML/CFT Channel of transmission would be lower demand for exports and possible reduction in donor support. Channel of transmission is reduction of remittances and influx of refugees. Channel of transmission is derisking, prompting banks to forego money transfer business and leading to lower remittances. Data compilation, analysis, and dissemination remain problematic Lack of revenue against the backdrop of large expenditure commitments would lead to further arrears accumulation. The introduction of a new currency or new banknotes without proper systems in place would damage credibility. Delays in strengthening supervisory capacity lead to a reduction in remittance inflows, which support the livelihood of many Somalis. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of Fund staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline. The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with authorities. Page 14