Overview . Somalia is a fragile state that emerged in 2012 from a two decade-long civil war that caused significant damage to the country’s social and economic infrastructure. Post-war social and economic conditions continue to be difficult, with poverty widespread and more than half the working-age population unemployed. The Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) continues to face weak institutional capacity, fragile security, and complex clan politics which complicate economic reconstruction. The security situation remains fragile . The Al-Shabaab group has continued to launch sporadic attacks, despite recent gains by the Somali national army and African Union (AU) troops. Political developments. The presidential elections have been postponed for the fourth time in a row. The international community had expressed concern over repeated delays and pressed for a peaceful, transparent, and inclusive electoral process in order to send a strong signal of electoral order to the people of Somalia and international partners. They stressed the urgent need to swiftly conclude the electoral process by January 19 and warned of the risks of further delays (including compromising donors’ support to the FGS). Fund relations . The IMF recognized the FGS in April 2013. The IMF Executive Board concluded the 2015 Article IV Consultation with Somalia in July 2015, the country’s first in more than a quarter-century. Somalia’s overdue financial obligations to the IMF were last reviewed by the Executive Board on December 2015. The next review was postponed to take into account the outcome of the 2016 Article IV discussions and the first review of the SMP and to be considered by the Executive Board together. Somalia is in arrears to the Fund ($319.4 million, 537.6 percent of quota, as of the end of December 2016) and is therefore ineligible for financial support from the Fund. IMF management approved a 12-month Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) in May (May 2016–April 2017, Countrty Report No. 16/136), marking another milestone in normalizing relations between Somalia and international financial institutions. The authorities have since continued to move forward with their reform agenda, making significant progress in areas recommended under the SMP and the 2015 Article IV recommendations (Box 1). About 14,000 delegates selected by their clans elect parliament members who in turn elect the president among the designated candidates. Presidential elections were originally scheduled for August 2016 and have since been postponed four times between September 2016 and January 2017. Somalia–Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation (2015). Somalia– Review of Overdue Financial Obligations to the Fund and Further Review Following Declaration of Ineligibility (2015 and 2017). Somalia was declared ineligible for IMF resources at the time of the review of overdue obligations to the IMF by the Executive Board on May 6, 1988. SDR237.6 million (US$/SDR=0.743864 of December 30, 2016). Page 10 Box 1. Somalia: The 2015 Article IV Policy Recommendations and Follow-Up On July 27, 2015, Somalia completed its first Article IV Consultation with the IMF since November 18, 1989 Executive Directors recognized that Somalia is facing daunting challenges and they stressed that the first priority is to continue building institutions and administrative capacity. They also urged the Somali government to take decisive steps toward building fiscal discipline, underpinned by realistic budgeting and effective implementation systems, including commitment controls. On banking and financial policy, Directors welcomed the Central Bank of Somalia’s (CBS) currency reform initiative, supported by the Fund’s TA. They stressed that the elaboration of a financial sector roadmap would be a critical first step toward building credibility in licensing and supervising banks and money transfer businesses (MTBs). The authorities have continued to move forward with their reform agenda by making significant progress in areas recommended by Directors . On May 16, 2016 IMF management approved an SMP to support the FGS and to establish a track record of policy implementation. Prior to the approval of the SMP, the authorities demonstrated tangible commitment by implementing key measures, including: (1) adopting an Appropriation Bill consistent with a zero-cash balance; (2) setting up an institutional framework for fiscal data reporting; (3) adopting an arrears-management strategy as part of their public financial management (PFM) reform; and (4) approving the key principles for currency reform. Reform implementation momentum is continuing under the SMP On fiscal policy and reforms , the authorities completed electronic payments of civil service wages, submitted the 2015 financial statements to the Auditor General, and approved the 2016–20 public financial management (PFM) reform action plan. The implementation of the commitment system, which has been delayed, is expected to start in January 2017, and the stock-taking of existing bank accounts of Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) is underway. On currency reform , the CBS has reconstituted a fully staffed cash management department, and prepared a draft anti-counterfeit strategy and roadmap for currency reform. On financial sector policy , the authorities achieved: (1) the completion of the audit of the financial statement of the CBS for 2014; (2) continue to reach out to foreign banks to recover missing, lost, or stolen assets; (3) the recruitment of a reputable Trusted Agent to work with MTBs on anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), in addition to assisting the CBS to help secure confidence in the payment system and safeguard the continued flow of international remittances to Somalia; (4) banks are now complying with prudential norms; (5) as of September 2016, banks have started publishing quarterly financial statements; (6) the adoption of a foreign direct investment (FDI) law; and (7) under the World Bank’s project “Core Banking System,” a new financial infrastructure for CBS banking operations is being developed. On technical assistance (TA), efforts to restore key economic and financial institutions continue. From June 2013 to December 2016, the IMF delivered 66 TA missions, including training in its areas of expertise and 14 TA missions delivered support to the Financial Governance Committee. Page 11