Real GDP Real disposable income Adjusted for Terms of Trade (index 2011=1) South Sudan: Real GDP and Real Domestic Income Economic conditions have deteriorated rapidly since the beginning of the civil conflict. Real GDP growth is estimated to have declined by 18.8 percent in the two years through 2015/16 (July-June) and annual inflation rose to about 550 percent in September 2016 (Table 1 and Figure 1). However, with the recent tightening of policies, inflation declined to about 370 percent in January and monthly price changes have been in single digits in recent months. The conflict and the collapse in oil prices have led to closure of oil fields and lack of maintenance and investments which in turn have resulted in dwindling production. South Sudan’s effective average oil export price declined from US$98 per barrel in 2013/14 to about US$33 per barrel in 2015/16, while daily production has fallen by about 40 percent of the level produced immediately before the conflict (Box 1). The conflict, poor rains, and decline in oil activity also weakened the non-oil sector, including food crop production. Non-oil GDP declined by an estimated 17 percent over the last two years. Moreover, real domestic income adjusted for terms of trade declined by an estimated 35 percent since 2013. A large and widening fiscal deficit has exacerbated economic instability. Depressed oil revenue, weak non-oil revenue mobilization, and runaway security-related expenditure caused the deficit to rise rapidly. Oil revenue net of transfers to Sudan dropped from about US$2.3 billion in 2013/14 to US$0.5 billion in 2015/16 (Text Table 1; Table 2a and 2b). With unadjusted spending, the overall fiscal deficit increased rapidly from 3 percent of GDP in 2013/14 to 31 percent of GDP in 2015/16). With limited access to external financing, the deficits were primarily financed through discretionary central bank financing and accumulation of arrears, including on salaries and external obligations. The fiscal deterioration in 2015/16 Under the agreement signed with Sudan in 2012, the South Sudanese government pays oil transit and pipeline fees of US$9.10 per barrel of oil export and transitional financial transfers to Sudan of US$15 per barrel of oil exports. In 2015/16, South Sudan accumulated payment arrears on the Transitional Financial Arrangement (TFA) and transit fees to Sudan of US$291 million. The sharp depreciation of the South Sudanese pound in the second half of 2015/16 (the SSP/US$ rate rose ten- fold) caused a jump in foreign currency denominated revenues and expenditures in 2015/16. Since nominal GDP rose only by a fraction of the exchange rate depreciation, foreign currency denominated budget categories also rose markedly as a percent of GDP. 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 Oil revenue (gross) Transit fees Transfers to Sudan Net oil revenue Text Table 1. Government Net Oil Revenue (in US$ millions) Page 11 reflected rising foreign currency denominated outlays due to the exchange rate liberalization and a salary raise by 200-300 percent (depending on grade) in March 2015. Arrears on external and domestic payments rose by an estimated 23 percent of GDP in 2015/16. Box 1. South Sudan. Oil Sector Republic of South Sudan: Oil Production and Prices Production (thousands of barrels per day; LHS) Dar price (Per barrel; RHS) Oil production plays an important role in the South Sudan economy, contributing slightly more than half of GDP, 95 percent of exports, 90 percent of government revenue and a significant share of private sector employment. The oil sector of South Sudan remains closely linked to Sudan. Most of the former Sudanese oil fields are now in South Sudan, but the processing facilities, pipelines, export terminals, and refineries are in Sudan. Transit and processing fees and oil-related transfers represent an important income stream for Sudan. Following the departure from Sudan of western oil companies in the early 1990s, the Chinese oil company, China National Petroleum Corporation, started investments in Sudan by mid-1990s. The Chinese company was followed by the Malaysian-owned Petronas and the Indian-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited. These companies financed development of the current oil fields in South Sudan and built a network of pipelines, refineries, and export terminals in Sudan that enabled the sector to grow. South Sudan’s Nile Petroleum, a state- owned oil company, holds minority shareholding in production-sharing contracts with the foreign oil companies. China is the largest export destination for crude oil from South Sudan. When South Sudan became independent in 2011, it gained control of three-quarters of Sudan’s oil production, which amounted to 490,000 barrels per day (bpd) in 2010. South Sudan is estimated to have proven oil reserves of 3.75 billion barrels as of January 2014, ranking 38 th in the world and 3 rd in Sub Sahara Africa. South Sudan has experienced frequent disruptions to oil production since independence. In January 2012, South Sudan shut down its oil production for 15 months because of a dispute with Sudan over transit fees and transfers. Oil production resumed in April 2013, following an agreement under which South Sudan would pay to Sudan US$9.10/barrel in transit fees and US$15/barrel under the Transitional Financial Arrangement. However, production was partially shut down again later in the year because of civil conflict and it has not fully recovered since. As oil fields in South Sudan are mature, output will naturally decline over time unless new investments in enhanced oil recovery (EOR) techniques are made. The civil conflict and low oil prices led to a postponement in investment in EOR. Source: South Sudanese authorities. Page 12 Box 2. South Sudan. The Evolution of the Exchange Rate Regime From September 2011 until December 2015, the South Sudanese pound was pegged to the U.S. dollar at 2.96 SSP/$US. Under this system, the government’s foreign exchange earnings from oil, by far the largest part of foreign exchange earnings, was sold to the Bank of South Sudan (BSS) at the official rate. The BSS then allocated the foreign exchange to economic agents at the same rate. While ostensibly aimed at ensuring the supply of essential goods, BSS foreign exchange allocations were prone to being captured by rent seekers who sought to benefit from the large spread between the official and parallel market rates. The allocation of a fixed amount of foreign exchange to each bank (initially weekly sums of US$1 million for foreign-owned banks and US$1.7 million for domestic banks) and smaller amounts to foreign exchange bureaus, led to an increase in the number of banks, many of which focused purely on arbitrage opportunities. Similarly, part of the foreign exchange allocated to government ministries for imports of goods and services found its way to the parallel market. Non-government imported goods tended to be priced at parallel market rates, with prices adjusting rapidly to rate changes. The official exchange rate became increasingly unrealistic as oil revenues and foreign exchange receipts fell; first during the 2012 government’s shutdown of oil production and again when oil prices and production fell in 2014. From mid-2014, the parallel market rate rose from about SSP 4/US$ to SSP 17/US$ by late 2015. The widening gap between the official and parallel exchange rates discouraged investment and spurred further rent-seeking. Initial attempts to reform the system were defeated by vested interests in late 2013. In December 2015, the authorities officially switched to a de jure floating exchange rate system, with a view to eliminating the parallel exchange rate market. Under the new regime, the BSS supplies foreign exchange through market-based auctions and commercial banks are free to determine their rates with customers. The reform was initially successful in reducing the spread between the official market rate and rates in the parallel cash market. However, excessive monetary expansion and shortage of foreign exchange connected with the security crisis have continued to exert downward pressure on the exchange rate and has undermined convergence of the official and parallel rates. The de facto exchange rate arrangement was reclassified to other managed from conventional peg, effective December 15, 2015. The reform also led to the removal of several exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices (MCPs).1 ________________________________________ South Sudan removed the following measures earlier maintained under Article XIV transitional arrangements: (i) the exchange restrictions arising from limiting the availability of foreign exchange through the rationing and further earmarking of foreign exchange by the central bank; (ii) the exchange restriction arising from requiring a tax clearance certificate for access to foreign exchange for priority imports; and (iii) the MCP arising from the spread of more than 2 percent between the official exchange rate (buying and selling exchange rates of the central bank) and the exchange rate at which commercial banks sell foreign currency within the limits set by the central bank. South Sudan also removed the MCP maintained under Article VIII arising from the exchange rate guarantee arrangements maintained by the BSS. Fiscal dominance undermined monetary policy objectives . The Bank of South Sudan (BSS) financing of the government deficit grew five-fold from June 2013 to June 2016. This credit expansion led to strong money growth which was exacerbated by the exchange rate depreciation (Table 3). Broad money grew by 219 percent in the 12-months through June 2016. The combination of policy slippages, resumption of conflict, and an external shock led to a rapid rise in annual Page 13 inflation, which peaked at 550 percent in September 2016. Rapid money growth and exchange rate pressure led to the liberalization of the foreign exchange market in December 2015 (Box 2). Since then, the value of the South Sudanese pound lost about 95 percent against U.S. dollars. Moreover, international reserves fell to about two weeks of imports by June 2016 and further to about one week of imports by December 2016 (Table 4).