A proper management of oil revenues is crucial for South Sudan’s development. The Petroleum Revenue Management Act (PRMA), passed by parliament in October 2013, is an important step, and complements the already enacted Petroleum Law. These two pieces of legislation include provisions to prevent corruption and mismanagement, and their reporting and transparency requirements go beyond EITI requirements. The PRMA prescribes that all oil revenue should flow through specific accounts, that utilization of this revenue should be approved by the National Legislative Assembly and flow through the budget, and that key information and reports should be regularly published. The act also provides for prudent financial management, with investment guidelines and auditing provisions for two reserve funds and an explicit prohibition against oil- guaranteed borrowing except in a case of a national emergency (Box 2). The PRMA is yet to be signed into law by the President, yet the authorities indicated that the implementation of some of its provisions can begin in coming months. At the same time, the Petroleum Law requires that all oil contracts should be awarded through competitive tender, and that data on contracts, production, and revenue should be publicly available. See Staff Report “Republic of South Sudan: Debt Sustainability Analysis”. The authorities stated their intention to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and take steps to make South Sudan an EITI candidate. Page 16 Box 2. Saving Provisions of the Petroleum Revenue Management Act The Petroleum Revenue Management Act aims at ensuring a transparent and efficient management of the oil wealth and at preventing wasteful spending before the necessary improvements in absorption capacity and public financial management are introduced. The act enshrines the provisions of South Sudan’s provisional constitution to establish two reserve funds: a Petroleum Revenue Stabilization Account to shelter public expenditure from unexpected fluctuations in oil revenues, and a Future Generation Fund that accumulates savings for future investment spending. The rationale for the latter is that the projected profile for oil revenues anticipates sizable amount of revenues that could be available within certain timeframes, even though such amounts cannot possibly be efficiently invested within the same periods. While the act is model legislation, one drawback is the coexistence of two fiscal rules that stipulate the maximum amount of oil revenues that can be made available for use by the budget in a given year. One of the rules puts a cap on these transfers at 75 percent of oil revenue, with the remaining 25 percent to be saved in the stabilization account (15 percent) and the future generation funds (10 percent). The other rule uses a seven-year historical average of oil prices to compute the maximum oil revenues available to the budget. During the discussions, the authorities agreed that the 75 percent rule is inferior compared to the 7-year rule as the former: (i) creates confusion in interpreting the minimum level of mandated savings; (ii) could provide for unfeasibly low levels of government spending in some years; and (iii) could foster pro-cyclical fiscal spending. A simulation of both rules (see box figure) shows that the fixed 75 percent cap will likely be too restrictive considering that public spending will most likely need to increase in nominal terms and that, over time, higher levels of public investment should be largely financed by current oil receipts. The authorities shared the view that the law will need to be amended to address these drawbacks. Fiscal rules: Oil revenues available for the budget ( Fiscal year, in billions of South Sudanese pounds ) 7-year oil price rule 75-percent rule Total expenditure in FY 2014/15 (excluding grant-financed and oil related transfers) Source: IMF staff estimates.