South Sudan’s fragility is complex and multifaceted. A troubled history of conflict left a legacy of poverty, low human development indicators, weak governance, and lack of infrastructure and institutions. Although rich in natural resources, the economy is centered on oil production and subsistence agriculture, with almost all intermediate and consumer goods imported. The Sudan’s People Liberation Movement (SPLM) is still in the early stages of transitioning to being a political party after a peace deal with Sudan in 2005, and ethnic and other regional tensions persist, leading to a lack of cohesiveness and hindering nation building and development. Lastly, volatile relations with Sudan and recurrent internal conflicts contribute to poverty and frequent displacements of civilians. Saharan Africa GDP per capita (US$, 2012 data) Share of the population below the poverty line (%) Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) Literacy rate (age 15+, %) Access to improved drinking water (% of population) Access to electricity (% of population) Paved roads (% of primary network) Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators; South Sudan Authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Data for Sub-Saharan Africa are averages for 2009-2010, except for the GDP per capita (weighted; 2012) and poverty figures (average of 2003-2010). Republic of South Sudan: Selected Social Indicators South Sudan Sub- Social indicators improved gradually after 2005 although little progress was made in building the public infrastructure. Between 2005 and 2011, foreign aid and technical assistance amounted to about US$500 million per year, focused on humanitarian support, health and education. Government spending amounted to about US$2.5 billion per year amidst large oil-related inflows, but its effectiveness was constrained by poor budget execution and governance problems. Some progress was made in lowering child mortality rates, increasing school attendance, and reducing poverty, but little was achieved in terms of building the energy and the transport infrastructure. Unresolved issues with Sudan led to a shutdown of oil production in January 2012. Amidst disagreements with Sudan over oil transit fees (the infrastructure to export oil is within Sudan’s territory), South Sudan suspended all oil production in January 2012. Before the shutdown, South Sudan’s oil production was about 330,000 barrels per day. In the past year, oil production accounted for 99 percent of exports, 95 percent of government revenue, and about one-half of GDP. South Sudan has a large area of fertile arable land, important fishing and forestry resources, and undeveloped deposits of gold, silver, iron ore, copper, and other minerals. In his 2012 annual audit report of the financial year that ended in December 2008, the auditor general reported protracted problems with budget execution, including neglect for spending procedures, disregard for budget appropriations, nontransparent accounting, and weak legislative oversight (Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of the Government of South Sudan, National Audit Chamber, http://www.auditchamber-ss.org/). National Bureau of Statistics, 2012 Millennium Development Goals Report (http://ssnbs.org/publications/). Following the 2005 peace agreement and until independence in 2011, oil proceeds were equally shared between the central government in Sudan and the regional government of South Sudan—where three-fourths of former Sudan’s oil production was located. South Sudan is believed to have the largest oil reserves in sub-Saharan Africa after Nigeria and Angola. Proven oil reserves are 1.2 billion barrels, although observers contend that a new review would reveal a higher figure. To counteract Sudan’s monopoly power on the transit of oil, the authorities are building domestic refineries and would like to build alternative pipelines through neighboring countries. Page 6 A new agreement with Sudan led to a resumption of oil production in April 2013. Under the agreement, South Sudan pays oil transit and pipeline fees of about US$10 per barrel plus a cumulative US$3 billion in direct financial transfers over about three and a half years (financial transfers are linked to the flow of oil production at the rate of US$15 per barrel). The agreement contains provisions for a demilitarized zone, forgiveness of bilateral claims, and regularization of cross-border and pension payments. While some progress has been made in these areas, the settlement of important border issues (including the status of the disputed region of Abyei) remains outstanding. More recently, a political struggle escalated into a civil war. In December 2013, growing tensions within the ruling party (SPLM) and a power struggle between President Kiir and former vice- President Machar triggered arrests and the exile of key party leaders and a conflict along ethnic lines (between the Dinka and the Nuer, the main ethnic groups) in four states, two of which (Upper Nile and Unity) produce most of South Sudan’s oil. The conflict left thousands dead, about 1.7 million people displaced, destroyed infrastructure in the affected areas, and worsened already poor humanitarian conditions, leading to a high risk of famine in coming months.