The baseline projections assume a gradual normalization of the political and security situation, regional stability, and economic reforms. In the next 10 years, annual real GDP growth could expand at an average of 6-7 percent. This reflects the recovery of oil production after the 2012/13 shutdown and the recent slowdown, the low initial level of non-oil GDP (including an The Petroleum Law, the Petroleum Revenue Management Act (forthcoming), the Public Financial Management and Accounting Law, the Mining Law, and the Central Bank Law. An external audit of the 2012 accounts of the central bank was conducted but could not be completed because of limited information. As a result, the country’s auditor general issued a disclaimer of opinion for the audit. The issues include, but are not limited to, mismatches related to “nostro” accounts and suspense accounts that remain to be cleared. In response to the audit findings, the authorities have initiated steps to begin addressing the issues raised in the report, and a time-bound plan of action is being prepared. The authorities have applied to join the East Africa Community (EAC). Integration with the EAC could bring about important benefits, including principles of good governance and the rule of law (Article 3.3 of the EAC charter stipulates that membership is contingent upon adherence to universally acceptable principles of governance, democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and social justice). Given South Sudan’s low levels of development and human capital, the transition will need to be managed carefully to ensure that the non-oil economy can develop in a competitive environment. Page 14 estimated decline in 2013/14 and a projected decline in 2014/15 because of the conflict), and a recovery in trade with Sudan in light of the recent reopening of the border. The GDP path is driven by the oil production profile, as the latter first recovers from the current slowdown to reach about 260 thousand barrels per day by 2016/17, then decline until 2022 as production rates fall in aging oil fields, and ultimately increase again as a result of assumed investment in enhanced recovery and exploitation of new fields in the early 2020s (oil output could reach about 400 thousand barrels per day by 2026. In the medium term, non-oil GDP (especially agriculture and services) is also expected to benefit from higher post-conflict spending (particularly the rebuilding of destroyed infrastructure), while other non-oil activities could also expand as investments in transport and energy begin facilitating economic diversification (Table 6). In the next five years, two priorities will be building foreign reserves and scaling up public investment. In light of South Sudan’s vulnerabilities, it is estimated that a target for foreign reserves of 6-8 months of imports could be appropriate. In addition, the country has massive infrastructure needs, requiring public investments of at least US$15 billion in the next 10 years. However, capacity constraints imply that the scaling up of public investment will need to be gradual, with priority given to transport and energy infrastructure as a way to enable other investments over time. A debt sustainability analysis puts South Sudan at a moderate risk of debt distress South Sudan’s external debt ratios are presently very low, there are no external arrears, and the baseline scenario projects that a moderate amount of external debt (mostly non-concessional) may be incurred in coming years to fill temporary investment gaps, yielding debt ratios that are below their respective thresholds (see accompanying Staff Report “Republic of South Sudan: Debt Sustainability Analysis”). However, several factors linked to the country’s fragility and heavy dependence on oil revenues pose serious vulnerabilities, thus implying a moderate risk of debt distress. The authorities agreed that five major risks could lead to a worse outcome compared to the baseline. First, lack of political inclusiveness could intensify internal conflicts, leading to Preliminary industry estimates suggest that, under a secure and stable environment, sufficient investment could bring oil output to nearly 700 thousand barrels per day. The baseline takes a less optimistic view in light of lingering political and regional risks. Barring new discoveries, oil production is expected to fall to negligible levels by 2035. This is a preliminary reserve adequacy estimate for South Sudan. Vulnerabilities include the country’s dependence on volatile oil revenue flows. A full reserve adequacy analysis is not applicable at this point as many key variables (namely, the bottom 10 percentile of the distribution of external demand growth, terms of trade growth, change in FDI to GDP, and change in Aid to GDP) are not available. Nevertheless, comparable averages for fragile states with fixed exchange rates indicate that an appropriate reserve cover would be around 6-8 months of imports (Dabla- Norris, Kim, and Shirono, Optimal Precautionary Reserves for Low-Income Countries: A Cost-Benefit Analysis, IMF Working Paper 11/249, October 2011). A 2011 World Bank study estimated that South Sudan will need about US$1.4 billion per year in infrastructure investment for about 10 years, of which one-half would need to be spent on transport and 40 percent on energy and water projects. These figures did not include the construction of alternative oil pipelines (through Kenya or Ethiopia and Djibouti), a project that could add another US$4 billion. Page 15 protracted economic instability. Second, failure to embark on economic reforms, especially the unification of the exchange rate and improved fiscal management, will prevent an appropriate buildup of reserves and force additional borrowing, arrears, and/or lead to high inflation. Third, unresolved territorial issues with Sudan and the expiration of the oil sharing agreement in 2016 could reignite tensions and threaten to disrupt oil production. Fourth, rent seeking behavior and corruption, if not combated, would concentrate wealth and resources within a few and stifle development. Lastly, a further and sustained decline in international oil prices would create serious macroeconomic tensions, possibly leading to a fiscal and balance of payments crisis (Table 7). Given these risks, alternative scenarios with protracted political instability and insufficient reforms or a shutdown of oil production cannot be ruled out. Under such scenarios, fiscal and balance of payments gaps could become impossible to manage, domestic arrears could continue to mount, real GDP growth would be stifled and inflation higher, and debt ratios could climb to unsustainable levels. These risks, which would perpetuate fragility and threaten the country’s viability, underscore the importance of a strong commitment to internal peace, economic reforms, good relations with Sudan, and close cooperation with the international community.