The 2016 Budget envisages additional consolidation aimed at stabilizing debt. High revenue buoyancy—partly the result of policy measures—and the withdrawal of a proposed reduction in social security contributions should yield a 3.9 percent of GDP deficit in FY15/16. With measures to cut compensation budgets and raise revenue, the authorities anticipate the deficit to fall to 2.4 percent of GDP by FY18/19 and debt to peak at 51 percent of GDP in FY17/18 and decline thereafter. The Budget emphasized slowing public sector hiring, greater spending efficiency, and less waste, mainly by blocking hiring for non-essential personnel in the central payroll system and more robust procurement processes. But the 2015 public wage settlement and rising interest rates mean interest and compensation absorb a rising expenditure share (46 percent). In the baseline scenario, which includes staff’s macroeconomic assumptions and the proposed Budget measures, achieving the authorities’ targets will be challenging. The Budget projects higher growth and GDP inflation than staff. As a result, staff project the fiscal deficit to decline more slowly than in the Budget to 3.2 percent of GDP by FY2018/19. Debt would reach 53½ percent of GDP by FY2018/19 and continue rising, albeit slowly. As acknowledged in the Budget, the fiscal outlook is subject to significant risks: weaker growth and commodity prices, greater support for SOEs, and higher borrowing costs. If contingent liabilities and permanently lower growth materialize, debt could reach 70–75 percent of GDP by 2021 (see accompanying Debt Sustainability Analysis). The mooted new nuclear power plants could pose considerable fiscal risks depending on scale and modalities. On the upside, buoyancy could continue exceeding expectations and the authorities’ efforts to combat Base Erosion and Profit Shifting could widen the tax base. Policies to maintain debt sustainability are critical for investor confidence, but need to be carefully chosen and calibrated to avoid pressuring an already-weak economy. The 2016 Budget is appropriately ambitious, though if staff’s macroeconomic assumptions materialize debt may not stabilize at 51 percent of GDP in FY17/18 as envisaged by the Although revenue directly linked to the resources sector is only around 2 percent of total, lower commodity prices have an impact on other sectors of the economy and also lower the GDP deflator which matters for revenue, while expenditure is linked to CPI. Page 23 authorities. The sharp adjustment required in a short period of time to keep debt at that level could reduce growth as much as -1½ percent. Instead, given that the weak economic outlook is the main reason behind the buildup of fiscal vulnerabilities and that growth is critical for confidence, implementation of pro-growth structural reforms (as outlined below) would be the best sustainable way to ensure an improved fiscal outlook over the medium term. Only if such reforms are not an option, should fiscal policy be tightened further and this should be done over a multi-year period to minimize the growth decline (which could render the consolidation self- defeating) and with a composition that protects the poor. Specifically, building on strengthened procurement processes and performance budgeting could reduce waste, freeing up resources to aid the consolidation without compromising service delivery and hence with minimal impact on growth and the poor. Asset sales could also reduce borrowing and arrest the debt rise, while contributing to growth, especially if combined with decisive SOE reforms (see below) and appropriate regulatory frameworks. Absent structural reforms and measures suggested above, additional spending or revenue measures to stabilize debt at the authorities’ debt peak projection (51 percent of GDP) should be calibrated based on conservative estimates of the multiplier to ensure credibility, but phased over a longer period than the three-year budget horizon to smooth the adjustment. Over the longer term, reducing debt to 40 percent of GDP as recommended in the 2014 Article IV Consultation Staff Report would be advisable to leave space for shocks. Laying the groundwork for targeted expenditure cuts, including to the bloated government wage bill, while protecting social grants and investment, would avoid the need for across-the- board cuts that would be most damaging to growth and hurt especially the poor. If the need for fiscal consolidation is sizable or large spending projects (e.g., National Health Insurance) materialize, further revenue measures, notably raising consumption taxes toward the EM average, could be needed. Strong commitment to a fiscal anchor, besides the expenditure ceilings, lengthening the budget horizon, and communication about future fiscal policy could be instrumental in maintaining credibility, in addition to protecting South Africa’s strong fiscal institutions. Using the approach in Batini, Nicoletta, Luc Eyraud, Lorenzo Forni, and Anke Weber (2014), “Fiscal Multipliers: Size, Determinants, and Use in Macroeconomic Projects”, the first-year fiscal multipliers in South Africa are estimated to be between 0.4–0.9. Achieving the authorities’ debt peak projection of 51 percent of GDP in FY17/18 as envisaged by the authorities would likely require a further adjustment of ¾ to 1½ percent of GDP in FY16/17, depending on multipliers. Page 24 Improving spending efficiency and composition is critical to maintain confidence, ensure public support for, and minimize the growth impact of the consolidation. As noted by the Auditor General, progress in strengthening procurement processes has contributed to a reduction in “irregular, fruitless, and wasteful and unauthorized expenditure” in the national and provincial governments by 28 percent in FY14/15 relative to FY13/14. However, “irregular, fruitless, and wasteful and unauthorized expenditure” in municipalities increased by 30 percent during the same period and, despite a much smaller budget, is now similar in magnitude to that seen in national and provincial governments. An eTender portal, central supplier database, and mandatory use of centrally-negotiated contracts should help increase the efficiency and effectiveness of government spending and, as the Chief Procurement Officer reported, reduce “the risk of fraud, corruption, and losses”. However, increased performance monitoring and consequences for poor performance (as recommended by the Auditor General) remain important to ensure that government receives value for money. At the same time, it is critical that the use of public procurement as a tool to advance social transformation does not undermine transparency surrounding procurement decisions. A generous public sector compensation favors insiders: civil servants represent 40 percent in the top 3 deciles of the income distribution. Slowing growth in public wages, which at 184 percent of Auditor-General South Africa, “Consolidated General Report on the National and Provincial Audit Outcomes, 2014- Auditor-General South Africa, “Consolidated General Report on the Audit Outcomes of Local Governments”, 2014- 2015 Public Sector Supply Chain Management Review, Chapter 8. The 2015 public sector wage settlement envisages a 10 percent increase in overall compensation (CPI+2 average wage increase and higher benefits) in FY2015/16, and wage increases of CPI+1 in the subsequent two years. The risks to these figures are skewed to the upside as sectorally-negotiated allowance adjustments and promotions are not ili pp ill ee ili pp Page 25 GDP per capita are high among EMs, will require stricter monitoring of wage and personnel decisions across all spheres of government, and a reassessment of the institutional structure for public wage negotiations. A more rigorous process for selecting and costing investment projects is also important. Concrete steps to reform SOEs are needed to lower fiscal risks, and improve confidence and growth. The government’s commitment that support to SOEs be budget neutral, and conditional on sound business plans and improved governance and operational efficiency, is welcome. However, as the recent report by the Presidential Review Committee on State-Owned Entities notes, SOEs’ challenges require far-reaching reforms (Box 4). A strong governance framework, including transparency surrounding board appointments and remuneration of board members and management, and stronger accountability are essential to improve efficiency and ensure incentives are aligned with those of the country. Greater private participation—e.g. allowing private competition in some sectors, partial stock market listings, or management contracts to run certain parts of SOEs’ operations—and effective regulators could help improve efficiency and service delivery, and free up resources for SOEs’ investments. Clear mandates for every SOE that quantify the cost and address potential conflicts between commercial and developmental activities would facilitate benchmarking performance and contribute to greater accountability. taken into account, and because government is required to compensate for higher inflation but has historically been unable to claw back lower-than-anticipated inflation. IMF (forthcoming), “Managing Government Compensation and Employment” suggests potential measures to help control compensation budgets, including aligning public sector wage negotiations with the budget cycle, increasing National Treasury’s role in wage negotiations, regular payroll audits to eliminate ghost workers, systematic annual comparisons between public and private wages, and differentiated pay scales to attract and retain staff in areas with skill shortages. See IMF (2015), “Making Public Investment More Efficient”. ee ill Page 26 Box 4. State-Owned Enterprises in South Africa SOEs’ performance has deteriorated. Several SOEs suffer from inefficient operations, poor governance, and weak balance sheets. Far-reaching reforms are needed to ensure SOEs deliver essential economic and social services, hence supporting growth and the fiscal accounts. South Africa’s key SOEs play an important role in the economy. Most SOEs are small, but a few, notably Eskom (electricity), Transnet (ports, pipelines, and freight rail), South Africa Post Office (SAPO), South Africa Airways (SAA), SANRAL, and PetroSA, are large and/or several have a monopoly position in their sector. Moreover, because of their strategic position in network industries and their role in carrying out the government’s infrastructure build program (over the next three years SOE account for 39 percent of total public infrastructure spending, equivalent to around 7 percent of GDP), SOEs are an important part of the enabling environment for the private sector. According to the Presidential Review Commission on State-Owned Entities (PRC), SOEs contribute in excess of 8 percent to overall GDP. The financial performance of SOEs has deteriorated. Measures of profitability and leverage have worsened, though some SOEs (e.g., Transnet) perform well. Also, leverage measures have improved since the government’s recapitalization of Eskom in 2015/16. As noted in the 2014 Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA), reasonable shocks to borrowing costs and earnings could undermine SOEs’ ability to service debt and require government intervention. Also, PetroSA, South African Airways (SAA), and the South African Post Office (SAPO) are loss making and (in the case of Eskom, SAA, SANRAL and SAPO) reliant on government guarantees which have increased to R553bn (14 percent of GDP) in FY2015/16 from R177bn (8 percent of GDP) in FY2007/08. Auditors’ concern with SAA’s going-concern status means it has yet to finalize its FY14/15 financial statements. The authorities are keenly aware that SOEs face a number of challenges that require far-reaching reforms. In addition to their poor financial position, the 2016 Budget Review maintains that many entities suffer from “internal weaknesses such as inefficient operations, poor governance, and weak balance sheets”. The PRC found that “governance, ownership policy, and oversight systems”, and “the quality of the board and executives’ recruitment...and remuneration frameworks and practices” in SOEs were inadequate. _______________________________________ 1/ This amount excludes R200bn in guarantees issued to independent power producers under power-purchase agreements with Eskom. = = t t pe en on equ pe en on pe en eb t t equ pe en t age o7 j ned en ed hedu f t he xc ud ng de op en t f nan on ou ona ea f ou and ff ou ca Ow se ce ca l gh ea Page 27 Authorities’ views The authorities affirmed their commitment to and confidence in meeting the budget targets. The authorities’ core commitments are to expenditure limits, achieving a primary surplus over the medium term, and ensuring a stable national debt-to-GDP ratio. Even if growth were to develop as in staff’s projections, they maintain that deficit targets are likely to be met in 2016/17—by which time the bulk of the consolidation will have been achieved. They point to a history of excellent budget execution (i.e., spending remaining within the expenditure ceiling), the budget’s conservative tax buoyancy assumptions (relative to recent years), and savings from procurement reforms ensuring that the Budget’s targets are met. The bulk of the spending reductions have been targeted at compensation budgets—an area of expenditure that has been a key driver of deficits over the past decade. Underscoring their commitment to the debt sustainability principle, the authorities are committed to take additional measures, should debt stabilization be seriously at risk. They stress the dilemma that fiscal policy would face, if growth disappointed substantially: if necessary, they will consider additional reprioritization of spending and additional revenue options as appropriate to maintain confidence or stretch out the adjustment to minimize the growth impact. The authorities will balance these imperatives on the basis of data and analysis of fiscal and economic developments as they materialize over the medium term, but remain committed to the stabilization of debt. The authorities are taking measures to improve SOEs’ efficiency and governance. They monitor fiscal risks associated with SOEs on an on-going basis and associated contingent liabilities are reported in the Budget. The 2016 Budget outlined four broad areas of reform that will be overseen by the Deputy President, which include exploring ways to stabilize SOEs’ financial performance, quantify the cost of developmental activities, improve transparency and governance by benchmarking boards’ and executives’ performance and compensation, and where appropriate, seeking greater private sector participation.