Monetary policy should focus on reducing inflation, gradually replenishing international reserves, and strengthening monetary policy instruments. The proposed fiscal adjustment will set the stage to achieve this, including through eliminating BSS direct lending to government and the full financing of the deficit through Treasury bills. Tighter monetary conditions will gradually lower inflation and stabilize the foreign exchange market. With the proposed fiscal tightening, broad money growth could decelerate to about 40 percent in 2016/17 and further to near 25 percent in 2017/18, supporting a lowering of inflation to about 20 percent (year-on-year). With banks holding large excess reserves, the BSS should urgently enforce the statutory minimum reserve requirement. In particular, it should apply the adopted increase in reserve requirements from 15 percent to 20 percent, and begin reserve averaging. The staff support the authorities’ plan to introduce repurchase agreements for liquidity management. A tighter monetary policy stance will also support a gradual recovery in foreign exchange reserves and enhance confidence in the South Sudanese pound. Information through December 2016 confirms that money growth indeed is slowing down and that new direct BSS lending to the government has been small in recent months. Page 17 The BSS should enforce the minimum capital requirement for all banks. Since the decision to raise capital requirements for commercial banks in 2013 (US$30 million for foreign- owned banks and US$15 million for locally-owned banks to be met over two years), only about half of the banks have met the requirements. Indeed, financial soundness indicators reveal that capital adequacy ratios, earnings, non-performing loans (NPLs), and profitability have declined, and asset quality has been eroded. (Figure 5 and Table 6). The recent pick-up in NPLs and drop in earnings reflect the worsening of the security situation in July 2016, which particularly affected the construction and service sectors. The staff urged the authorities to address the undercapitalized banks by adopting bank resolution regulations, and fostering banking system consolidation by closing banks that do not meet the capital requirements. Authorities’ views The BSS agreed with the assessment and recommendations on monetary policy . It has stopped direct lending to the government, and plans to finance the fiscal deficit solely through the issuance of Treasury bills. The BSS plans to enforce reserve requirements and reserve averaging by early 2017. It instructed banks to address the inadequate capitalization, and will either agree on a specific plan with the delinquent banks or start withdrawing banking licenses. The audit of BSS’s financial statements for 2013-15 is expected to be completed in the first half of 2017.