There are four main fiscal challenges in the near term: Financing the higher deficit. The authorities are aware of the risks of monetizing the fiscal deficit and are contemplating expenditure cuts. They are also considering exchange rate unification, a measure that could have a significant positive effect on the fiscal accounts (since about 95 percent of revenues are denominated in foreign currency). As no decision has been made yet, the near-term macroeconomic projections (Tables 1-5) assume a spending envelope in line with the approved budget and no exchange rate unification. Improving budget execution and preventing arrears. Budget execution has been complicated by emergency unbudgeted expenditures and extra-budgetary spending by government agencies. The authorities agreed to monitor expenditure commitments for consistency with monthly budget limits, enforce procurement regulations (a procurement act is about to be passed by Parliament), and proceed with steps to set up a single treasury account. On the latter, the authorities are expected to prepare a plan including a list of all government accounts held at commercial banks and a timetable to centralize the management of fiscal resources and expenditures. The authorities also agreed to conduct an inventory of valid arrears and prepare a plan for their repayment; they have requested assistance from the World Bank to begin evaluating claims from two key ministries (Ministry of Defense and Ministry of Roads and Transport). In the baseline, expenditures are in line with the 2014/15 budget but oil and non-oil revenues have been adjusted downward in light of lower oil price and output projections. Compared to the previous year’s budget, current spending has been increased while capital expenditures have been curtailed. The overall spending envelope is somewhat higher, although in real terms it is around its level in 2011/12. In early 2014, a “crisis management committee” took over spending decisions to deal with the security challenges; the committee was recently dissolved in order to restore budgetary procedures. Page 10 Establish a functioning revenue administration. Severe capacity constraints, corruption, and lack of a legal framework and resources have delayed setting up an efficient system of non- oil revenue administration. In the near-term, with support from the IMF and other providers, the authorities intend to implement a new customs tariff schedule, automate customs operations at the largest customs post, and allocate additional resources to enforce compliance with domestic taxes, especially through the large taxpayers’ unit. In addition, the National Assembly has approved a Financial Bill specifying all the elements of the tax system at the federal level. Staff also encouraged the authorities not to divert their efforts to establish a National Revenue Authority in the near-term; such an institution could be important in the medium term but it need not be a priority compared to the basic measures required to boost collection. Reorient spending towards development. About 40 percent of public spending goes to security and a similar share is devoted to public sector salaries, while infrastructure spending has been meager and declining since 2011/12. The authorities concurred on the need to reverse this trend as soon as fiscal pressures become less severe and oil revenues recover.