Inflation is likely to have peaked. Since 2011, headline and core inflation have been driven mainly by the large depreciation, even though the negative and rising output gap has moderated exchange rate pass-through (Figure 8). In 2014, food inflation has also contributed to the inflation increase. Inflation momentum is declining, which is likely to continue as evidenced in falling PPI inflation. Inflation expectations remain broadly stable. Monetary policy is finely balanced. Inflation Momentum is Declining (seasonally adjusted, 3-month moving average percentage change, annualized) CPI PPI Price Pressure (RHS) 1/ 1/ PMI input prices - PMI output prices Sources: StatsSA, MarkIt, Haver, and staff calculations A simple Taylor rule using a 0.4 percent real neutral rate (the 2010–13 average), a 6 percent inflation target, the top of the SARB’s band, and staff’s inflation forecast argues against a rate increase. However, over the medium term the SARB is appropriately aiming for inflation below 6 percent and the neutral rate is highly uncertain but likely higher than in recent years, all pointing to the need for higher policy rates. On balance, therefore, with the recent large drop in oil prices and the announced fiscal consolidation, the SARB may be able to afford to stay accommodative for longer, though an increase in rates will ultimately be needed. In case of materialization of risks to inflation or inflation expectations, or significantly tighter external funding conditions, policy rate hikes may become necessary sooner to bolster the SARB’s credibility and facilitate external funding. To help guide expectations, the SARB could consider enhancing its communications by publishing inflation projections conditional on explicit interest rate and exchange rate assumptions, as some other inflation targeting central banks do. Estimates of Taylor rules for South Africa reveal a very small weight on the exchange rate, suggesting only including inflation and the output gap is appropriate in normal times. Page 17 Authorities’ views The Reserve Bank has announced it is on a gradual and data-dependent normalization process. SARB officials emphasize that the monetary stance remains accommodative. However, over the medium term, real interest rates will have to turn positive to avoid exacerbation of imbalances and possible asset bubbles, and to encourage savings. Inflation expectations remain anchored at the upper end of the target band and subject to the risk that continued depreciation could move them to a higher plateau. Staff expect that the SARB’s Monetary Policy Committee will assess in its next meeting on November 20, inter alia, how the recent large drop in oil prices and the government’s fiscal consolidation strategy expressed in the 2014 MTBPS may affect the stance of monetary policy going forward. Moreover, the SARB remains committed to transparent communication and outreach, but believes that releasing interest rate and exchange rate assumptions could lead to reduced operational flexibility, as markets could interpret these assumptions as targets.