The discussions centered on the strategy to address the country’s main political and economic challenges. A political settlement and peace are essential. In addition, steps to deal with pressing fiscal issues, a distorted foreign exchange regime, and insufficient transparency and accountability in public financial management (including oil revenue management) are needed for economic stability and to enhance the legitimacy of the state. Staff advised the authorities to adopt appropriate policies to deal with the current financing shortfall and the threat of economic instability. The authorities indicated that they would most likely adopt a combination of measures that could increase non-oil revenue and reduce fiscal spending, and possibly undertake additional external borrowing. Yet they recognized that the benefits of non-oil reforms will not be large enough, that spending cuts will be difficult, and that As per the Central Bank Law, the authorities were expected to allow the currency to float for a period of up to six months beginning in July 2011 and subsequently peg it at a sustainable level vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. By mid-2013, there were 79 foreign exchange houses licensed in South Sudan. A significant part of goods are imported at the parallel market exchange rate while only a small number of transactions (i.e. imports of food, medicine, fuel, and construction materials) benefit from foreign exchange acquired at the official exchange rate. Discussions with Fund staff on economic challenges and policies began in 2012 when the authorities requested feedback on policies to respond to the challenges of the oil shutdown; they continued through regular staff visits since then. In parallel, a program of IMF technical assistance in selected areas of Fund competence began in late 2012. Page 9 access to external borrowing may be limited, leaving the residual financing gap to be filled through central bank financing. In this regard, the staff urged the authorities to proceed with exchange rate unification, a policy that could yield substantial fiscal benefits in the near term (see below).