The authorities have made some progress on structural reforms, especially in infrastructure, but some other measures have been counterproductive. The bringing online of Medupi’s first unit and some independent power producers (IPPs), maintenance improvements, and lower demand have reduced load-shedding. Private providers have expanded broadband, contributing to improving South Africa’s ranking in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index. But some freight transport projects are postponed, port tariffs remain among the highest in the world for manufactured goods, and the drought has exposed structural challenges in water supply. The use of Socio-Economic Impact Assessments is a positive step, though not all policy initiatives are covered. The Employment Tax Incentive Act has led to 270,000 youths being employed during its first year. The proposed national minimum wage could help reduce inequality, though depending on its level and modality, risks causing job losses, especially among the less-skilled, young, and SME workers. The Competition Commission’s pro-active market inquiries in different product markets hold the promise of facilitating market entry for smaller businesses. Government, in collaboration with the private sector, is exploring ways to boost SMEs. Nonetheless, large businesses and labor unions maintain a stronghold on insider-outsider dynamics that contribute to above-market-clearing wage settlements that are binding on the entire sector and hinder SMEs’ entry and development, and employment. Besides, complex business regulations are particularly damaging for SMEs. However, lack of clarity about pending legislation that would determine modalities for property expropriation and pricing of strategic minerals, as well as implementation of B-BBEEE codes in the mining sector are examples of policy uncertainty. In addition, stricter limits on temporary contracts have reduced employment especially for the low skilled. Stricter visa requirements hurt tourism and their reversal, though partial, is welcome. Finally, BER surveys report that more than 80 percent of responding firms in the manufacturing sector point to the general political climate as a constraint on their business. A comprehensive package of structural reforms remains the preferred policy to increase growth, create jobs, and lower income inequality. In addition to closing infrastructure gaps, greater product market competition, more inclusive labor market policies and industrial relations, and improved education and training remain critical to promote growth and employment in the private sector. Job creation, especially in SMEs, which are more labor intensive and hire a relatively high share of low-skilled workers, is the best way to ensure a sustainable reduction in inequality (lowest 20 percent only hold 2.5 percent of national income). These reforms will lower business costs, increase See IMF (2013 and 2014), “South Africa: Article IV Consultation Country Report”; OECD (2013 and 2015) South Africa Economic Survey; and OECD (2015 and 2016) “Going for Growth”. Also, see World Bank (2016), “South Africa Economic Update (Eighth Edition)-Promoting Faster Growth and Poverty Alleviation through Competition” for recommendations about how to increase competition. Page 31 efficiency, boost employment and savings, and reduce the external gap, making the economy more resilient. Advancing these reforms will require building trust among stakeholders, ideally via a social bargain. Labor and businesses could agree on wage restraint in return for saving jobs and hiring commitments. Government could improve the functioning of SOEs, and the quality of government services, especially in education, and represent the interest of outsiders (the unemployed and SMEs). An alternative option might be implementation of a focused set of tangible measures that can have some positive effects even in the short term and generate reform momentum. Focus. The severe effects of high unemployment on poverty, inequality, and social cohesion and analysis pointing to the critical importance of prior work experience suggest a need for a clear focus on jobs. With fiscal space exhausted, the priority must be to boost private sector employment, including temporary and informal jobs. Principles. A centralized evaluation of all policy proposals should be done systematically to ensure that reforms, at a minimum, “do no harm” to growth and private employment. Reforms that reduce policy uncertainty and boost confidence and trust should be favored. Actions. Improving governance and SOEs are key interventions to build confidence and trust. Clarifying the regulatory environment in mining would help lower policy uncertainty (Box 6). Reforms in the authorities’ G20 growth strategy—including reducing business costs (e.g., port tariffs and spectrum allocation for broadband) and trade liberalization to promote regional integration—would further promote SMEs, and policies to reduce crime and transport costs could help the unemployed find jobs. Anand Rahul, Siddharth Kothari, and Naresh Kumar (2016), “South Africa: Labor Market Dynamics and Inequality”, forthcoming IMF working paper find that the probability of finding a job doubles with prior work experience, controlling for education attainment. OECD (2010), “Making Reform Happen, Lessons from OECD Countries”, suggests that trust is a key ingredient to successful structural reforms. Chichello, Paul, Colin Almeleh, Liberty Ncube, and Morné Ooshuizen. (2011), “Perceived Barriers to Entry into Self- Employment in Khayelistha, South Africa: Crime, Risk, and Start-up Capital Dominate Profit Concerns” argue that crime is a key deterrent to micro-entrepreneurship, Ngarachu, Maria, Schimmelpfennig, Axel, and Volker Schöer, (2014), “The Costly Road To Work? Wages and Transport Costs in South Africa”, forthcoming IMF Working Paper, finds that transportation costs take up significant share of workers’ wages. Page 32 Box 6. The Role of Policy Uncertainty and Structural Bottlenecks. What’s Holding Back Exports? This box explores the role of policy uncertainty, using a new measure based on “news chatter”. Our results suggest that policy uncertainty has a negative impact on South African exports and the responsiveness of exports to the exchange rate depreciation. Policy Uncertainty It is well known that investment and exports are subject to partially irreversible fixed costs that result in a real option value of delaying investments and hiring which increases with rising uncertainty. Baker et al. (2015), for example, find that increased policy uncertainty leads to diminished investment, employment, and output across 12 major economies. To assess the importance of this channel for exports we follow Baker et al. (ibid) and construct a “news chatter” measure of economic policy uncertainty which tracks news articles that include words related to policy, economics, and uncertainty in South Africa. The resulting index suggests uncertainty was high around 2012 when industrial relations in the mining sector reached a nadir, and has picked up in recent months after leadership changes at the Treasury. Drivers of South Africa’s Export Performance We investigate the role of policy uncertainty in explaining South Africa’s poor export performance by estimating a dynamic panel across 10 sectors. Our results suggest economic policy uncertainty has a statistically significant impact on the level of exports and the sensitivity of exports to movements in the REER. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in uncertainty would result in a drop in export volumes of 5 percent and a decline in the elasticity of exports to movements in the REER. Consistent with Anand et al. (2016), electricity shortages also adversely affect export volumes, while labor market disputes appear to be captured by the uncertainty measure itself. The above results are also used to construct a measure of competitiveness that captures policy uncertainty and electricity constraints, as well as the REER. While the REER points to an improvement in competitiveness since 2010, the new competitiveness measure suggests competitiveness deteriorated in 2011–12 and in 2014. Both regression results and granger causality tests show that the new measure outperforms the standard REER in explaining export performance. ___________________________ 1/ Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2015), “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, NBER Working Paper No. 21633. 2/ Hlatshwayo, Sandile and Magnus Saxegaard (2016), “The Consequence of Policy Uncertainty: Disconnects and Dilutions in the South African Real Effective Exchange Rate-Export Relationship”, IMF Working Paper WP/16/113. 3/ Anand, Rahul, Roberto Perrelli, and Boyang Zhang (2016), “South Africa’s Exports Performance: Any Role for Structural Factors?” IMF Working Paper WP/16/24. New Weighted Index REER Alternative measuresof competitiveness (index, 0-1)Source: Hlatshwayo, Sandile and Magnus Saxegaard (2016). Page 33 Timing. Research shows that reforms that increase wage flexibility are particularly important in bad times as they offer firms channels other than retrenchments to cut labor costs. Therefore, the introduction of the proposed national minimum wage should be accompanied by reforms that increase wage flexibility, including exempting SMEs from collective bargaining outcomes, and the introduction of contracts where workers gradually accumulate benefits and job security. While the benefits from such reforms typically take time to materialize, they could lift growth in the short run if they boost confidence and signal policy consistency. Furthermore, these labor market reforms should be supported by product market reforms, such as lowering fees in telecommunications and transport, which could have large positive spillover effects to other sectors. Momentum. The authorities need to sustain reform momentum even as some impediments to growth are lifted and others become binding. Other countries’ experience highlights the importance of publicizing successful reforms. Authorities’ views The authorities re-affirm the primacy of the National Development Plan and are committed to speeding up its implementation. The NDP (2012-2030) is being implemented through successive 5-year Medium Term Strategic Frameworks, which inform the expenditure framework on which the Budget is based. Based on short-term circumstances and risks, the authorities revisit policy priorities each year and monitor and evaluate departments’ performance. The Nine-Point Plan is one such mechanism and puts forward immediate actions/priorities for government to boost growth and employment. Recognizing challenges to policy implementation at the sectoral level, the authorities are implementing the Malaysian style fast results framework, called Project “Phakisa,” to unblock implementation challenges through work with social partners on sector-specific interventions. To date, this style of intervention has been utilized to explore opportunities in the oceans economy, reforming education and primary health care, and transforming the mining industry. The authorities highlight that cooperation with social partners and policy certainty are imperative for higher inclusive growth and are optimistic that results are forthcoming. The dialogue with social partners focuses on three key areas: (i) restoring confidence and reaffirming the country’s investment grade rating; (ii) catalyzing employment growth in key sectors; and (iii) SOE reforms, including exploring opportunities for private sector participation. The interactions have already resulted in the creation of an SME venture fund, which includes not only finance, but also mentoring by seasoned business leaders for start-ups. Duval, Romain. and Davide Furceri, IMF (2016) “World Economic Outlook: Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies”. OECD (2009), “The Political Economy of Reform: Lessons from Pensions, Product Markets, and Labor Markets in Ten OECD Countries”. “Phakisa” means “hurry-up”. Page 34 To improve industrial relations, the government is finalizing a framework with social partners to reduce economic disruption caused by large, protracted strikes. Further, the national minimum wage will be an important tool in addressing income inequality: the modalities are being discussed, but the government will ensure that due consideration is given to minimizing possible adverse employment effects. The authorities point to bright spots of increased FDI in the automotive industry after the renewal of the support program till 2020 and of the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act till 2025, and higher numbers of tourist arrivals after the partial reversal of visa requirements: they hail these as examples of policy certainty. The government is committed to infrastructure investments and is exploring ways to boost the economy with a range of interventions. The authorities highlight that energy supply is currently stable. They have stepped up efforts to partner with the private sector and the renewable energy independent power producer (IPP) program has begun to diversify South Africa’ energy mix. Building on the success of these IPPs, the authorities have solicited bids for a coal-fired IPP. A similar process has been instituted for gas-fired IPPs. The BRICS New Development Bank recently approved a loan for electricity transmission lines. InvestSA is a one-stop shop that should facilitate FDI by coordinating and accelerating government departments’ approvals. A Red Tape Impact Assessment bill dedicated to reducing red tape is with parliament and the authorities are assessing the ease of doing business across various municipalities to improve the business environment, especially for SMEs. Nine of the largest municipalities are undertaking a peer learning process based on a World Bank survey to roll out good practices. Government and businesses are working closely via the Presidential Business Working Group to address regulatory and licensing issues, and the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Investment will oversee progress and alleviate indentified obstacles. To enhance competition, the Competition Act amendment (into effect from May 1) classifies cartel behaviour as a criminal rather than a statutory offence. The authorities are confident that South Africa will soon ratify the World Trade Organisation Trade Facilitation Agreement, and that tangible progress is being made for the Tripartite Free Trade Zone between the East Africa Community (EAC), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), and the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) with the framework agreement completed and the Tripartite Free Trade Area launched in June 2015. The African Union Heads of State and Government also have commenced negotiations for the Continental Free Trade Agreement. The authorities also maintain that the recently-approved Protection of Investment Act will ensure that South Africa continues to provide protection to foreign investors in a manner Page 35 consistent with Constitution and in accordance with international best practice and international customary law.