Acknowledging that “fiscal consolidation can no longer be postponed”, the authorities have announced a front-loaded package of measures to narrow the deficit and stabilize debt. Despite weaker growth, the 2014 MTPBS maintains the 2014 Budget targets, reducing the deficit from 3.9 percent of GDP in FY2013/14 to 2.5 percent of GDP by FY2017/18, which in the authorities’ framework results in debt stabilizing just below 50 percent of GDP. Expenditure ceilings over the next two years have been reduced by a cumulative 0.6 percent of GDP by freezing spending on nonessential goods and services, restraining the government wage bill, and reducing transfers to public entities, while aligning spending with the MTSF, protecting core social services, and enhancing efficiency. Revenue measures yielding a cumulative 0.6 percent of GDP over two years are to be announced in the 2015 Budget. The fiscal consolidation announced in the 2014 MTBPS is significant, but may not be sufficient to stabilize debt over the medium term. Automatic stabilizers are expected to result in a deterioration of the primary balance to -1.1 percent of GDP in FY2014/15 from -0.8 percent in FY2013/14 (the cyclically-adjusted primary balance is estimated to remain unchanged). In FY2015/16, the fiscal adjustment is expected to result in a 0.5 percent of GDP improvement in the primary balance, which is projected to reach 0.2 percent of GDP by FY2017/18 (Figure 9). Also, rising borrowing costs are expected to keep the consolidated deficit close to 3 percent of GDP. Under staff’s baseline scenario, debt is projected to rise to 56 percent of GDP by FY2019/20. Minister Nhlanhla Nene, MTBPS Speech, October 22, 2014. Page 18 Despite Weak Growth, Consolidation Path is Maintained (consolidated fiscal deficit, percent of GDP) 2012 Budget 2013 Budget 2014 Budget 2014 MTBPS Source: National Treasury Multiple risks affect the fiscal outlook. Differences in Debt Forecast due to Growth and Inflation (percent of GDP) Projections Revenues Staff forecast Nominal GDP Interest Impact of lower growth and inflation Authorities' forecast Sources: South African National Treasury and staff estimates Wage demands in public sector wage negotiations have started at 15 percent, though the MTBPS has signaled that “any departure from the path of CPI-linked cost-of-living adjustments will require either a reallocation of resources from other spending areas…or prompt a need to reduce government employment” and initial demands are typically significantly higher than final settlements. The weak state of several SOEs’ balance sheets could require further support from the sovereign, but the government has announced that future support will be deficit-neutral and contingent on sound restructuring plans with strong oversight. In addition, the planned national health insurance could add to spending pressures and the mooted nuclear power plants could entail a large public debt increase. Growth could continue to disappoint. Higher-than-projected interest rates and weaker terms of trade would also weigh on the fiscal accounts. In the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA), shocks to medium-term growth and contingent liabilities would raise debt to 66–72 percent of GDP by 2019, compared to the 70 percent of GDP threshold in the DSA and the 60 percent ceiling the 2013 Article IV considered appropriate for South Africa. Under the same shock scenarios, the financing need would exceed 15 percent of GDP, the DSA high-risk threshold. Stabilizing debt below 50 percent of GDP as the 2014 MTBPS plans is appropriate, and consideration could be given to reducing debt to safer levels in the longer run. For example, staff simulations indicate that meeting the 2014 MTBPS debt projection (50 percent of GDP) by 2020 would require about 1½ percent of GDP in additional measures. The resulting impact on growth would depend on the degree of frontloading and could be offset by an accommodative monetary policy stance, high credibility, and by implementing Saxegaard, M. and J. Torres (2014), “A Discussion of Fiscal Consolidation Options in South Africa”, South Africa 2014 Article IV Selected Issues. Page 19 pro-growth structural reforms. Protecting the poorest from the consolidation would cost only a modest amount and could be done within existing well-targeted social grants. Over the longer term, to ensure that debt remains below 60 percent of GDP, it would be advisable to maintain a tight fiscal stance to reduce debt to 40 percent of GDP and allow space for macro-fiscal shocks that could have a significant impact on South Africa. Adopting a formal debt anchor could enhance the transparency of the fiscal framework and strengthen the perceived commitment to fiscal sustainability by enforcing corrections for past slippages. The composition of the adjustment is a political choice, but cross-country analysis suggests the wage bill is relatively high and consumption taxes are relatively low. The increase in tax collection since 1994 is testament to the efforts of the South African Revenue Service, which have contributed to a robust tax system that compares favorably internationally. Tax revenue in percent of GDP is now close to the EM median. Revenue from consumption taxes, however, are relatively low, even though a World Bank study suggests South Africa’s consumptions taxes are broadly neutral due to zero-rating of basic food items. The Davis Tax Committee tasked with assessing the tax policy framework might identify other revenue sources. Primary expenditure as a share of GDP is close to the EM median, and the above-mentioned World Bank study finds that the progressivity of in-kind social spending is high compared to other countries. But, the government wage bill is one of the highest among peers. This is offset by the welcome absence of wasteful subsidies, a problem in many peer countries. Relatively Low Consumption Taxes (percent of GDP) Wage Bill One of the Highest Among EM Peers (percent of GDP) f f Source: WEO For further details, see Saxegaard M. (2014), “Safe Debt and Uncertainty in Emerging Markets: An Application to South Africa”, forthcoming IMF Working Paper. World Bank (2014), “South Africa Economic Update (Sixth Edition)-Fiscal Policy and Redistribution in an Unequal Society”. Page 20 As the 2014 MTBPS underscores, spending composition and quality is critical to ensure the fiscal strategy supports the objectives of growth, employment, and equity. South Africa’s challenges stem partly from poor service delivery. For example, although South Africa’s spending on education is high compared to other EMs, educational outcomes are poor (see Figure 2). The 2014 MTBPS recognizes that “our expenditure on public services achieves less than it should”. To improve spending efficiency, the Chief Procurement Office is working toward centralizing procurement and the 2014 MTBPS states that “we will continue to fight waste and corruption, supported by our audit institution and stringent monitoring and reporting requirements”. In addition, undertaking spending reviews, evaluating the impact of tax incentives in achieving growth and employment goals, and addressing the Auditor General’s recommendations could help improve the impact of government programs, and minimize the adverse growth impact of the consolidation while bolstering public support for it. Authorities’ views The authorities maintain that this year’s budget deficit slippage is likely to be small, but acknowledge fiscal risks. Despite weaker-than-expected growth, the contingency reserve, underspending in some areas, and the depreciation will likely offset part of the revenue underperformance in the first half of the year. The authorities acknowledge that fiscal risks are significant, but argue that “the fiscal package will mitigate some of these risks, including helping to reduce the current account deficit” while acknowledging that a “deterioration in the economic outlook…would require consideration of additional measures”. Though fiscal policy continues to be guided by the principles of counter-cyclicality, debt sustainability, and intergenerational fairness, the focus will rotate from counter-cyclicality to sustainability. The authorities remain firmly committed to fiscal sustainability and to taking the measures necessary to achieve this objective. The medium-term consolidation path outlined in the 2014 Budget remains an appropriate roadmap. Growth and inequality concerns will determine the pace and composition of the adjustment. Improving service delivery and spending efficiency will reduce the burden of adjustment and render it more socially acceptable. Further, stronger growth in the medium term will buoy tax revenue, allowing fiscal space to be rebuilt at the same time as spending can be expanded to achieve the goals of eliminating poverty and lowering inequality. Finally, while the government will support strategic SOEs, it will explore ways to divest nonstrategic assets and will encourage high standards of efficiency in public investment projects. Treasury officials deem that expenditure ceilings and a deficit reduction path remain appropriate anchors of their fiscal framework. The government aims to stabilize public debt and begin to rebuild fiscal space. This will be achieved by remaining within the primary expenditure limits set in the medium-term framework and reducing the primary deficit. 2014 MTBPS. Page 21 The authorities do not consider that adopting a debt-to-GDP ceiling or benchmark would be an appropriate fiscal anchor, given the multitude of factors affecting debt, including the debt management strategy, and believe that it might undermine the credibility of their well- understood fiscal framework. The authorities point out that several factors underpin South Africa’s sustainable debt position. They emphasize that net debt at about 40 percent of GDP remains low. The maturity of the government debt portfolio is well structured, and debt denominated in foreign currency is only about 10 per cent of the total, which limits the consequences of rand depreciation. A smooth maturity profile, with the average term-to-maturity above 13 years, and a large domestic institutional investor base suggest that the impact of short-term swings in global capital markets could be well absorbed.