Economic performance has been unsteady. Growth has been volatile owing to disruptions in oil production, weather conditions, and internal conflict. After the January 2012 shutdown, oil production recovered to more than 235,000 barrels per day at end 2013, only to fall to about 160,000 barrels per day in early 2014 as a result of the conflict. Despite an increase in private investment around Juba in recent years and a weather-related increase in agricultural production in 2012, non-oil economic activity is estimated to have declined since then. Because of the conflict, the forecast for the current fiscal year (ending in June 2015) is also subdued owing to constrained oil production and an expected fall in agricultural output (Table 1). The near-term macroeconomic framework is based on the assumption of a gradual normalization of the security situation in 2015, although serious risks remain (see below). The agreement, signed in September 2012, also stipulates that Sudan would assume all external debt of former Sudan subject to securing a “firm commitment” of international creditors for debt relief (i.e. Sudan’s reaching the HIPC decision point) no later than two years from the date of agreement (this was termed the “zero option”). Upon expiration of the two-year window, the two countries agreed in November 2014 to extend the zero option to October 2016. Sudan’s authorities have started implementing an outreach strategy with South Sudan under the auspices of the African Union High Implementation Panel to garner support for debt relief. Confrontations erupted between government and rebel forces (most of which splintered from the South Sudanese army) in four states. Other states, notably those in the Greater Bahr El Ghazal, were also affected by displaced populations. Heightened insecurity led to the evacuation of the IMF resident representative and four long-term advisors in December 2013. Technical advisors from all other agencies were also evacuated. As the situation in the capital Juba improved in 2014, Fund operations began resuming in August. Page 7 Figure 1. Republic of South Sudan: Oil Production and Real GDP Growth Oil Production (In thousands of barrels per day) Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Real GDP Growth (Fiscal year, in percent) Overall GDP growth Non-oil GDP growth Sources: South Sudanese authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Instability in oil receipts and the conflict led to financial challenges. The oil shutdown worsened the fiscal accounts. In response, the authorities cut expenditures by about 40 percent in real terms in 2012/13 and funded the budget with government deposits and short-term domestic and external borrowing. The resumption of oil production allowed spending to recover in 2013/14 and permitted servicing some of the debt. However, fiscal pressures re-emerged in 2014 as a result of the fall in oil production and the recent decline in international oil prices, leading to a projected worsening of the fiscal deficit in 2014/15 (Tables 2a and 2b). In addition, extra budgetary expenditures and financing shortfalls led to a continuous accumulation of domestic arrears that the authorities estimate could exceed 12 percent of GDP. Figure 2. Republic of South Sudan: Government Expenditure Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 period: third quarter of 2011) in Real Terms (Annualized, in billions of inflation adjusted South Sudanese pounds, base Inflation rose after independence but has declined since 2012. Higher government spending after independence and the initial monetization of the deficit caused by the oil shutdown pushed inflation to about 80 percent by mid-2012. Thereafter, lower food prices and fiscal austerity brought inflation down to near zero by mid-2013. As the fiscal situation is worsening again in 2014, shortfalls in revenues and in external financing are leading to a monetary expansion that threatens to bring inflation to double digit levels in 2015 (Tables 3 and 4). Sources: South Sudanese authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Figure 3. Republic of South Sudan: Twelve-Month Rate of Inflation (percent change) Proj. Headline Food and non-alcoholic beverages Sources: South Sudanese authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Recent inflation data is based only on consumer price indices for the cities of Juba and Wau as data for the city of Malakal are not available because of the conflict. As a result, the true inflation figures for 2014 may be higher than reported. Page 8 Figure 4. Republic of South Sudan: Official and Foreign currency rationing led to a parallel market for foreign exchange. The parallel market emerged in September 2011 as the Bank of South Sudan (the central bank) decided to peg the currency at an overvalued level and ration foreign exchange. The rationing entails a hidden transfer of resources from the government to those with privileged access to foreign exchange at the official rate. The number of foreign exchange houses grew rapidly as they became beneficiaries of foreign exchange allocations. Since 2011, the parallel market rate has responded closely to monetary stimuli and expectations about oil flows; the widening of the parallel market premium in recent months reflects the challenges regarding oil production and the expansion in monetary aggregates. (South Sudanese pounds per U.S. dollar) Sources: South Sudanese authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections. Parallel Market Exchange Rates Parallel rate Official rate Financing the projected fiscal deficit in 2014/15 will be difficult. Government deposits and foreign reserves have reached all-time lows this year (as of end-September 2014, net foreign assets of the central bank amounted to US$379 million, about 3 weeks of imports), and the availability of external financing has been limited owing to high levels of country risk.