20 YEARS AND CHALLENGES AHEAD South Africa Has Strong Institutions South Africa has made substantial progress in its first 20 years of democracy. As the government’s Twenty Year Review states, “…the country has emerged from its deeply divided and violent past into a peaceful, robust and vibrant democracy that has made major strides in improving the lives of its citizens”. Since 1994, real per capita GDP growth averaging 1½ percent annually and social assistance that now reaches nearly 30 percent of the population have resulted in much improved living standards, with increased access to education and healthcare (Figure 1). Strong institutions and policy frameworks have delivered macroeconomic stability and a globally-integrated economy. Malaysia Source: World Economic Forum Global Competetiveness Index, 2014-15 Philippines Argentina Indonesia Colombia Romania Thailand Hungary Ukraine Peru Poland Turkey China Mexico Russia Brazil Chile India Unemployment 1/ High Unemployment, Poverty and Inequality The country’s aspiration is a society free of poverty with low levels of unemployment and inequality, which requires addressing deep-seated structural issues. A 25 percent unemployment rate and differences in labor income and wealth have resulted in one of the most unequal societies in the world. Poverty is high relative to other emerging markets (EMs). These challenges largely result from structural problems. Barriers to entry in product markets and above-market-clearing wage settlements between labor unions and large firms contribute to insider-outsider dynamics that leave large segments of the population excluded from economic activity (Figure 2). Poor educational outcomes, skill mismatches, spatial divides, and limited opportunities for entrepreneurship during apartheid hinder employment and small and medium enterprise (SME) development. Supply bottlenecks, especially in electricity, but also in transport, are increasingly constraining growth. Tense industrial relations are leading to prolonged strikes, which are on an upward trend and result in lost workers’ income, lower production, and weak investor confidence. The Presidency, Republic of South Africa (2014), “Twenty-Year Review, South Africa 1994-2014”. See IMF (2013), “South Africa: 2013 Article IV Consultation”, IMF Country Report No. 13/303 and OECD (2013), “Economic Surveys: South Africa 2013” for more details on South Africa’s structural issues. Note: the highest value scaled to 100; a smaller value represents a better outcome. Sources: WDI, Presidency of the Republic of South Africa: 20 Year Review 1/ percent, 2014 2/ $1.25 a day, percent of population, 2011 3/ GINI coefficient: South Africa figure is from WDI, 2011 South Africa Latest South Africa 2000 EM Median 2010 Inequality 3/ Poverty 2/ Page 6 The South African economy is also facing challenges in the near term. Since 2010, growth, driven mainly by consumption, has been weak, and the private sector has created too few jobs, despite supportive macroeconomic policies and ample global liquidity providing easy financing for the large twin deficits. Going forward, headwinds stem from tighter global financial conditions, the uneven global recovery, and reduced policy space. Also, commodity prices and credit, which provided a fillip to growth in the boom years, are no longer as supportive. With the elections over, the government has an opportunity to make strides in addressing the country’s challenges. The African National Congress (ANC) won 62 percent of the vote in the May 2014 elections (66 percent in 2009). President Zuma stated that radical socio- economic transformation to push back the triple challenges of poverty, inequality, and unemployment is the priority in his second term. The policies, which have the large infrastructure program at its core, are articulated in the Medium-Term Strategic Framework (MTSF), which is the implementation roadmap of the National Development Plan (NDP) and the ANC manifesto. Structural economic reforms are executed through the Industrial and Policy Action Plan and New Growth Path, which emphasize the role of a developmental state and industrial policy, and through “budget decisions that contribute to making the NDP a reality” (Annex I). The 2014 Article IV consultation centers on policies to boost growth and job creation and strengthen resilience. In particular, it focuses on: (i) macro-critical structural reforms to generate job-rich growth and increase the economy’s flexibility; (ii) fiscal policy in a constrained environment; (iii) policies to further enhance financial sector resilience, as recommended by the 2014 Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA).