South Sudan maintains a fixed exchange rate. Given severe capacity constraints and lack of tools to implement monetary policy, and in line with staff’s view, the authorities consider that the fixed exchange rate regime mandated by the Central Bank Law is the best option at this point and that, if the exchange rate is set at a realistic level, it can serve as an anchor for prices. However, as oil receipts have proven to be quite volatile, the authorities do not preclude moving towards a more flexible exchange rate regime in the medium term. Foreign exchange market distortions are a major challenge. The minister of finance and the governor of the central bank agreed that the rationing and allocation of foreign exchange since 2011 have created significant distortions in the economy and reinforced perceptions of poor economic management by fostering corruption and rent-seeking, altering critical price signals, and detering foreign invesment. And while the paucity and quality of historical data does not permit the estimation of an equilibrium exchange rate, the persistent parallel market premium since September 2011 strongly suggests that the official exchange rate is overvalued. South Sudan maintains a The above measures are consistent with technical advice from the IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department. For a description of South Sudan’s tax system, see Appendix I. The premium on the parallel market rate has been between 30 and 80 percent since 2011, although most recently it has hovered around 70 percent. The exchange restrictions and the dual rate also lead to large quasi-fiscal losses as the government has not been servicing its debt to the central bank and has been building more debt. As of end- September 2014, this debt amounted to SSP 4 billion (8.8 percent of GDP). Page 11 number of exchange restrictions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV and one multiple currency practice subject to the Fund’s approval under Article VIII (see Informational Annex). The authorities concurred on the need for exchange rate reform. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MoFEP), recognizing that current policies are too costly for the budget and the economy, planned to carry out a reform of the market in 2013, but the reform could not proceed because of opposition by vested interests. The reform entails unifying the exchange rate and setting up two-way fixed rate auctions and an interbank market for foreign exchange where foreign exchange houses would bid for foreign currency only through commercial banks and the market would clear at a sustainable exchange rate without rationing (Box 1). During the Article IV discussions, the authorities indicated that they would like to proceed with the reform soon, but that the timing will depend on securing the necessary political consensus. They were also concerned about not having enough foreign reserves to defend a new parity. The staff noted that, if the exchange rate is set at a realistic level, the excess demand for foreign currency could be eliminated if backed by a consistent fiscal policy. In September 2013, the IMF’s Legal Department conducted a review of South Sudan’s foreign exchange system. The multiple currency practice subject to the Fund’s jurisdiction under Article VIII is related to an exchange rate guarantee arrangement established by the central bank with a commercial bank and introduced after South Sudan joined the Fund. Upon request by the authorities, the IMF’s Monetary and Capital Markets Department provided technical advice and training on all aspects of the reform in 2013. In November of that year, the central bank announced a 34 percent devaluation of the South Sudanese pound, but the announcement was reversed immediately and the reform was not implemented. Page 12 Build legitimacy in government policies. The reform will eliminate the large transfer of funds from the government to a few beneficiaries and provide reliable and transparent access to foreign exchange for the public and businesses. Unification of the exchange rate will help reduce the large demand for dollars created by the artificially low price at which they could supposedly be purchased. It will also signal a commitment to transparency and remove incentives for corruption. Non-Oil Revenue Expenditure Overall balance Financing Domestic (net) Foreign borrowing (net) NFA of the Central Bank (millions of U.S. dollars) Net Foreign Borrowing (in millions of U.S. dollars) Projected Inflation (end of period, percent) Box 1. Why Exchange Rate Reform Matters Reforming the foreign exchange market in South Sudan could provide the following benefits: Improved fiscal position and reserve buffers. Exchange rate unification, through an adjustment of the official rate to a realistic level, will substantially increase the value of oil and non-oil (i.e. customs) revenues. This would alleviate financing needs, thus reducing reliance on external borrowing and facilitate an increase in government deposits and in central bank’s foreign exchange reserves (the text table illustrates the estimated effect of exchange rate unification on key macroeconomic variables in fiscal year 2014/15). Simulation: Effect of Exchange Rate Unification in FY 2014/15 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) No UnificationUnification Difference Revenue and Grants Of which : Oil revenues Source: IMF staff estimates The figures assume exchange rate unification for the entire fiscal year. Including payment of arrears. Set up an interbank market for foreign exchange. The envisaged two-way trading by banks and the central bank is an important step to foster financial market development. The ensuing interbank foreign exchange market will facilitate the monitoring and managing of liquidity and pave the way for the introduction of monetary instruments and the establishment of a money market. Foster non-oil economic activity. The reform will instill clarity in the price for foreign currency and reduce foreign exchange market distortions which, in turn, will lower risks for import competing or non-oil export activities, notably agriculture, and promote foreign investment. Focus on core central bank activities. Scarce resources were used since 2011 to deal with administrative controls and exchange rate allocations. The allocations, at first roughly equal in volume to exchange houses and banks, became increasingly discretionary as central bank’s foreign reserves dwindled. The reform will lower administrative costs and allow the Bank of South Sudan to focus on its core mandates. To be successful, the reform requires (i) an appropriate communications strategy, (ii) a sustainable set of fiscal and monetary policies; (iii) a level of the exchange rate that is consistent with these policies; and (iv) proper regulations, including those to prevent overbidding by banks. The reform is expected to have a very small effect on consumer prices since most goods and services are already priced at the parallel market rate (staff estimates a pass through of 10-20 percent). Page 13