WEIGH ON GROWTH South Africa’s growth remains weaker than peer countries’. Real GDP growth declined to 1.9 percent in 2013 and to 1.3 percent (y/y) in 2014:H1 due mainly to protracted strikes and reduced electricity availability, as well as soft external demand (Figure 3). Stagnant real disposable income and decelerating credit growth to President Jacob Zuma, State of the Nation Address, June 17, 2014 Minister Nhlanhla Nene, 2014 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement Speech, October 22, 2014. For the purpose of this report, EM comparators are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Thailand, Turkey, and Ukraine. Commodity exporter comparators are Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Peru, and Russia. GDP will be rebased according to the System of National Accounts 2008 in November 2014. This may affect South Africa’s metrics, but is unlikely to affect the main trends and ratios significantly. Page 7 highly-indebted households weakened private consumption. A five month strike in the platinum industry—the longest since the return to democracy in 1994— was followed by a month long strike in the metal and engineering sectors. Investor confidence remains low and high-frequency indicators point to continued sluggish economic activity, though recovering from the strikes. While several EMs are facing growth South Africa's Growth Has Underperformed Peers 1/ (real GDP growth, percent) EM median Commodity exporters median Sources: WEO and staff calculations 1/ The light blue area represents the three center quintiles for other EMs. challenges, since 2010 South Africa’s growth is estimated about ⅔ of a percentage point lower per annum than expected given trading partners’ growth. The unemployment rate remained at 25½ percent in 2014:Q3. The private sector has recovered less than 40 percent of the jobs lost in 2008–10, while most new jobs during this period have been created in the public sector. Although difficult to pinpoint, the evidence points to lower potential growth. As in many EMs, several studies suggest that South Africa’s potential growth has declined in the past few years. This is consistent with staff estimates which indicate that potential growth has fallen to 2–2½ percent—implying a negative output gap of about ½–1¼ percent in 2014—as what were initially perceived to be cyclical factors turn out to be increasingly structural. Estimates of South Africa's potential growth (in percent) Klein (IMF, 2011) SARB (2013) SARB (2014) 1/ Montalto (Nomura, 2014) J.P. Morgan (2014) Kemp (Bureau for Economic Research, 2014) Tsounta (IMF, 2014) Staff's latest estimates HP filter Production function approach Multivariate filter 3.3 (1994-2010); 1.7 (2010) 3.9 (2000-07); 2.9 (2008-11) 3.0 -3.5 2 (2014); 3-3.5 (in the long run) 2.8 - 3.2 (average 2013-2017) 2.1 (2014) 2.4 (2014) 2.0 (2014) Sources: IMF, SARB, Bureau for Economic Research, J.P. Morgan, and Nomura. 1/ March, 2014, Monetary Policy Statement Declining productivity growth is the main driver behind lower potential growth, which might be related to increasingly-binding structural constraints. At the same time, the contribution of labor to potential growth has been limited and capital intensity has risen. South Africa was among the EMs most affected by risk-off episodes that started with Fed tapering concerns. As in other EMs, portfolio inflows slowed from May 2013 and Wu, Y. (2014), “Estimating South Africa’s Potential Growth”, South Africa 2014 Article IV Selected Issues. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Page 8 ) turned to outflows in the second and fourth quarter of 2013 and again in 2014:Q3, resulting in sharp sell-offs in the rand and fixed income South Africa Among the EMs Most Affected by Market Volatility markets (Figure 4). Large twin deficits, a sizable (change from April 30, 2013 to October 31, 2014) share of foreign holdings in rand government debt, and deep financial markets explain these outcomes, combined with accommodative monetary policy and absence of FX intervention. Equity inflows, mainly in companies with large operations abroad, fared better in 2014. Nevertheless, at end-October 2014, the rand- dollar exchange rate (the real effective exchange rate (REER) was 23 (11) percent below its end- 2012 level, and local bond yields about 110 basis points (bps) higher, raising borrowing costs mainly for the government and state-owned enterprises (SOEs). L ( E Source: Bloomberg, L.P. Philippines Mexico 10-Year Bond Yields Turkey Indonesia Poland Thailand Colombia Malaysia Romania Hungary Brazil China Peru India Chile Russia Bank lending rates, which matter more for households and private corporates and are linked to the policy rate, have also risen. Besides the South African Reserve Bank’s (SARB) 75 bps repo increase since January 2014, factors contributing to tighter domestic financial conditions include: Basel III’s more stringent capital and liquidity requirements; the placement of African Bank (a small bank specialized in unsecured lending) under curatorship in August 2014, credit rating downgrades, and tighter lending standards as asset quality of unsecured lending is deteriorating. The impact is falling mainly on households, especially in lower income segments, which are highly indebted and have benefitted less from housing and stock price rises. Private firms are less affected, as retained earnings typically fund a large share of their investment. External rebalancing has started, though limited considering the large depreciation. The current account deficit reached 5.8 percent of GDP (5.6 percent cyclically adjusted) in 2013 and 5.4 percent of GDP in 2014:H1, reflecting strikes, persistent competitiveness problems, soft terms of trade, and weaker trading partners’ demand (Figure 5). Moody’s August 2014 downgrade of the four largest banks was mainly triggered by the appropriate decision to bail in senior unsecured bond holders and wholesale depositors of African Bank, lowering the likelihood of government support for other financial institutions rather than a reassessment of these banks’ stand-alone credit rating. Other rating agencies did not downgrade South African banks at that juncture. S&P’s June 2014 downgrade and Moody’s November 2014 downgrade of the largest banks followed the sovereign downgrade. Mu, Y. and Y. Wu (2014), “The Impact of Tighter Financial Conditions on the South African Economy”, South Africa 2014 Article IV Selected Issues. Page 9 Although trade volumes have begun to adjust, South Africa’s exports have remained subdued despite a substantial and prolonged depreciation. A staff study suggests that the exports of firms in sectors with higher electricity intensity, greater product market concentration, and more marked labor market rigidities have responded less to the depreciation. v ( G Slow External Rebalancing Has Started Albeit Limited Thailand India Hungary Chile Poland Romania Philippines Malaysia Australia Russia Mexico China Brazil Peru Canada Indonesia Ukraine Argentina Colombia Turkey ) v v REER depreciation (avg. 2013Q3-14Q2 over avg. 2012Q3-13Q2) Sources: Haver, IFS Despite sources of resilience, vulnerabilities remain elevated. External. The external position remains weaker than implied by desirable policies and Hungary Malaysia Elevated Twin Deficits (percent of GDP, 2013) fundamentals (Box 1 and Annex II). The current account deficit remains some 2½ percent of GDP wider than the estimated norm, implying a REER overvaluation of 5-20 percent. However, the exchange rate adjustment alone is unlikely to bring about the required external rebalancing. With structurally-low savings, largely due to high unemployment and easier access to credit, the current account deficit is likely to remain elevated, unless structural constraints ease or tighter financing conditions force a sharp import compression. Gross financing needs of 17 percent of GDP, low FDI, large unrecorded transactions (whose sustainability is uncertain), and low reserve coverage contribute to high external vulnerability, despite a modest international investment position (-6 percent of GDP in June 2014), a favorable currency composition of external debt, and capital controls on residents (Figure 6). Philippines Russia General Government Balance Canada Indonesia Chile Colombia Argentina Mexico Source: WEO Australia Romania Thailand Poland Turkey China Brazil India Peru Fiscal. Despite fiscal efforts, rising government debt (46 percent of GDP in FY2013/14 from 27 in FY2007/08), above the EM median, contributed to an S&P downgrade to BBB- in June 2014 and to Moody’s downgrade to Baa2 in November 2014, both with a stable outlook. Significant SOE borrowing—especially by the electricity monopoly Eskom—means public sector debt is growing even faster. A large domestic institutional investor base mitigates refinancing risk for the government. Anand, R. and R. Perrelli (2014), “South Africa’s Export Performance: Any Role for Structural Factors?”, South Africa 2014 Article IV Selected Issues. In September 2014, the SARB started publishing quarterly international investment position data, in compliance with the IMF Special Data Dissemination Standard and the G-20 Data Gaps Initiative. Fitch revised the outlook to negative in June 2014, but kept its BBB rating. Page 10 Reduced Policy Space Inflation (y/y, percent) Gross Government Debt (percent of GDP, RHS) Inflation declined to 5.9 percent in September underpinned by lower fuel and food prices, after staying above the SARB’s 3–6 percent band for six months. Corporates and households. Private corporates have relatively low leverage and high, but declining, profitability. Household balance sheets, especially those of lower-income households, are relatively weak. High unemployment, inequality, and labor tensions constitute additional vulnerabilities that are not easily captured in standards metrics. SARB inflation target band Sources: StatsSA, Haver Box 1. External Sector Assessment ULC in USD 10-year average CPI-based REER Relative ULC in USD ULC-based REER Has Depreciated Less than CPI-based REER (Index, 2005=100) The IMF external balance assessment (EBA) estimates South Africa’s current account (CA) norm at percent of GDP and a CA gap of -3.2 percent of GDP for 2014. The external sustainability (ES) approach yields a CA gap of -2.6 percent of GDP. Due to wide confidence intervals and uncertainty related to the effect of depreciation in the pipeline, staff assess the CA balance to be 1½ to 3½ percent of GDP weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings. The EBA CPI-based REER regression estimates an undervaluation for 2014, but other competitiveness indicators, including the EBA CA and ES gap estimates, and South Africa’s declining share of world’s exports, continue pointing to overvaluation. Also, the unit labor cost (ULC)-based REER, which better captures competitiveness, remains closer to its 10-year average than the CPI-based REER. Based on the EBA CA gap and ES estimates, staff assess the REER as overvalued by 5-20 percent, although structural factors are hindering the CA adjustment to the depreciation. Non-FDI flows, particularly portfolio and other investment liabilities, have accounted for most of the financing of the CA deficit in recent years. A sharp slowdown of capital inflows would complicate the financing of the CA deficit, but these risks are attenuated by the floating exchange rate, the large share of long-term local currency bonds, and large assets under management of domestic institutional investors, subject to capital controls. South Africa’s exchange rate regime is one of the most flexible among EMs, and FX intervention is rare. Reserves cover 5 months of imports and close to 80 percent of gross external financing needs, but remain slightly below the lower bound of the IMF’s reserve adequacy metric. Gross external debt has increased to 41.8 percent of GDP in 2014:Q2 from about 25 percent of GDP in 2009, but short-term external debt (12.7 percent of GDP) remains manageable. The net IIP position (-6.1 percent of GDP in 2014:Q2) has improved with depreciation, due to 55 percent of external debt being in rand while most external assets are in foreign currency. Sources: SARB, Haver, IMF GEE, and staff calculations CPI-REER 10-year average Page 11 Financial. The FSSA concluded that financial sector risks and vulnerabilities are elevated but manageable given a challenging operating environment (Annex III). Capital buffers are relatively high, and regulation and supervision are strong (Figure 7). The main risks are credit risk, which is rising, reliance on wholesale funding, high interconnectedness, and a large OTC derivatives market. The placement of African Bank under curatorship last August has had limited spillovers. q E Banks Are Profitable and Have Relatively High Capital Buffers (percent, latest) Australia Canada Chile Peru China Malaysia Brazil Russia India Mexico Turkey Poland Indonesia Colombia Philippines Romania Hungary Source: IMF Financial Soundness Indicators Database Capital Adequacy Ratio