RESILIENCE Minister Nene: “…the biggest constraints to a faster rate of growth are domestic factors, in other words things that are within our powers to fix” The authorities’ macroeconomic policies and Fund views in previous Article IV consultations have been broadly aligned, but progress on structural reforms remains mixed. The authorities have adhered to stringent expenditure ceilings and committed themselves to debt stabilization, but have not adopted a debt anchor. The SARB has appropriately balanced elevated inflation and weak growth, but, with the rand under pressure, has not increased reserves. Structural reform progress includes ongoing public infrastructure projects, the Employment Tax Incentive, a renewed focus on SMEs, and the proposed social and economic impact assessments of legislative initiatives (Text Table 1). Also, South Africa recently concluded an Economic Partnership Agreement with the European Union, is negotiating the renewal of the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act, and pursuing greater integration with SSA. But some recent legislative initiatives (see paragraph 44) could adversely affect jobs and the business environment and could contribute to policy uncertainty. Structural reforms are macro-critical and indispensable, as macroeconomic policies are constrained by increasingly-binding structural impediments, vulnerabilities, and prevailing downside risks. The 2014 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) marks a shift in fiscal policy to address vulnerabilities, encouraging a rebalancing of the economy from consumption to investment and exports, and ensuring sustainable long-term growth and support for critical social programs. The SARB highlights inflation risks from further depreciation, a higher exchange rate pass-through as margins have fallen, and a wage-price spiral. Structural rigidities hindering the current account adjustment to the depreciation force macroeconomic policies to play a greater role in reducing the current account deficit by lowering domestic absorption, as external financial conditions become less benign. Hence, addressing structural constraints is essential to generate more growth and jobs, as well as to improve the external position, facilitate the economy’s rebalancing, and allow macroeconomic policies to be more counter-cyclical. A substantial increase in employment is the key component to achieve greater inclusiveness. Authorities’ views The authorities agree that the space for further countercyclical policies is limited and structural reforms are necessary to raise growth and lower vulnerabilities. The 2014 Minister Nhlanhla Nene, Budget Vote 10 Speech: National Treasury, July 21, 2014. Page 16 MTBPS notes that “debt levels have approached the limits of sustainability”. Similarly, the SARB highlights the challenge of subdued growth and relatively high inflation and the limited effectiveness of monetary policy in addressing the root causes of South Africa’s weak growth. The authorities also acknowledge that structural constraints are preventing the country from benefiting fully from the global recovery and the currency depreciation.