South Sudan is suffering tremendously in the aftermath of internal conflict and external shocks. The country descended into a civil war about three years ago, as a power struggle between President Kiir and Vice President Machar triggered a conflict along ethnic lines, which left thousands dead, nearly 2 million internally displaced, more than a million refugees in neighboring countries, and over 5 million out of an estimated total population of 12 million in need of humanitarian assistance. The war also caused significant damage to the country’s infrastructure and oil fields and undermined already fragile institutions. The sharp decline in oil prices from late 2014 caused further decline in foreign exchange receipts, government revenue, and real disposable income. The country continues to face multi-faceted challenges. After long delay, the Transitional Government of National Unity (TGNU) was formed in April 2016, in line with the August 2015 peace agreement. The return to Juba of former Vice President Machar paved the way for the new government, headed by President Kiir with Machar as First Vice President. However, the onset of fighting between the parties only three months later and the subsequent ouster of Machar have since challenged the peace process. Political uncertainty remains and clashes along ethnic lines continue in several regions of the country. Going forward, President Kiir’s recent call for an all- inclusive national dialogue is a welcome step. Success in restoring the country’s credibility will require urgent simultaneous efforts to immediately address the insecurity, the humanitarian emergency, and the economic and financial crises. These challenges are interdependent and failure to address any of them could quickly compromise a successful peace process. On the economic front, restoring macroeconomic stability will require tighter fiscal and monetary policies, and establishment of sound economic management to foster renewed growth and employment creation. Peace dividends. Lasting peace achieved through an inclusive political dialogue will be necessary to successfully restore macroeconomic stability, refocus on developing economic activities, and restore social services. Protecting public resources and putting them to productive and peaceful good use will be crucial. The challenge of returning to normalcy is to make sure that peace dividends are widely shared (Annex II). Implementation of recommendations from the 2014 Article IV consultation has been hampered by the civil war . In concluding the consultation, the Executive Board urged the government to implement measures to address fiscal imbalances, including exchange rate unification, and stressed the importance of peace and political inclusion to set the basis for growth and development. They supported the authorities’ intention to mobilize non-oil revenue, and emphasized the importance of improving expenditure management and preventing domestic arrears. Directors cautioned against increased central bank financing of the fiscal deficit, which would fuel inflation and further weaken the local currency. There has been little progress in these Page 10 areas, except for the exchange rate liberalization in December 2015 and, more recently, the lowering of central bank financing and new measures to improve non-oil revenue.