As the FSSA notes, the challenging operating environment for the financial sector puts a premium on tighter scrutiny of asset quality and ensuring adequate liquidity. The events surrounding African Bank provided a reminder that asset quality can deteriorate quickly in a weak economy and that even a small institution can entail systemic risk in a highly- interconnected system. The authorities’ decisive action, led by the SARB, in the case of African Bank limited contagion and the proposed bail-in of senior unsecured creditors is a welcome step in reducing the too-big-to-fail premium for the large banks. The ongoing twin peaks reform provides an opportunity to address priority areas to enhance financial sector resilience, including strengthening macro- and micro- prudential supervision and a more robust financial safety net. Macro-prudential supervision. The SARB should have the resources and authority to collect granular data and perform regular stress testing, especially of systemically important financial institutions. The tests should be conducted on a system-wide basis, including cross border operations, and be used to validate banks’ own stress test results (Text Table 2). Micro-prudential supervision. The design and implementation of the proposed twin peaks reform should address overlaps, gaps, and inconsistencies in supervision, with clear demarcation of supervisory responsibilities and accountability. In particular, group-wide supervision and greater coordination between supervisory authorities are essential given high interconnectedness and a large financial system (300 percent of GDP). Enhancing regulation of collective investment schemes, including introducing variable net asset values Under the planned twin peaks reform, the SARB will be responsible for the prudential supervision of banks, insurers, financial conglomerates and financial market infrastructures through a Prudential Authority. The Financial Services Board will become the Market Conduct Authority and will be responsible for consumer protection through its market-conduct supervision. Page 22 for money market funds, should strengthen market discipline and lead to higher banks’ retail deposits and less reliance on short-term wholesale funding. Financial safety net. Early intervention powers of the SARB and other prudential regulators should be enhanced. The intervention of African Bank demonstrates the need to introduce a resolution regime for banks and systemic nonbank financial institutions that is in line with the Financial Stability Board’s Key Attributes of Effective Resolution. A deposit insurance scheme founded on depositor preference would also be an important plank in the crisis management framework, which can potentially encourage a shift from wholesale to retail funding South Africa's Reserves Remain Below the IMF's Reserve Adequacy Metric (2013, reserves in percent) The flexible exchange rate has helped manage volatile capital flows, but higher reserves could also help prepare against surges in market volatility. South Africa’s reserves remain below the IMF’s reserve adequacy metric and most EMs’, many of which have recently increased reserves taking advantage of renewed capital inflows. The BRICS’ Contingency Reserve Arrangement would enable South Africa to draw US$10 billion (US$3 billion without an IMF- supported program). As the expected tightening of financial conditions puts a premium on strengthening buffers, the authorities could also consider pre- announced small regular FX purchases that would not interfere with the floating exchange rate regime (as done by Israel, Mexico, and Turkey). In addition, during risk- on episodes and in the event of large transactions, the SARB could be more opportunistic in purchasing foreign exchange. Although FX purchases beyond needed base money creation would have to be sterilized, the carry costs can be viewed as insurance costs that lower the probability and impact of a negative external financing shock and the country’s external funding costs. Sources: IFS, WEO, and IMF staff estimates Suggested adequacy range f Improving the business environment and allowing greater private participation in infrastructure projects could attract more FDI. Despite no capital controls on non-residents and recent changes to facilitate leveraging the country’s position as gateway to Africa, South Africa’s inward FDI remains low relative to other EMs. At the same time, greater outward FDI, which over time will generate higher dividends, has contributed to higher reliance on portfolio inflows to finance the current account deficit. Hence, attracting more FDI is likely to require improving the business environment and greater consistency of policies and legislative initiatives given South Africa’s recent sliding in some investor perception surveys, such as the World Page 23 Economic Forum. Further, allowing greater private sector participation in the large infrastructure projects holds the promise of raising more stable funding sources. The authorities could also explore more official financing. Finally, building on last year’s improvements of trade data, enhancing balance of payments statistics by lowering unrecorded transactions might uncover a more favorable picture of the funding mix. South Africa's FDI is Relatively Low (2010-2013 average, percent of GDP) Inwards Outwards Net FDI v Challenging Education and Labor, but Strong Institutions and Financial Markets EM Median EM Max EM Min Basic requirements Efficiency enhancers Innovation Sources: IFS, Haver, and Fund staff calculations f Sources: WEF Global Competitiveness Index (2014/15), OECD, and staff calculations. Authorities’ views The authorities concur with the FSSA assessment on financial stability. They agree that a weak economy and external vulnerabilities will continue to weigh on the financial sector, but underscore that the financial sector is sound. The intervention in relation to African Bank, which had a unique business model, is not symptomatic of wider problems in the system. The banking system remains robust, based on good levels of capitalization, liquidity, and profitability. The authorities also emphasize mitigating factors with regard to banks’ dependence on short- term wholesale funding, noting that wholesale deposits have historically been stable aided by prudential limits on domestic investors’ foreign exposure. To further improve systemic surveillance, the authorities will conduct top-down macroprudential stress tests to complement the existing bottom-up exercises conducted by banks and insurance firms and devote more resources to validate bottom-up stress test results. The authorities broadly concur with the FSSA recommendations to strengthen financial resilience. They find the BCP, IAIS and IOSCO assessments comprehensive and balanced, and consider them useful tools for enhancing the regulatory and supervisory framework. The authorities have already taken a number of recommendations into consideration in drafting legislation for the proposed twin peaks regulatory structure. In particular, they welcome the recommendation to break down silos and strengthen regulatory coordination, South Africa’s position in the 2014 WEF Global Competitiveness Report fell to 53 rd place from its best placement of 40 in 2005. Similarly, South Africa slipped to 43 rd position in 2014 from 28 th position in 2005 in the World Bank Doing Business Indicators. Page 24 proposing to include the National Credit Regulator in the membership of the new Financial Stability Oversight Committee. They also recognize the need to enhance group-wide supervision in view of the high interconnectedness, and for stronger regulation of collective investment schemes, including money market funds. The authorities have some questions on how best to implement deposit insurance, but view the recommendation in line with the Financial Stability Board’s Key Attributes. The authorities reiterate the importance of exchange rate flexibility. A large depreciation compared to other EMs has demonstrated their commitment to a free floating currency regime, which continues to be the key adjustment mechanism to external shocks. Exposure to exchange rate risk in banks’, corporations’, and households’ balance sheets is limited, and SOEs are required to hedge fully their exchange and interest rate risks. The authorities concur with the assessment that South Africa’s external position remains weak, as the current account deficit is above normal levels, especially considering the weak growth. Nevertheless, they note that part of the current account deficit reflects income payments related to non-resident purchases of rand assets, which are not caused by any particular policy setting or action. The authorities agree with the desirability of higher reserves and are mulling options to achieve this goal. The trend in portfolio flows this year has not provided opportunities to accumulate reserves, but the SARB remains open to opportunistic purchases. The Treasury, which has borne most of the cost of higher reserves in the recent past, is unable to commit resources at this stage given the fiscal situation. Also, the SARB remains concerned about sterilization costs increasing its losses and about investors’ possibly interpreting FX intervention in the manner suggested by staff as a change in exchange rate policy that could undermine capital inflows at a delicate juncture.