The 2016/17 budget reflects an ambitious fiscal consolidation objective . The fiscal trajectory in recent years has been unsustainable and strong fiscal measures are needed to reduce the deficit to a level consistent with price and exchange rate stability. The 2016/17 budget and the accompanying policy measures go a long way towards restoring macroeconomic stability. The budget presents a substantial reduction of the deficit (accrual) from about 31 percent of GDP in Page 14 Text Table 2. Fiscal Adjustment in 2016/17 (Percent of GDP) Text Table 3. Revenue Measures January 2017 (Percent of GDP) Budget 1/ include change in arrears and errors and omissions. Total revenue and grants Total expenditure 1/ Overall balance (accrual) Financing gap Closing the financing gap: Total Additional measures Salary raise in Jan 2017 Lower domestic financing from banks Oil price and other ajustments 2015/16 to 8½ percent of GDP and it intends to stop direct borrowing from the BSS (Text Table 2). The budget includes a string of revenue measures, including increases in sales and excise taxes, and introduction of a new departure tax, that could raise annual revenue by 1.4 percent of GDP (Text Table 3), and tough spending limits across the board, including on travel, purchases of goods and services, wages, and domestically financed capital spending. The savings on the latter implies a steep decline in real spending compared to previous years. Nevertheless, the mission urged the authorities to consider additional measures and adjustments to eliminate a budgeted external financing need. The adopted budget for 2016/17 implies domestic financing of 5 percent of GDP and an estimated external financing requirement of about US$200 million. Since no external financing is readily available, the budget implies a financing gap of 5.6 percent of GDP. Moreover, the assumed domestic financing, mostly through Treasury bill issuances, is unrealistically high given the undeveloped nature of the financial market. In this context, staff proposed additional measures, including (i) maintaining foreign currency-denominated operational spending notwithstanding the exchange rate adjustments; (ii) eliminating subsidies to Nile Petroleum (Nilepet) and raising domestic fuel prices to cost recovery; and (iii) reducing the cost of operating foreign diplomatic missions (the estimated budgetary effect in 2016/17 of these measures is 0.4 percent of GDP). Moreover, updated assumptions for the exchange rate, which has continued to depreciate, oil prices, and oil production in line with current production, are estimated to improve the budget by 7.2 percent of GDP. The additional measures and updated assumptions would close the financing gap while allowing for (i) reducing domestic financing by 1 percent of GDP, and (ii) raising civil servant salaries by 30 percent in January 2017. Given the recent steep decline in real wages for civil servants, staff proposed the salary adjustment and advised the authorities to let it primarily benefit the lower grades. • Raise sales tax from 15% to 18% • Raise excise tax on alcohol (50% to 100%) and • Impose 8% withholding tax on government contracts and 10% withholding tax on fees paid to contractors • Strengthen tax admin. and information exchange • Moratoriam on customs exemptions • Update customs valuation schedule • Departure tax of US$20 per passenger • Implement new customs tariff schedule tobacco from 30% to 50% Total impact of measures Page 15 The proposed measures are estimated to reduce the fiscal deficit to 1½ percent of GDP in 2016/17. This would reduce the domestic financing requirement to 4 percent of GDP and allow for repayment of external obligations in 2016/17. This would broadly achieve the objective of moving towards a domestic borrowing requirement of 2-3 percent of GDP, which in staff’s assessment is consistent with a return to price stability, and eliminate the need to borrow from the BSS. access to external financial support. Given improvements to the political environment and a path toward macroeconomic stability, the coming years would offer an opportunity to reinforce the gains while gradually shifting spending from security towards development and social services. With a small amount of external borrowing, and a deficit targeted at 3½ percent of GDP, domestic financing could be contained at 2-3 percent of GDP in 2017/18. Successful fiscal consolidation would contribute to regaining credibility and getting The mission welcomed the recent measures to improve public financial management (PFM). Consistent with staff recommendations (Box 3), the authorities have taken measures to require all revenue to be immediately transferred from government accounts in commercial banks to the treasury account, and established a Cash Management Committee. The mission urged the authorities to take additional steps to strengthen the PFM framework, including measures to enforce Box 3. South Sudan. Public Financial Management (PFM) Reforms South Sudan’s nascent PFM institutions and processes largely collapsed during the economic and political turmoil in recent years. With falling revenue, high inflation, and expenditure pressures, financial controls were circumvented. As a result, payroll control was lost, payment decisions became ad hoc and based on non- transparent criteria, expenditure arrears grew, and the use of the budget as a policy instrument has been undermined as significant spending takes place outside the budget. The authorities devised a short-term reform program in late 2016 to jumpstart the restoration of PFM integrity . Rebuilding the PFM institutions will take several years, but some immediate actions can be taken to reestablish core routines, enhance transparency, and strengthen the integrity of the system. The program, recommended by a FAD TA mission in mid-2016, aims at implementing a number of basic and quickly achievable PFM measures. For simplicity and in order not to divert limited policy implementation capacity into too many reforms at a time, it is organized in reasonably ambitious monthly milestones to improve budget preparation, budget execution, and accounting and fiscal reporting procedures. The PFM reform milestones for implementation include: enactment of the Public Financial Management and Accountability Act (PFMAA). verification of the 2015/16 non-salary arrears and formation of a clearance plan; completion of payroll audit and removal of ghost workers; establishment of a Treasury Single Account (TSA) structure; remittance of all revenue collected to the consolidated treasury account; registration of all civil servants (including military) on payroll system; enactment of the Public Procurement Bill; and Page 16 The mission urged the authorities to seek support from development partners to commitment control, conduct a payroll audit, strengthen reporting of public sector accounts, and adopt the Procurement Act. Staff also provided a set of recommendations to improve the effectiveness of the Cash Management Committee and complete verification of domestic arrears. develop and finance a program for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) Such a program would not only release budgetary resources toward other priorities but it would also support a move away from the current war economy. An estimated 70 percent of the wage bill is currently spent on the armed and organized forces; hence, a properly implemented DDR program that would provide an alternative source of living for redundant soldiers could be an important measure to achieve a sustainable budget. Over the medium term, a reduction in the need for humanitarian assistance could allow room for additional donor support for DDR. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed that strong fiscal adjustment is necessary to restore macroeconomic stability. The authorities agreed to revise the budget to eliminate the financing gap and pursue strict fiscal discipline to avoid any new borrowing from the BSS. Preliminary information indicates that the authorities already have taken initiatives to eliminate transfers to Nilepet and reduce costs in foreign missions. Moreover, based on preliminary reports on execution and financing, the envisaged budgetary tightening for 2016/17 has been broadly implemented in the early parts of the fiscal year. Moreover, the authorities have started implementing the needed reforms to strengthen the PFM systems.