Steps to enable support through country systems will be important. Over time, the authorities will need to improve service delivery and build legitimacy in the state. At present, donors are focusing on humanitarian assistance and have been encouraging the authorities to bring the conflict to an end, a precondition for increasing development assistance. At the same time, no aid would be channeled through the budget unless there are improvements in fiscal management. Therefore, a partnership between the government and donors under which the former undertakes key reforms to improve transparency and accountability in budget execution and expenditure management will facilitate the process, even if the actual service delivery has to be temporarily subcontracted because of capacity constraints. In the medium-term, private sector investment will also be essential to sustain growth and diversify the economy. In this regard, the staff noted that a stable political environment, investment in basic infrastructure, and the implementation of the economic and governance reforms described above will go a long way to increase competitiveness and attract investment, thus fostering economic diversification over time. In this process, improvements in the regulatory framework and attention to financial sector development will be important. Before the conflict broke out, the transport and the energy infrastructure were already seriously deficient. Less than 2 percent of the primary road network was paved and less than a third of the unpaved roads were in good condition. Power generation and transmission networks were lacking, serving a mere 1 percent of the population. Defined as non-oil revenue excluding grants minus domestically-financed current expenditure minus transfers to Sudan, minus transfers to oil producing states and communities. For a description of the activities of the World Bank and the African Development Bank in South Sudan, please see Republic of South Sudan, 2014 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex. South Sudan’s financial sector is very small and undeveloped, a cash-based economy with negligible levels of intermediation and private sector credit. Over time, measures to foster financial development should become a priority. For a description of the financial system and related issues, see Appendix 2. Page 18