Real GDP growth is projected to slow to 1.4 percent in 2014 and recover only modestly thereafter. The rebound to 2.1 percent in 2015 is predicated on improved labor relations allowing inventory rebuilding to offset the drag from financial and fiscal tightening. A muted recovery is expected over the medium term, as slowly easing infrastructure constraints and the global recovery provide some support for private investment and exports. However, Eskom recently announced that electricity shortages will continue even after the two new power plants start operations owing to overdue maintenance on the old system. Hence, growth is projected to average 2¾ percent in 2016–19, with unemployment remaining close to 25 percent. The current account deficit is projected to fall modestly to 4½ percent of GDP by 2019 as major import-intensive infrastructure projects are completed. Inflation is projected to fall further in 2015 on account of easing oil and food prices, and tighter monetary and fiscal stances. Risks are tilted to the downside. Further delays in relieving electricity constraints, more strikes, and lower-than-projected growth are deemed the key domestic risks, with adverse implications for the twin deficits (Box 2). External risks also weigh heavily, especially a sharp surge in global financial market volatility, whose impact on vulnerable EMs, including South Africa, could be particularly marked (Box 3). Lower global growth and commodity prices could weaken South Africa’s exports and growth, pressure the fiscal accounts, and result in retrenchments, though lower oil prices could be a partial offset. Also, the weak economy could undermine financial institutions’ asset quality. High interconnectedness, concentration, and the size of the financial system could amplify these risks. Combinations of these risks could lead to capital A 125 bps increase in the SARB repo rate is assumed by end-2017: the magnitude is broadly in line with analysts’ expectations, but the timing is postponed by one year. IMF (2014), “October 2014 World Economic Outlook”. Page 12 outflows, especially if accompanied by a downgrade to sub-investment grade. The growth and jobs outlook would brighten if substantial progress is made on structural reforms. Nature/Source of Threat Likelihood Expected Impact on Economy Policy Responses Box 2. Risk Assessment Matrix 1/ Abrupt surges in global financial market volatility Protracted period of slower global growth Further delays in the completion of power plants Further labor market disruptions Increased state intervention and reduced economic flexibility Deterioration in banks’ asset quality and liquidity shortfalls. M H Capital flow reversals could trigger a disorderly adjustment in the current account deficit, especially if accompanied by credit rating downgrades and spillovers to the financial system. M Protracted period of lower growth and worse twin deficits, especially if accompanied by lower commodity prices. Provide FX liquidity if dollar shortages appear. Increase policy rate to ensure adequate fiscal and external financing. May also need to tighten fiscal policy further if financing becomes problematic. Structural reforms needed to drive growth. Take additional fiscal measures to ensure debt stabilization over medium term. H Lower investment growth, and employment, with adverse implications for the twin deficits. Explore options to ration electricity demand more efficiently, greater private participation. H Weaker growth, worse twin deficits, lower investor confidence, and layoffs. Intensify dialogue with social partners. M Lower growth and employment, exacerbating vulnerabilities. Try to broker a national grand bargain to jump start structural reforms. M. Decreased lending to the private sector and increased spillovers in a highly interconnected system, with adverse implications for growth, the fiscal outlook, and financial stability. Conduct asset quality reviews, and adjust provisioning accordingly. Encourage banks to rely on stable funding sources. The CLF will also help once it becomes operational in 2015. 1/ The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Nonmutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. South Africa benefits from a high share of institutional investors, who typically provide more stable funding than retail investors but also tend to reduce exposure significantly with downgrades to sub-investment grade and take longer to return. For further details see IMF (2014), “April 2014 Global Financial Stability Report”. Page 13 Box 3. Channels of Inward Spillovers South Africa’s liquid and open financial markets are a source of strength, but also expose it to volatile capital flows. Gross external assets and liabilities each exceed 100 percent of GDP, though the net international investment position is small. Nonresidents’ holding of South Africa’s securities have increased markedly in recent years, reaching US$200 billion at end-2013 (57 percent of GDP). A high share of equities in non-resident holdings (about 70 percent) and the long duration of South Africa’s bonds entail that potential capital outflows would be markedly less. As U.S. investors account for half of all portfolio investment, South Africa’s equity and bond markets are mainly linked to financial conditions in the U.S. In contrast, BIS foreign claims statistics suggest bank flows depend more on European banks, especially U.K. banks. Financial and Trade Openness (percentof GDP, 2013) Imports of goods Exports of goods and services and services External assets External liabilities Sources: Haver and Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey. Rest of the EMs, good exit Vulnerable EMs, bumpy exit South Africa, bumpy exit Vulnerable EMs, good exit South Africa, good exit Rest of the EMs, bumpy exit Emerging Markets: Good and Bumpy U.S. and U.K. Monetary Exits (Real GDP, percent deviation from baseline) The impact of key advanced economies’ monetary policy normalization on South Africa will likely depend on the nature of the exit from unconventional monetary policies. The 2014 IMF Spillover report finds that a Fed exit driven by a stronger-than-expected recovery would generally benefit emerging markets including South Africa, though South Africa’s moderate trade linkages with the U.S. limits these benefits. But a bumpy exit due to unexpected monetary tightening would hurt EM growth, especially vulnerable ones: the impact on South Africa is in between the one on vulnerable EMs and the rest of the group. Inward spillovers could also occur through trade and commodity channels. China is the largest individual market for South Africa’s exports. A one percentage point slowdown in China’s growth is estimated to lower South Africa’s growth by 0.6 percentage points cumulatively over two years. This includes the impact through the prices of commodities, which account for over half of South Africa’s goods exports. However, a lower oil price (accounting for 20 percent of goods imports) could be a partial offset. Sub-Saharan Africa now accounts for 26 percent of South Africa’s exports, while the euro area’s importance has declined in recent years. Export Markets (percent of total exports, average 2010-2013) Sub-Saharan Africa Euro area China United States Japan Rest of the World Sources: South African Revenue Service, Haver, and staff calculations 1/ IMF (2014), “April 2014 World Economic Outlook”. Page 14 Rising trade and financial linkages may be increasing spillovers to, and spillbacks from, the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), though these have been muted thus far SSA has become the most important destination for nonmineral exports and a major investment destination for South African corporates and banks, possibly resulting in increased regional spillovers going forward. This offers promising opportunities for South Africa, but could also amplify the commodity price impact and expose the country to potential negative spillbacks from mispricing of risks and less developed regulatory structures. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agree on the near-term outlook and are more sanguine than staff about South Africa’s medium-term growth prospects. While the differences for 2014 are small, they view staff’s medium-term growth forecast as too cautious, pointing to continued strong public investment in infrastructure and easing supply constraints that should spur private investment and growth. The authorities also expect a stronger rebound in private consumption expenditure, anticipating higher employment growth, continued positive wealth effects, and reduced household debt levels. They emphasize that the MTSF will bolster confidence and reduce policy uncertainty. The authorities concur with the key risks and vulnerabilities, but highlight South Africa’s resilience. While acknowledging that domestic factors have played a key role in the recent growth slowdown, the authorities underscore that key trading partners’ protracted slowdown and soft commodity prices have been a major drag. They consider further delays in easing electricity constraints as the main domestic risk. While acknowledging that structural factors have lowered potential growth, officials argue that some policies can reverse this trend quickly, such as opening up borders for skilled workers. They are concerned about the slow adjustment in the current account deficit, given that U.S. monetary policy normalization will likely make external financing more challenging. However, the flexible exchange rate, the relatively low and mainly rand-denominated external debt and the large domestic institutional investor base provide resilience. Basdevant, O., A. Jonelis, B. Mircheva, and S. Slavov (2014), “The Mystery of Missing Spillovers in Southern Africa: Some Facts and Possible Explanations,” IMF Working Paper 14/03. See the IMF Pan-African Cross Border Project for further details of South Africa banks expansion into SSA. Page 15