Banking system indicators have improved in the last year: Banks’ asset quality and specific provisioning have strengthened. The domestic non-performing loans (NPL) ratio fell to 12.1 percent at end-March 2015 from 13.4 percent one year earlier, while provisions rose to 57 percent of NPLs—significantly above the euro area average (Figure 7). Banks have increased nominal capital , mostly through reinvested earnings and equity issuance. The phased-in Basel III CET1 capital ratio of the system has increased, reaching 11.8 percent (ranging between 9.7 and 12.7 in the case of the 10 largest banks), comfortably above the minimum regulatory levels. Spain’s large banks are on track to complete the fully-loaded Basel III capital schedule on schedule—or ahead of time in case of the two systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), which are benefiting from globally-diversified earnings. Page 17 Funding conditions have become more favorable, supported by the ECB’s Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs) and lower market financing costs, although resident deposits declined moderately mainly due to a shift to higher yielding instruments. Liquidity has also improved, with Spanish banks now fully complying with the phased-in requirement of 60 percent for the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). The profitability of the banking system has increased reflecting lower provisioning costs due to improved asset quality, stronger net interest margins, as deposit rates declined more rapidly than lending rates, and mark-to-market gains on holdings of government bonds linked to the ECB’s purchase program. Banking sector efficiency has continued to strengthen. Spanish banks lowered operating costs- to-income by 1.5 percentage points (to 49 percent) at end-2014, which compares favorably with peers in large euro area economies. Efficiency gains have followed significant consolidation of the banking sector during 2012–14, with the number of commercial banks falling from 50 to 15. Banks' capital ratios have strengthened Capital Ratios (Index, 2007=100) Tier 1 capital Risk-weighted assets Tier 1 ratio (rhs) 2007 Q2 2011 Q4 Sources: Bankscope, IMF staff calculations 2008 Q4 2010 Q2 2013 Q2 2014 Q4 Banks' earnings have been recovering Net Income (2005=100, rhs) Net Interest Margin (percent) Source: Bankscope, IMF staff estimates. Progress towards the banking union continues. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) now directly supervises Spain’s larger banks, representing more than 90 percent of the assets in the banking system. The transposition of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) in Spain, approved in June 2015, constitutes an important step in implementing an effective European resolution framework. The law established a two-tier setup, with the Bank of Spain being responsible for pre-resolution tasks and the national bank resolution fund (FROB) responsible for all resolution functions in the execution phase. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) has noted that further progress is needed to bring the macroprudential framework in line with its recommendations. Against this background and with the outlook improving, the ongoing deleveraging process has become more selective. The overall level of credit in the economy is still declining but the pace has slowed from around -10 percent at end-2013 to -5 percent year-on-year in April 2015, and it is expected to turn positive by the end of this year. Meanwhile, new credit is being extended, Page 18 especially to non-financial corporations outside real estate and construction with healthy financial positions. New household credit is also growing. The improved credit outlook is mostly demand driven. In the meantime, the process of dealing with the public legacy of the financial crisis continues (see Box 3). However, banks still face challenging operating conditions. Upcoming international regulations on fully-loaded Basel III capital, total loss-absorbing capital (TLAC), and minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) will likely demand additional loss- absorbing capacity, including capital, for most banks. A change in the treatment of deferred tax assets (DTAs) might require additional capital buffers for some banks. A prolonged low-interest rate environment in the euro area could compress lending margins, while some banks continue to face significant costs from foreclosed assets and high levels of NPLs. In this context, pressures to cut operational costs are likely to persist. Continued strengthening of the Spanish banking sector will support growth as credit demand picks up . It remains important to further encourage banks to increase high-quality capital (e.g., through equity and restraint on dividends and bonuses) and reduce the carrying costs (e.g., for administration, capital, and funding charges) associated with high levels of NPLs. This will ensure more favorable credit conditions for financially-sound households and corporates, and make it less likely that credit growth will be constrained by supply as the recovery matures. The recent insolvency reforms are significant steps to help facilitate private sector deleveraging. Consistent with previous staff recommendations, in early 2015 Spain introduced a “fresh start” for individual entrepreneurs and consumers. The new mechanism allows for a conditional discharge of individuals’ residual debt after liquidation of assets in bankruptcy. This could encourage liquidation of nonviable businesses whose debt is inseparable from that of individuals (e.g., sole proprietorships) and help households reduce debt to sustainable levels. Other reforms include amendments to the out-of-court restructuring mechanism for SMEs and the restructuring and liquidation procedures within insolvency to facilitate restructuring of viable firms and the sale of businesses as going concerns. Implemented effectively, the “fresh start” can encourage demand and entrepreneurial activity in the formal sector, while preserving Spain’s strong payment culture. Staff analysis suggests that this could potentially reduce the stock of household debt by around 3–4 percent and the level of corporate debt by about 1–2 percent relative to the baseline, which would contribute to higher private consumption and investment (Box 1). At the same time, the negative effects on bank earnings are estimated to be limited. Correspondingly, banks are unlikely to face significant impact on their ability to extend credit. See fourth chapter of Selected Issues Papers. Page 19 However, there are critical challenges related to implementation, including: Achieving the greatest possible clarity regarding the post-liquidation payment plan and conditions that would lead to a revocation of the fresh start would reduce uncertainty for debtors and limit potential for abuse, ultimately maximizing the positive effects of the reform. The inclusion of public creditors —fully involving them in all restructuring processes of the insolvency regime and making at least those public claims considered ordinary (i.e., 50 percent of tax and social security claims) subject to discharge after liquidation—would increase the effectiveness of the system and avoid creating incentives for debtors to strategically prioritize payments to public creditors at the expense of private ones, with negative effect on payment culture. Staff estimates that the possible immediate impact on the public sector will likely be small, and it could be positive in the longer term if formal-sector activity increases. Authorities’ view There was broad agreement on the assessment of banks. The authorities stressed the progress made in dealing with crisis legacies and the continued strengthening of the banking system in terms of capital ratios, profitability, asset quality, funding and liquidity conditions, while acknowledging the challenges coming from a prolonged low interest rate environment and new regulatory issues, including the prospects for higher international loss-absorbency requirements in the coming years. The authorities also generally concurred with staff’s views on the reforms to the insolvency regime. They agreed with the need to clarify certain key elements in the “fresh start” reform, and pointed out that Parliament has already approved amendments to do so. While taking note of staff’s concerns regarding the exclusion of public creditors, they did not consider that this would limit the reform’s effect, and pointed to potential fiscal repercussions of excusing even bankrupt firms from their obligations to the public sector and the harmful impact on the current tax deferment policy. The authorities broadly agreed that the short-term impact of the recent insolvency reforms on banks’ earnings was likely to be limited while stressing that the effects on Spain’s strong payment culture deserved careful monitoring.