Social indicators tightly linked to unemployment Unemployment rate (percent) and population at risk of poverty and social exclusion (million) The labor market reforms are helping, but unemployment remains very high. The 2012 reforms increased room for workers and firms to adjust wages and hours worked, and staff analysis suggests that this helped protect employment during the recession and promoted job creation during the recovery (Figure 5). In 2014, average real wages increased very moderately and employment growth strengthened considerably, reaching over 3 percent by end-2014—a pace not seen since 2007—and exceeding output growth. The unemployment rate has come down, but remains too high. As of the first quarter of 2015, more than 23 percent of the active labor force and more than half of those under 24 years old were looking for a job. Moreover, about 60 percent of the unemployed have been jobless for over a year, many of them low-skilled, and risks of poverty and social exclusion have been rising with the level of unemployment since the crisis. Unemployment Risk of poverty and social exc. (RHS) 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Source: Eurostat. Despite the reforms, wage dynamics still do not adequately reflect differences in business conditions across firms. Not enough firms are yet making use of the flexibility clauses introduced by the reforms to deviate from sector-level wage agreements. This reflects, among other things, administrative and legal costs to firm-level wage agreements, and uncertainties over the abolishment of the automatic extension of expiring collective wage agreements (ultra-activity), where recent court decision could limit firm-level adjustment going forward. As a result, it remains difficult for the labor market to adjust to variations in sectoral or regional demand. This also reduces See first chapter of Selected Issues Papers. Page 14 the incentives for workers and capital to move from low- to high-productivity firms, including in the tradables sector, which slows Spain’s much needed adjustment towards a model of faster and more export-oriented growth. Labor market duality remains high. Measures to reduce duality, including statutory limitations on the use of temporary contracts and hiring subsidies for new permanent workers— which were modified earlier this year to benefit low-income earners more—appear to have contributed to a pickup in employment based on permanent contracts. However, after dropping sharply during the recession, the share of temporary jobs in overall employment has remained fairly steady at around 25 percent, still among the highest among European peers. Such high duality in the labor market exacerbates downward wage rigidity, lowers workers’ productivity, and concentrates the burden of market adjustment on those temporarily employed. This suggests there is still significant scope for measures that will foster high-quality job creation. Further action in this direction will help reduce unemployment and, thereby, raise Spain’s longer-term potential for inclusive growth. Steps toward this goal include the following: Setting the right labor market conditions . Keeping wage growth in line with developments in productivity and external competitiveness is key for promoting strong and sustainable employment growth in the medium-term. Promoting firm-level adjustment . Making sure that wage dynamics reflect differences in firm- and sector-specific conditions will boost aggregate productivity and income. To this end, it is important that the existing options for firm-level adjustment are used as needed, and that remaining obstacles to firm-level wage bargaining and opt-out, particularly for small firms, are removed. Lowering duality . The new incentives for permanent hires are better targeted but temporary in nature. At the same time, the cost of dismissing a permanent worker is still materially higher than that for a temporary one. This gap should be closed, for example by introducing a single contract with tenure-based dismissal costs in sectors without high seasonal turnover. Alternatively, other approaches could be considered—for example, uniformly financing dismissal costs through regular employer contributions to a common fund so that workers are adequately protected and employers’ hiring decision are not distorted toward excessive reliance on temporary contracts. Finally, reducing legal and administrative uncertainties in collective dismissals and streamlining the application of objective criteria for fair dismissals would also help support permanent hiring. Making Active Labor Market Policies count . The recent measures to improve the skills of the long- term unemployed and low-skill youth are important. However, to be effective these programs need to be closely monitored, evaluated, and, if needed, fine-tuned, starting with the more transparent use of regional coverage and enforcement data. Steps to increase the effectiveness of public and private job-placement agencies also deserve consideration. Page 15 Authorities’ view The authorities broadly agreed with the assessment of the impact of labor market reforms and most of the remaining challenges. They stressed that the reforms have been a crucial driver of the Spanish recovery and the pickup in employment. They shared the view that firm and sector-level adjustment should improve further and suggested that, given the significant scope of recent reforms, more time is needed for the social partners to adapt to the new rules before considering additional measures. The authorities recognized that duality is still a problem but noted that the solutions to address it are complex.