France Italy Euro area Rebounding growth Real GDP (Index, 2007=100) Spain’s recovery has gathered speed, but unemployment is still high. The economy expanded at 1.4 percent in 2014, and growth accelerated significantly in the first half of this year. This reflects the continued rebound in business investment and private consumption, which came on the back of rising confidence supported by strong policies (Figure 1). Significant external tailwinds are helping, including from lower oil prices, the depreciation of the euro, and the European Central Bank’s (ECB) expansionary monetary policy. Financial conditions remain supportive, with sovereign bond yields about 5¼ percentage points below their 2012 peak, despite some recent rise. Borrowing costs of Spanish corporates and households have fallen as well, although the decline came later. Employment has increased with the rebound in demand and moderate wage growth. At the same time, a significant share of the jobs created still takes the form of temporary and part-time contracts. More than 5 million Spaniards, over 23 percent of the labor force, remain unemployed, many of them young. 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Sources: WEO, IMF staff calculations. Germany Declining lending rates to SMEs since mid-2014 Short-term Interest Rates on Small Loans to NFCs 1/ (%) Italy Euro Area France Germany Increasing Confidence Confidence Indicators % balance Consumer Retail trade Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15 May-15 Source: Haver Analytics. Jan-05 Jul-06 Jan-08 Jul-09 Jan-11 Jul-12 Jan-14 Jul-15 Apr-15 Sources: Bank of Spain; ECB; IMF staff calculations. 1/ Small loans up to 1-year maturity and up to €1million. The reforms are making a difference. Labor market reforms and moderate wage growth have supported job creation and helped Spain regain competitiveness lost during the pre-crisis boom. The Market Unity Law has begun to address some of the obstacles for firms to grow and raise productivity. The progress achieved by financial sector reform, supported by the European Stability Mechanism, has been confirmed by the positive outcome of the ECB’s comprehensive assessment. Together with continued fiscal consolidation, these reforms have reassured markets, consumers, and investors alike. Page 10 Deleveraging is slowing and new credit is being extended, especially to firms with strong financial positions. New credit to households is also growing. This comes on the back of improving banking sector performance, with increased capital and earnings, improved asset quality and provisioning, and more favorable funding conditions. There are also signs that the real estate sector might have begun to turn the corner. After a long period of decline, housing prices started to increase moderately in the second half of 2014—albeit unevenly across regions—and investment and employment in construction have started to recover (Figure 2). The current account maintains a small surplus, but external vulnerabilities remain. As in past recoveries, imports accelerated with the strong rebound in domestic demand. However, the external current account registered a 0.8 percent of GDP surplus in 2014. This reflects, in part, healthy export growth supported by regained competiveness from price and wage moderation. Employment in the tradables sector has been relatively resilient throughout the crisis as more firms turned towards external markets. However, Spain’s negative net international investment position (NIIP), while expected to improve in the medium term, is still among the highest in Europe at 93 percent of GDP in 2014 (Figure 3). Given the need to improve the NIIP, the cyclically adjusted current account remained ½ to 2½ percent of GDP weaker than what would be consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings, and staff assesses that the real effective exchange rate (REER) is still about 5–10 percent overvalued (see Appendix I for the External Stability Report, ESR). Against this background, the growth momentum is expected to carry on this year and next. The forces driving private consumption and corporate investment are expected to weaken only gradually, while construction investment should continue its moderate recovery. Net exports will profit from the gradual pickup in euro area activity and the expected continuation of improvements in competitiveness, helped by moderate wage growth. Overall, real GDP growth is expected at 3.1 percent in 2015 and 2½ percent in 2016, well above the euro area average. Spain's unemployment has historically been high Unemployment rate (Percent) However, deep structural problems remain and vulnerabilities persist, limiting Spain’s growth potential in the medium term. As the recovery matures and tailwinds dissipate, growth is bound to decline to levels closer to Spain’s still very low rate of potential growth of less than 1½ percent. Absent further reforms, this will leave unemployment at its estimated structural level of about 16½ percent even as the output gap closes. Moreover, a strong link between domestic demand and imports is expected to persist and will continue to curb the See fifth chapter of Selected Issues Papers. Euro area Sources: IMF WEO, IMF staff calculations. Page 11 scope for current account improvement as growth strengthens. Multiple factors are holding back the prospect for well balanced growth in the medium-term: Labor market challenges. Structural unemployment is persistently high and the crisis has lengthened unemployment spells and aggravated skill deficits, especially for the young. Moreover, duality is still pervasive, and labor market participation is declining. A lack of differentiation in wage dynamics across firms slows the reallocation of labor toward more productive sectors. Low productivity. Spanish firms tend to be smaller, less productive, and less export-oriented than their European peers. A number of obstacles prevent them from generating economies of scale domestically as well as externally, which would allow them to compete more successfully in global markets and against imports. Continuing deleveraging Private and public debt levels remain high, at 235 and 98 percent of GDP, respectively. Household debt, in particular, is still significantly above its pre-crisis levels (Figures 4 and 8). Hence, deleveraging is likely to proceed, continuing to weigh on domestic demand (Box 1). Vulnerabilities amplify risks on the downside. Risks of contagion from developments in Greece remain significant. Although the initial market reaction from the recent breakdown in negotiations with official creditors and the Greek referendum have been contained, there is still substantial uncertainty about potential spillovers. Depending on the final outcome, heightened uncertainty could weigh on market sentiment and renew sovereign and financial sector stress in Spain. These risks, however, would be mitigated if timely and effective policy measures are implemented at the euro area level, including—if necessary—an expansion of the asset purchase program and additional longer-term liquidity support for banks. Domestically, a firm commitment to complete the reform agenda and to reduce the level of sovereign debt through continued fiscal consolidation would help anchor market confidence. Risks: Still High Vulerabilities Exacerbate Downside Risks Likelihood Impact Upside Better-than-expected domestic demand dynamics. Weak euro area demand and persistently low inflation. Sharp asset price adjustment and decompression of credit spreads. Euro area bond market contagion. Downside Low High High Low/Medium Reversal of past structural reforms that undermines confidence and growth. Low/Medium High The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). See Risk Assessment Matrix (Table 3) for further discussion of risks and methodology. Page 12 In this context, a key risk is a reversal of past reforms. Such a reversal would create uncertainty and could hamper the recovery, especially if the external environment were to deteriorate significantly. On the external side, other important risks are weaker than expected demand and inflation in the euro area and a sharp asset price adjustment and decompression of credit spreads (see Appendix II for the full Risk Assessment Matrix). Authorities’ view The authorities have higher forecasts for medium-term growth while agreeing that remaining vulnerabilities and structural issues require attention. They broadly shared staff’s view about the short-term outlook and risks and stressed that high growth and progress achieved in the correction of imbalances offered important protection against a possible deterioration of the external environment. In this context, they emphasized the role played by past reforms in explaining the strong economic rebound and the progress already made in reducing domestic imbalances, especially with regard to public finances, private sector deleveraging, the financial sector, and employment. They expect higher growth in the medium term as the output gap is still large, but agreed that there was still significant scope to improve Spain’s long-term growth potential. They considered that external imbalances have already been reduced amid structural competitiveness improvements, and pointed out that, unlike in previous recoveries, higher GDP growth rates have been accompanied by current account surpluses. At the same time, they recognized the need for further competitiveness gains.