Productivity growth is fundamentally weak, partly reflecting the dominance of small firms. Spanish firms tend to be more numerous, smaller, less productive, innovative, and export- oriented than those of most European peers. Firms with fewer than 50 workers employ nearly two thirds of the labor force while generating only about half of the value added in the economy. At the same time, the productivity gap between small and large companies is wider than in many other European countries. Staff analysis suggests that, for example, lowering the share of small firms to match that of Germany and closing the productivity gap between small and large firms to German levels could raise the level of aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) by as much as 9 percent, with most of the improvement coming from the reallocation of employment between firms. A number of obstacles prevent firms from expanding to exploit economies of scale. Staff analysis shows substantial variation of TFP across firms’ size, sector, and region. This regional heterogeneity could point to market fragmentation from the proliferation of regulatory requirements and practices (such as permits and standards) at the regional and local level, which constitute barriers to entry and inhibit competition. Other obstacles to growth include size- dependent thresholds in regulation (e.g., in reporting, auditing, and labor-related regulation) and taxation, as well as limited financing access (Figure 6). Creating the conditions for small- and medium-size enterprises (SME) to grow is critical. A number of measures can help generate crucial economies of scale, both in domestic and external markets. Exploiting these would increase productivity, long-term growth, and employment. Fostering competition. Fast and effective implementation of the Market Unity Law and moving ahead with the long-delayed liberalization of professional services would facilitate market entry and allocation of resources to their most productive uses. Lowering constraints. The recent corporate tax reform is set to reduce fiscal disincentives for companies to expand. However, a careful review and assessment of all size-related rules and regulations is needed to identify and eliminate other unwarranted obstacles to growth. See second chapter of Selected Issues Papers. Page 16 Supporting exports. While the number of exporting firms has increased significantly since the crisis, the degree of internationalization of SMEs is still relatively low. Against this background, the government strategy for boosting internationalization could do more to help SMEs enter export markets and remain competitive, for example by helping reduce the high fixed costs of exporting—including market penetration and other trade costs, and fostering innovation. Relatively low export-to-GDP ratio Ireland Hungary GDP share of exports and total labor force, 2014 (OECD countries) Netherlands f c p s c i v s d s d g f s p x Estonia Slovak Republic Slovenia Austria Denmark Finland Norway Israel Czech Republic Belgium Switzerland Iceland Sweden Portugal Greece New Zealand Korea Poland Germany Chile Canada France Australia Mexico Italy United Kingdom Japan Turkey United States Total labor force (Logs) Sources: WEO, IMF staff calculations In this context, efforts to strengthen smaller firms’ access to finance are still important. While bank lending will remain dominant, efforts to increase market-based financing for SMEs, including via alternative exchanges, venture capital, and securitization should continue. The accuracy of financial reporting and transparency could be increased, for example by incorporating consolidated financial information of SMEs in the centralized database and register. For the financing of new firms, the ongoing program providing guarantees and direct financing through ICO, a state-owned financial institution, remains highly relevant and could be complemented by European efforts (including by guarantees extended under the Juncker plan), while making sure they support all SMEs lacking market access. Authorities’ view The authorities agreed on the need to help firms grow and stressed recent progress in this area. They noted that the implementation of the Market Unity Law is ongoing and that differences in regulatory norms and practices across Spain, which among other factors limit firm growth, are being addressed. They emphasized the link between firm size and export orientation, pointing out that, despite recent advances, additional efforts are necessary to support the internationalization of Spanish SMEs.