Sustaining the current high levels of growth over the medium term and reducing vulnerabilities requires additional policy efforts. Spain has rebounded strongly and employment is increasing. However, the level of unemployment is still painfully high and domestic and external vulnerabilities remain. Sustaining job-rich, inclusive growth at the current pace, transitioning to a more balanced and export-oriented growth model, further reducing public and private indebtedness, and maintaining confidence call for additional structural reforms and gradual but sustained fiscal consolidation (Box 2). Acting while economic activity is strong and monetary policy is very supportive will make these measures easier to implement and add to their effectiveness. The main priorities are: Reforms benefit from macroeconomic support Simulated impact of wage moderation on GDP in Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain 1/ (difference from baseline, in percent) adding structural reforms (G20 growth strategy) moderate wage growth adding QE Improving labor market performance Keeping wage growth aligned with productivity and external competitiveness developments, Years since reform Source: Decressin and others (forthcoming), Staff Discussion Note. 1/ Model-simulated impact of wage moderation relative to the rest of the euro area, QE support at the ZLB, and implementation of the G20 growth strategy commitments. Page 13 ensuring wages reflect differing business conditions across firms, and strengthening the skills of the long-term unemployed will enhance prospects for higher and more inclusive growth. Enhancing small firm growth. Removing obstacles for Spain’s many small firms to grow will allow them to scale up both domestically and externally, and raise productivity. Facilitating private debt reduction. Further reducing firm and household debt will support investment and growth going forward. Continued strengthening of banks will ensure they support growth as credit demand recovers. Anchoring confidence . Continued gradual and growth-friendly fiscal consolidation, well coordinated across all levels of governments, will help maintain strong market confidence.