Sri Lanka had some 235 public enterprises representing 17 percent of the nation’s economic activity in 2010. Although some SOEs are profitable and performing well, collectively they represent a drag on the private economy and a drain on public finances (both directly, and through the state banks, which fund the largest SOEs). The obligations noted above are largely tied to SOEs, which highlights the need for financial discipline. The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC, the monopoly in fuel refinery and distribution) and the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB, the state electricity company) have incurred financial losses in fulfilling non- commercial obligations because of implicit energy subsidies—retail fuel and electricity prices have been set below cost-recovery levels. Sri Lankan Airlines has been a loss-making SOE, reflecting competition with international airlines operating within the region. Against this background, the authorities will introduce far-reaching SOE reforms, as elaborated below (MEFP ¶12). A resolution strategy for Sri Lankan Airlines will be completed by September 2016, effectively removing this company from the government’s accounts. Enhance oversight and financial discipline of SOEs. Drawing on FAD TA recommendations, six major SOEs will establish (with agreement of MOF and the relevant line ministry) a Statement of Corporate Intent (SCI), to include: the SOE’s objectives and multiyear corporate plan; capital expenditure and financing plans; explicit financial and non-financial targets; and cost of non-commercial obligations. The authorities will also consider strengthening the legal framework for the governance and oversight of SOEs. Reform of energy and other utility subsidies. The authorities will introduce a formula- based automatic pricing mechanism for petroleum products, so as to ensure that future losses by the CPC and large retail adjustments are avoided. Also, the Public Utilities Commission will be granted enhanced authority to set electricity and water tariffs in a cost- reflective manner. To support these objectives, the fiscal cost of non-commercial obligations for SOEs will be included in the central government budget.