frontier and developing economies in recent years, albeit somewhat volatile. After falling to 6.3 percent in 2012, real GDP growth accelerated to 7.3 percent in 2013—driven primarily by a pickup in services activity, and supported by manufacturing and construction, but also benefiting from an increase in net exports. Price pressures meanwhile remained moderate, with headline and core inflation reaching 4.7 and 2.1 percent, respectively—the fifth consecutive year of single digit inflation and a marked contrast to the average of 12 percent headline inflation in 2001–08. Lower food prices played a key role in lowering the overall CPI to below 5 percent in 2013, but demand side pressures were also contained. Headline inflation declined further to 3.2 percent year-on-year in May 2014, even while first quarter growth came in at a robust 7.6 percent. The mission questioned the consistency of high levels of growth with low inflation, weak credit demand, and reduced import of investment goods. The authorities saw the picture as broadly coherent, but reflecting structural change. Lower food prices reflect, inter alia, improved transport infrastructure. Moderate private credit growth partly (continued) Page 6 2013 Real GDP Growth (In percent) April 2014: Headline Inflation (In yoy percent change) Sources: IMF staff calculations (WEO) Sources: APDCORE Database External Accounts . Sri Lanka’s external position strengthened in 2013 and into 2014, as exports gained ground and imports remained subdued. The current account deficit improved from 6.7 percent of GDP in 2012 to 3.9 percent in 2013. On the export side, recovery in advanced economies (Sri Lanka’s main export markets) helped boost exports in the second half of 2013 and into 2014. Foreign exchange receipts from services (particularly tourism) have also risen steadily, and net remittances are now equivalent to 8.4 percent of GDP, compared with 6.4 percent a decade earlier. At the same time, imports decreased by 6.2 percent. A fall in oil and fuel shipments (reflecting a favorable monsoon and increased hydropower production) contributed over half of the overall decline in 2013, but intermediate and investment goods also dropped. The stronger external position and issuance of new external debt enabled the Central Bank of Sri Lanka to accumulate additional foreign exchange reserves, and the rupee has been virtually stable in nominal terms vis-à- vis the U.S. dollar since the end of October 2013. target. However, as in previous years, tight spending control allowed fiscal consolidation to continue. With current and capital spending cuts, the government came close to meeting its budget deficit target of 5.8 percent of GDP. First quarter revenue data suggest that reforms implemented in 2013-14 (extending VAT coverage, lowering the threshold, broadening the base) and aided by a pick-up in imports, may finally be yielding some results. However, achieving the FY 2014 deficit Fiscal Position . During 2013, tax revenue fell almost 1.5 percent of GDP short of the budget reflects the aftermath of a credit boom, as well as increased use of corporate debentures; and the fall in import of intermediate and investment goods captures rising domestic production of such products and backward linkages. The mission followed up on a cash margin requirement for letters of credit for vehicles, which was identified (at the time of the first Post Program Monitoring consultation in November 2013) as an exchange restriction inconsistent with Sri Lanka’s obligations under Article VIII, Section 2a of the Fund’s Articles. The authorities provided staff with a copy of the Circular withdrawing the cash margin requirement effective January 2, 2014 and, based on this, staff has found that the exchange restriction has been eliminated. No other changes have been introduced to the foreign exchange system that could give rise to restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions or multiple currency practices. Page 7 target of 5.2 percent of GDP will be challenging given the ambitious year-end target for revenues (an increase of 26 percent— a significant acceleration compared to previous years), and continued tight spending control will likely be needed. Total Government Expenditures, 2011-2014 (Percent of GDP) Government Capital Expenditures, 2011-2014 (Percent of GDP) Budget Actual Budget Actual Sources: Ministry of Finance and Planning, staff calculations Sources: Ministry of Finance and Planning, staff calculations The banking system remains well capitalized, but a number of financial soundness indicators have deteriorated . Nonperforming loans (NPLs) rose from 3.7 percent of total loans at end-2012 to 5.6 percent by end-2013, and the sector saw profits decline by 10 percent. Net interest margins have declined, reflecting high-cost term deposits, slow credit growth, and an increase in low yielding assets. The rise in nonperforming assets appears most closely linked to gold pawning activity (which accounts for a significant share of assets in most banks) and the sharp drop in gold prices in 2013. In this context, the CBSL has announced a credit guarantee scheme to foster a resumption of credit growth. The CBSL announced in January 2014 a financial sector consolidation plan to reduce the number of nonbank financial institutions and create larger banks.