Sri Lanka’s short-term outlook is challenging, but medium-term prospects are favorable if current macro-financial imbalances can be addressed. There are significant challenges for 2016 as the government seeks to undertake difficult reforms to re-start fiscal consolidation and tackle high priority structural reforms. Nonetheless, with a solid commitment to reform, clear direction on macroeconomic policies, and restoration of market confidence, there is room for a small uptick in real GDP growth—based on a resumption of investment projects stalled in 2015, continued strong growth in services, and a modest increase in foreign direct investment. Real GDP is projected to rise from 4.8 percent in 2015 to 5 percent in 2016, supported by a recovery in construction from negative growth in 2015 (base effects), regaining of GSP plus status, and sustained momentum in services including tourism, transport, and IT. Growth is projected to increase to 5½ percent (in line with estimated potential output) by 2020, and inflation to stabilize at 5 percent. The negative output gap is thus projected to narrow over the medium term and close by 2020. This relatively positive outlook is based on several elements, including Sri Lanka’s comparatively buoyant performance during earlier periods of stress (including during the civil war). The outlook is also supported by several macroeconomic pillars. Notwithstanding current challenges, Sri Lanka has a strong base of human capital and reliable infrastructure—especially compared with other South Asian economies. It also occupies a strategic position in a fast growing and dynamic region, and capital investments over the last decade (particularly on port and other transport-related facilities) have been geared to take advantage of this opportunity. Services growth has been strong, particularly in such relatively new areas as tourism (which continues to enjoy double digit growth as part of the peace dividend), IT, and accounting. However, stronger macroeconomic management, a decisive return to an outward orientation, a stronger role for the private sector and market forces, and further investment in physical infrastructure and human capital are needed to achieve high, inclusive, and sustained growth. The key risks to the outlook (both short- and medium-term) stem from (i) government inaction on key policies; and (ii) a significant deterioration in the external environment, as highlighted in the Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM, Annex II). Current policies are likely unsustainable. Over the past 2 years fiscal consolidation has been reversed, gross financing needs have increased sharply, public debt has risen as a share of GDP, and persistent defense of the exchange rate has reduced net international reserves by over $2.3 billion. Inaction on policies and continued reliance on borrowed resources to fund fiscal deficits and defend the exchange rate is unsustainable over the medium-term, and will undermine prospects for investment and inclusive growth. In this context, the key risks relate to not achieving the envisaged increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio, a further decline in growth, or additional losses from state enterprises—all of which would pose challenges for fiscal consolidation. External risks are also clearly present. Pressure on the balance of payments is expected to continue in the short run given global rebalancing and shifting investor sentiment—with the potential for additional capital outflows beyond what is currently envisaged. Other external risks include a further reduction in export growth in case of a slowdown in demand in key textile/apparel markets (the U.S. and EU); a further drop in inward remittances in the wake of lower oil prices and the negative economic impact on host countries in the Middle East; or a drop in services activity in line with slower Page 14 global trade and a downturn in tourism. These shocks can have substantial impact on the balance of payments. Staff estimate that a “worst case” combined shock to the current account (through goods and services exports and remittances) and the capital account (impacting FDI and foreign exit from the government securities market) could widen the financing gap by as much as $1.8 billion over 2016-17 (assuming no policy adjustment). ARTICLE IV DISCUSSIONS: NAVIGATING RISK, RESETTING POLICIES, ACHIEVING LIFT-OFF Discussion focused on the authorities’ plans to address short-term macroeconomic imbalances, create stronger momentum toward sustainable public finances and economic growth, bolster competitiveness, increase the role of market forces in the economy, and build greater resilience to shocks.