The proposed new Fund-supported program aims to provide a policy anchor for macroeconomic stability and structural reforms, while strengthening external resiliency in a challenging global environment. As described in the Letter of Intent (Appendix I) and Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP, Attachment I to LOI), the key objectives of the program relate to fiscal policy and the balance of payments, and measures to: (i) implement a structural increase in revenues, facilitating a reduction in the fiscal deficit; (ii) reverse the decline in central bank foreign exchange reserves; (iii) reduce public debt relative to GDP and lower Sri Lanka’s risk of debt distress; and (iv) enhance public financial management and improve the operations of state owned enterprises. The program also aims to transition toward flexible inflation targeting with a flexible exchange rate regime and to promote sustainable and inclusive economic growth. To achieve these objectives, the program would envisage implementation of a set of reforms under six pillars: (i) fiscal consolidation; (ii) revenue mobilization; (iii) public financial management reform; (iv) state enterprise reform; (v) transition to flexible inflation targeting under a flexible exchange rate regime; and (vi) reforms in the trade and investment regime. The program is expected to meet Sri Lanka’s BOP needs arising from the legacy of past policies and deterioration in the external environment—providing sufficient reserve cover to buffer against new shocks as macroeconomic policies are adjusted. The structural nature of key reforms and the time required to achieve durable solutions (and an improvement in the BOP) support the use of an extended facility. Page 30 Sri Lanka: Extended Arrangement under the EFF ‒ Program Objectives, Policy Pillars, and Key Measures Objectives - Structurally increase revenues to facilitate fiscal deficit reduction - Reverse decline in foreign exchange reserves - Reduce public debt to GDP ratio and lower Sri Lanka's risk of debt distress - Enhance public financial management and improve the operations of state owned enterprises - Transition to flexible inflation targeting and flexible exchange rate regime - Promote sustainable and inclusive economic growth Pillars I. Fiscal consolidation II. Revenue mobilization III. Public financial management reform IV. State enterprise V. Enhancing monetary VI. Supporting trade and reform policy effectiveness investment Measures 1. Improvement in primary balance (PC) 1. Tax policy reform 1. Commitment control system (PA, SB) 1. Resolution strategy of SOEs' obligations (PA, SB) 1. Prudent monetary policy management 1. Trade regime reform 2. Increase in tax to GDP ratio (IT) 3. Annual budget in line with the program target (SB) - Tax expenditure rationalization (PA, SB) - Commitment record - New income tax law (PA, SB) - Quarterly expenditure ceilings 2. SOEs' non-commercial obligations in budget (SB) - VAT diagnostic (SB) and reform 2. New IT system roll-out (SB) 3. Statement of Corporate Intent for major SOEs (SB) 4. Pricing reform for energy and other ulitility (SB) 2. Administration reform - Key Performance Indicators for risk-based audit (SB) - Compliance strategies for VAT and income tax (SB) - New IT systems roll-out (SB) - Review of tariffs and para- tariffs - Trade facilitation 2. Enhanced access to finance 3. Improved investment climate - Monetary policy consultation clause - Reserve money monitoring (IT) 2. Buildup of net international reserves (PC) 3. Transition to flexible inflation targeting and flexible exchange rate regime 4. Financial market deepening Note: PC = quantitative performance criterion; IT = quantitative indicative target; PA = prior action; SB = structural benchmark. K Y U Page 31