concerns about Sri Lanka’s medium-term external sustainability . Recent improvement in the external current account is encouraging, but may be short-lived given the heavy role played by import compression. Longer-term trends signaling potential vulnerabilities include (i) a chronic current account deficit and relatively low reserve adequacy metrics; (ii) a gradual but steady decline in goods exports as a share of GDP; (iii) a similar decline in Sri Lanka’s share of world exports; (iv) an already high external debt burden and a rising cost for external financing as Sri Lanka shifts to middle-income status and bilateral concessional debt is replaced with borrowing on commercial terms; and (v) modest increases in foreign direct investment, which would otherwise alleviate the need for debt financing. While the current account deficit has decreased in recent years, it remains financed largely by debt-creating inflows and central bank foreign exchange reserves are at the lower end of what is considered adequate by standard metrics. The predominance of debt-creating inflows is reflected in a high debt component in gross reserves—which is slowly improving along Goods (% of GDP) Goods and Services (% of GDP) Goods (% of World Exports) (RHS) Goods and Services (% of World Exports) (RHS) Page 16 Exchange rate analysis does not signal an obvious problem of competitiveness, and with the gradual decline in external debt. While gross reserves are now within the “adequate” band of the composite metric, they are still on the low side relative to short-term debt and upcoming amortizations. To raise the reserve cushion, the authorities have absorbed foreign exchange inflows. While generally supporting the accumulation of additional reserves, the staff emphasized the need to maintain a flexible exchange rate regime, as the CBSL’s interventions had effectively stabilized the exchange rate. the exchange rate appears broadly in line with fundamentals . The External Balance Assessment (the current account approach) points to a slight overvaluation of the rupee. By contrast, analysis based on the CGER indicate that the underlying current account deficit is slightly smaller than the level predicted by panel regressions on advanced and emerging markets, suggesting a slight undervaluation while staying in line with the estimated current account norm. According to the external sustainability approach, only a smaller adjustment would be compatible with a stabilization of the external debt/GDP position. Overall, however, the relatively small degree of estimated misalignment in either direction suggests that the exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. Sri Lanka - External Balance Assessment Approach: Macrobalance External (CGER) Sustainability Current Account (Current Account) Underlying Current Account Balance Current Account Norm Required Improvement in the Current Account Implied over (+) / under (-) valuation Sri Lanka fares relatively well with respect to qualitative indicators of competitiveness, although there remains room for improvement . Sri Lanka ranks well in the World Economic Forum Competiveness Index as well as the overall World Bank Doing Business Index (ranking 85 out of 189 countries and well ahead of the rest of South Asia, although areas for improvement include tax rates and administration, enforcing contracts, and registering property). Several sectors also report problems hiring and retaining labor at different skill levels. The garment industry (40 percent of exports) has also shown considerable flexibility to shocks—such as the end of the Multifibre Agreement in 2005 and discontinuation of preferential access under the EU’s Generalized System of Preferences (GSP+) in 2010—by moving up the value chain (Box 2). The rupee has been virtually stable vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar since the beginning of October 2013. As a result, the IMF classification of Sri Lanka’s de facto exchange rate has been changed from “managed float” to “stabilized” (Informational Annex). Page 17 Box 2. Sri Lanka’s Garment Industry After trade liberalization in the late 1970’s and with the support of the Multi-Fibre Agreement (MFA), the garment industry emerged as Sri Lanka’s key export engine and source of employment. After peaking at 55 percent in 2000 garments still account for over 40 percent of total exports. The sector employs around 280,000 people—with significantly more indirectly dependent on the industry. FDI and joint ventures were initial catalysts, but the industry is today dominated by local firms. The Sri Lankan garment industry has gone through rapid structural change in the past 15 years in response to a shifting competitive landscape—notably the phasing out of the MFA in 2005 and of China safeguard in 2008, followed by discontinuation of the EU Generalized System of Preferences (GSP+) in 2010. The industry responded by moving up the quality ladder, with leading companies progressing towards becoming total service providers by designing and developing products. The structural changes implied a decline in the number of firms, and a drop in employment from at most 340,000 in 2003. The decline in employment also reflects difficulties hiring due to perceived low wages, as well as being a side effect of a comparatively better educated labor force (labor costs are also higher than in most other Asian garment producing countries). The garment sector’s strategy to move even higher up the quality ladder is well placed and its track record indicates that the sector will remain an important source of exports for Sri Lanka. However, critical to future garment export earnings will be how volumes develop in a higher price segment. In this respect, further diversification to markets beyond the E.U. and U.S. will be important. Given limited backward linkages and largely imported input material, the contribution to the trade balance will also depend on how firms decide to set up their future production chains and to what extent they will keep lower value production segments in Sri Lanka. LKA, Quality Index, 2010 Garments Other Manufacturing Goods Importantly, even if garment exports growth continues to average 6 percent as during the past decade, this will not be enough to alone reverse the negative long-term trend in Sri Lanka’s overall goods exports. Diversification to other export sectors will be necessary and there is significant room for existing non-garment exports to move up the quality ladder. Structural transformation may ameliorate some medium-term pressures on the Source: Diversification Toolkit; IMF Policy Paper, March 2014 external accounts . While goods exports have decreased as a share of GDP, services receipts have increased and now rival the garment industry as a source of foreign exchange earnings. The most visible aspect of this is growth in tourism—which more than doubled in dollar terms between 2011 and 2013—in tandem with transportation services, supported by significant investment in port Page 18 The mission highlighted that sustained improvement in the current account would facilities. Rapid growth (albeit from a small base) is also visible in information technology and accounting services. Inward remittances have also risen as a comparatively well educated Sri Lankan work force increases its overseas presence. Net remittances as a share of GDP have increased to about 8.4 percent of GDP in 2013, compared with 6.4 percent a decade earlier—equivalent to a rise from about one-quarter the value of total goods exports in 2003 to nearly two-thirds by 2013. likely require further diversification of exports, and that cross-country experience demonstrated greater gains from equity and direct investment relative to debt flows . The mission noted that there appears room for further growth in the garment industry and higher value added, but that rising competition and labor scarcity might also give rise to shifting some operations to lower-cost locations. Further diversification of goods and services exports would rest on continued macroeconomic stability, improvements to the investment environment (including the tax structure, enforcement of contracts and property rights) and a predictable policy environment. In this context, staff noted that FDI flows might also gain from such structural improvements, and that available evidence suggest greater gains to productivity and growth from equity and FDI flows than from debt financed investment. The authorities had confidence that the external accounts would continue to improve, and that the current development strategy (the Five Hubs) would facilitate diversification They highlighted the competitiveness of the garment industry as an example of innovation and productivity gain despite a highly competitive environment and loss of preferential trading arrangements. They also noted the rise in services, and that in addition to tourism and emerging sectors such as IT, transport and logistics services were expected to increase as a result of continued investment in port facilities. With respect to financing, they highlighted the focus on attracting FDI and creating an enabling investment environment, but noted that a small domestic market would likely constrain the amount of foreign investment compared to other emerging markets.