(In percent of GDP) Tax revenue Expenditure Revenue and grants Nontax revenue and grants Sri Lanka: Central Government Operations, 2015-20 Witout measures Measures (cumulative from 2017) The program envisages a return to fiscal consolidation, guided by the authorities’ goal of an overall deficit of 3.5 percent in 2020 (MEFP ¶4). To support this, the program sets a deficit reduction path from 5.4 percent of GDP in 2016 to 4.0 percent of GDP in 2018. The corresponding improvement in the primary balance (the program’s fiscal anchor) by 0.7–0.8 percentage point each year in 2017–18 would be accomplished primarily by base- broadening tax policy measures, which are envisaged to generate additional revenues of about 1.2 percent of GDP annually in 2017 (see text table). The growth impact of this consolidation effort is expected to be limited, given lack of economic slack or financial distress although it will be important for the government to work toward more effective social protection schemes going forward. The revenue-based fiscal consolidation is expected to preserve fiscal space for increasing infrastructure and key social spending, while ensuring (through a path toward steady primary surpluses) a steady reduction in the public debt ratio from 76 percent in 2015 to 68 percent in 2020. At the same time, fiscal consolidation will reduce gross financing needs by 6 percent of GDP over the program period—allowing sufficient room for an orderly expansion of private sector credit. Overall balance Primary balance Central government debt Gross financing needs Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Overall balance without measures Primary balance without measures Current non-interest Interest Capital Memorandum items: Under the baseline scenario, the projection assumes fiscal multiplier of about 0.3 based on the evidence for emerging market economies, which would lower growth by about 0.2 percentage points during 2017–18. The World Bank has committed to deeper analytical work with respect to the potential social implications of the planned fiscal consolidation path, as well as to help the authorities with better targeted social protection schemes. The programmed level of capital spending is justified given the low base in 2015 (capex fell to 4½ percent of GDP). The World Bank has also cited the need to finance infrastructure needs going forward to meet rising demand; as well as higher spending on health, education and related areas to avoid undercutting Sri Lanka’s past gains in human development. These figures do not account for the outstanding obligations of SOEs, amounting to 11 percent of GDP as of end-2015. If assumed by the government, these obligations will have a material impact on the stock of debt, once assumed by government, and would effectively create a step-change in the path for public debt reduction. Such a scenario is analyzed in the attached DSA. Page 32