While the financial system appears well capitalized and liquid, the authorities should remain vigilant to the risk of a potential rise in non-performing loans (NPL ). Financial soundness indicators for the fourth quarter of 2015 were generally favorable with capital adequacy comfortably above regulatory limits. Asset quality of state banks appears broadly sound, with most of the loans to state enterprises guaranteed by the government—these loans amount to 18 percent of total loans of state banks. However, in the absence of a clear and consistent government policy with respect to non-commercial operations of state enterprises (such as subsidies—which frequently end up as SOE debt to state banks), close scrutiny of these banks and stress testing which includes an emphasis on contingent liability risk is recommended. Staff welcomed steps toward supervision on a consolidated basis and shifting to Basel III. The preliminary draft on the amendments to the Banking Act to bring the single borrower limit (SBL) and related party lending definitions in line with international best practices, are welcome, and were assessed by an IMF technical assistance mission in mid-April 2016. The CBSL is also assessing the possibility of introducing fit and proper assessments for owners of finance companies, and requirements on the Basel III capital standard are expected to be introduced in the first half of 2016 in line with the international timeline. Staff concurred with the authorities that continued efforts are needed to strengthen the legal framework for crisis preparedness and resolution. The Fund will work to provide technical assistance in support of ongoing work toward a resolution framework to deal with finance companies which are insolvent or currently operating below the regulatory minimum capital adequacy requirement (which could be done through an establishment of a special purposed vehicle—as suggested in the 2016 Budget). The authorities viewed the financial system as robust and well capitalized. They highlighted that existing weaknesses in the financial system are mostly in the nonbank financial sector. Some finance companies (comprising 16 percent of the non-banking sector) need to replenish capital, although the size of capital injection needs would be limited because the total assets of these companies are about 1 percent of GDP. The authorities reiterated their commitment to finalizing a resolution framework for weak finance companies—through establishment of a special purpose vehicle—by the end of this year, and are seeking support of IMF technical assistance in this area. Page 29