Steps to tighten monetary policy in late 2015 and early 2016 were appropriate but further tightening may be needed in the months ahead. The central bank uses market based instruments, in particular policy interest rates and open market operations, as the main policy tools along with adjustments to the statutory reserve requirement. The staff welcomed steps already taken to tighten monetary policy given the steady increase in core inflation and high private credit growth (the CBSL increased the statutory reserve ratio from 6 percent to 7.5 percent in January 2016, and then increased the standing deposit facility rate and lending facility rate by 50 basis points to 6.5 and 8 percent, respectively, in February 2016). March data suggest core inflation and private credit growth have begun to moderate. However, staff believes the CBSL should stand ready to further raise policy rates and tighten liquidity should inflationary pressures continue and private credit growth not continue to moderate, or to support adjustment to exchange rate flexibility. Where warranted, the CBSL should be also prepared to strengthen macroprudential measures to mitigate excessive credit growth while carefully assessing the nature of the risks. These actions should also be supported by the planned reduction in the government budget deficit. Policy Rates (In percent per annum) Repo (standing deposit rate) Reverse repo (standing lending rate) Call market rate (weighted average) Statutory Reserve Ratio (In percent) Statutory Reserve Ratio Sources: Country authorities: and IMF staff estimates. Exchange Rate and Policy Rate (In percent) The central bank has made progress toward upgrading the monetary policy framework by setting out the pre-conditions for a move to flexible inflation targeting. Recognizing the lack of a close relationship between monetary aggregates and inflation, the authorities have made a public commitment to shift toward a flexbile inflation targeting framework. Short-term forecasting tools and medium-term dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) techniques are being studied to improve inflation forecasting, and inflation expectations surveys are also conducted. Sources: Country authorities: and IMF staff estimates. USD/Rupee (year-on-year change) Real call market rate Nominal call market rate A flexible inflation targeting framework gives weight to inflation as a normal anchor while also considering the policy’s impact on growth. Page 21 The staff recommends development of a roadmap to set milestones in the development, testing and making operational a shift to flexible inflation targeting within the next three years, supported by additional IMF technical assistance, as needed. Quantitative analysis of the exchange rate indicates that pressures in the foreign exchange market reflect high policy imbalances (Annex IV). Econometric estimation of the real exchange rate misalignment suggests that Sri Lanka’s current account gap is small (-0.2 percent of GDP) with a cyclically-adjusted current account deficit close to the norm predicted by fundamentals. However, the analysis also shows that policy imbalances are high, at 0.8 percent of GDP. Other analysis of the equilibrium real exchange rate point to an overvaluation of about 11 percent. A more qualitative analysis based on central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market suggests that recent intervention has been driven largely by capital account transactions. Sri Lanka’s external position is weaker than implied by fundamentals and desirable policies, and there are several concerns with respect to external sustainability (Annex IV). Amid the CBSL’s accommodation of foreign exchange demands from non-resident exit of the government securities market, gross international reserves have fallen to a point short of gross foreign currency claims coming due in 2016. Renewed swap arrangements with the RBI ($700 million) and through the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) line ($400 million) provide additional buffer space, but are likely to be short-lived. The net International Investment Position (IIP) has been increasingly skewed away from equity investments and toward debt and loans. However, on the upside, external debt remains sustainable with low rollover risk (medium and long-term debt represents 83 percent of external debt), although currency risk is elevated (see external DSA in Annex III). With corrective fiscal policies presumed to be coming in to place, and a clear commitment to confidence-boosting reforms, the staff sees it as essential for the CBSL to begin an exit from current intervention policy. The steady, one-sided intervention policies of the past 20 months have drained net reserves by about $3.2 billion and are unsustainable. In the staff’s view, foreign exchange intervention is useful to contain volatility, but not to respond to underlying outflows (which require policy strengthening). The staff recommended that the authorities preserve reserve buffers by phasing out intervention in the foreign exchange market, or buying foreign exchange reserves while sterilizing intervention to avoid undermining measures toward monetary tightening. As a second step, the CBSL should start to accumulate foreign exchange reserves to replenish buffers, and limit supply of residual foreign exchange to the market to the minimum, including cases where market imperfections hinder settlement of smaller transactions. Over the medium term, the staff argued that structural reforms to strengthen the monetary policy transmission mechanism and deepen markets could also support a durable transmission to a more External balance assessment (EBA) current account methodology. Estimates of the other two EBA methodologies are not available. The bilateral swap with the RBI is due to expire in June 2016, or upon approval of a Fund arrangement. The SAARC swap line is also due to expire in June 2016, but could be rolled over upon approval of a Fund arrangement. Page 22 flexible exchange rate regime. Such measures, supported with IMF technical assistance as needed, could include: The functioning of the money markets could be enhanced through the continued use of term operations, generally with maturities of between 7 and 30 days (longer instruments to be used for managing structural liquidity) and the removal of restrictions on short-selling of securities along with broadening the investor base. The repo markets could also benefit from the adoption of standard repo documentation across the markets. To deepen foreign exchange markets and reduce volatility, it is recommended that the CBSL undertake a review of foreign exchange laws and regulations and develop a timeline for rolling back restrictions on banks’ net open and forward positions in foreign exchange, as well as phasing out remaining capital account restrictions. The authorities consider that the current monetary policy stance is broadly appropriate, but stand ready to adjust as necessary. They expect inflation to remain at the mid- single digits and private credit growth to decelerate from the current rapid pace to about 15 percent for the year. While they are committed to moving toward flexible inflation targeting, they emphasized that the commitment of the government on fiscal consolidation is essential to avoid an expansionary fiscal stance fueling domestic demand and crowding out private credit. The authorities concurred that flexible inflation targeting should accompany greater exchange rate flexibility along with transparent and clear communication with the market. They also expressed an interest in technical assistance to conduct a comprehensive diagnosis on capital market developments, noting that the money markets are shallow and need broadening the investor base. Page 23 Box 4. Sri Lanka: Pathway to Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility The CBSL has shown a tendency to actively manage the rupee in times of stress In the past year, the CBSL has intervened heavily in the foreign exchange market, announcing daily the rate for spot transactions, and supplying substantial amounts of dollar liquidity ($3.7 billion from January 1, 2015 to February 15, 2016). The CBSL’s policy reduced reserves and increased Sri Lanka’s vulnerability to shocks. Such policies were not new—it utilized similar operations in 2008 and 2012. An exit from the “on-again, off-again” approach to exchange rate flexibility would better serve Sri Lanka in times of economic stress or external shocks. Planning such an exit should take into account cross- country experience, which suggests four ingredients for a successful transition to a floating regime: (i) a deep and liquid market; (ii) adequate systems to review and manage exchange rate risks, (iii) a coherent intervention policy consistent with a floating regime; and (iv) an appropriate nominal anchor (IMF Occasional Paper No. 256). Sri Lanka fares variably on these dimensions, and has experimented with periods of greater flexibility. The most binding constraints are a lack of transparency, a shallow market, and large deficit financing requirements. A coherent and transparent intervention rule would help restore market confidence . Currently, Sri Lanka does not have a publicly announced intervention rule. Given that intervention becomes discretionary under a flexible regime, setting up well-specified principles enhances credibility and signals commitment to a market- determined rate. It is also important in avoiding excessive smoothing, which could also be confusing and send contradictory messages. An intervention rule would also avoid suppressing useful market signals that strengthen market development. It could be calibrated based on a set of objectives, including meeting reserve targets, supply publicly acquired forex, correcting misalignments, or calming disorderly markets. A successful intervention strategy needs to be realistic, useful, robust, and clear . The strategy should be realistic on the uncertainty around the fair value of the rupee, and help the CBSL gain credibility through a viable monetary policy framework and measurable success in controlling key targets. To maintain credibility, an intervention strategy should be set once, remain fundamentally unchanged, and be robust to shocks, although parameters (e.g. specific intervention thresholds) can evolve as needed. Clarity helps guide markets and provides actionable instructions to traders. A number of countries have used an intervention strategy which consists of five components: (1) the mid-point (the middle of the desired daily trading range for each day), (2) the maximum volatility band (maximum desired within-day movement of the spot rate), (3) the neutral band (the range of the spot rate over which the central bank would not intervene), (4) the daily intervention limit, and (5) the intervention frontier (at what level to intervene and maximum intervention volumes at that rate). Continued efforts are needed to deepen the forex market to facilitate price discovery . The authorities could reduce constraints on market participants (allowing higher net open positions), develop derivative markets, and increase hedging opportunities to build capacity to manage foreign exchange risk. Although Sri Lanka has spot and forward markets, they are shallow (average daily interbank volumes are about $30 million). A number of official and customary practices foster the lack of depth. Transactions by intermediaries are monitored by the CBSL, which asks for detailed information when a trader’s net open position is not consistent with orders—creating moral suasion to limit trading. Traders cannot smooth interventions by building short or long positions to anticipate large orders, which leads to higher market volatility and less depth. A shift to inflation targeting could facilitate exchange rate flexibility . The monetary framework has been anchored on such quantitative indicators as broad money. While monetary targeting can be an alternative anchor, inflation targeting could enhance credibility by making clear that price stability is the first priority. A flexible inflation targeting framework includes a mandate to pursue an explicit inflation target as the overriding objective of monetary policy; central bank independence and accountability; and a forward-looking procedure that incorporates forecasts into policy and responds to deviations from targets. These would help rule out the “on-again, off-again” approach to exchange rate flexibility by prioritizing policy objectives and eliminating time- inconsistency, together with a transparent intervention rule. In line with recent steps toward the FPAS model, the authorities could lay the ground for inflation targeting as an alternative anchor by increased communication with the public and the markets about the plans and objectives of monetary policymakers. Page 24