The focus of monetary policy will be to keep inflation in the low single digits, while allowing for a durable transition to a more flexible exchange rate regime. Inflation performance will be monitored through a monetary policy consultation clause, and exchange rate flexibility will be enforced by the programmed accumulation of net international reserves. The program establishes an inflation target band around the projected inflation path, and if Page 34 inflation falls outside the band, the authorities will consult with the Fund on the reason for the deviation and proposed policy response, which may include adjustment in the CBSL’s policy interest rates. The monetary policy consultation clause will be supported by monitoring of reserve money as an indicative target. A strengthening of reserve adequacy (guided by the level of net international reserves (NIR) as a percentage of the ARA reserve metric) will also be programmed, anchored with a PC (floor) on NIR. Further, because the supply and demand for foreign exchange will be uncertain over the program period, the program includes a clause whereby the authorities would consult with the Fund staff on the appropriate policy response in the event that the gap between supply and demand of foreign exchange results in a more sudden and disruptive depreciation of the exchange rate than anticipated by the staff and authorities. The program would support the move toward flexible inflation targeting and financial market deepening. Technical work in support of this objective (focused on developing more sophisticated econometric models for macroeconomic forecasting) has been supported by Fund technical assistance. Further work is needed to develop a working model estimation of the economy to support inflation forecasting. A roadmap would be developed to set milestones in the development, testing and making operational a shift to inflation targeting within the period of the program, supported by additional technical assistance. Such milestones would include adopting an inflation forecasting model, announcing a medium-term numerical inflation objective to serve as a nominal anchor, introducing a policy rate in the middle of the corridor which will serve as an operational target, and establishing an effective communication arrangement. Further, appropriate legal and organizational frameworks need to be put in place to ensure accountability and credibility of inflation targeting.