Successive IMF staff reports since the completion of the 2009–12 Stand-By Arrangement have highlighted the fiscal framework and the steady decline in government tax revenue as a key risk. The ratio of tax revenue to GDP has fallen from nearly 13 percent of GDP in 2006 to 10.1 percent in 2014, rebounding to 12.1 percent in 2015 (largely on the basis of one-off tax measures and a short-term surge in import taxes). The composition of tax revenue has changed dramatically. The share of revenue generated by the VAT has fallen by more than half, while the share of excises, trade taxes, and other miscellaneous taxes has increased from about 40 percent of total revenue in 2006 to 60 percent in 2015. A VAT-like indirect tax (Nation Building Tax, NBT) coexists with the VAT, undermining the simplicity of the tax system (Box 2). Income taxes are plagued with an extended list of tax incentives and concessions. The low level of domestic revenues has hampered fiscal and macroeconomic management and magnified reliance on both domestic and external debt. Non-Oil Exporting Emerging Market Economies: Tax Revenues and Public Debt, 2015 NAM Median SYC BLR x m G ) P G f ( BRB JAM SWZ BWA ARG CHL MNE BGR TUR GEO ZAF BIH GUY TUN MAR COL ARM POL ROM MUS CHN THA URY IND BHS SUR PER PHL SLV GNQ DOM CRI MEX GAB PRY IDN GTM PAK PAN UKR HUN MDV HRV SRB LCA VCT BLZ BRA ALB GRD JOR EGY LKA ATG Median CPV LBN General government debt, 2015 (% of GDP) Sources: World Economic Outlook Database; Sri Lankan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Sri Lanka: Central Government Revenue (In percent of total) Nontax revenue Other tax Trade taxes Excise VAT Income tax Revenue (% of GDP, RHS) Sources: Ministry of Finance and IMF staff estimates. Page 15 Box 2. Sri Lanka – the VAT versus the National Building Tax (NBT) Two similar indirect taxes coexist in Sri Lanka: the VAT and the National Building Tax (NBT). Sri Lanka’s VAT has such standard features as a credit offset system, a single rate (raised from 11 percent in 2015 to 15 percent in 2016), and zero-rating for exports. However, its effectiveness is hindered by a large number of exemptions. The VAT raised only 2 percent of GDP in 2015. The NBT is levied on a company’s turnover at a single rate (2 percent), imposed through all production stages and on provision of services. Manufacturers can claim credits for imports and purchases from registered manufacturers, but not for services. Refunds are not allowed, and exports are exempted but not zero-rated. The NBT raised 0.4 percent of GDP in 2015. Theory and experience suggest the VAT is a clear winner over the NBT as an efficient revenue- raising vehicle. The VAT is more effective in terms of: Limiting tax cascading. With its limited offset for tax on inputs, the NBT is a cascading tax that leads to price distortions. This negative effect would be exacerbated if the NBT rate were raised substantially above the current level. On the other hand, a standard VAT avoids tax cascading (up to the minimum level implied by exemptions and the registration threshold). Preserving export competitiveness. With exports exempt but not zero-rated under the NBT, exports leave Sri Lanka burdened with the NBT paid on inputs. On the other hand, the VAT is not levied on inputs for exports because they are zero-rated. Thus, the NBT weakens competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s exports and provides disincentives for FDI. Mobilizing revenue. Keen and Lockwood (2010 1/) find that countries with a VAT raise more revenue than those without, although gains vary with countries’ openness and income levels. The VAT does pose administrative challenges, such as preventing fraudulent VAT refunds. In a standard VAT, the tax authority needs to refund taxpayers whose input taxes exceeds tax receipts on final products (e.g., exporters and start-up enterprises purchasing capital goods). Country experience indicates that the refund process can be the “Achilles heel” of the VAT, as opportunities for fraud often result in tension between tax authorities and taxpayers as well as complex administrative measures (Harisson and Krelove, 2005; Keen and Smith, 2007 2/). Sri Lanka is not an exception: concern over VAT fraud led to introduction of the so-called Simplified VAT (S-VAT) system, under which large exporters are allowed to purchase goods and services free of VAT from registered suppliers, thereby effectively eliminating refund entitlements. The concern has also prompted policymakers to look at the NBT as an alternative to the VAT because refunds do not occur. Managing VAT refunds would require introducing a risk-based compliance strategy and simplifying the VAT. Country experience suggests no panacea. In Sri Lanka, the S-VAT can increase compliance risk, because it now allows VAT-free purchases for more than 10 percent of VAT taxpayers. Thus, it would be important to establish a VAT compliance plan, encompassing a review of the S-VAT implementation and introduction of risk-based refund audit. The S-VAT should be phased out and replaced by a robust VAT refund system, supported by improvements in administrative capacity. Also, simplifying the VAT system, including through minimizing exemptions and setting an appropriate registration threshold, would help improve VAT compliance. 1/ Keen and Lockwood, 2010, “The Value-Added Tax: Its Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 92, pp. 138 2/ Harisson and Krelove, 2005, “VAT Refunds: A Review of Country Experience,” IMF WP 05/218; Keen and Smith, 2007, “VAT Fraud and Evasion: What Do We Know, and What Can be Done?” IMF WP 07/31 Page 16 As a critical first step toward medium-term fiscal objectives, the authorities revised down the 2016 budget deficit target to 5.4 percent of GDP (0.5 percentage points lower than the original budget target). To offset the impact of the one-off and temporary factors in 2015 and maintain the revenue to GDP ratio at the 2015 level, the authorities introduced tax measures including increasing the VAT rate to 15 percent (from 11 percent) and removing exemptions on telecommunication services, starting from May 2016. They also scaled back initial plans to exempt wholesale and retail sectors from VAT, introduce multiple VAT rates, and raise the NBT rate from 2 percent to 4 percent. On the expenditure side, the authorities plan to control spending within available fiscal space by streamlining non-critical expenditure on goods and services and capital spending. There is a clear need to improve the quality of tax revenues and put them on an upward path as part of a growth-friendly phase of fiscal consolidation and debt reduction. In this context, the staff welcomed the authorities’ decision to reduce the 2016 deficit to 5.4 percent of GDP. This is a necessary first step on a path to restructure public finances, and shift from a plethora of fees, excises, and levies to a core revenue base with a stronger emphasis on direct versus indirect taxation. A well designed path of fiscal consolidation should be a cornerstone in addressing current macroeconomic imbalances and restoring investor confidence. Over the medium term, a stronger fiscal position and improved public financial management can also create the space necessary for a reorientation of public expenditure toward levels of infrastructure and social spending needed to ensure high rates of sustained income growth, a steady reduction in poverty, and improvement in Sri Lanka’s social development indicators. Lower fiscal deficits, enhanced tax revenues, stronger expenditure management, and mitigated risks from state enterprises are essential to reducing Sri Lanka’s macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities. Sri Lanka’s public debt sustainability analysis (DSA) continues to demonstrate a high level of risk to medium-term sustainability (see Annex III). The debt burden benchmark of 70 percent of GDP and gross financing need benchmark of 15 percent of GDP are exceeded in all shock scenarios. Risks are estimated to be particularly high for a potential contingent liability shock (e.g., assuming all or part of the debt of public enterprises). Continuation of the envisioned fiscal stance for 2016 (a primary deficit of 0.8 percent of GDP) would reduce the debt to GDP ratio only by 3½ percentage points over 2015–20, leaving public debt highly vulnerable to downside risks (e.g., negative growth shock). Revenue mobilization will be essential to create fiscal space for higher expenditure and deficit reduction, and reducing key vulnerabilities. Moreover, very low efficiency of income tax and VAT collection suggest ample room to increase the tax-to-GDP ratio through base-broadening tax reforms (see panel chart below). These efforts should be supported by improving the quality and effectiveness of public expenditure and reducing fiscal risks from state enterprises. In that context, the following elements should be emphasized: Under a contingent liability shock scenario in the public DSA (the central government becomes liable for additional debt of 10 percent of GDP in 2017), public debt and gross funding needs would reach 80 percent of GDP and 15 percent of GDP in 2020, respectively. Page 17 A medium-term commitment to revenue mobilization and fiscal consolidation , as outlined in the fiscal framework under the proposed Extended Arrangement and following the principles highlighted in Box 3. To the extent that contingent liabilities come onto the government books, the additional interest cost will need to be absorbed while adhering to the envisioned fiscal path. Tax policy reform to create a simple, efficient, equitable tax regime aimed at collecting revenue rather than distributing benefits and incentives. Rationalization of income tax expenditures and a new Inland Revenue Act will be critical steps, and should be followed by VAT and customs reform. Building capacity in revenue administration. Government ownership of this reform is essential. Staff recommends establishment of performance benchmarks for efficient and effective tax administration, a shift toward risk-based audit, and efficiency-enhancing organizational reform of IRD operations. To achieve these objectives, full and expedited rollout of the IT systems for tax and customs administration (RAMIS and ASYCUDA) is critical, including linkages between the two systems. Stronger expenditure management. This should be supported by measures to rationalize ineffective public spending (e.g., replacing ill-targeted subsidies with cash transfers targeted for the poor). At the same time, improvements in public expenditure management, in particular in the area of commitment control, are necessary. Spending arrears have recurred because of overly optimistic revenue projections and heavy reliance on cash releases to control expenditure. While the ministry of finance should start to implement commitment record and quarterly commitment ceilings using the current IT system, the expected roll out of the new ITMIS system should be implemented without delay for fully automated commitment control. Decisive reform of state enterprise operations. Loss-making enterprises such as Sri Lankan Airlines need to be restructured or resolved to stop the hemorrhage of public finances. Other enterprises need to operate on a commercial footing—with the essential first step being market-based pricing of fuel, electricity, and other utilities. A clear commercial relationship, based on annual statements of corporate intent (SCI ) signed by the Ministry of Finance, the line ministry, and the SOE, will help ensure viable commercial operations, and clarify government’s obligations with respect to non-commercial operations (e.g., subsidies). Statements of corporate intent are important public accountability documents. They typically include a description of the entity’s core purpose, operating environment, key objectives, financial targets (commonly for the medium- term), and important accounting or policy rules. Page 18 Sri Lanka: Comparative Tax Productivity Corporate Income Tax Productivity, 2014 (Corporate tax collection in percent of GDP/corporate tax rate) Personal Income Tax Productivity, 2014 (Personal income tax in percent of GDP/personal income tax rate) Maximum Maximum VAT/Sales Tax Productivity, 2014 (VAT/sales tax revenue in percent of GDP/tax rate) Sri Lanka: Revenue Collection Efficiency 1/ (Percent of GDP) Average sample efficiency Actual Sri Lanka Maximum PIT CIT VAT 1/ Collection with Sri Lanka's tax rate and average sample efficiency of collection Source: Ministry of Finance, WEO database; FAD tax rate database, country staff reports, staff calculations The authorities agreed with the need for revenue-based fiscal consolidation and further improvements in fiscal transparency and public financial management. Starting from a significant reduction in the 2016 deficit to 5.4 percent of GDP, the authorities aim to steadily reduce the deficit further to 3.5 percent of GDP or less by 2020 (equivalent to a primary surplus of 1 percent of GDP to ensure continued debt reduction). In light of substantial needs for social and infrastructure spending, the authorities agreed that fiscal consolidation needs to be revenue based. The planned introduction of the new Inland Revenue Act will help to simplify the income tax system. Reforming the current regime of corporate income tax incentives toward a targeted, transparent, and rule-based system would be also important. The authorities also highlighted the benefits of digitalization, and that tax administration should also improve with support from newly developed IT systems. On the expenditure side, the authorities have already started to streamline untargeted subsidies and introduced zero-based budgeting to prioritize high-quality government projects. They plan to further strengthen capacity to identify and execute efficiently infrastructure projects, improve commitment control including by expediting roll-out of a new IT system, and move swiftly on the issue of outstanding obligations of SOEs. Page 19 Box 3. Tax Reform Strategy in Sri Lanka Future tax reform should be geared toward a simple, efficient, and equitable system tailored to Sri Lanka. Low tax efficiency in Sri Lanka suggests large potential revenue gains from base-broadening and tax administration reforms. Basic principles that should guide year-to-year reforms (as emphasized in IMF policy papers and TA reports) are as follows: Direct taxes A simple and broad-based corporate income tax regime would preserve revenue collection while facilitating competitive statutory rates. Corporate tax incentives should be limited to those linked to strategic investment. The personal income tax regime should treat individuals equally regardless of occupation, with a tax rate scale appropriately set to alleviate income inequality. Income from capital can be taxed at a low flat rate and collected at source. In Sri Lanka, numerous tax expenditures have been granted against these principles, including corporate tax holidays, low tax rates for professionals, and exemptions for debt securities issued by listed companies. Rationalizing these expenditures could significantly increase tax revenue. Estimated revenue foregone due to corporate profit exemptions was in the range of 1 1/3 percent of GDP in 2012–13, roughly equal to corporate tax collections. Indirect taxes Sri Lanka’s single-rate VAT should have minimal exemptions and an appropriate registration threshold. The degree of base erosion (including from recent measures to exempt excisable goods such as petroleum products, cars, tobacco, and alcohol and replace with increases in excise rates), should be reviewed. The Nation Building Tax should be abolished (see Box 2). Levying excises on a few key items at appropriate rates can support revenue needs while addressing externalities. Other taxes Reform areas would include strengthening property taxes, streamlining import tariffs and para-tariffs, and establishing simple and coherent regimes for taxing SMEs. Tax administration reform Effective tax administration makes proper use of tax withholding and third- party information to increase voluntary compliance, and uses resources efficiently through risk management and taxpayer segmentation. In Sri Lanka, there is a need to set up risk-based compliance strategies by tax type, taking advantage of a new IT system. Simplification of tax legislation will also contribute to improved tax administration. Reforms should take account of lessons from the past. Sri Lanka’s 2011 tax reform contained measures to improve the efficiency of the tax system: Board of Investment tax incentives were brought into the legal framework; import taxes were streamlined; VAT rates were unified; and some “nuisance” taxes were abolished. However, it also reduced corporate and personal income tax rates without a commensurate broadening of the tax base, and continued the use of the NBT. New tax incentives and exemptions have been added virtually every year since—eroding the tax base and complicating tax administration. The Ex Post Evaluation (EPE) of the 2009 Stand-By Arrangement noted that a more strategic approach to sequencing the reforms—by prioritizing base broadening, carefully calibrating the pace of rate reductions, and carefully aligning revenue targets—might have made a difference. As suggested in the IMF’s Ex-Post Evaluation report, annual revenue targets should be supported by clearly-specified, bottom-up measures that are marked by strong ownership. Page 20