Monetary policy has eased but the impact on monetary aggregates has been minimal Following a tightening of policies to address overheating and rapid credit growth in 2011–12, the CBSL began reducing policy rates in December 2012. Between December 2012 and October 2013, the CBSL reduced the repurchase and reverse repurchase rates by 125 basis points and reduced banks’ reserve requirement by 2 percentage points. In addition, the standing rate corridor was compressed from 200 basis points down to 150 basis points, resulting in the recent reduction of the bank interest rate spread, leaving its lower bound (the deposit rate) intact. The policy easing has fed through to a reduction in lending and deposit rates over time, although the effect has been more noticeable with respect to short-term rates. Aggregate private sector credit was seemingly unaffected, with year-on-year private credit growth falling to 7.5 percent in 2013, compared to 17.6 percent in 2012 and 34.5 percent in 2011. The mission discussed with the authorities the dynamics of monetary transmission in Sri Lanka (Box 1 and Selected Issues Paper) . Research by the staff in collaboration with the CBSL suggests several important findings. First, there is a weak correlation between central bank policy actions and money market and bank retail rates in Sri Lanka. Second, from a cross-country perspective, the contemporaneous effects of policy rate changes in Sri Lanka are also very weak. Short-term impact on money market and bank retail rates is limited compared with ASEAN countries and Vietnam. Third, the contribution of the bank lending channel to the interest rate channel in affecting output is operational, but with a significant lag—on the order of five quarters. The staff suggested that some obstacles to a more effective monetary transmission might include a strong presence of state banks in the financial system, a shift in banks’ portfolios from lending to government securities, and less-than-optimal levels of bank competition. Page 14 Box 1. Dynamics of Monetary Transmission in Sri Lanka The efficacy of monetary transmission channels has been a key question given a slow pass- through of policy changes to lending rates and private credit growth. The mission looked in particular at: (i) how effective are adjustments to monetary policy instruments in effecting changes to output and prices and (ii) what is the timing and magnitude of the effects of policy changes. Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model was used to analyze: (i) interest rate channel; (ii) bank lending channel; (iii) exchange rate channel; and, (iv) asset price channel. Standard methodology proposed by Sims (1972) in using Granger causality is followed to describe the relationship between monetary policy variables and output and prices. The baseline VAR model is estimated using five variables from 2000q1 and 2013q3: output, prices, money supply, interest rates, and exchange rates. The results are summarized below—with vertical lines showing that the channel is inoperative: Interest rate channel (money view) Bank lending channel Asset price channel Exchange rate channel Business and households decision making/Investment/Domestic demand Output/inflation Tobin’s q effect /Domestic demand Change in the money supply/policy rate Money market rates/lending/deposit rates/ quantity of loans/Domestic demand Other key findings include: (i) the policy rate has significant predictive value for output and money supply has weak Granger effects for prices . Output declines by about 0.6 percent in the second quarter and by about 0.5 percent during the entire period of nearly 3 years after innovations to the repo rate; (ii) the bank lending channel contributes to policy innovations that affect output— weakly and with a significant lag. Private credit contributes to the interest rate channel by about 0.2 percent starting in quarter two but only in the model with exchange rates. The prime lending rate has a significant Granger effect on output--reducing it by about 0.1 percent more after 5 quarters; and (iii) exchange rate and asset price channels are not significant in affecting output and prices. Net External demand Given continued growth momentum and the long lags in monetary transmission, staff argued for keeping the current monetary stance unchanged . The slow response of private credit to successive reductions in policy rates mitigated the risk of upward pressure on prices through more rapid growth in money supply. However, recent data on GDP growth (first quarter GDP growth was 7.6 percent year-on-year), and rising private credit growth in areas not linked to gold pawning Page 15 suggest some risk of demand side pressures emerging later in the year. In this context, staff noted the risk of monetary policy becoming pro-cyclical if further cuts were made and suggested that rates remain unchanged for now. On monetary policy, the authorities highlighted several structural innovations. They noted that five years of single digit and declining inflation have altered inflation expectations— affording an opportunity to lower policy rates. For the time being, they did not envisage any further easing, but would be ready to reduce rates further if growth falters or inflation remains low. However, they also noted a constraint with respect to how low deposit rates could fall given the lack of social safety nets for a significant part of the retired population, and a reliance on high rates of return on deposits for income support (an issue they are seeking to rectify through the banking system via introduction of annuities and longer-term instruments). The authorities agreed that monetary transmission was not working as effectively as it might. However, in reviewing the mission’s findings, they suggested that (i) there is sufficient competition among banks; (ii) the shift in bank assets from lending to government securities was partly a result of a lack of credit demand, reflecting greater use of corporate debentures; and (iii) low credit growth is partly a supply side issue (banks’ reluctance to lend given the rise in non- performing assets a result of gold pawning) which would eventually be resolved, sharpening the transmission response from policy rates to bank lending. Share of Exports of Goods and Services Previous staff reports have highlighted