Sustainability Achieving medium-term growth and reserve objectives will require a renewed effort toward greater integration into regional and global supply chains, higher levels of FDI, and enhancing prospects for private sector investment. In addition to better infrastructure, this will entail improvements in the trade regime and investment climate, and also restoring export profitability. Sri Lanka has been actively promoting further integration to the world economy through Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). It has signed FTAs with India, Pakistan, and Iran, and further strengthened cooperation in technical areas with India through the India Economic and Technical Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) which was signed in early 2016. An FTA with China is under discussion. Sri Lanka has strengthened the economic relationship with the U.S. through the Trade Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA), the primary forum for bilateral trade and investment discussions between the two countries. Notably, the EU announced the lifting of a ban on fisheries imports from Sri Lanka in April 2016. This should facilitate talks toward Sri Lanka regaining the Generalized Scheme of Preferences Plus (GSP Plus) status with the EU, potentially by the end of this year. Sri Lanka is also a member of the South Asia Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Page 35 Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) which aims to achieve its own free trade area by 2017. To boost trade and private sector development, the program envisages reducing protectionism to enable competitiveness. A key element in this work will be a review of Sri Lanka’s trade regime including an evaluation of para-tariffs and other nontariff barriers. The trade regime remains complex, and needs to be simplified by limiting the number of rates, phasing out para-tariffs, and minimizing the number of duty exemptions. The authorities are currently negotiating a program loan with the World Bank to enhance competitiveness. It aims to increase the efficiency of trade facilitation (including through the ratification of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement, the establishment of the National Trade Facilitation Committee (NTFC), and full implementation of use of electronic customs documentation), remove barriers to foreign investment entry and establishment (including access to land), enhance access to finance, and strengthen financial market infrastructure. In this context, a one-stop-shop for foreign investors has been created to reduce the processing time for investment approval. These steps should help to attract FDI and complement public investment.