Staff welcomed the commitment to fiscal consolidation and debt reduction evident in the 2013 fiscal outturn and the 2014 budget . After peaking at close to 10 percent of GDP in 2009, the fiscal deficit has been reduced to 5.9 percent of GDP in 2013, and the debt-to-GDP ratio fell from 86 percent to 78.3 percent during the same period. The steady decline in the fiscal deficit and public debt as a share of GDP is a linchpin of macroeconomic stability and a critical factor in maintaining credibility and investor confidence. At the same time, the continued decline in the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio remains a concern . Repeated revenue underperformance places a heavy burden on expenditure compression to meet budget targets, and limits the government’s ability to use counter-cyclical fiscal policy in the event of shocks. In addition, resorting to repeated cuts in public investment could delay the development of infrastructure and human capital required to meet ambitious growth targets. In turn, weaker growth would worsen debt dynamics and make the ambitious debt reduction plans (essential to reducing vulnerability) more difficult to achieve. Sri Lanka - Tax Revenue, 1950-2013 (Percent of GDP) Sri Lanka: Tax Revenue, 1950-2014 (Percentage change) 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 Sources: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, staff calculation Actual 2014 Budget Sources: Ministry of Finance and Planning; staff estimates Fiscal reforms are generally moving in the right direction, but key steps on tax exemptions and holidays should be accelerated. The authorities have taken some important steps to broaden the tax base: in 2013, they extended the VAT to the retail and wholesale level, and in 2014, they reduced by one half the threshold for imposition of VAT on wholesale and retail activities, and restricted exemptions applicable to national building tax (NBT). In addition, excise duties on tobacco, alcohol and motor vehicles were increased. While welcoming these steps, staff highlighted that numerous tax exemptions and concessions play a key role in undermining potential revenue gains. In addition to narrowing the tax base, these exemptions complicate tax administration and weaken tax compliance. The granting of new exemptions also mitigates potential Page 12 progress toward broadening the tax base and perpetuates business expectations for special treatment. In staff’s view there is significant scope for further extension of the tax base. The mission argued that a more systematic effort to broaden the tax base is needed to improve revenue collection. In this context, the mission suggested IMF technical assistance to quantify the costs of tax expenditures—as an input to the government’s own medium-term reform plan. The authorities agreed that the weakening revenue position needs to be addressed. However, they were more sanguine about the impact of measures already implemented to boost future revenue collection. In addition to the tax broadening, they observed that a recovery of imports should result in improved collection of border taxes (which performed particularly poorly in the recent period). The authorities also noted that a number of tax holidays granted for a fixed period need to be phased out gradually. Finally, the authorities highlighted tax administration reforms, including the implementation of the Revenue Administration Management Information System (RAMIS) at the Inland Revenue Department expected to become operational by September 2015, and the upgrade of the Customs Department to ASYCUDA WORLD system. At the same time, the authorities noted the tax administration challenges arising due to the shift from an agriculture- based to a more industry- and service-oriented economy. Staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to strengthen public financial management. With the help of IMF and Asian Development Bank (ADB) technical assistance (TA), Sri Lanka is moving ahead to strengthen public financial management systems. TA is focused on improving the oversight of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), strengthening budget preparation and improving the commitment control system. The authorities expect that these reforms will allow them to further improve expenditure control and limit the occurrence of payment arrears. The authorities are also using the current favorable market environment to improve the public debt structure . With the yield on government securities falling in response to lower inflation, a supportive global environment and increased market confidence, the authorities succeeded in lengthening the average maturity of public debt from 3.2 years in 2012 to 4.8 years in 2013, while at the same time reducing the overall borrowing costs. In 2014, they also successfully placed two five-year international sovereign bonds in total amount of US$ 1.5 billion at yields of 5-6 percent. A diversified funding base and longer maturities should help reduce fiscal vulnerability and rollover risk. The government’s commitment to medium-term fiscal consolidation is clear, but staff suggested some modifications . In the 2014 Budget and the revision of the Fiscal Management Responsibility Act of 2003, the authorities announced plans to reduce the fiscal deficit to 3.8 percent VAT collection is particularly weak: at 2.5 percent of GDP in 2013, the C-efficiency of VAT collection in Sri Lanka is 0.25, about one half of the C-efficiency for lower-middle income countries and Asia/Pacific countries. See M. Keen, 2013, The Anatomy of the VAT. IMF Working Paper 13/111. At the end of 2012, recurrent and capital payment arrears reached about 1 percent of GDP, and were cleared in 2013. Data for end-2013 payment arrears are being collected. Page 13 of GDP by 2016, while the debt to GDP ratio is expected to fall to below 65 percent. Staff argued that current targets for debt reduction were ambitious relative to recent revenue performance, and also highly sensitive to assumptions on economic growth. Drawing on cross-country experience and empirical work on debt sustainability, staff suggested the option of re-casting fiscal and debt consolidation objectives in a longer-term context—targeting a debt ratio of 50 percent (deemed significant from an vulnerability perspective) over a longer time horizon (see Selected Issues Paper). The authorities shared staff’s view that long-term plans are necessary and did not disagree with the potential debt target, but did not consider a need to reformulate their current fiscal consolidation strategy as spelled out in the 2014 budget and the 2013 amendment of the Fiscal Responsibility Act. Tariff adjustments and favorable weather conditions all but eliminated the losses of the energy and petroleum companies. In 2012, the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) and Ceylon petroleum Company (CPC) incurred total loss of almost 2 percent of GDP. However, large electricity tariff adjustments for clients using more than 60 units and moderate fuel price adjustment in 2013, together with ample rains that allowed increased reliance on cheaper hydro power, brought the combined financial outcome of the two companies to a small surplus. Staff raised concerns about renewed losses in 2014 as a result of drought during the first quarter. However, the authorities argued that with new coal power plants now operating, there is less need for more expensive fuel power plants and that the financial position of CEB and CPC is projected to remain solid.