The short-term outlook appears broadly positive, as Sri Lanka is well positioned to benefit from the global economic recovery and particularly stronger growth in advanced economies . Staff’s medium-term projections, which are anchored around a potential output level of 6.5 percent, a modest level of inflation, continued public and private investment, and a maintenance of sound macroeconomic policies, suggest gradual improvement in incomes and a reduction of key vulnerabilities (most notably, a lower budget deficit, a reduction in public debt, and a shrinking external current account deficit). The framework is sensitive to assumptions on growth, however, and the authorities’ medium-term outlook (which targets real GDP growth of more than 8 percent) projects a more rapid improvement in key macroeconomic balances. The mission discussed with the Total NPLs increased by Rs74 billion in 2013, of which Rs 56 billion (76 percent) were linked to gold pawning. For additional information on gold pawning activity, see EBS/13/140). The CBSL aims to increase loan-to-value ratios to a maximum of 80 percent (from 65 percent) and cap interest rates at 16 percent per year. This is part of a broader goal to support economic activity in agriculture and small and medium enterprises (SMEs)—the primary sectors that have historically taken advantage of pawning advances. Page 8 Near-term risks appear moderate given the ongoing recovery of advanced economies authorities differing views on the medium-term framework, which rest in large part on estimates of potential output (which in turn rely on key assumptions regarding the economic gain from reintegration of Northern and Eastern provinces, and the effects of structural transformation and development). It was agreed that IMF and CBSL staff would collaborate on potential output, with a view to reconciling estimates. and a relatively benign outlook for international commodity prices. Adverse climatic events (such as the recent drought) remain a constant source of vulnerability, but the impact of such events on power generation and the balance of payments may be lessened by the introduction of coal- based electricity generation. Medium-term risks remain centered on the potential for slower-than- projected growth in the advanced economies, tighter external liquidity conditions and chronic turbulence in international capital markets (negatively affecting rollovers and borrowing costs), and continued weakness in government revenues (which would threaten fiscal and debt consolidation objectives and potentially undermine confidence). Page 9 Source of Risk Continued drought Tax revenues fail to strengthen as planned GDP growth momentum fades Increased private and quasi private debt, without parallel increase in foreign exchange earnings. Sri Lanka Risk Assessment Matrix Likelihood Expected Impact on Economy Policy Response Medium High Medium Potential Domestic Shocks M-L : Adverse impact on agriculture output, increased costs of energy production, higher oil imports. H : Pressure to cut spending to reach deficit target, including capital spending, with possible adverse impact on growth. H : Could induce excessively stimulative macro policies and risk higher inflation and external imbalances. Medium M : Increased external indebtness and vulnerability to external shocks. Raise electricity tariffs, increase efficiency and lower electricity generation costs, allow exchange rate flexibility, and ensure open market for food imports. Accelerate reforms on revenue administration and broadening tax base, reduce tax exemptions. Avoid loose macro policies; concentrate on structural reforms to promote domestic and foreign investment. Monitor closely the volume and terms of external borrowing by private and quasi private entities. Surges in global financial market volatility High Potential External Shocks M : Increased borrowing costs and more difficult rollover of maturing debt, with adverse impact on fiscal consolidation and external position. Strengthen macro fiscal fundamentals and allow exchange rate flexibility. High H : Slower-than-projected pickup in exports to the EU and the United States, weaker trade balance and growth. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging markets The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability of 30 percent or more). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Limited room for fiscal stimulus. Diversify exports markets, support increased value added production. Page 10 The authorities recognized potential vulnerabilities as highlighted by staff, but noted that such risks had been part of the backdrop in planning macroeconomic and structural reform strategies . On external risks, they highlighted measures (such as the cap on non-resident holdings of government securities) that had limited foreign exchange inflows during the boom period in international capital markets—limiting Sri Lanka’s exposure to market turbulence over the past year. Slower growth in advanced economies is a chronic risk, but Sri Lanka is seeking to diversify economic ties (a free trade agreement with China is being examined). With respect to domestic risks, climatic shocks remain a potential source of vulnerability. However, the impact of drought on power generation has, in the authorities’ view, at least been mitigated by new coal- powered thermal energy stations. Sri Lanka has also agreed on a $110 million development policy credit with the World Bank to bolster resilience to climatic shocks. The authorities were confident, that ongoing reforms would bring a recovery in revenues, and that growth momentum would continue. The authorities also reassured staff that new external borrowings by commercial banks and other entities will add to Sri Lanka’s growth capacity, but agreed that such exposure should be limited.