highlighting potential gains and pitfalls. On the positive side, the mission noted that consolidation could potentially increase resilience and contribute to more effective oversight. The strong focus on consolidating nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) sector seems warranted given expected gains from economies of scale and enhanced efficiency of operations. While not large, the NBFI sector has been more prone to weakness. Consolidating NBFIs with a view to building a stronger capital base may add some resilience to shocks, potentially generate cost efficiencies, and should also allow for closer oversight. With respect to the banking sector, consolidation could provide sufficient scale to invest in technology and management systems to enhance efficiency and profitability. Over the longer term, sufficient scale could also facilitate introduction of new products and services. A larger capital base would also increase resilience to shocks. Kose, et al (2006 and 2008); Bosworth and Collins (1999); and Borensztein et al (1998). The mission discussed ongoing consolidation of the financial sector (Box 3)— Page 19 Box 3. Sri Lanka’s Master Plan for Financial Sector Consolidation There are 24 commercial banks in Sri Lanka and nine specialized banks. In the NBFI sector, there are 58 firms—47 finance companies and 11 specialized leasing companies. Together banks and NBFI’s control 64 percent of total financial system assets (banks control 57 percent). The financial sector is dominated by the state. The top three banks (the Bank of Ceylon, People‘s Bank, and the National Savings Bank) are state-owned and together account for about half of total assets of the 33 commercial and specialized banks. Twelve foreign banks account for 10 percent of market share. Sri Lanka’s financial sector consolidation master plan seeks to reduce the number of NBFIs, create a set of larger banks able to compete regionally, and to bolster the strength and resilience of the financial system. Comprehensive plans for all mergers were required at end-May 2014, with a view to completing most mergers (or consolidations) by end-year. Key pillars of the strategy include: Creating a stronger banking sector comprising 5 strategically important banks with assets in excess of LKR 1 trillion; merging two development banks (DFCC and NDB—now operating as commercial banks) to a single large development/universal banking entity; and consolidating (or absorbing) smaller state banks into larger state banking units. Consolidating the NBFI sector—reducing the number of institutions from the current 58 firms down to 20, with three specialized in microfinance. CBSL will make available funds through its deposit insurance window for any merger that may need capital infusion. If there remain any of the weakest NBFIs by March 2015, the CBSL can direct a consolidation. Higher minimum capital thresholds starting in 2016. Minimum capital requirements for commercial banks will be raised to LKR 10 billion, and LKR 5 billion for specialized banks. For NBFI’s minimum core capital requirement will be raised to LKR 1bn by 1 January 2016, then LKR 1.5 billion by 1 January 2018 (compared to LKR 200-300 million now for finance and leasing companies respectively). Consolidations cannot result in any forced redundancies of staff, or in reduced salaries of staff. Sri Lanka: Financial System: Post-consolidation Sri Lanka: Financial System: Pre-consolidation, 2013 NBFI Commercial Banks Foreign banks Large banks NBFI incl. 3 microfinance inst. Commercial Banks Foreign banks Large banks The plan shares some common elements with consolidation efforts in other EMs, but also some differences. First, for most EMs, cross-border mergers and acquisitions have typically accounted for a large share of consolidation activity—this is unlikely for Sri Lanka. Second, consolidations in EM markets have often been a way of resolving financial crises, whereas in Sri Lanka the effort is more pre-emptive. Third, market forces have played a dominant role in mature markets, whereas in EMs (and Sri Lanka), country authorities typically had a more major role. Finally, ownership structures and concern over job losses have been key issues in EMs, and appear to be in Sri Lanka as well. Page 20 The mission highlighted some aspects that might limit potential gains from consolidation . Since the plan restricts merged financial institutions from restructuring employment or reducing salaries, gains from economies of scale may be limited. Further, as small NBFIs as a group represent less than two percent of the financial system and are not systemically important, the requirement to consolidate small NBFIs could provide at best marginal improvements in financial system stability. Consolidation can also bring new risks. For example, larger financial institutions can pose greater systemic risks. In this context, the CBSL’s intention to implement regulatory reforms in line with Basel is move in the right direction, but additional buffer requirements for systemically important banks/NBFIs might also be considered. A post- consolidation push to improve profitability can also trigger aggressive credit expansion and higher risk-taking. Increased concentration can also, in some cases, hinder competition. The authorities noted staff’s concerns, but also highlighted that consolidation will be an evolving process . In their view, it was important for stability to signal that no mandatory restructuring of employment would be required, but rather, that the process could be voluntary and done over time as institutions merged and operations were adjusted organically. They also argued that systemic risks would be limited, as the currently largest banks in the banking system are very close in terms of the levels of required post-consolidation capital and asset bases. Having said this, the authorities agreed that risks exist regarding the ultimate capital structure of consolidated companies, limited options for self-organizing staff related retentions, potential IT problems and lags in installing effective management systems and corporate governance.