Sri Lanka has demonstrated a relatively high degree of resilience to external shocks, but nonetheless faces challenges from stronger economic headwinds, competitiveness issues, and the need for a stronger outward orientation. The Sri Lankan economy has shown considerable resilience during turbulent times, but building greater capacity to weather shocks may be increasingly important in the years ahead. During most of the past two decades, Sri Lanka’s growth has been faster than that of the region, and well above the emerging market average despite the dampening effect of civil war. Market turbulence from the “taper tantrums” of 2013 and initial steps toward a reversal of unconventional monetary policies also had comparatively less impact on Sri Lanka than other regional markets. Rebalancing in China and related market disruptions has also had limited spillovers given stronger trade ties with the U.S. and EU, the resilience of tourist inflows from China, and renewed efforts to cement new trade arrangements and investments. However, the period ahead could pose new external risks with a sharper impact: A sharper than expected global growth slowdown (particularly in European countries), and lower non-oil commodity prices could further depress Sri Lankan exports, widen the current account deficit, and reduce economic growth. These effects could be mitigated by a further dampening of oil prices, although lower collection of oil-related fiscal revenue would reduce the mitigating impact. Slower global and regional growth could also deter new FDI projects and potentially slow implementation of new projects—precisely at a time when Sri Lanka is seeking to make a welcome shift from public debt to a greater reliance on private financing. Tighter external financing conditions . Sri Lanka’s sovereign borrowing spreads have already widened considerably in response to domestic risks and shifting investor confidence. Rebalancing of global portfolio flows and closer scrutiny of emerging markets in the midst of heightened turbulence could further increase spreads, increase public financing costs and public debt rollover risks, and reduce activity in the still-nascent Sri Lankan stock market. Stronger de-risking trends owing to profitability concerns, risk appetites and more stringent AML/CFT regulations could put a dent in remittance inflows . Anecdotal evidence shows that the ongoing remittances slowdown is not primarily associated to de-risking factors. However, reduced financial services from global and regional banks could exacerbate this factor, adding to CA pressures and slowing down growth through reduced households’ consumption and investment. Sound macroeconomic policies and larger fiscal and external cushions (greater fiscal space and higher net international reserves) are the essential elements for maintaining resilience. An ambitious and credible fiscal consolidation path anchored around debt sustainability, while being mindful of growth implications, would help replenish fiscal buffers. Recent interest rate Page 25 hikes would help attract foreign capital, while monetary policy should remain attuned to domestic conditions. A renewed commitment to exchange rate flexibility with minimal recourse to intervention and capital flows measures would help the exchange rate to absorb new external shocks—reducing balance of payments disequilibria and facilitating reserves buildup. Structural reforms should also be part of the equation. As discussed above, reforms to strengthen the monetary policy framework, deepen the foreign exchange market, and increase transparency in foreign exchange intervention policy would help maintain an internally coherent monetary policy framework and provide a clear operating environment for the market. Renewed efforts to improve competitiveness and integrate into regional and global supply chains will be key to achieving sustained high growth and greater resilience. To boost external trade and private sector development, the staff recommended reducing costs through addressing protectionism. A key element in this work would be a review of Sri Lanka’s trade regime including an evaluation of para-tariffs and other nontariff barriers (which have raised Sri Lanka’s effective rate of protection to high levels). The staff welcomed ongoing efforts to enhance competitiveness through other means, including removal of the EU fisheries import ban, and the reinstatement of GSP plus status. Further steps are needed to increase the efficiency of trade facilitation (including through full implementation of electronic customs documentation), remove barriers to foreign investment entry and establishment, enhance access to finance, and strengthen financial market infrastructure. A recent IMF Board paper showed that these reforms are among those with the highest productivity payoff for emerging markets. “ Structural Reforms and Macroeconomic Performance: Initial Considerations for the Fund”, IMF Policy Paper, November 2015. Page 26 Box 5. Sri Lanka’s Trade Regime and Performance in World Markets While statutory customs tariffs are relatively low, use of para-tariffs and other trade taxes make the effective rate of protection considerably higher . This partly reflects the revenue problem, as progressive use of border taxes somewhat compensated for weak VAT and income tax. Trade taxes currently in use are the Cess Levy, Special Commodity Levy, and Port and Airport Development Levy, which amounted to 1.4 percent of GDP in 2015 while import duties were 1.2 percent of GDP. World Bank estimates suggested that the average total nominal protection rate as of 2011 was about 24 percent, with para-tariffs amounting to 12 percent. The imposition of these para-tariffs and other trade taxes are often considered as complex and unpredictable, reducing transparency. Cross country comparison suggests Sri Lanka has effectively gone backwards on trade protection—defying both regional and global trends in policies and performance. Sri Lanka’s weaker trade performance points to the need of reforms . Growth has not been driven by expanding exports and shifting to more processed goods, but by domestic demand fueled by government spending and inward remittances. This reflects in Sri Lanka’s trade performance – both exports and total trade as a share of world market declined over the 2000s and stagnated in recent years (albeit with fluctuations). Lack of integration and continued protection will only limit Sri Lanka’s growth potential and undermine increased diversification and resilience to external shocks. Average Protection Rate (In percent) Share in World Trade (In percent) Para-tariffs Customs duties Source: Pursell and Ahsan (2011). Exports Exports and Imports 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Sources: UNCTAD and IMF staff calculation. Page 27 Reviving Sri Lanka’s outward orientation will also be essential to achieving growth and other macroeconomic objectives. As noted above, Sri Lanka’s share in world trade has declined over the years. Some of this was likely linked to increasing isolation and lower productivity during the civil war, but a second component seems to have been a policy of creeping protectionism and import substitution. Several of Sri Lanka’s neighbors have performed more strongly in this regard— managing to boost their share of global exports between 2000 and 2015. Notably, the services sector (which has been largely immune from para tariffs, excises, and other forms of non-tariff barriers) has performed much more strongly than goods exports in recent years, mirroring the rise of services in the economy as a whole, and more than keeping up with other lower middle income economies. FDI remains relatively low, however, highlighting the cost of policy uncertainty. Share of World Goods Exports -- Percentage Change Share of World Services Exports -- Percentage Change The authorities largely agreed with staff’s recommendations, and highlighted the initiatives already started in these areas. They noted the steady decline in Sri Lanka’s exports as a share of world trade over the past two decades as a sign of fundamental structural bottlenecks and misguided trade policies that had effectively made Sri Lanka more protective. They highlighted the establishment of two new agencies, for trade and development, respectively, charged with taking stock of current impediments and creating strategies for structural reform. They were keenly aware that a clear outward orientation was needed to bolster competitiveness, and move Sri Lanka into higher value chains, as well as the need to foster more equity-related investments to ensure less debt accumulation and greater transfer of technology and management skills. Page 28