Notwithstanding the significant fiscal adjustment and debt restructuring under the Fund-supported program, the strength of the economic recovery and fiscal performance in recent years owes much to the strong CBI inflows and their spillovers across the economy Critical goals are to increase the resilience of fiscal performance through a prudent medium-term fiscal framework, ensure continued accumulation of savings from the CBI revenue windfall, and press ahead with reforms to enhance public financial management, in order to preserve fiscal and debt sustainability. Despite efforts to maintain a reasonably prudent budget framework, fiscal policy has been expansionary and procyclical in recent years. The underlying fiscal position, measured by the fiscal deficit net of CBI budgetary receipts and SIDF grants, has been an average -6½ percent of GDP since 2013. The expansionary stance coincided with a surge in CBI inflows (at about 40 percent of GDP annually over 2012-15), which, besides financing the underlying deficit, also contributed to the SIDF, with the remaining large share flowing to the construction sector through the program’s real-estate investment option. The quasi-fiscal activities of the SIDF increased the fiscal impulse, observed through the widening of the consolidated public sector deficit by about 5 percent of GDP over 2013-2015. This reflects SIDF’s sizeable spending on social programs (e.g., the People Employment Program (PEP)) and funding of other public and private investment projects that further boosted the construction boom. This off-budget activity has made it difficult for the Consolidated Public Sector Balance, net of CBI inflows (In Percent of GDP) Gen. Gov. overall balance (less CBI budgetary fees) SIDF Grants and Investment Proceeds 1/ Gen. Gov. balance (less CBI fees, SIDF grants and Inv. Proceeds) Other SIDF Spending o/w PEP Consolidated Gen. Gov. and SIDF balance, net of CBI inflows Public sector enterprises, overall balance 2/ Consolidated public sector balance, net of CBI inflows 1/ Reflects SIDF budgetary and capital grants as well as SIDF investment proceeds over 2012-2013 to General Government. 2/ Reflects the overall balance of 14 public sector sector enterprises. Avg. Excludes SIDF grants and investment proceeds to the budget. Page 15 government to ensure coherent fiscal policy design and implementation. Further VAT and import- duty exemptions in 2015 have also weakened the fiscal framework. Fiscal Buffers and Public Debt under Baseline and Sudden Stop Scenarios (In Percent of GDP) Elevated risks to future CBI inflows, including the possibility of a sudden stop, pose significant risks to fiscal and debt sustainability. Despite significant accumulation of liquid financial buffers by the central government and the SIDF (an estimated 36 percent of GDP at end-2015) and the authorities’ conservative budgeting of future CBI inflows, a sudden stop (or sharp slowdown) in inflows could result in fiscal deficits that erode the buffers as early as 2019, and leave the debt-to-GDP ratio about 8 percentage points above baseline, absent a fiscal adjustment. A combined natural disaster and CBI sudden-stop shock could leave the debt ratio about 18 percentage points above baseline (Annex III). The resulting slowdown in economic activity would further weaken tax performance, which had benefited from significant spillovers from large CBI-related spending and investments before being structurally weakened by new tax exemptions. 1/ Assumes a complete sudden stop of CBI inflows in 2017, while maintaining baseline assumptions on expenditure, including the capital budget. 2/Based on unaudited SIDF data at end-2015, excluding illiquid assets and loans to the public sector. 3/ Assumes social spending by SIDF is maintained in a sudden stop scenario. Sources: ECCB, SIDF, Authorities and IMF staff estimates. SIDF Buffers-Sudden Stop 2/ 3/ CG Deposits-Sudden Stop Public Debt-Baseline (RHS) Public Debt-Sudden Stop (RHS) CG Deposits& SIDF Buffers-Baseline Challenges facing the Nevis Island Administration (NIA) and some public corporations have persisted. The NIA continues to face significant financing constraints and has more recently relied on short-term T-bills, overdrafts and ad hoc fiscal transfers from central government to finance its deficit, while rolling over a sizeable stock of budgetary arrears (about 0.5 percent of GDP). The St. Kitts Electricity Company, SKELEC, runs significant arrears to its fuel supplier (PDVSKN) and remains unable to service its debt due to cash flow problems from slow collection of bills. Ensuring adequate oversight of public corporations and timely audited financial statements remains a challenge. Safeguarding fiscal sustainability requires a prudent medium-term fiscal framework anchored by a General Government zero-primary-balance target net of CBI receipts and SIDF grants. Adhering to such a target would (i) reduce the risk of weakening fiscal discipline and dependence on CBI inflows and SIDF grants and (ii) facilitate saving the bulk of CBI-related inflows to the budget, including upside surprises. The framework aims to (i) build resilience to a sudden stop in CBI flows, by financing the budget from domestic revenues and safeguarding against large deficits if tax performance disappoints after CBI-related activities dry up, and to (ii) dampen the fiscal impulse from the SIDF’s quasi-fiscal spending and other public sector activities. A credible Includes central government deposits, SIDF cash, and fixed deposits, net of pledged funds for the FREESH program for mortgage financing of residential home construction. The target is also adjusted to offset the government’s 3.5 percent dividend payment on unsold land from the debt- land swap; this temporary payment replaced the high interest rate banks previously received on government debt, with a view to safeguarding bank stability until land sales are mobilized (see text table). Page 16 commitment to the target will be critical to successful implementation of the framework. Curtailing extra-budgetary spending will also help achieve the target by limiting risks of expenditure overruns. Underlying Fiscal Position Est. Projections Primary balance (after grants) Less: CBI Budgetary Receipts Less: SIDF Investment Proceeds Less: SIDF grants Primary balance (less CBI fees, SIDF grants and Inv. Proceeds) Add: Dividend payments for swapped land (in Percent of GDP) Proposed Adjustments over 3 years net of CBI and SIDF Grants by 2018 Deviation from Target Primary Balance (less CBI & SIDF Grants) Primary balance (less CBI fees & SIDF grants), adjusted for dividend payments Improvement (+)/Deterioration (-) in underlying fiscal position Achieving the zero-primary-balance target (net of CBI receipts and SIDF grants) will require additional fiscal effort over the Proposed Adjustments to Achieve a Zero Primary Balance Target, medium term. Meeting the target within a 3-year adjustment period will require closing a primary-balance gap of about 2.9 percent of GDP in 2018. To this end, it would be important to broaden the tax base, including by streamlining tax incentives (both discretionary and granted by legislation) and further improving tax administration and compliance, especially at the local government level (NIA). Revenues forgone from tax exemptions at customs are estimated at 6 percent of GDP (large by international standards)—including 1.3 percent from the recent VAT and Import Duty exemptions on food and other items, and 1.2 percent on construction materials and vehicles. Addressing the specific features of the tax concession system with TA support and necessary administrative and legislative reforms in consultation with the private sector would facilitate successful implementation. The reformed concession system should be rule-based, with limited discretion, to ensure consistency with the fiscal framework. Increasing property tax intake can also contribute to meeting the target, including by updating property valuations and enhancing compliance (particularly by economic citizens through the CBI program). Cabinet approval on an action plan to meet the underlying primary-balance target, at both central government and NIA levels, would help entrench fiscal discipline in the Federation. Enforce a EC$100 million cap on all exemptions at customs Increase property tax intake, including on new developments Continue to improve tax administration and compliance Implement civil service reform: payroll audit and public sector modernization and contain growth in the wage bill Contain spending on goods and services 1/ Adjusted for dividends on unsold land. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed on the need to enhance resilience to downside risks in CBI flows and to reinforce a culture of savings. They broadly agreed with staff’s proposed measures to strengthen structural revenue sources but preferred a more gradual pace of adjustment. Estimates of revenue foregone are based on data from the St. Kitts and Nevis Customs and Excise Department. Page 17 They expressed commitment to a comprehensive review of the tax concession regime, particularly as it relates to concessions on VAT, Customs Service Charge, Stamp Duties, Property Tax, Withholding Tax and Import Duties, and intention to continue efforts to contain growth in recurrent expenditure, by formulating a preset 3-year package to contain the wage bill, restraining new hires to the civil service, and containing growth in spending on goods and services. They also support a regional fiscal responsibility law and wish to explore fiscal rules in a regional context to strengthen fiscal discipline. A comprehensive investment and debt management strategy is needed to optimize the government balance sheet, through further debt reduction where possible, and improved cost and composition, while maintaining adequate buffers for possible shocks. Using CBI resources to retire debt remains a policy priority, to increase fiscal space and reduce the debt- service burden. Staff urged progress on finalizing negotiations on restructuring the debt to PDVSA and resolving accumulated arrears (about 2.7 percent of GDP). Staff also recommended reducing outstanding T-bills, particularly those held by private investors (2.7 percent of GDP), lowering the average interest rate on debt instruments, and lengthening their maturities (including possible issuance of a 2-year T-bond) to support debt sustainability. A comprehensive strategy that considers the impact of these actions on the earning assets of financial institutions (banks, insurance companies, and the Social Security Board) is also needed. Introducing a ‘Growth and Resilience Fund’ (GRF) can provide an effective and transparent framework to manage the savings from the CBI program, while providing a buffer for future shocks. Staff encouraged setting up a fund with a simple sovereign wealth fund (SWF) structure that operates as a financing fund, fully integrated with the fiscal framework—that is, linking the fund’s flows directly to the fiscal balance, which in turn adheres to the zero-primary balance target, net of CBI receipts and SIDF grants. The GRF would serve as a contingency buffer to address future shocks, such as natural disasters, consistent with staff’s previous recommendations, best practices in setting up SWFs for revenue windfalls, and recent Fund advice on managing fiscal risks. The fund would enhance the governance and accountability framework for managing CBI resources, including through transparent reporting on the use of saved resources to Parliament. In using the resources, staff cautioned against rigid withdrawal/accumulation rules that can complicate budget financing. Staff recommended management of financial assets according to appropriate investment guidelines that define risk tolerance and investment horizon, and placing the funds in safe investments overseas to ease excess liquidity pressures in banks and limit incentives to take undue risks to boost profitability. Authorities’ views The authorities have taken steps similar to staff’s approach. They recently extended the purview of the Debt Management Unit, to develop a strategy for managing the accumulated See the Ex-Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access under the 2011 SBA (IMF Country Report No. 15/297). See IMF Country Report No. 14/297, Annex IV, on launching a SWF for CBI-generated resources, and FAD report, “Fiscal Advice on Establishing a Sovereign Wealth Fund in Panama” by M. Villafuerte, J. R. Ruiz and S. Vtyurina (2011). See “Analyzing and Managing Fiscal Risks: Best Practices,” IMF Policy Paper, June 2016. Page 18 savings, with a view to supporting sustainable development over the medium term. They have been taking steps to set up a fund to support resilience and preserve CBI-generated savings at the Federation level, but noted sensitivities to investing the funds abroad. They noted that the room for further debt repayments is limited but the intention is to press ahead with resolving arrears to PDVSA. The authorities have already taken steps to change the composition of the T-bill portfolio towards longer maturities, reduced interest rates by 1 percentage point (from May 2016), strictly limited issuing T-bills to new investors, and refrained from rolling over interest. They expressed interest in TA to develop an effective debt strategy to issue longer-dated instruments. A careful strategy is needed to manage SIDF finances in light of its declining revenue stream and significant drain on its resources. CBI contributions to the SIDF, net of processing, marketing and due diligence fees, have declined by around 30 percent in 2015, reflecting an increasing share of applications to the real-estate option (which offers possible divestment after 5 years and a potential interim return). Competition from other programs that accept lower contributions to their national development fund has further dampened the SIDF’s appeal. Staff projects SIDF net contribution income to be subdued in 2016 (at about 4 percent of GDP), against a projected expenditure of about 3½ percent of GDP (including capital grants to the government of 1 percent in 2016, with the remainder on extra-budgetary social programs—mainly to finance PEP). A number of steps recently undertaken will help in better managing SIDF finances. Staff welcomed ongoing efforts to streamline and reorient PEP as a training, rather than a social, program. Staff supported the government’s initiative to increase the transparency of SIDF financial reporting, including progress in publishing financial statements and the ongoing forensic audit. Staff welcomed plans for potential integration of the SIDF with the government’s Consolidated Fund, in line with previous recommendations, and encouraged the development of a comprehensive fiscal perimeter, reflecting the SIDF’s quasi-fiscal activities, to facilitate a more comprehensive assessment of the fiscal policy stance. At the same time, staff noted that the SIDF’s existing portfolio of equity investments in key tourism projects might require private sector experience to ensure adequate returns to the nation and minimize contingent liability risks to the government. Centralizing the investment budget at the Ministry of Finance can facilitate efficient allocation of resources towards well-targeted transformative priority projects that support long-run potential growth. Authorities’ views The authorities were mindful of the increasing challenges to SIDF finances and noted plans to recruit the necessary expertise to devise a reform strategy after the ongoing forensic audit is completed. They stressed the significant progress in reducing the size and cost of PEP and reorienting its focus, with the support of the Technical and Vocational Education The authorities noted a 20 percent (y/y) reduction in program costs and a 30 percent (y/y) fall in enrolled participants at end-March 2016. Refers to the central government’s Single Treasury Account. See IMF country report no. 15/248, Annex IV on the SIDF’s economic activity. Page 19 and Training Council; the Council will provide program participants with vocational certification to facilitate graduation to the job market, gradually bringing the program to sustainable levels and reducing its drain on SIDF resources. Further strengthening of public financial management, particularly at the NIA and public corporations, is critical to protecting fiscal and debt sustainability of the Federation. Improving the NIA’s budget framework and debt management strategy is crucial. Strengthening its fiscal position requires improvement in its revenue stream, by refraining from renewing concessions to long-standing investors in Nevis and enhancing tax policy and revenue administration. A clear mechanism for sharing VAT and CBI revenues between the two islands is needed to minimize ad hoc transfers and expenditure overruns that weaken the overall fiscal position. The NIA can also build cash buffers over the near term given its limited access to new credit and high rollover risk from the short-maturity of its T-bill portfolio. Resolving persistent cash flow challenges at SKELEC and improving its bill collection rates are needed to enable servicing its debt. The authorities are also encouraged to continue efforts to fully operationalize the ASYCUDA World system to increase the efficiency of reporting at the Customs and Excise Department—a critical element for monitoring and implementing reforms to the tax concession system. Finally, an action plan is needed following completion of the payroll audit, and, to ensure the long-term sustainability of the Social Security Board, prompt implementation of the parametric reforms highlighted in the Final Report on the 10 th Actuarial Review of the Social Security Fund. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the need to strengthen revenue administration in Nevis, particularly at Customs, and the need for legislative action to revise property tax valuations. They noted that some of the concessions granted at NIA were not sustainable and further efforts were needed to improve its tax performance.