The medium-term outlook remains favorable, but risks are tilted to the downside and are particularly subject to future developments in CBI inflows. The flow of new CBI applications has declined significantly since mid-2015, compared to the average flow in 2014, reflecting, in part, the negative impact of the loss of visa-free access to Canada and the US FinCEN advisory. Growing regional and global competition, global security concerns, and rising international migration pose downside risks to future CBI inflows, with budget receipts projected to fall closer to the budgeted figures over 2016-2018. CBI-related FDI is also expected to moderate, with real estate developers likely to exercise caution, considering the increased uncertainty about future applications. With strengthened due diligence and marketing efforts, the authorities expect CBI inflows to continue, albeit at a lower pace. Other risks to the outlook, highlighted in the Risk Assessment Matrix (Annex I), include potential spillovers from weak growth prospects in key tourism source markets, regional financial sector challenges, including derisking, and exposure to natural disasters. 1/ Reflects investment commitments through the real estate route at the time of application approval based on the estimated number of main applicants in each year. 2/ Net of processing, due diligence and marketing fees. 3/ Estimated based on the average current flow of new applications and assumes clearance of a further 100 applications from historical backlog. SKN Citizenship by Investment Inflows (2007-2015) (in Percent of GDP) Real Estate Investments 1/ Fees to Government SIDF Inflows 2/ Proj. 3/ Economic activity is projected to slow as the surge in construction activity tapers off. Growth is expected to moderate to 3.5 percent in 2016 and 3 percent, on average, over the medium term, with a projected contraction in construction after 2019. By then, most projects would have reached completion and a large number of new real-estate developments would become eligible for resale to new CBI applicants following expiration of the mandated 5-year holding period. Tourist arrivals are projected to continue recovering, bolstered by the new CBI-funded tourism facilities, the bulk of which are expected to come on stream over 2017-19. Inflation is expected to remain below 2 percent over the medium term, benefitting from the projected weakness in commodity prices and subdued inflation in key trade partners. The projected decline in CBI inflows is also expected to widen the current account deficit over the medium term and increase pressures on the net international investment position. On the upside, stronger-than-projected CBI inflows and a protracted period of low oil prices could support growth compared to the baseline. In May 2014, the US FinCEN issued an advisory relating to financial activities of some individuals applying to St. Kitts and Nevis CBI program. In November 2014, Canadian authorities reintroduced visa requirements for citizens of St. Kitts and Nevis. Following these actions, the authorities implemented a comprehensive reform program, including enhanced due diligence procedures for applicants. The decline in new applications has not affected budgetary receipts in 2015 owing to the significant clearance of the backlog of applications accumulated in previous years. These risks, including natural disaster shocks, are not reflected in the baseline scenario. Page 14