critical for enhancing medium-term growth. While the St. Kitts and Nevis financial system remains relatively strong following the financial crisis and the debt restructuring, continued efforts are needed to monitor and strengthen the financial sector and reinforce the supervisory framework for non-bank financial institutions. Updated stress tests based on end-September 2013 data remained consistent with the previous assessment (Country Report No. 14/49, ¶4) and confirmed that the banking system remains sufficiently capitalized and liquid to weather a host of shocks. Despite the growing liquidity, the relative weaker banks remain vulnerable to a large liquidity shock. Strong priority should be given to facilitating the banks’ plans to implement actions to return NPLs to the prudential requirement of below 5 percent over the medium term In this context, the current protracted proceedings for realization of non-performing assets through the courts may be a significant challenge for banks. The new Bankruptcy and Insolvency bill introduced in Parliament in July 2013 is a step in the right direction. The agenda for updating ECCU foreclosure legislation should also be accelerated In addition, the impact of the debt/land swap on the banking system will continue to warrant particular attention. In that regard, it is key to engage the process of selling the lands on a timely basis while ensuring that the operational guidelines of the SPV are aligned with best practices (prior action for the completion of the seventh and eight review), including with respect to securing competitive sales prices. Fund and World Bank staff are collaborating toward a regional approach to implement the ECCU’s comprehensive bank resolution strategy. Vigilance will be needed to manage the potential spillovers from the challenges facing the other ECCU banks. The staff urged the continued implementation of the CARTAC/World Bank reform program for strengthening the supervisory framework of the non-bank financial sector. The focus should be on building capacity for on-site and off-site supervision and strengthening reporting requirements. Moreover, swift issuance of the regulations supporting the FSRC Act would enhance its supervisory powers and leverage the efforts by credit unions to raise their regulatory capital to 10 percent by October 2014, in line with the Cooperative Societies Act. The FSRC should Page 17 also maintain its close monitoring of the insurance industry. The adoption and implementation of the Insurance and Private Pension Plan Act will strengthen the protection of insurance policy holders and firms’ reporting requirements.