The new VAT exemptions, combined with a weakening of the outlook for CBI inflows, increase fiscal vulnerabilities and raise new challenges to sustainability. The VAT and customs exemptions are estimated to lead to a direct loss of revenues of over 2 percent of GDP in 2015, relative to what they would have been, and a larger amount in 2016, when the full year impact will be realized. The projected weakening in the fiscal outlook, if not addressed, could quickly undo much of the gains achieved under the program. The fiscal balance (net of CBI) is projected to be in deficit by 5.3 percent of GDP in 2020, with a primary deficit (net of CBI) of 3.4 percent, compared to an overall deficit of 1.7 percent and a small primary surplus of 0.3 percent at the last review. Moreover, any slowdown in CBI inflows could further erode the tax base resulting in a higher shortfall than that implied from the direct loss in CBI revenues. The weaker fiscal outlook, combined with scheduled debt repayment, could substantially reduce accumulated fiscal buffers, and could trigger a renewed upturn in the debt-to-GDP ratio in case of an exogenous shock. Newly exempt items include food, medicine and funeral expenses. Prim. Bal. (less CBI) Prim. Bal. (less CBI) -9th Review Overall bal. less CBI (lhs) Overall. Bal. (less CBI) -9th ReviewSources: Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Fiscal Balances Prim. Bal. (less CBI) Prim. Bal. (less CBI) -9th Review Overall bal. less CBI (lhs) Overall. Bal. (less CBI) -9th Review Sources: Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Fiscal Balances -With Recommended Measures EC$ mil.% of GDPEC$ mil.% of GDPEC$ mil.% of GDPVAT4.20.239.51.643.71.8Import duties2.30.16.80.39.10.4 Total6.50.346.31.952.72.2 Source: Authorities and IMF staff estimates December Exemptions (Jan. - Mar.)December and April Exemptions (Apr. - Dec.)Annual Total Impact of Recent VAT and Import Duties Exemptions on Fiscal Accounts Page 14 Staff strongly recommended corrective action to safeguard fiscal and debt sustainability. The need for this is underscored by the country’s high vulnerability to external shocks (including natural disasters), the still high debt-to-GDP ratio, and heightened uncertainty regarding the sustainability of CBI inflows. Reversing the VAT exemptions and using the social safety net to more effectively target assistance to the poorer segments of the population is the optimal strategy. This would also reduce the pro-cyclicality of fiscal policy. Staff also presented alternative measures given the political difficulty of reversing recently granted VAT exemptions in the short run. These would bring back the fiscal path over the next 3 years to that envisaged in the 9th review. These measures include further reducing tax exemptions for construction projects, since the sector needs no further incentives given the CBI program, enhancing other tax measures, in particular, property tax, and slowing the pace of the already high level of capital spending. Moving forward with land sales would also lower expenditure by reducing dividend payments to banks. In addition, staff emphasized the need to continue implementing structural reforms, mainly continued strengthening of the tax administration, PFM reform, civil service reform, and improved targeting of social support, while containing expenditures and transfers. The proposed illustrative package would secure fiscal and debt sustainability over the medium term and place the authorities in a stronger position to deal with exogenous shocks. The rest of the public sector must also play its part in maintaining a sound financial position. Continued monitoring and strict oversight of public sector activity must be a priority. In particular, the absence of financial statements for the electricity company, SKELEC, since its incorporation makes concrete assessments of its financial position difficult. Although SKELEC has improved its billing and metering, the company continues to face challenges, including in collecting overdue bills. Additionally, the recent government action to write off residential customer arrears of EC$21 million will need to be offset by some other asset or a reduction in liabilities. Staff stressed the need to devise a strategy to ensure the medium-term viability of SKELEC. Staff also noted that reforms to the Social Security Board will be needed, as outlays are expected to overtake total income by 2024, based on the 2013 actuarial review (Box 2). Authorities’ views : The authorities broadly agreed that additional measures will be needed to preserve fiscal sustainability, but they stressed the importance of more widely sharing the benefits of the improved public finances. Exempting food and other basic necessities was a quick and direct way to deliver these benefits. They are looking to raise additional revenue by broadening the tax base, especially by reducing discretionary tax incentives and seek to optimize the benefits already provided to ensure that new construction projects contribute more to the economy (Box 3). They also plan to complete the ongoing work to revise the investment code to increase transparency and reduce discretion. They will look to update (in Percent of GDP) Deviation in Primary Balance (less CBI) from 9th Review 1/-3.6Proposed Adjustments over 3 years Progressively reduce exemptions 1.2Increase property tax intake0.2Continue to improve tax administration0.3Implement civil service reform: payroll audit and public sector modernization1.0Contain spending on goods and services 0.5 1/ Net of changes in SIDF funding to the budget Proposed Adjustments to Close the Primary Balance Gap by 2017 Page 15 the valuation of properties to ensure that property tax collection is in line with recent market developments. They agreed with the need to continue public sector reforms, including strengthening the oversight of public enterprises, although they noted that reforming SKELEC will take time. Substantial progress has been made in reducing public debt, although the debt-to- GDP ratio remains high and continues to be vulnerable to adverse shocks. Public debt declined to 79 percent of GDP at end-2014, and is half of that in 2010, reflecting further debt-land swaps, advance repayments, and economic growth. However, at nearly 80 percent of GDP, the debt remains high, and risks to debt sustainability over the medium term are elevated given plausible shocks (Annex III). Staff welcomed plans to further accelerate repayments, which are estimated to reduce debt to 66.3 percent of GDP at end-2015 compared to 73 percent if debt is paid as scheduled. The gross debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to fall to 52.1 percent by 2020, but in the absence of strengthening fiscal policy, accumulated government deposits will be depleted. Staff also recommended lengthening the tenor of debt instruments, which are mostly in the form of 91-day T-bills, while continuing to reduce borrowing costs as the government is now in a strong position to obtain better terms. Authorities’ views : The authorities pointed to the substantial progress and further plans for advance debt repayment, including to the IMF. They have also agreed on a new repayment schedule with one non-Paris Club creditor, will repay another, and plan to finalize debt restructuring negotiations with other non-Paris Club creditors. They continue to work towards reducing borrowing cost on remaining outstanding obligations, and have had some success, including reducing the interest on new T-bills to rates ranging from 4.75 percent to 5.0 percent. However, lengthening the tenor of T-bills may be more challenging given the limited market appetite for longer maturities. NIA noted that they were facing challenges in raising funding. B. Managing CBI Inflows and Improving the Accountability of the Sugar Industry Diversification Foundation The reform of the CBI program to improve its operations and strengthen the due diligence framework will improve the program’s sustainability. The reforms being implemented include using a minimum of three due diligence companies to leverage their different strengths, incorporating a risk matrix to the reports, increasing CBI Unit staffing and upgrading IT to improve efficiency and reporting capacity. Steps taken to improve transparency of the operations and increasing collaboration with other programs in the region are also important for ensuring high standards for due diligence. Staff urged the government to quickly complete the reforms to the CBI Unit, while continuing to strengthen its oversight. Reforms will also be needed to enhance supervision and monitoring of real estate developments and ensure that the pipeline of CBI-related condominium developments be consistent with the tourism master plan. Page 16 Box 2. The Social Security Board The Social Security Board (SSB) is in a stable financial position with substantial investment funds The SSB is currently in surplus, averaging 3.8 percent of GDP per year over 2009-2013, with a reserve- expenditure ratio of 20 years. Reserves have been increasing steadily reaching around 65 percent of GDP in 2013, the highest in the ECCU. The scheme is also the most liquid, with more than 60 percent of its assets in bank deposits, comprising 17 percent of total banking system deposits. Investments in the public sector, including in public sector enterprises, represented around 20 percent of the investment portfolio as of end-2014, while real estate investments comprised at least 7 percent. The ageing population dynamics are expected to negatively impact the long–run sustainability of the SSB. Based on the 9 actuarial review, the dependency ratio of pensioners to working age persons is expected to more than double from 0.15 to 0.33 by 2035, and to triple to 0.44 by 2055. The 10 review indicates that the SSB will start running down resources between 2024-2030, and exhaust reserves between 2038 and 2044. Nonetheless, strong employment growth in the past two years has led to a significant increase in contributions, with benefit expenditure currently standing at 72 percent of contribution income. Reform of the pension scheme should be a policy priority. The 9 actuarial review recommended reforms including: increasing the minimum retirement age for full pension entitlement from 62 to 65; raising contribution rates; increasing the period over which insurable earnings are averaged to calculate benefits; and indexing annual adjustments of pension payments to actual inflation. The investment portfolio of the SSB also needs to be diversified since the current asset mix is significantly exposed to the government and statutory bodies, including state-owned indigenous banks. ______________________ Reserve-expenditure ratio measures number of years of payments the fund could make if no future contributions or interest were received and no additional benefits were awarded. The 9 actuarial review was completed in 2010 and the 10th actuarial review in 2013. 500 700 900 1,100 1,300 1,500 1,700 2,100 2,300 2,500 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 200920132017202120252029203320372041 Reserves (right axis) Total Income Total expenditure St.Kitts and Nevis: NIS Financial Position (in EC$ million) Source: SocialSecurity Board and IMF staff estimates. Deposits in the Banking System T.BillsT. BondsLoans to GovLoans to Public EnterprisesReal estateOther NIS Investmentsby Asset Class, 2014 ( In percent of total) Source: Authorities and IMF staff estimates Page 17 Box 3. Tax Incentives in St. Kitts and Nevis More effort is needed to contain the magnitude of tax exemptions. Total exemptions granted in 2014 exceeded the EC$100 million cap introduced in the 2014 budget by EC$3 million. As a ratio to GDP, revenue forgone from tax incentives has remained stable since 2011. Additional exemptions were granted in late 2014 and April 2015, on food and other items, which will increase foregone revenue by about 2.5 percent of GDP. The granting of tax exemptions involves considerable discretion. Several laws guide the granting of tax concessions, including the Fiscal Incentives Act, the Small Business Development Act, the Income Tax Act, the Stamp Act for Special Development Areas, the Special Resort Development Act, the VAT Act, the Hotels Aid Act, and the Duty Free Shop Act. However, Cabinet has the authority to grant concessions, and in practice, has discretion in almost all aspects of the decision, including the terms of the concessions. This results in many concessions being provided on a case-by-case basis, based on special Cabinet decisions. The tourism sector share of foregone revenue has declined. As with other ECCU countries, the main argument for granting concessions is to encourage investment in tourism. However, it appears that other factors are becoming increasingly important drivers of tax incentives as the share of revenue forgone from tourism has shrunk over time. The authorities are considering strategies to improving the process of granting exemptions. In addition to maintaining the $100 million cap on discretionary exemptions, they indicated that the VAT and the Customs Service Charge will be excluded from negotiations pertaining to exemptions. The improved monitoring of exemptions granted, with monthly revenue-loss reports, may also aid in containing new exemptions. Staff encouraged the authorities to publish these reports to increase scrutiny of the benefits received by projects that are accorded incentives. Staff also suggested centralizing the power to grant and manage tax incentives at the Ministry of Finance as a move towards a more rules-based concessions system. ______________________________ The cap and estimates exclude corporate income tax since the authorities do not have a reliable methodology to estimate forgone revenue from these sources. The FAD report “Tax Incentives and Property Taxation in the ECCU”, by Norregaard, J., E. Crivelli, R. Franzsen, and R. Krelove, IMF (2015), estimate these at 1 percent of GDP. These estimates are about half of the estimates of tourism-related exemptions in the abovementioned study, so this may also reflect classification issues. Tourism 22%Industry29%Other49% Tourism30%Industry33%Other37% Tax Incentives: By Activity (Revenue forgone in percent of GDP) Sources:Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Import Duties Consumption Tax/VAT Excise Tax Custom Service Charge Tax Incentives: By Tax Type (Revenue forgone in percent of GDP) Sources:Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 18 In light of the uncertainty surrounding future CBI inflows, careful management of the stock of accumulated savings should be a priority. Staff urged the authorities to create a comprehensive and transparent CBI management framework, build precautionary balances to address exogenous shocks, stabilize economic activity, and prepay debt. Indeed, the return on government deposits is likely to fall short of the cost of debt. CBI resources could also be used for investment in high-priority public projects, subject to a rigorous cost-benefit analysis. While such a framework may take some time to establish, the government should proceed with interim plans to invest these savings abroad, to reduce the pressure on banks’ profitability (see below). Strengthening of SIDF management and its integration with the government accounts should be a high priority. The SIDF has been increasingly involved in quasi-fiscal activities, including substantial expenditure under PEP (see below). A clear operational framework limiting these operations is needed. Transfers from the SIDF to the budget should also be limited, and be subject to clear rules, to ensure that the government operates with a clearly defined budget constraint. The selection of SIDF investment projects needs to be transparent and based on sound economic returns, while SIDF financial statements should be audited and released to the public on a timely basis. Over the medium term, staff recommends establishing an overarching framework to integrate saving and investment activities of the SIDF with the government under a SWF structure, with strong accountability and governance frameworks to preserve accumulated savings and allow for the sustainable use of the resources to face exogenous shocks and promote long-term development (Annex IV). The operation and costs of PEP need to be streamlined. Around 3,300 persons were employed under the program as of end-March 2015, with a cost of about 3 percent of GDP for 2014. Although PEP supported employment when the economy was operating with considerable excess capacity, it needs to be downsized and refocused on skills development in line with labor market needs. Restructuring the program should include establishing a strict budget for its operations, limiting enrollment periods, and lowering the stipend below the minimum wage. Incentives should be put in place to ensure both applicants and participating employers treat it as a training opportunity rather than a permanent subsidy. Plans will need to be made to redeploy the majority of participants working at the public sector since these cannot be absorbed by the civil service, if fiscal discipline is to be sustained. Authorities’ views: Substantial progress has already been made in reforming CBI operations and strengthening security. Government’s effort to coordinate with other programs in the region will help maintain high standards. Notwithstanding, the implementation of reforms must not be rushed, but given adequate time to implement the necessary changes to ensure a stronger and more credible program. The authorities plan to strengthen outreach to clarify the reforms and reduce adverse impressions that the program has stalled. They agreed that construction projects See IMF working paper (WP/15/93), “Prudent Management of Inflows under Economic Citizenship Programs”. In the absence of a Board, the audited financial statements for 2012 have yet to be released. Page 19 under the CBI program need greater scrutiny and are looking at options to maintain the value of real estate projects. They plan to reform the SIDF and are beginning to examine alternatives, and are eager to improve the transparency and accountability of its operations. They are keenly aware of the need to limit and reform PEP to move it to a sustainable path, but they will need to move gradually in light of the large number of participants.