The economy grew at an estimated 5 percent in 2015, somewhat below the 6 percent growth in 2013-2014. Strong construction activity has underpinned growth in recent years, supported by large real-estate projects funded through the CBI program and large public investment projects. The lower growth reflects deceleration in construction activity in some CBI-funded real-estate developments toward end- 2015, reflecting caution by developers as the CBI program was being reformed. The ongoing recovery in stay-over tourist arrivals, buoyant cruise-ship business, and strong activity in the wholesale and retail sectors continued to support growth. Consumer price inflation turned significantly negative (-2.9 percent, year-on-year), reflecting lower global commodity prices and the impact of new VAT and Import Duty exemptions on food items that carry a large weight in the CPI basket. Manufacturing Construction Other Services Hotels and restaurants Real Estate Wholesale/retail trade Financial Services Real Growth Rate Sources: Authorities; IMF staff calculations 2015 Prel. Page 11 Fiscal Performance 2010-2015 (In percent of GDP) CBI budgetary fees Grants Overall balance (less CBI Receipts and SIDF Grants) Overall balance The overall fiscal balance remained in surplus in 2015, at an estimated 5 percent of GDP, but has significantly weakened compared to recent years. Weaker performance partly reflects the decline in CBI receipts to the budget (to an estimated 12 percent, from 14 percent of GDP in 2014). The decline was partly due to a temporary slowdown in processing applications at the start of a rigorous program reform that subsequently reduced processing time to 45-70 days. The weaker fiscal performance also reflects the impact of the VAT and import-duty exemptions granted in 2014-2015, with an estimated 2 percent of GDP in foregone revenue at Customs and Excise and Inland Revenue Departments. Stronger collection of other taxes helped limit the deterioration in the overall tax performance to 0.8 percent of GDP. Notwithstanding savings on the interest bill and goods and services, delays in external grants from the EU and one-off financing of the Sugar Industry Diversification Foundation (SIDF) spending (due to the delayed appointment of its board of directors) further worsened the overall balance by 1.5 percent of GDP. On an underlying basis, excluding CBI receipts and SIDF grants, the overall deficit increased from 6 to 6.9 percent of GDP. Public debt has continued its impressive downward trajectory, to 68 percent of GDP at end- 2015, and is projected to reach the ECCU’s 2030 debt-to-GDP target of 60 percent in 2017, well ahead of peers. Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis Authorities and IMF staff estimates. The domestic banking system remains stable, but has pockets of vulnerability. The reported capital-adequacy ratio (CAR) remains high at 22 percent as of end-2015. (A different regulatory treatment of land assets in bank balance sheets would imply a lower ratio, but still comfortably above the regulatory minimum—see below.) The nonperforming loans (NPLs) ratio is high and rising, even after adjusting for the impact of the debt-land swap on the size of the banks’ loan portfolio. Banks’ appetite for lending is dampened by the high level of NPLs, and by the limited number of projects deemed bankable (in particular for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) Swapping banks’ public sector loans for land reduced the size of their loan portfolio, leading to an initial rise in NPLs. The rise in the NPL ratio in 2015 to 22.2 percent reflects reclassification of a Nevis Island Administration loan as nonperforming—discussions for the loan’s resolution are ongoing. Page 12 perceived as risky), despite strong economic activity and high banking system liquidity. Private sector credit growth hence remains subdued, at 3.2 percent in 2015 following two years of negative to flat growth. Ample project funding through the CBI program and limited government borrowing needs also contain credit growth. Limited lending, along with a growing deposit base and the high cost of funds induced by the ECCB’s 2 percent interest rate floor on savings accounts, in turn, put pressure on indigenous banks’ profitability. External sector performance presents a mixed picture, with an accurate assessment hampered by significant shortcomings in balance of payment statistics. While the current account deficit remained stable at an estimated 12 percent of GDP in 2015, the international investment position has deteriorated significantly from a recent peak (Figure 4). Reduced CBI budgetary receipts (which appear as service receipts in the current account) and lower foreign grants in 2015 were largely offset by an estimated decline in merchandise imports—the latter reflecting the significant drop in fuel and commodity prices and lower imports of construction materials. CBI-related inflows, including capital transfers and CBI-linked FDI, continued to finance the current account deficit. However, net international reserves and commercial banks’ net foreign assets (NFA) fell for the first time since 2010, indicating a significant drain on foreign currency assets, even after adjusting for large repayments to external creditors in 2015. Distortions arise from inaccurate estimation of tourism receipts, spending by the large foreign student population, and significant underestimation of the volume of merchandise imports and exports since 2013; these have complicated the assessment of the current account balance (see Annex II). Further, the methodology for estimating foreign direct investment (FDI) based on transfer of title from the land and property registry does not capture foreign developers’ significant investment spending on construction, while CBI-related inflows of foreign currency deposits to domestic banks through the real estate route also appear underestimated. The ECCB is currently revising external sector statistics with new surveys using the BPM6 methodology. Technical assistance from CARTAC and IMF headquarters is being mobilized to address the significant data gaps. Based on staff’s preliminary revisions to merchandise imports over 2013-2015, using data from the US Census Bureau, Eurostat and historical ECCB’s BPM5 data (Annex II). The decline may be partly explained by the slowdown in new CBI investment commitments through the real estate option, while real estate developers continued funding construction activity by drawing down on their balances—in effect, reducing banks’ NFA. Page 13