Fiscal performance under the SBA remains strong. The fiscal targets have been met for end-June 2013 and end-September 2013, the latter in part due to ample CBI receipts, which more than offset some overruns in current outlays—including the granting of a thirteenth month wage after the three-year nominal wage freeze—and an accelerated execution of the investment budget. Tax revenue was aligned with program expectations at end-September 2013, partly due to buoyant receipts from taxes related to real estate transactions. The budgetary surplus at end-June 2013 was EC$126 million, and at end-September EC$175 million, more than twice the adjusted program targets. The primary surpluses at end-June and end-September also amply exceeded their adjusted targets. St. Kitts and Nevis: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets (in EC$ million) Ma End-Jun. 2013 Actual Prog. Adjusted Actual Status Prog. Adjusted End-Sep. 2013 Actual Status Performance Criteria Performance Criteria: Central government overall balance including grants (floor) 1/ 2/ Stock of central government budget expenditure arrears accumulation (ceiling) 3/ Stock of external short term debt (ceiling) Central government or guaranteed external arrears accumulation (ceiling) 4/ Indicative Target: Central government primary balance (floor) 1/ 2/ 1/ Cumulative within each calendar year. 2/ See the TMU for a description of adjustors. 3/ Including the estimated stock of expenditure payable on electricity. 4/ To be monitored on a continuous basis. X All other performance criteria have been met through end-September 2013, except for the continuous ceiling on the accumulation of external arrears. The Development Bank of St. Kitts and Nevis (DBSKN) accumulated temporary and minor arrears of EC$1.6 million (0.08 percent of GDP) to the European Investment Bank (EIB) in September 2013, which were cleared at end-October 2013. This resulted from the DBSKN’s temporarily tight cash flow situation compounded by coordination gaps with the central government. The DBSKN is addressing this situation by tightening administrative procedures and establishing a fund for the pre-payment of debt service. The Nevis Island Administration (NIA) also accumulated small arrears to the CDB (of EC$0.3 million This includes constitutional provisions for ninety days beyond the five-year term of the Parliament. Page 8 or 0.01 percent of GDP) after normal operations were impeded by the fire destruction of its Treasury building three days before payment was due, destroying paper records and damaging the data server. The NIA promptly alerted the CDB of the impending delay and shortly thereafter repaid the outstanding amount. Despite the improving consolidated fiscal position, the NIA has been facing financing pressures and temporarily incurred domestic arrears on its bond. The NIA EC$20 million Treasury Bill issued on the Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM)—due on June 20, 2013— could not be rolled over without a federal government guarantee, which was routinely provided in the past. The temporary default gave rise to domestic arrears, but did not breach the program ceiling on the accumulation of domestic arrears (Country Report No. 14/49, Technical Memorandum of Understanding, ¶13) since the authorities entered into negotiations to settle the arrears immediately. The issue was resolved with an NIA offer to exchange the Treasury Bill against a new Treasury Bill yielding ½ percentage point higher interest, which was accepted by most of the debt holders at end-July. Progress on structural reforms has slowed, reflecting capacity constraints, technical assistance challenges and changes in priorities. The authorities met the structural benchmark on establishing and operationalizing the Inland Revenue Department (IRD) unit dedicated to program design, planning and monitoring at end-September 2013. They also met the structural benchmark on updating the quarterly stress tests of banks based on end-June 2013 and end-September 2013 data. However, administrative and capacity bottlenecks factored into the delay in the implementation of the regulations of the 2011 Civil Service Act (structural benchmark for end- July 2013) and the submission of the Customs Law to Parliament (structural benchmark for end- December 2013). Both measures had to be resubmitted following revisions. These actions are now expected to be completed by end-June 2014 and end-May 2014, respectively. Challenges with securing continuous technical assistance hampered progress in finalizing implementing regulations to the Procurement and Contract (Administration) Act and developing a proxy means testing for the eligibility criteria for the planned consolidated cash transfer program (structural benchmarks for end-December 2013). The former requires technical assistance from the World Bank, which has faced issue with funding. The authorities are intensifying efforts to secure the required financial support to complete the measure. The latter, which was being implemented with the assistance of UNICEF, was delayed by an unforeseen change in the consulting staff and funding constrains. A new consultant is being identified to be funded by a budgetary allocation and the project completion is planned by end-2014. The authorities have postponed the draft proposal for a comprehensive pension reform (structural benchmark for end-June 2013 (Country Report No. 14/49 ¶9)) to integrate it with the regional initiative on pension reforms, launched by the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). Page 9 St. Kitts and Nevis: Structural Benchmarks for September and December 2013 Draft proposal for a comprehensive pension reform Action Operationalize the implementing regulations of the 2011 Civil Service Act (pertaining to recruiting, discipline, promotion, and standing orders) by amending the general orders accordingly Establish and operationalize a unit dedicated to program design, planning and monitoring in the Inland Revenue. Target Date End-June 2013 End-July 2013 Status delayed delayed, expected for end-June 2014 End-September 2013 completed Develop method for the proxy means testing for the eligibiity criteria of the planned consolidated cash transfer program End-December 2013 delayed Submit to parliament the new Customs Law Finalize the implementing regulations to the Procurement and Contract Act Update the existing stress tests of banks Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities and IMF staff estimates. End-December 2013 End-December 2013 To be monitored on a quarterly basis delayed, expected for end-May 2014 delayed completed