While the financial system has been stable, safeguards need to be strengthened. Financial soundness indicators have suffered due to the prolonged recession and the debt restructuring. The significant growth in deposits, reflecting government savings from CBI inflows, has also increased pressure on bank profitability. Going forward, banks need to reduce the NPL ratio and revisit their business model to improve credit growth and profitability while exercising caution with new lending to safeguard their asset quality. In particular, exposure to the long pipeline of CBI- financed real estate projects should be carefully considered, to ensure that the projects can be brought to closure. Meanwhile, the government needs to consider an alternative investment vehicle for government deposits to help alleviate excess liquidity. The regional banking resolution is progressing. The authorities should continue to consult with the ECCB on addressing regional financial sector issues following the completion of the asset quality reviews. We commend the authorities for ratifying the new banking law which will facilitate the implementation of the regional financial resolution plans. The government should continue to exercise caution and due diligence in assessing plans for regional financial integration to safeguard St. Kitts and Nevis’ banking system and ensure its viability and efficiency going forward. Moving forward with the land sales will consolidate the progress with debt restructuring. Unwinding the debt-land swap would jeopardize the hard earned gains in fiscal and The bill was passed July 29 Dec-11Dec-12Dec-13Dec-14 Capital adequacy ratio40.738.223.725.4NPLs/Total Loans5.88.912.116.8Provisioning/NPLs53.034.743.046.5 Liquid Assets/Total Assets 38.043.650.751.3Return on Assets2.00.90.50.5 Source: ECCB St. Kitts and Nevis: Selected Financial Indicators, 2010-2014 (Indigenous banks, In percent) 700800Jan-10Jan-11Jan-12Jan-13Jan-14 Gov deposits in EC$ Gov foreign currency deposits Total banking system deposits (RHS) St. Kitts and Nevis Banking System Liquidity (In EC$ millions)Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 20 debt sustainability. An extension of the dividend agreement—a three year agreement to pay banks a dividend of 3.5 percent per annum on the stock of land held by the Special Land Sales Company (SLSC)—would provide time to consider options. The SLSC’s executive board should be reappointed and authorized to develop long-term strategies that would benefit the country. Moving forward with land sales will help enhance potential growth through the wider deployment of otherwise idle land assets. It will promote the development of a stronger middle class, stimulate construction by domestic developers for local consumption, and contribute to supporting other sectors, including medical schools, agricultural projects, as well as tourism. Expansion of the offshore financial sector needs to follow best practices. New legislation passed in June 2015 in Nevis facilitates the establishment of offshore banks. Staff cautioned that offshore banks should comply with global AML/CFT regulations and enhanced reporting requirements for tax compliance (e.g. FATCA), and will require direct oversight and strict monitoring by the Financial Services Regulatory Commission (FSRC). It would also be important to consider ramifications on the onshore banking system, and potential loss of correspondent banking relations of indigenous banks. Additionally, any perception of an offshore banking jurisdiction as being a tax haven can negatively impact the image of the CBI program, leading to increased pressure by the international community through greater travel restrictions, undermining the sustainability of the CBI program. Authorities’ views: They were mindful of risks related to the regional financial resolution and the high NPL ratio. On the challenges created by the debt-land swap, they noted that preserving public land is of special significance to the nation. Their first priority is to introduce transparency to the process, while considering the merits of individual transactions, ensuring that they are consistent with the government’s overall vision for the country. They will consider options for addressing the debt-land swap while developing a long-term strategy for land use that would be consistent with supporting strong economic growth. They assured staff that any new offshore bank would need to meet criteria established under the country’s Anti-Money Laundering legislation.