The buoyant recovery reflects a surge in construction activity. Growth in 2013 was revised up from 3.8 percent to 6.2 percent and, estimated to have been 6.1 percent in 2014, driven by the surge in CBI-related construction activity, government and Sugar Industry Diversification Foundation (SIDF) investments and spending, including the People Employment Program (PEP), and the ongoing recovery in tourist arrivals. Wages and employment in the construction sector were Improved macroeconomic circumstances permitted the authorities to begin to treat the arrangement as precautionary at the time of the completion of the Seventh and Eighth Review, in March 2014. The revision follows technical assistance provided by a CARTAC National Accounts expert. Page 9 up by 30 and 15 percent, respectively. Inflation remained low at 0.6 percent (y/y) at end-2014, reflecting low commodity prices. The current account deficit has remained lower than its historical average, at around 7.5 percent of GDP, owing to high CBI service receipts. International reserves continued to increase in 2014, with import coverage remaining at about 9 months. The fiscal surplus remained high as a result of strong growth in tax revenue, more than offsetting higher spending. Reflecting the strength of the economic activity, tax revenue increased by 1 percentage point from 2013, significantly higher than envisaged in the 9th Review in Eastern Caribbean dollar (EC$) terms. Current spending was also higher than projected (in EC$) in the 9th Review as a result of the 13th- month salary bonus, increased outlays, in part related to CBI program reforms and higher transfers, but continued to decline as a percent of GDP. Meanwhile, CBI budgetary revenues grew to 14.1 percent of GDP from 13 percent in 2013. As a result, the surplus before grants increased to 6.5 percent of GDP, from 5.2 percent in 2013. Significantly lower grants in 2014, including from the SIDF, generated a decline in the headline central government surplus to 9.5 percent of GDP from 12.1 percent in 2013. Netting the impact of grants, CBI flows and SIDF budgetary support, the central government registered an improvement of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2014. Debt declined faster than anticipated, reflecting higher GDP growth and advance debt repayments, to 79 percent of GDP at end-2014 compared to a projected 86.2 percent, and 100.8 percent at end-2013. In 2015Q1, the fiscal result remained strong. The fiscal performance of Nevis was weaker, reflecting slower revenue growth, and higher current and capital spending, which turned its small surplus in 2013 into a deficit. Estimates based on the monetary survey and public sector debt data suggest that the overall public sector balance, including 14 public sector enterprises, deteriorated by 4.3 percent, although it was still was very strong, with a surplus of 10.4 percent of GDP in 2014. Manufacturing Construction Other Services Hotels and restaurants Real Estate Wholesale/retail trade Financial Services 9th Review Current Contribution to Growth (In percentage points) Sources: Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Contribution to Growth (In percentage points) Contribution to Growth (In percentage points) Contribution to Growth (In percentage points) Interest payments 9th Review Current Public Debt and Interest Payments Sources: Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Grants CBI budgetary fees Overall balance (after grants) Overall balance (before grants) Overall balance (before grants less CBI fees & SIDF Investment proceeds) Fiscal Indicators Sources: Authorities and IMF staff estimates. Page 10 Box 1. Implementation of 2014 Article IV Recommendations The authorities undertook the following actions, consistent with the last Article IV recommendations: Completed the second tranche of the debt-land swap agreement for St. Kitts and the first tranche for Nevis. Saved a large portion of CBI budgetary revenues to build further precautionary buffers. Reduced public debt more rapidly using accumulated government deposits. Limited discretionary tax exemptions on new construction projects to about EC$100 million limits. Passed a new Customs Law in November 2014 to facilitate the enforcement of post-clearance audits at the Customs and Excise Department. Further strengthened the tax administration, including greater focus on large tax-payers, representing 80 percent of total tax revenues and broadening the tax base by limiting deductions. Progressed with civil service reform by operationalizing the implementing regulations of the 2011 Civil Service Act, in May 2014, for the effective implementation of the legislation, and began the payroll audit and functional review of selected departments, with the final review due for completion by end-2015. Made important revisions to strengthen the National Energy Policy and Action Plan and made significant progress in negotiations on the geothermal project in Nevis. Policy action was slow, delayed, or reversed, in the following areas: Introducing new VAT and import duties exemptions that staff estimates will lead to substantial loss of tax revenues absent offsetting measures. Mobilizing land sales by the Special Land Sales Company (St. Kitts). Curtailing tax holidays and centralizing the power to grant and manage tax incentives in the Ministry of Finance and moving from discretionary to a rules-based concessions system. Strengthening oversight of public enterprises and enhancing their reporting requirements. Implementing an action plan to improve the business climate, which was, however, initiated in 2015. Publishing the latest audited financial statements of SIDF. Developing a time-table for implementing parametric reforms proposed in the latest actuarial review of the Social Security Board (SSB). Strengthening statistical capacity. See IMF Country Report No. 14/86. For a review of SBA program implementation see IMF Country Report No. Page 11 The banking system remains stable while credit growth is low. The debt-land swap in July 2013 and August 2014 contributed to increasing indigenous banks’ NPL ratio to 16.8 percent as of 2014Q4, as public sector loans were removed from the balance of total loans. Private sector credit recovered modestly by 0.5 percent (y/y) in December 2014, following two years of contraction, reflecting banks’ low risk appetite and the elevated NPL ratio. On other hand, bank liquidity continued to grow, fuelled by strong deposit growth associated with high CBI inflows and government savings.