Other Assets Indigenous Banks' Balance Sheet (In Percent of Total Assets) Sovereign-bank linkages continue to pose risks to financial stability and the soundness of banks’ balance sheets . The debt-land swap (which cut the public debt by 30 percent of 2015 GDP and reduced banks’ direct exposure to the government) was the most significant element of the debt restructuring. However, it introduced an illiquid asset onto bank balance sheets, with implications for financial soundness and long- run profitability, particularly given the limited progress in land sales since the swap took place. Although the swap provides banks with title for the land, assigning the Special Land Sales Company (SLSC) the task of approving land sales created an operational hurdle given the delay in Soc. Sec. Deposits Gov. Deposits Other Liabilities Equity Correspondent Bank Balances & Foreign Investments Reserves at ECCB Other Deposits Source: ECCB Liabilities T-Bills Loans Land Assets Assets Page 20 appointing the new board of directors. Further delays in land sales may require banks to start provisioning for unsold land in line with the ECCB’s prudential requirement to divest seized collateral assets within 5 years, adding to banks’ challenges. T-bills Bonds (external) (in percent of 2010 GDP) Debt Restructuring Package - Impact on debt Stocks Establishing a clear framework for completing the debt-land swap is crucial to preserve the credibility of the debt restructuring and hard-earned gains in debt sustainability, while protecting financial stability. The significant achievements in creating fiscal space, putting the public debt on a firm downward trajectory, and building sizable buffers will be jeopardized if the second leg of the restructuring is not completed by divesting the land within a timeframe consistent with the ECCB’s regulatory guidelines. In this context, staff welcomed the appointment of the SLSC board of directors and the recent approval of two outstanding purchase offers, and urged consideration of others. Staff stressed the need to develop a clear action plan to enable reasonable progress with land sales and operationalize the SLSC to market the remaining land, to sell it to domestic and foreign investors, including the Kittitian and Nevisian Diaspora, lease it on behalf of banks, subject to regulatory requirements, or facilitate joint ventures with foreign investors to turn the land into productive assets. While setting up this framework, staff recommended consideration of a temporary extension of the dividend guarantee on unsold land, at possible renegotiated terms, to support bank stability. Loans and advances Multilateral Source: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities and Fund staff estimates. Possible relief from other bilateral creditors Bonds (domestic) External others and discount bond with 50% cut in face value. Domestic others Official bilateral Domestic debt swapped for land. Exchange offer of a par bond w/o cut in face value Pre-Restructuring (end-2010) Post-Restructuring (end-2014) x E m In the interim, the economic and legal treatment of the debt-land swap needs to be clarified and agreed by all parties—the banks, the regulator, and the government. The legal transaction of transferring the land to banks extinguished public debt, as envisaged under the swap agreement. However, in 2014Q3, the ECCB reclassified the banks’ holdings of SPV shares as de facto government exposure, assigning a zero risk-weight in computing the CAR, compared to a previous 100 percent risk weight. The new treatment results in a reported CAR of 22.3 percent as of end- December 2015, compared to 15.3 percent if the full risk weight were applied. Staff urged the authorities, the ECCB and the banks to agree on a uniform treatment of the swap to better assess the loss-absorption capacity of the banking system. Authorities’ views The authorities noted the Cabinet approval of the purchase offers and signaled commitment to moving forward with the debt-land swap, including by considering all credible purchase The reclassification considers the SPV shares as a financial investment in government securities collateralized by land, given the implicit government control over approving land sales and the limited profit or loss if proceeds from land sales exceed or fall below the original valuation. Page 21 offers, while ensuring that national interest is preserved and the resulting investment contributes to the economy. In addition, the Cabinet will examine other policy options that can further expedite the downward trajectory of the national debt. They are also cognizant of the need to safeguard bank soundness, while considering options to reduce the annual cost to government of dividend payments on unsold land. The authorities agree on the need to articulate a pro-active role for the SLSC in marketing the land and are engaging with the ECCB on adopting a consistent treatment of the swap in the balance sheets of both the government and the banks. Rapid progress is needed to resolve the high level of NPLs in the banking system and restore sustainable private sector credit growth. Like in other ECCU countries, a protracted foreclosure process, with difficulties in seizing and divesting collateral, slows down the NPL resolution process. As a result, banks have tightened lending standards and exercise caution in new lending (especially to SMEs perceived as high-risk borrowers in the absence of adequate business plans, cash flow projections, and audited financial statements), despite the high level of liquidity in the system. Legislative reforms, including the draft regional Foreclosure Law (targeted for implementation by end-2016) and the recent passage of the Eastern Caribbean Asset Management Corporation (ECAMC) Act, should support banks’ efforts in lowering their NPL ratios, stimulating credit growth and improving profitability. Educating borrowers, creating a culture of business planning, and establishing credit bureaus should also help reduce information gaps on the creditworthiness of borrowers to generate more bankable projects. Continued strengthening of the supervisory frameworks and more systematic coordination between the regulators of banks and nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) are critical to limiting risks to the domestic financial system. Following the introduction of the risk- based supervisory framework in 2014 and increased onsite examinations of NBFIs, the nonbank regulator (Financial Services Regulatory Commission, FSRC) has identified weaknesses in some segments of the sector (e.g., high delinquency rates and accelerated lending activity). Staff recommended continued strengthening of supervisory frameworks to capture risks in growing market segments, and close coordination between the FSRC and the ECCB, to limit potential risks from ownership and funding linkages between banks and NBFIs. Close coordination will also help limit contagion risks that may emerge in the absence of clear prudential regulations on cross- transactions between onshore and offshore financial institutions. Staff stressed that enforcement The FSRC is also in charge of AML/CFT oversight, for both banks and nonbanks, and banks operating offshore. The two domestic insurance companies are subsidiaries of two groups, which include financial institutions with domestic banking licenses. One of the indigenous banks has an offshore subsidiary regulated and supervised by the FSRC branch in Nevis. Page 22 of the new Banking Law, ratified by Parliament in July 2015, would enable the ECCB to conduct consolidated and risk-based supervision, while helping banks increase capital. Supervision and regulation of offshore banks should continue to follow international best practices. With the increased scrutiny and de-risking practices by international banks now also affecting indigenous banks in St. Kitts and Nevis, staff recommended systematic monitoring of developments in existing CBRs, maintaining a watertight AML/CFT framework with adequate financial disclosure, prudent financial sector oversight, and full compliance with international standards on transparency and exchange of tax information, to reduce the risk of losing CBRs and avoid adverse implications for the CBI program. Authorities’ views The authorities shared the concerns on the potential impact of losing CBR’s. Some indigenous banks are proactively exploring other potential counterparts, training staff and expanding compliance departments. The authorities have continued efforts to ensure full compliance with international standards on AML/CFT, and requested Fund advice on possible alterative arrangements should de-risking trends continue.