amass buffers and create fiscal space for important infrastructure investment. They are also aware of the special challenges in terms of financial integrity and international security associated with the program, and continue to ensure that strong safeguards are observed. Noting St. Kitts and Nevis’ high vulnerability to exogenous shocks, the staff urged the authorities to use the exceptional CBI inflows to build buffers and consider developing a framework, including specific norm, to save excess CBI receipts in a stabilization fund, similarly to resource funds established by resource- exporting countries. This would help prevent CBI revenues in excess of the historical norm (staff suggest about 2 percent of GDP with an additional 0.5 percent of GDP to cover due diligence costs) from being used to support recurrent expenditure and/or to finance routine capital spending. The accumulated savings could be used to: Reduce public debt, especially the costlier instruments, which would lower interest costs and expand room to borrow in case of a shock. Indeed, in the current global economy, it may not be possible for the government to obtain higher returns than their borrowing costs without bearing unacceptable risk. Page 16 Stabilize government finances by withdrawals to compensate for a revenue shortfall, support economic activity, and/or meet unforeseen expenditure to address a natural disaster or other events (e.g., recapitalizing a systemic financial institution). These savings could also be used to finance large lumpy infrastructure projects, although such investment should be carefully timed to avoid exacerbating cyclical trends. The already accumulated savings, and robust future flows, may provide scope for the government to explore both options and develop a consensus on the optimal strategy. The authorities were receptive to these proposals, and wanted more assistance in developing guidelines. Indeed, they noted that were already examining option to pay down debt, factoring in the impact of penalty costs for prepayment and possible implications of collective action clauses. At the same time, they were also looking at ways to support critical intervention in their economy to improve medium-term growth prospects. The staff urged caution, to ensure that savings are not expended on unsustainable projects. A healthy and stable financial system that can support private sector development is