The economic situation has continued to improve with robust growth and a strong fiscal balance. Economic growth for 2013-2014 averaged about 6 percent per year, the fiscal surplus remained high as a result of strong tax revenue, which more than offset higher spending, while the public debt-to-GDP ratio fell faster than anticipated. This follows the successful completion of the 36-month exceptional access SBA, which aimed to restore growth and fiscal and debt sustainability, while preserving financial stability. Under the program, St. Kitts and Nevis implemented substantial fiscal consolidation measures, undertook a major debt restructuring exercise, including a debt-land swap, while making substantial progress with key structural reforms. The latter included strengthening tax administration and improving public financial management. There was considerable progress in implementing Fund policy advice from the 2014 Article IV consultation but important issues remain outstanding (Box 1). Recent developments suggest increased risks to the Citizenship-By-Investment (CBI) program, the main driver of the economy’s strong performance. The Canadian imposition of visa requirements on citizens of St. Kitts and Nevis on November 22, 2014 led the government to undertake important reforms to address security concerns. However, the heightened international scrutiny, combined with substantial competition from new CBI programs in the region and globally, raises concerns about the sustainability of these inflows. Recent elections led to a change in administration. Team Unity, a three-party coalition won Parliamentary elections on February 16 , 2015, with Dr. Timothy Harris replacing Dr. Denzil Douglas—the country’s Prime Minister since 1995. The campaign promised strong employment creation, lower taxes, and higher welfare benefits, and opposed the debt-land swaps. The campaign also promised to strengthen the CBI program administration and improve the transparency of the operations of the Sugar Investment Diversification Foundation (SIDF). The new government has already moved by widening tax exemptions introduced by the previous government and stepped up the reform of the CBI program.