sustainable fiscal framework that would not be reliant on high CBI inflows . Such a strategy would be anchored in achieving the authorities’ public debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2020 while using for budgetary purposes only a conservative amount of CBI receipts. The staff presented a medium-term framework, consistent with the 2014 budget (Box 3) and the government’s debt objective, and modest CBI inflows. The main underlying assumption are improvement of tax administration and a modest widening of the tax base leading to an increase of revenues of about 1 percentage point relative to 2013; a wage bill increase consistent with the 2014 budget with growth in subsequent years slightly below nominal GDP based on implementing civil service reform; and constrained spending on goods and services. The framework illustrates that the authorities could achieve their objective without undue reliance on CBI inflows, while at the same time accommodating higher capital outlays. The authorities recognized the risk associated with undue reliance on CBI receipts for budgetary purposes, and are continuing with the implementation of the reforms initiated under their adjustment program that would be consistent with the proposed medium-term fiscal framework. Indeed, they underscored that the budget is consistent with their plans to continue to save the bulk of the CBI receipts. The authorities agreed that enhancing tax revenue must remain a priority. Receipts from the VAT, after the first full year of its implementation in 2011, have remained disappointingly Page 14 low, and total tax revenues have not yet recovered to their pre-crisis level since the sectors leading the economic recovery have benefited from transitional VAT and customs duties exemptions. The focus should be on: Continuing to reform the revenue administration . The authorities plan to fully integrate the operations of the VAT Unit and other units of the Inland Revenue Department into a function- based administration that includes audit, enforcement, collections and refunds, providing a critical platform for a comprehensive compliance and enforcement strategy for the VAT and the corporate income tax. Broadening the tax base through streamlining tax incentives (Box 2). The substantial budgetary costs of incentives suggest an urgent need for their review and the development of a strategy to substantially reduce them. The authorities plan to continue improving public finance management. Better expenditure control together with an improved process of prioritization of outlays will enable further savings on budgetary resources while delivering the public services and investment in infrastructure needed to sustain growth. Measures include: Civil Service reform. Following the relatively sizable increase in the wage bill in 2013 and 2014, it is critical to proceed with the ongoing audit of the public service to streamline the civil service and to move towards a more performance-based remuneration system. Staff cautioned that the recent wage increases and the expansion in the wage bill to support new government initiatives could rapidly undermine the hard earned gains over the past few years to moderate the size of the wage bill, and underscored the need to move quickly with these reforms. Targeting of the social safety net. The authorities see their conditional cash transfer pilot program as a catalyst for improved targeting of all social programs, which will provide a basis to consolidate all existing social programs offered across ministries. Public financial management reforms. Following the full application of the Procurement Act, the next steps should include adoption of International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), development of improved performance indicators to support fiscal discipline, and strengthening internal and external budgetary audit capacities. Oversight of public entities and a stronger financial position. A key priority is to strengthen the capacity of public enterprises to meet their reporting requirements under the Finance Administration Act. Building on the recent granting of enforcement powers to the Government Entities Oversight Board, it is particularly important that the Board intensifies its monitoring of these entities and engages them on their business plans. In that regard, it would also be needed These recommendations are in line with Sandeep, S. et al. (2012) “St. Kitts and Nevis: Proposal for SEMCAR Public Financial Management, Technical Assistance and Related ICT Capacity Building 2012–13”, FAD, World Bank, SEMCAR, October 2012. Page 15 to extend the Procurement Act provisions to public entities. The new management of the electricity company (SKELEC) should prioritize improving the recovery of receipts. The Social Security System. The government should review the parametric reform and other recommendations proposed in the recent actuarial review of the Social Security Board, assess the scope for their integration with the new health and unemployment insurance schemes, and develop a timetable for their implementation. Developing a framework to manage PPPs and limit contingent fiscal liabilities is key to using public funds efficiently and avoiding accumulating debt through indirect channels. Establishing an overarching legal framework for PPPs would enhance the Ministry of Finance’s control over budgetary commitments to PPP projects and help contain future contingent government obligations. The authorities requested technical assistance to better understand the scope of the proposed reform. Notwithstanding the significant decline in public debt following restructuring, it remains very high and vulnerable to exogenous shocks. With continued fiscal discipline, debt is projected to reach 66 percent of GDP by 2018, on track to achieving the ECCU region-wide target of 60 percent by 2020. This is predicated on the authorities’ commitment to maintaining fiscal prudence and on the continuation of the economic recovery. However, should fiscal policy be relaxed, or growth be significantly weaker, the debt would decline considerably more slowly. Moreover, the country is very vulnerable to natural disasters. A combined shock that entails weaker growth, higher interest rates, and larger primary balances, could see the debt-to-GDP ratio rise to 110 percent of GDP by 2018 (Annex III). The authorities recognize that the large CBI proceeds provide a unique opportunity to