tourism, the mainstay of the economy. They have made significant progress in increasing airlift capacity to complement the increase in new hotel rooms that is already taking place and will continue with the support of new FDI projects and the CBI real estate option. In addition, the new tourism master strategy, to be finalized April 2014, reflects extensive consultation with main stakeholders. It aims to develop more diversified source markets; raise the value-added of tourism through upgraded hotel, infrastructure, and tapping into the yachting market; and increase backward linkages. Staff recommended that the strategy also clearly identify infrastructure shortcomings, establish guidelines for real estate development, address bottleneck in approving high-end tourism projects under the CBI program, update institutional arrangements, and clarify the resource requirements needed to achieve the agreed upon goals. Along with staff, the authorities recognized the need to strengthen their statistical capacities, as an important input for tourism policy design, and plan to develop new surveys. They stressed that the estimated growth contribution from the stay-over tourists is underestimated since it does not factor in the change in tourists’ country of origin (fewer tourists from the Caribbean and more from the United States) since the global crisis, with the latter spending considerably more. The high cost of energy is reported as the most important challenge facing the private sector in St. Kitts and Nevis, as in the rest of the Caribbean. The 2014 budget reflects the authorities’ goal to transition to alternative sources of energy over the medium-term and their support for the development of solar, geothermal, wind and waste-to-energy projects. To that effect, the authorities grant tax concessions for the production of solar energy and customs duties exemptions for the import of renewable energy and energy-efficient technologies. In partnership with the SIDF, they are also building solar-powered homes. Moreover, they are negotiating an agreement on a geothermal energy project in Nevis, and are participating in a regional project to negotiate more advantageous prices for Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) imports. To alleviate the current Airlift capacity increased with additional direct flights from Miami and Toronto and a widening of the peak season flying period by two major airlines in 2013. An additional new flight from Puerto Rico started in 2014. The previous tourism master plan dates from 2006. Page 12 high cost, the SIDF is temporarily subsidizing households’ electricity consumption (on a sliding scale based on use and according to a three-year program expiring in 2015) and covers the customs service charge on petroleum imports through a subsidy to the electricity company SKELEC. Staff commended the authorities for their foresight in fostering the development of alternative sources of energy, but cautioned on the need to monitor costs, including foregone tax revenue. In addition, it recommended that the energy subsidies should be more targeted and be included in the budget, rather than being provided by the SIDF. The authorities are moving quickly to improve the investment climate. According to the ECCU Doing Business Rankings, 2013 2013 Doing Business Survey, the business climate rank of St. Kitts and Nevis is 96 out of 185 countries and 5th out of the 6 ECCU countries. Key areas identified for improvements are resolving insolvency, reducing lengthy processes for paying taxes and a relatively high effective profit tax, accessing credit, and registering property. Important steps have already been taken to address the first two concerns, the adoption of the new Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act in 2013 and the reduction of the corporate income tax rate from 35 to 33 percent (Country Report No. 14/49 ¶14 and ¶15). The authorities are also improving taxpayer services, including with the implementation of e- filing. Moreover, they are formalizing an action plan, following a thorough review of government agencies, to further lift constraints in these areas. Ease of Doing Business Rank Source: World Bank Doing Business Indicators, 2013 St. Kitts and Nevis Average Worst Best Protecting Investors Getting Credit Resolving Insolvency Starting a Business Enforcing Contracts Trading Across Borders Paying Taxes Registering Property Dealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity St. Kitts and Nevis also participates in several regional initiatives, launched by the Caribbean Growth Forum (CGF), that seek to identify and remove impediments to growth. Working groups are assessing priorities for improving: the investment climate; training, research and The initiative was launched in June 2012, with the support of the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the Caribbean Development Bank, in collaboration with the United Kingdom Agency for International Development (DFID) and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA). The CGF national chapters have taken place in 12 Caribbean countries and the St. Kitts and Nevis national chapter began in February 2013. Further information is available in the Statistical Appendix, under Relations with the World Bank. Page 13 development; contribution of tourism to growth; government operations to make it more user- friendly for the private sector; framework to develop Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs); and logistics and connectivity. The SIDF offers scope to support growth and stimulate economic activity. It currently supports a host of programs ranging from airlift capacity, wages for on-the job-training programs, and facilitating financing construction of both low-cost housing and luxury tourism developments. Staff recommended that SIDF funding should be limited to productive investment that would support growth and development, and it should not be providing subsidies which should be part of the government budget. Moreover, the SIDF investment should be phased to ensure that its activities do not lead to overheating, nor compete with the domestic banking system in the provision of credit to commercial enterprises. Further, enhanced transparency regarding operating guidelines and the project selection process, and in publishing SIDF financial statements, not available after 2011, would provide additional safeguards for its operations. In this context, staff recommended that the SIDF financial statement be made available with the government’s budget. The authorities observed that the SIDF was an important motor of the economy and a key tool for its development. They noted that their investment aimed to support a recovery in the context of the prolonged decline and recession. They do not see SIDF activities as competing with the banking sector, but as collaborating with the banks. They clarified that audited financial statements of the SIDF for 2012 and 2013 would be published online by end-2014, after the asset valuation of their investments is fully completed. Moreover, they are considering options to further improve its long- term sustainability. The staff emphasized the importance of continuing to implement a prudent and