Persisting weakness in the banking sector hampers economic growth . NPLs are high at 21.8 and 12.5 percent for indigenous and foreign banks, respectively (Table 5). As banks attempt to increase provisioning, profitability remains low or negative. Limits in the regulatory framework — which prevents creditors from owning the collateral in case of foreclosure—, underdeveloped insolvency and debt restructuring frameworks, and low liquidity of the real estate market reduce the value of collateral. With provisions for impaired assets averaging only 50 percent, capital adequacy remains low once NPLs are written off. Against this background, banks continue to deleverage and reduce lending. Low bank profitability and excess liquidity are aggravated by distortions to banking conditions. The regional minimum savings rate (MSR), which was reduced in 2015 to 2 percent by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), aims to protect small depositors. However, it has prevented a decline of deposit rates in conditions of excess liquidity, contributing to low bank profitability, high lending rates, and reinforcing weak loan demand and bank excess liquidity. Large liquidity buffers, however, mitigate risks to financial stability. With a loan to deposit ratio of about 90 percent, banks have a large volume of liquid assets that can be used to repay depositors. At the end of 2016, the liquidity coverage ratio stood at 37 percent while coverage of deposits stood at 48 percent (text figures and Table 5). St. Lucia: Loans-to-Deposits Ratio ( Percent ) St. Lucia: Liquid Assets ( Percent ) Liquid Assets/Total Deposits Liquid Assets/Total Deposits + Liquid Liabilities The loss of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs) has been limited to the offshore sector, but CBR-related costs have increased substantially. Most domestic banks have been forced to dedicate more resources to due diligence and increased data reporting while correspondent banking fees for indigenous banks have reportedly increased by some 30-to- 40 percent over the last five years. In some cases, banks had to terminate certain services, such as Euro check clearance. To address these issues, the authorities, jointly with the ECCB, are continuing to strengthen their regulatory frameworks, including for AML/CFT and international tax cooperation. In particular, St. Lucia has established automatic exchange of tax information with the U.S. under the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), signed MOUs for tax information exchange with Page 20 32 jurisdictions, and strengthened legislative provisions to improve the availability of ownership and accounting information. Finally, the authorities have committed to adopting the OECD Common Reporting Standard for automatic exchange of tax information. Progress in strengthening the financial sector remains slow. A new insolvency bill is under preparation, but the regional asset management company (ECAMC) for resolution of bank NPLs has not yet been established as some jurisdictions have not provided the necessary financial support. In the non-bank financial sector, a risk-based supervision framework has been introduced for the large number of regulated entities. However, support for a new insurance bill —which would provide for regional regulation and supervision of the sector and allow companies to freely operate in the ECCU single market— is dwindling.