The current fiscal stance is inconsistent with fiscal and debt sustainability. In line with what happened in the recent past, staff assumes that further deterioration in the fiscal balance will reduce market access, leading to a curtailment of investment projects (baseline scenario). Even under this assumption, debt is unsustainable under the baseline of no significant change in policies. Page 13 With high public debt, interest payments are expected to rise, reflecting an increased risk premium and the prospective increase in world interest rates. Fiscal consolidation, which is needed to stabilize debt, can be aligned with the authorities’ objective of reforming the tax system. With relatively high tax rates and tax revenues at some 25 percent of GDP, St. Lucia’s tax burden is above comparators, despite tax concessions estimated at about 7 percent of GDP, above the Caribbean average of 6.1 percent of GDP. Significantly streamlining exemptions would generate fiscal space for sustainable tax cuts and the creation of a social safety net to protect low-income households. After sufficiently broadening the tax base, consideration could be given to reducing high tariffs and other taxes on imports which, by increasing import value by 20 percent (before VAT) on average, are particularly harmful to competitiveness. Personal Income Corporate Tax Rates: Regional Averages (2016) VAT St. Lucia Caribbean Small States Emerging Markets Small Competitive World Sources: WDI; Ernst & Young; KPMG and IMF staff estimates. 1/ As of latest available. 2/ Simple average of latest available data on WDI Database (2010-14). 3/ Based on World Bank's Small States classification. 4/ Small Competitive group corresponds to the simple average of Estonia, Iceland, and Mauritius. Tariffs (2010-14) 2015: Goverment Tax Revenue (In percent of GDP) World ECCU Caribbean Small states 1/ Countries include Estonia, Iceland, and Mauritius. Source: WEO; and IMF staff estimates. Competitive, small countries St. Lucia 2015: Components of Total Tax Revenue (In percent) Income Goods and Services Trade Other St. Lucia Caribbean Sources: WEO; and IMF staff estimates. Emerging market and middle-income countries In line with the empirical evidence, the baseline scenario assumes only a partial pass-through from global rates to regional/domestic rates (Myrvoda, A. and J. Reynaud, “Monetary Policy Transmission in Eastern Caribbean Currency Union”, IMF WP, forthcoming). Page 14 The public sector wage bill has a key role in expenditure control. Relative to comparators, compensation of employees is high while social expenditure is low. Despite the recent wage freeze, the government continues to devote a large share of its spending to employee compensation. In addition, temporary work programs cost the equivalent of 1 percent of GDP. On the other hand, spending on health, tertiary education, pensions and social assistance remains below relevant comparators as a share of GDP (Figure 3). Capital spending was relatively high in 2015, but the stock of public capital is comparatively low. 2015: Goverment Spending (In percent) Goods and Services Interest Bill Social Spending Compensation of Employees Other Current Spending Capital Spending St. Lucia LAC EM Competitive, small countries (Estonia, Caribbean Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Iceland, and Mauritius) Public Capital Stock (Latest value available) St. Lucia Caribbean EMs Public Capital Stock, percent of GDP Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff estimates. The ECCU debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2030 is an appropriate anchor for the adjustment effort. This effort, which in net terms would require a fiscal adjustment of 4.4 percent of GDP, could be extended over six years through 2022, after which debt dynamics would lead to the attainment of the debt target in 2030. The focus should be on broadening the tax base, controlling expenditure, and improving financing terms while preserving capital spending and protecting low-income households (text table and Figure 4). On the revenue side, the elimination of selected VAT exemptions and reduced VAT rates, and the removal of non-targeted subsidies could yield 1.5 percent of GDP, of which 0.5 percent of GDP could be used to reverse part of the increase in the airport tax. In addition, the authorities could consider reducing import duties by 25 percent, which could be fully financed by reducing concessions by half. On the expenditure side, control of the wage bill and reduction in other non-interest expenditures would produce savings of 3.7 percent of GDP. The former could be obtained by Page 15 anchoring wage growth to CPI inflation (1.5 percent of GDP) and other measures (0.7 percent of GDP) such as attrition, review of pay systems in education, payroll audits, benchmarking with private sector wages, and performance-based pay. These fiscal savings would create room to build a targeted social safety net (0.5 percent of GDP). Higher capital spending and structural reforms under the adjustment scenario would lead to higher medium-term growth of 2 percent. The use of concessional finance, enhancements in the bond market, and a lower debt level, would lead to savings of 2.9 percent of GDP in interest payments. Staff Recommended Adjustment Scenario 1/ Passive (no policy adjustment) scenario: Interest payments Primary balance Public sector debt Adjustment scenario: Interest payments Primary balance Public sector debt Adjustment measures of which: Non-interest expenditure items Compensation items Social benefits Other expenses o.w. Make public events financially viable Offset increase in funding to Tourism Authority Phase out temporary work programs Goods and services Revenue items o.w. Broader VAT base Eliminate non-targeted LPG subsidy Reduce airport taxes to regional average Source: IMF staff calculations 1/ Fiscal year (April- March) basis. Both passive and adjustment scenarios incorporate the annualized natural disaster cost described in Box1. A medium-term fiscal framework should account for the frequent occurrence of natural disasters. St. Lucia, like other countries in the region, is heavily exposed to natural disasters, which entail significant economic costs in terms of investment, GDP, unemployment, poverty, and fiscal revenues. These costs can be substantially reduced by appropriate policies that mitigate disaster-related risks and provide financing of these costs prior to the event. While optimal financing is likely to involve a mix of fiscal buffers, contingent financing plans, and insurance, budget provisions of 1 percent of GDP per year are likely to be needed to address direct fiscal costs (Box 1). Page 16 Box 1. Estimating the Cost of Natural Disasters In the absence of insurance and other forms of financing, budget provisions should cover the average annual fiscal cost of natural disasters. Based on EM-DAT data for the period 1950-2014, the average annual impact of natural disasters in St. Lucia is 1.5 percent of GDP. This figure, however, includes costs borne directly by the private sector. According to the World Bank’s Post Disaster Needs Assessments (PDNAs) available in recent years for small island states, private costs average 45 percent of total damages and losses, but vary widely between 8 and 83 percent. Using these values for St. Lucia, the annual cost to the government would be 0.8 percent of GDP, but it could be as high as 1.4 percent of GDP. A cautious approach suggests that an assumption of 1 percent, slightly higher than the average value, is appropriate for St. Lucia. This is confirmed indirectly by Guerson (2016), which, using Monte Carlo simulations to assess the appropriate size of a government savings fund to insure against natural disasters, estimates that the necessary annual budget saving for St. Lucia would be 1.05 percent of GDP. ________________________________________________________________________________________ 1/ Guerson, Alejandro (2016) “Assessing Government Self-Insurance Needs Against Natural Disasters: An Application to the ECCU”, Eastern Caribbean Currency Union, 2016 Discussion of Common Policies of Member Countries, Annex VIII, IMF Country Report No. 16/333. The authorities are making progress toward establishing a medium-term fiscal framework. Welcome provisions in the Public Financial Management (PFM) Bill commit the Ministry of Finance to adopt a formal medium-term fiscal plan (MTFP) (Box 2). However, the bill does not explicitly require the submission of the MTFP to Parliament for approval with the budget nor is there any explicit obligation to publish the MTFP and the accompanying fiscal statement, the content of which is yet to be defined. However, publication of the appropriation law and of the related budget estimates is required. Apart from requiring publication of the MTFP and fiscal statement, useful additions to the current bill would be the adoption of a new chart of accounts in line with GFS standards. The authorities should also consider expanding their definition of debt to the consolidated non-financial public sector to make sure that all public debt-generating bodies are monitored. Page 17 An appropriate fiscal rule would be useful to support the adjustment effort, but the draft PFM bill falls short of establishing a clear link with the debt target. The bill does define the medium-term debt anchor, but budget preparation and intermediate targets are not explicitly linked to it. Moreover, the bill defines “hard” targets for the current financial year, but only “indicative” targets for the outer two years. To enhance accountability and strengthen the commitment to debt sustainability, a separate Fiscal Responsibility Act would be required to translate the debt target into domestic legislation and define a quantitative fiscal rule to guide the formulation of the MTFP. Box 2. The PFM Bill The new PFM Act will repeal the current Finance Administration Act. At the time of writing, the PFM bill has important features strengthening fiscal discipline. In particular, the bill provides for: The Minister of Finance (MOF) to commit to: (i) prudent fiscal policy and fiscal stability over a multiyear horizon; and (ii) promote transparency and accountability (Art. 5(2)). The Accountant General to support agencies in preparing financial projections and supervise and guide agencies to comply with the intent of the Act (Art. 9(1)). The MOF to formulate a three-year medium term fiscal plan (MTFP) and submit to Parliament an accompanying fiscal statement. The statement would review budgetary performance and identify measures needed to meet budgetary and plan targets, and state fiscal risks to the economy and the debt situation (Art. 16 and 17). The MOF to indicate an aggregate budget ceiling for the upcoming financial year and indicative ceilings for the following two years. The aggregate ceiling for the upcoming year should be accompanied by separate recurrent and capital expenditure ceilings (Art. 17). CIP revenues are expected to bring increased revenues, which however carry risks. Introduced in January 2016, the citizenship program has attracted only marginal interest thus far. To increase the competitiveness of the program, the government has introduced significant changes (Box 3). These changes are expected to boost revenues, which the authorities plan to collect into a sovereign wealth fund to be used mostly to fund investment. Like other citizenship programs, St. Lucia’s CIP entails significant reputational and financial integrity risks, which could be minimized by strict adherence to standards for due diligence, governance, and transparency. The same principles should apply to the wealth fund, which should give priority to debt reduction to contain risks of fiscal dependence on these volatile revenues and follow transparent criteria in its operations. Strengthening public investment management would help ensure that only high-yield projects are selected. Page 18 Box 3. Changes in the Citizenship by Investment Program St. Lucia introduced its Citizenship by Investment Program (CIP) in 2016 with the intention to attract investments in high-end hotel and real estate products, and employment-generating business enterprises. Additionally, the program envisaged a donation to the Economic Fund and investment in an interest-free government bond as additional options. The program was targeted at individuals of high-net worth and an annual cap on the number of citizenships under the program was imposed. The program met limited success in its first year of operation . CIP performance was poor, owing to comparatively high requirements and the expectations that a new government might change policies after the elections. Six applications were approved under the real estate option, but none of them had reached investment stage at the time of the discussions. Fourteen applications were accepted under the donation option for a total of US$1.4 million and five applications were approved under the bond option for US$2.7 million. No interest was shown in the enterprise investment option. The new government introduced several changes to make the program more competitive. The requirement for an affidavit to declare financial resources of at least US$3 million was removed. The required contribution to the Economic Fund was reduced from US$200,000 to US$100,000 for single applicants and fees for applicants with dependents were reduced as well. An administrative fee of US$50,000 was introduced for the bond option. The cap of 500 citizenships per year has been removed. The remaining two options to obtain citizenship through investment remain the same. Citizenship can be obtained through a minimum investment amount of US$300,000 in a government-approved real estate project or an investment in an approved enterprise project starting from US$1 million. The authorities expect these changes to significantly boost applications and revenues . In 2017/2018 a total revenue of US$9 million is expected through donations, of which 80 percent will be transferred to the government and the rest used to cover the operations of the CIP office. The real estate option is expected to bring 36 applications. Owing to the newly imposed fee, the interest in government bonds is expected to be limited. The proceeds from the program will be collected in a sovereign wealth fund. The intention is for all CIP revenues to be transferred to a soon-to-be-announced sovereign wealth fund that will be owned, but not operated, by the government. The fund could then be used to finance investment projects and buy back debt. Page 19