Growth weakened in 2016 on the back of a disappointing tourist season. Driven by agriculture and construction, GDP growth is estimated to have reached 0.8 percent in 2016, down from 1.8 percent in 2015 (Table 1 and Figure 1). Strong employment growth in agriculture and construction put a dent on unemployment, which declined to 20 percent in the third quarter of 2016. Youth unemployment also fell, but remains very high at 41 percent (Table 6). Nonetheless, Page 10 weakness in tourism, manufacturing, and transportation dampened growth. Stay-over arrivals increased by only 0.7 percent and overall tourist expenditure fell by 5 percent, one of the worst performances among ECCU tourist destinations. Exports of goods also declined, contributing to widen the current account deficit to an estimated 6.7 percent of GDP in 2016 (Table 3). Headline inflation was driven down by import prices, and lingered in negative territory over the last 12 months, while core inflation moved closer to zero. Employment Financial Sector Construction Wholesale and Retail Manufacturing Agriculture Hotel & Restaurant 2016Q1 2016Q2 2016Q3 Source: National Competitiveness and Productivity Council, St. Lucia Statistical Office. The fiscal stance deteriorated in 2016, partly reflecting rising capital spending and interest payments. The government has been able to expand its financing and shift from short- term T-bills to longer-term bonds, which allowed it to increase capital spending while reducing rollover risks. Lengthening the maturity of debt, however, has also raised its cost, thus adding to the escalating dynamics of interest payments. The overall fiscal deficit is estimated to have increased from 2.6 percent of GDP in FY 2015/16 to 4.4 percent of GDP in FY 2016/17, prompting public debt to reverse its previous decline and rise to almost 83 percent of GDP (Tables 2a, 2b). Impact of New Government Measures on Fiscal Balance The fiscal package recently adopted by the new government further weakens the fiscal position and may not have the desired impact on growth . In line with the “Five to Stay Alive” electoral manifesto, the prime minister last November announced a number of tax reductions, including a cut to the VAT rate from 15 to 12.5 percent —effective February 1, 2017—, and increases in transfers totaling 1¾ percent of GDP. As an offsetting measure, effective April 1, 2017, the government plans to increase airport taxes from US$25 to US$98, one of Reduction in VAT rate Three year exemption from the residential property tax Reduction in vehicle licenses fees Increase in airport taxes and fees 1/ Sources: M inistry of Finance of St. Lucia and IM F staff estimates. 1/ 40 percent of additional tax revenues will be assigned to the budget of the central government. Transfers/grants and contributions School transportation subsidy School meal subsidy EC$ mill. % of GDP Total new government measures of which: Expenditure items Revenue items Besides the “Five to Stay Alive” manifesto, the electoral platform includes plans to increase the personal income tax threshold to EC$25,000 and reduce in the corporate tax rate from 30 to 25 percent within three years. Page 11 the highest levels in the Caribbean. Staff expects this measure to yield revenues of 0.6 percent of GDP, with a net impact of the total fiscal package on the overall balance of -1.2 percent of GDP. The steep rise in airport taxes, however, is likely to have negative effects on tourism, which could overwhelm any positive impact on growth from the other measures. Bank lending continues to contract. Credit growth remains negative, reflecting weak demand and the high level of NPLs still burdening banks (Figure 2 and Table 5). In the meantime, banks are shifting credit allocation from tourism and manufacturing to more profitable personal and professional loans, in particular mortgage and vehicle loans.