St. Lucia faces significant challenges in its attempts to attain higher sustainable growth . A member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU), St. Lucia is a small island developing state with a population of about 170,000, upper-middle income levels, strong performance on social indicators, and the highest stay-over arrivals in the ECCU. These achievements are all the more notable in light of key challenges that have arisen, including a need to diversify economic activities following the collapse of European trade preferences that supported the traditional banana crop, limited skills and production bases, dependence on fossil fuel imports, and relatively frequent natural disasters (Figure 1). The Global Financial Crisis had severe repercussions on St. Lucia . Visitor arrivals were hit by the crisis in the two main source markets (the United States and United Kingdom) and the cancellation of cruise ship visits in an environment of rising fuel prices. The strains in the tourism industry spilled over into other sectors of the economy, including FDI-backed construction and labor markets. Large exposures to tourism-related projects drove nonperforming loans (NPLs) in domestic banks to a peak of 29 percent of total loans. The government attempted to support activity during the crisis with an expansionary fiscal stance, including through construction stimulus and large-scale active labor market programs, but in recent years market access has become more difficult, deposit buffers have been drawn down, and capital expenditures had to be cut. Conditions have become more favorable recently . External conditions, including visitor markets’ economies and fuel prices, are now favorable. Tourism activity has increased and is slowly spreading into other sectors. The government has strengthened the fiscal position by enacting revenue measures and negotiating a wage freeze with labor unions. The authorities hope to strengthen their finances further, including by introducing a Citizenship by Investment Program (CIP; Box 1), which is scheduled to commence in January 2016. The financial sector continues to throttle the economy, however, as slow progress on balance sheet cleanup has constrained banks’ ability to support the recovery. Discussions focused on strengthening the financial sector, securing debt sustainability, and progressing with structural reforms . The authorities have implemented some elements of prior Fund advice (Annex I). Going forward, further progress towards promoting macroeconomic stability could include forward-looking plans for fiscal adjustment, prudent CIP management, and actions to strengthen the financial sector. With respect to raising potential growth, staff advised further progress on the structural agenda to allow the private sector to overcome potential capacity constraints. At the time of the 2014 Article IV consultation, the government and unions were negotiating a wage agreement for the 2014-16 triennium. In view of the generous agreements approved in previous years, the government had proposed a nominal wage cut. Ultimately, the parties agreed to a freeze. Page 9 Box 1. The Citizenship by Investment Program St. Lucia is the fifth ECCU country offering a citizenship-by-investment program . These programs, which confer citizenship on individuals meeting due diligence requirements in exchange for an investment or a cash donation to the government, have enabled other ECCU countries to mitigate vulnerabilities from high debt or low tax revenues. In return, applicants to these programs may benefit from easier visa requirements, protection against political and security concerns, or lower taxation. In recent years, partly reflecting higher international economic linkages and rising geopolitical risks, interest in these programs has increased dramatically, causing surging flows to countries with long-established programs, and prompting other countries to offer similar programs. St. Lucia’s program, which starts in 2016, contains both standard and unique characteristics . In St. Lucia’s case, the program maintains a cap of 500 successful applicants per year and a net-worth requirement of at least US$3 million per applicant. There are four types of qualifying investments, some of which are similar to those of other countries: St. Lucia’s National Economic Fund : This option entails a contribution of at least US$200,000 to fund government-sponsored projects. Approved real-estate project : Applicants may invest at least US$300,000 in a real estate project approved by the government, either in high-end branded hotels and resorts or high-end boutique properties. The investment may be sold or transferred after a period of five years. Approved enterprise projects : This option contains single-investor and joint-investor options. For single- investor projects, the investment must amount to US$3½ million, and create at least 3 permanent jobs. For joint-investment projects, the value of the enterprise must amount to US$6 million, each investor must contribute US$1 million, and the project must generate at least 6 permanent jobs. The government has selected seven sectors in which applicants may invest: specialty restaurants; cruise ports and marinas; agro- processing plants; pharmaceutical products; ports, bridges, roads, and highways; research institutions and facilities; and offshore universities. Purchase of government securities : Applicants may purchase US$500,000 of interest-free government bonds with a 5-year tenor and hold them until maturity. These programs may help to reduce fiscal and financial-sector pressures, but also carry risks . In particular, the real estate and enterprise options may help catalyze new investment flows and overcome a lack of financing from traditional intermediaries such as commercial banks, which may be reluctant to extend credit to large projects, particularly in the tourism industry. Similarly, the direct contribution or government securities options may help ease government funding pressures arising from tight financing conditions in regional markets. However, care is needed to prevent fiscal policies from becoming dependent on these flows, particularly in light of the cancellation of similar programs in other countries. Similarly, these programs entail important reputational and financial integrity risks, which necessitate strict adherence to standards for due diligence, governance, and transparency. The cap on applicants and additional transparency regulations passed by the authorities may help contain these risks. Among these transparency provisions, the CIP Unit will have to report annually to Parliament on the activities of the program including on the number of applications, approvals, rejections, as well as detailed information on the successful applicants. Page 10