Real GDP Growth Contributions (Percent) Economic activity recovered and the fiscal position strengthened in 2014 . On the back of strong tourism inflows and lower oil prices, the St. Lucian economy has returned to growth after experiencing a recession in 2012 and close-to-zero growth in 2013 (Table 1). GDP growth reached 0.5 percent in 2014, with transportation and hotels mostly contributing to the economic recovery while activity in construction, communication, and agriculture was still declining. Inflation increased to 3½ percent, mainly due to higher food prices. For the first time since FY2008/09, the primary balance switched to a small surplus of 0.1 percent of GDP in FY2014/15, reflecting somewhat higher revenues, including from policy measures, restraint on current spending, and cuts to capital expenditures. Nevertheless, debt continued to rise to almost 80 percent of GDP reflecting non-concessional interest rates and low growth (Tables 2a and 2b). Key tourism-related industries 1/ Other Sources: ECCB; and IMF Staff Estimates. Note: 1/ Tourism related industries include Hotels & Restaurants, and Transport, Storage & Communication sector. External sector performance improved markedly . The current account deficit is estimated to have narrowed from 11.2 to 6.7 percent of GDP in 2014, largely due to a robust pick-up in tourist arrivals and favorable food and commodity prices. About ¾ of the current account deficit were financed through FDI inflows, which at 5 percent of GDP continued to remain well below the peak of 23 percent of GDP in 2007. Labor market deficiencies, high energy and transportation costs, and economies of scale disadvantages, combined with an overvalued real effective exchange rate continued to impair competitiveness (Annex II). Unemployment, however, continued to rise and bank credit to the private sector declined (Figure 2) . Unemployment reached 24.4 percent in 2014 as demand was insufficient to fully absorb the growth of the labor force. Youth unemployment, in particular, rose to an alarming 41.8 percent. Despite some reduction in nonperforming loans, credit to private sector continued to decline, reaching -6.7 percent growth y/y by December 2014. Falling credit, compounded by robust deposit growth, continued to add onto liquidity accumulation in the banking system, raising excess reserves to an all-time high. The February 2015 decision by the ECCU Monetary Council to lower the minimum saving deposit interest rate from 3 to 2 percent (effective May 2015) alleviated pressures on bank profitability and allowed some easing of monetary conditions while the exchange rate, which is pegged to the U.S. dollar, appreciated by 3 percent as of September 2015 in real effective terms from a year ago. Page 11