Modest growth is expected in the short term. GDP is projected to grow at 0.5 percent in 2017, driven mostly by continued strong performance in construction and agriculture. Despite positive developments —the increase in the number of hotel rooms and the opening of new direct flights from the U.S.— tourism arrivals are projected to be stifled by the impact of the new airport tax while exchange rate and cyclical developments will continue to inhibit inflows from the U.K. Higher import prices, including oil, will cause inflation to rise temporarily and, together with weak tourist expenditures, will contribute to widen external imbalances. Without significant changes in fiscal policies, revenues are projected to decline as a share of GDP, accelerating the deterioration of the fiscal balance. Such dynamics would likely curtail government financing and severely constrain the implementation of investment projects. With slow progress in cleaning up their balance sheets, banks are expected to further shrink their loan portfolio. In the absence of stronger policies, the medium-term outlook is held back by structural weaknesses. Growth is expected to revert to its medium-term rate of 1.5 percent in 2018, as FDI in hotels sustains construction activity and expands capacity in the tourism industry. While the forthcoming budget should bring some clarity about fiscal policy, in the absence of corrective measures, rising interest payments will add to expenditure pressures, leading public debt to an unsustainable path. As commodity prices gradually rise from recent lows, the current account deficit will widen, reflecting low competitiveness. Unless structural reforms are implemented, rigidities in the labor market, high costs of doing business, and low external competitiveness will continue to weigh on growth. Downside risks dominate . While the baseline is built on the assumption of no significant policy corrections, the government has the opportunity to design and put in place appropriate policies that address key fiscal, external, and structural vulnerabilities. Together with the possibility that FDI inflows turn out to be higher than expected, this is an important upside risk to the projections (Annex I). However, several downside risks stem from both external conditions and domestic policies. In the absence of a sufficient fiscal correction, financing conditions could be much Owing to small fiscal multipliers, the positive impact of the VAT reduction on growth will likely be negligible. Conversely, under plausible assumptions on the price elasticity of long-haul leisure travelers, staff projects the negative effect of the airport tax on tourist arrivals (-14 percent) and growth (-1.4 percent) to be significant. Page 12 tighter than currently projected, forcing a sharp, disorderly fiscal adjustment that would have a negative impact on growth. A stronger-than-expected U.S. dollar appreciation would further reduce competitiveness. Owing to global instability and low medium-term growth in advanced and emerging economies, weak external demand could reduce tourist inflows. Although natural disasters are internalized in the macroeconomic framework using historical averages (Box 1), larger and more frequent disasters could occur. Slow progress in addressing bank weaknesses could undermine financial stability and growth. St. Lucia: Central Government Cash Flows Under a Passive Scenario 1/ (Millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars, Fiscal Years) Gross financing needs Overall deficit Debt repayments External Domestic Gross financing sources Debt issuance External Domestic Use of deposits Memo: Central government deposits 1/ Projections assume no asset transactions and that existing investors roll over maturing debt. Scenario assumes that there are no significant changes in fiscal policy in the future.