Despite recent improvements, addressing high structural unemployment is a priority. Several factors seem to be at play (Annex VI). Skills mismatches are pervasive and aggravated by brain drain, mostly directed to the U.S. and other parts of the Caribbean. Workers with specialized skills, such as electricians or plumbers, are also scarce, sometimes forcing firms to employ foreign workers. Possibly owing to strong unions, the link between wages and productivity is very weak, hindering external competitiveness (Annex V). Policies are focused on treating the symptoms with temporary work programs, both domestically and overseas, but a comprehensive strategy to tackle the problem at its roots is missing. Education and training are key components of the solution. A review of the education system would allow to identify how the system is performing in relation to its high cost — particularly in the primary and secondary components— and the needs of the labor market. The national curriculum may also need to be revised. Beyond the formal education system, targeted training and stronger incentives for on-the-job training and apprenticeships would help address the skills mismatch. A gradual move to performance-based pay in the public sector, which leads wages in the private sector, would help better align wages with productivity. Specific measures may also be needed to address female unemployment, which remains particularly high. Costs of doing business remain high. The authorities have made some progress on a program of structural reforms under the Caribbean Growth Forum, which focus on improving skills and productivity, logistics and connectivity, and investment climate. In addition, the six-pillar Long- Term National Development Plan is expected to target building human and physical capital, strengthening institutions, improving social resilience, and mitigating and adapting to climate The Financial Services Regulatory Authority (FSRA) regulates and supervises 16 credit unions, 26 insurance companies and a sales force of 18 agents, 11 brokers and 210 salesmen, 9 active international banks (branches), 14 mutual funds, as well as 22 registered agents and trustees providing financial services representation on behalf of international business companies and trusts. Page 21 change. However, high costs of trading —including costs of port operations and import duties— and energy and low access to credit remain considerable obstacles. Progress on reducing energy costs has been limited. To reduce their almost total dependence on fossil fuels, the authorities are promoting the adoption of renewable sources, but the 2020 target of 35 percent for the share of renewables is unlikely to be reached owing to delays in the implementation of the wind and geothermal components. Moreover, regulatory impediments and the need to recover investment costs could dissuade investment in renewable sources and prevent savings being transmitted to final users. In particular, the current legislation prevents individual producers of solar energy —households and businesses— from selling their excess supply to the grid, substantially reducing the advantages of adopting this source.