The credit crunch will continue to constrain growth. Despite the early signs of economic recovery, credit to the private sector has continued to decline, reaching -9.5 percent y/y in September 2015, reflecting tighter underwriting standards and still subdued domestic demand. While personal loans grew at a slow but steady pace, banks continued to deleverage in the corporate sector, particularly in tourism, trade, and professional services. The deposit base continued to show steady growth throughout the year. With Personal Professional Tourism Others Total Credit by Economic Activity (In percent, contribution to growth) 2015Q3 Page 12 slow progress on balance sheet cleaning, banks are unlikely to revive credit to the private sector and will continue holding their liquid assets at the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB). Significant vulnerabilities cloud the medium-term outlook . Growth is projected to converge towards 2 percent in the medium-term, reflecting the continuation of ongoing construction projects, additional FDI-financed high-end resorts and public infrastructure projects, such as upgrading Hewanorra International Airport. Moreover, this projection reflects implementation of structural reforms, energy initiatives, and diversification in agriculture. In this scenario, inflation is expected to stabilize at around 2½ percent. Over the medium run, the primary fiscal surplus is expected to increase further, reflecting full-year impacts of already announced revenue policies, including the CIP, which would more than offset higher expenditures on rental and central government transfers to support the operations of new hospitals. Debt, however, will continue to rise, reaching 86 percent of GDP by FY2020/21 and almost 90 percent of GDP by FY2030/31, the date at which the authorities have committed to achieve the ECCU 60 percent of GDP debt target. The current account balance is expected to widen as higher imports accompany e economic recovery (Table 3). Credit conditions should eventually normalize and moderate credit growth resume (Table 4). St. Lucia: Central Government Cash Flows (millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars, fiscal years) Gross financing needs Overall deficit Debt repayments External Domestic Gross financing sources Debt issuance External Domestic Use of deposits Memo: Central government deposits 1/ Projections assume no asset transactions and that existing investors roll over maturing debt. Risks are broadly balanced (Box 2) . Upside risks could emanate from improvements in external conditions including strengthening consumer confidence and labor-market conditions in key advanced economies, which could boost growth and tourist arrivals beyond expectations. Persistently low energy prices could exert an impact both directly through consumption and indirectly through tourism. Fiscal outturns may be better than expected if inflows related to the CIP exceed expectations and are directed at reducing debt. Downside risks remain significant, however. In particular, the likely path of U.S. monetary policy could adversely impact St. Lucia through higher Two large hospital projects are already well advanced, with both facilities expected to open in 2016. Upon completion, overall health spending will expand significantly. Page 13 borrowing costs and real exchange rate appreciation, if the U.S. dollar (to which the EC dollar is pegged) continues to strengthen. Global financial institutions de-risking activities could impart economic disruptions if financial institutions lose correspondent banking relations. Other ECCU and St. Lucia-specific risks include financial instability from the weak regional banking sector, lower tourism inflows if the U.S.-Cuba normalization diverts visitors, natural disasters, and the fiscal position, particularly if policy implementation weakens in advance of the upcoming elections.