Long-standing challenges hinder St. Lucia’s economic performance. The largest economy in the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU), St. Lucia is a small island developing state of upper-middle income with strong social indicators. With the erosion of EU trade preferences starting in the 1990s, St. Lucia downsized its traditional banana production and became heavily reliant on tourism. A narrow production base, low productivity, strong dependence on imported fossil fuel, and exposure to natural disasters hamper St. Lucia’s growth potential. The Global Financial Crisis highlighted these weaknesses, with a dramatic reduction of tourist inflows spilling over the rest of the economy, raising unemployment, and inflating bank nonperforming loans (NPLs). The government tried to cushion the impact of the crisis with public sector wage increases, construction stimulus, and large labor market programs, leading to a substantial increase in public debt. Supported by favorable external conditions, the economy has emerged slowly from the Great Recession. Economic recovery in the main tourist markets (the United States and the United Kingdom) and declining oil prices have supported a tepid increase in economic activity. Unemployment has declined although remains high, the external current account deficit has narrowed sharply from the peaks reached during the Global Financial Crisis, and some fiscal adjustment has been achieved with revenue increases —including through the introduction of a VAT—, enhanced tax compliance, a public sector nominal wage freeze, and reduced capital spending forced by financing constraints. The banking sector, however, continues to be encumbered by NPLs and credit growth remains negative. The new administration is developing a reform program, but key policies are still being shaped. After general elections held in June 2016, a new government was installed with a solid parliamentary majority. Its pro-growth reform agenda calls for a broad tax reform, a reorganization of the public sector, a revision of the Citizenship by Investment Program (CIP), and structural reforms to improve the business climate and encourage foreign direct investment (FDI). However, details on policies are still pending and many of the reforms will take time to yield results. In the meantime, rising public debt needs to be tackled to reduce risks to the implementation of the economic program.