Commercial banks’ limited progress in cleaning their balance sheets continues to constrain bank lending. Non-bank institutions have provided some offset, but overall tight lending conditions are a drag on the economy. The authorities have made some progress in financial sector reform, including under the ECCU regional initiative to strengthen banks. However, additional steps are necessary to implement the regional initiative and enhancing the foreclosure and insolvency frameworks is key to address high nonperforming loans. Global de-risking trends represent a risk for both bank and non- bank institutions. Completing the bank balance sheet cleanup Difficulties in resolving non- performing assets constrain the ability of banks to support the recovery. At 19 percent, nonperforming loans continue to weigh on banks’ willingness to provide credit to the private sector. While some progress has been achieved in resolving non-performing loans, further reductions are hampered by the legal foreclosure framework. Banks’ efforts to work directly with customers to resolve impaired loans also encounter difficulties. At the same time, efforts St. Lucia: Interest Rates (In percent, band shows min and max bands) Minimum prime lending rate Weighted average lending rate Saving deposit floor Saving deposit band Sep-14 Mar-15 Sources: ECCB; and IMF staff estimates and calculation. Dec-14 Jun-15 Sep-15 Some banks are offering programs where the holders of delinquent loans can sign the property over to the bank and banks assume all the risks connected with the property sale by either (i) forgiving the outstanding amount if negative equity results; or (ii) returning the difference to the customer in case of positive equity. However, the protection provided by the lengthy foreclosure process weakens the incentive for customers to take up the offer. Page 14 Box 2. Risk Assessment Matrix Source and direction of risk Persistently low energy prices ( ↑ Costs may be kept down if supply factors reverse gradually or if demand weakens. High citizenship program demand ( ↑ If citizenship revenues are high, and managed prudently, the program could reduce fiscal risks and debt overhang, boosting confidence and investment. High tourism inflows ( ↑ Good labor market conditions in key tourist source markets may boost tourism. Poor fiscal policy implementation ( ↓ Fiscal adjustment may be delayed, including from elections, which are due by November 2016. Decompression of credit spreads/ higher public sector borrowing costs ( ↓ Interest rates may rise from Fed tightening or if investors reassess underlying risks. Surge in the U.S. dollar ( ↓ The dollar may rise further reflecting improving U.S. economic prospects and lead to real effective appreciation in St. Lucia, weakening competitiveness. Financial sector instability ( ↓ ) The commercial banks in the ECCU, including St. Lucia, continue to report high NPLs and weak earnings. Natural disasters ( ↓ Tourist diversion due to normalization of U.S.-Cuba relations ( ↓ ) Easier access to Cuba for U.S. tourists may result in a diversion of tourist arrivals. Likelihood High Medium Medium to High to Impact Medium Policy response Take advantage of favorable conditions to ease the fiscal adjustment and buy time for structural reforms to yield results. Reduce fiscal dependence risks by directing receipts towards debt reduction, and high-impact infrastructure investment. Reduce sudden stop risks by maintaining strict governance and integrity standards. Medium Continue improving the business climate, High Low Medium High to High Medium Medium competitiveness, and infrastructure to sustain high levels of tourist arrivals. Articulate and implement an adjustment plan to put debt on a declining path to the ECCU-wide target; incorporate disaster recovery in fiscal planning. In addition to strong fiscal adjustment, seek to lower borrowing costs by improving the share of concessional borrowing in public debt. High Medium Medium Address cost competitiveness issues by public sector wage restraint, which may signal to the private sector; reforms to lower energy prices; and mitigate other bottlenecks that weigh on businesses. Promptly implement remaining elements of regional strategy to strengthen indigenous banks in the ECCU. High Medium High Medium Medium to Low Build buffers and optimize insurance policies, with World Bank assistance. Take action to address cost and structural competitiveness disadvantages; work with the private sector to foster diversified tourism markets. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source Page 15 to increase provisioning and speed up write-offs are curbed by low profitability, which banks counter by raising fees. Against this backdrop, the heavy NPL burden continues to weigh on loan underwriting decisions. Tighter credit conditions have intensified banks’ competition for well- established clients, while demand from smaller entities remains unsatisfied. Stronger competition, along with the lower savings deposit floor, prompted a decline in prime lending interest rates, while average lending rates remain largely unchanged. Banks report capital adequacy ratios above the regulatory minimum and slightly improved profitability in the third quarter of 2015. St. Lucia: Banking Sector Non-performing Loans Sectors with higher NPLs historically have seen lower credit growth rates, … St. Lucia: NPLs and Credit by Sector (In percent, 2004-14, selected sectors … as personal, tourism, construction, and trade sectors accounted for about 85% of total delinquent loans at end- St. Lucia: Distribution of NPLs by Sector (In percent of total, 2014) y y ( h w o g i d e C Linear trend Sources: ECCB, and IMF staff estimates and calculations. Selected sectors include tourism, construction, distributive trade, personal loans and overall. NPLs (% of total loans) Agriculture Construction & mining Manufacturing Utilities Distributive trade Tourism Public administration Personal Other Personal (42 % of NPLs, 43 % of credit) Construction & mining (16 % of NPLs, 8 % of credit) Distributive trade (8 % of NPLs, 7 % of credit) Tourism (18 % of NPLs, 15 % of credit) Sources: ECCB; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. St. Lucia: Selected Financial Institutions (Assets, 2014) Microfinance (4% GDP) Non-bank financial institutions are providing an alternative, albeit insufficient, supply of credit to the economy. According to the Financial Services Regulatory Authority (FSRA) credit unions and microfinance entities report increasing loan portfolios, reflecting healthier non- bank balance sheets and increasing demand for small credits. Declining global interest rates have had an impact on profitability in the onshore insurance sector and risks are rising. A new insurance act, which has not yet been adopted, seeks to provide the authorities with the necessary powers to address these emerging issues. Sources: ECCB; FSRA; and IMF staff estimates and calculations. Insurance: domestic (15% GDP) Offshore banks (56% GDP) Insurance: offshore (16% GDP) Insurance: domestic Offshore banks Microfinance Development bank Commercial banks Credit unions Insurance: offshore Development bank (1% GDP) Commercial banks (149% GDP) Credit unions (16% GDP) of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. As St. Lucia’s non-bank financial supervisor, the FSRA oversees all non-bank financial institutions, except onshore commercial banks, which are under the supervision of the ECCB. Page 16 Capital adequacy ratio 1/ Tier 1 capital ratio NPLs (pct of total loans) Domestic Foreign Provisions (pct of NPLs) Loan-to-deposit ratio Liquidity ratio 2/ Return on average assets Source: ECCB. St. Lucia: Financial Soundness Indicators Average Q3 Q3 Q1 114.1 109.0 Q2 Q3 ECCU Q3 1/ Total capital as percent of risk-weighted assets. 2/ Liquid assets as percent of deposits and liquid liabilities. Important efforts have been made to improve the regulatory and supervisory frameworks, but more remains to be done. The new Banking Act, based on the ECCU model, has strengthened the regulatory and supervisory frameworks, including by introducing higher minimum capital requirements, a more effective resolution of failed banks, and a stronger depositor protection. A prompt implementation of the remaining elements of the regional strategy for bank resolution is however needed. In particular, the legislation on the Eastern Caribbean Asset Management Corporation would allow banks to dispose of delinquent loans and return to normal operations more quickly. This step should be complemented by the swift finalization of new foreclosure and insolvency regulation and the adoption of the regionally harmonized credit union legislation. Further steps are the development of a new insurance framework to improve regulation and mitigate risks in the insurance sector and continued efforts to implement risk-based supervision and Basel II regulation for banks and non-banking financial institutions. Lastly, the removal of the savings deposit floor by the ECCU Monetary Council would help improve banking sector health. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly concurred with the staff’s assessment of the health of the financial sector and expressed their concern regarding the scarcity of private sector financing. The authorities agreed that reviving bank credit is key to sustaining the economic recovery and reducing bank non-performing loans may be necessary to achieve that. They also noted that, while foreclosure regulation does play a role, other factors may contribute, including bank lending policies and the absence of a credit bureau. Moreover, the authorities expressed concern for the limited availability of funding to strategically important sectors like agriculture, construction, and tourism. Global de-risking warrants close monitoring The global de-risking trend is a hazard to both bank and non-bank institutions . No operational disruptions have materialized yet, but there are increasing concerns about the potential loss of correspondent banking relationships, particularly among indigenous commercial banks. The Page 17 Caribbean region is perceived as high risk by global banks, sometimes without proper differentiation by country in the authorities’ view. Indigenous banks have responded by improving their reporting standards, keeping close relationships with existing correspondent banks, and looking for additional relationships. In addition, the establishment of new offshore banks is held back due to their inability to initiate correspondent relationships. Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to maintain high financial integrity norms, noting that they could help reduce vulnerability to de-risking . St. Lucia has made significant reforms to close gaps with international norms on Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). In recognition of the progress on the AML/CFT framework, St. Lucia has been removed from the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force International Cooperation Review Group process and has now entered biennial updating. Going forward, focus should be on implementing the 2012 Financial Action Task Force standard. With respect to the CIP, the Citizenship by Investment Act and its associated regulations contain a number of welcome aspects with respect to governance, but close vigilance will be necessary, particularly on the implementation of integrity safeguards.