Public finances have improved. However, a large part of the adjustment consists of unplanned capital expenditure reductions induced by tight financing conditions. Greater reliance on short-term instruments, which remain attractive to investors, adds to risks. In staff’s view, a detailed multi-year plan to achieve the ECCU-wide debt target is needed to strengthen confidence, preserve an envelope for high-impact expenditures, and build buffers against potential natural disasters. Prudent administration of the new CIP, consistent with the fiscal consolidation plan, is key. Continued progress on fiscal adjustment is needed The authorities have made welcome efforts to strengthen the fiscal position . Since peaking at 5.8 percent of GDP in FY2012/13, the primary deficit has narrowed in each subsequent year to reach a small surplus, which is expected to continue into the medium-run. The improvement partly reflects higher revenues, including recent measures as well as prior efforts to improve tax compliance and raise VAT revenues. The nominal wage freeze and capital expenditure reductions have also contributed to the improved outturns. Nonetheless, with spending pressures rising from upcoming wage negotiations in the public sector and demands in advance of 2016 elections, more efforts are needed to arrest the upward debt dynamics projected under staff’s baseline scenario. Staff advised that fiscal policies would need to consider enhanced resilience to natural disasters . As other Caribbean islands, St. Lucia is susceptible to tropical storms and hurricanes. In addition to the immediate threat from these storms, ensuing flooding entails additional disaster mitigation expenses. As for other Caribbean small states, staff is of the view that advance planning Page 18 Frequency of Natural Disasters since 1990 (pct. deviation from median number of disasters/person; top 25 independent countries) Average Annual Losses from Disasters, 1990-2013 (pct of GDP; top 25 fund members) Tuvalu Dominica Vanuatu American Samoa Antigua and Barbuda Tonga Micronesia Fed States St Vincent and the Grenadines Marshall Is St Lucia St Kitts and Nevis Guam Seychelles Grenada Bahamas Samoa Belize Fiji Solomon Is Barbados Iceland Kiribati Comoros Djibouti Cape Verde Is Samoa St. Kitts and Nevis Grenada Haiti Antigua and Barbuda Guyana Maldives Tonga Belize Tajikistan Bahamas, The Lao PDR Georgia Cambodia Chile Fiji Dominica Liberia Oman Pakistan Jamaica Dominican Republic Mauritius Madagascar Others Other Caribbean Others Other Caribbean Sources: EMDAT; World Development Indicators; and Fund staff estimates. Sources: EMDAT; USAID; WDI; and Fund Staff Estimates. should incorporate potential future expenses associated with natural disaster recovery. Annual damages associated with natural disaster recovery have averaged about 1.3 percent of GDP since 1990. The public sector’s share has been estimated at about three-quarters, or some 1 percent of GDP. For the purposes of illustration, staff has assumed that a large-scale storm would occur in the forecast horizon at 5-year intervals, entailing cumulative losses of 5 percent of GDP spread over 3 years. In addition to calibrating the fiscal adjustment in anticipation of future natural disasters, there is scope to build further resilience to future weather events by an appropriate selection and design of key infrastructure projects. The authorities are committed to the ECCU-debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2030, but have not yet adopted a medium-term fiscal framework consistent with that objective. In the absence of such framework, the authorities would find it difficult to execute planned capital projects owing to lack of long-term funding. Under this financing-constrained scenario, which staff prepared with the authorities to illustrate its implications, capital expenditures would decrease in line with expected market conditions, but no other measures would be taken. Reflecting the severity of financing constraints, the primary balance would improve each year, rising to about 3¾ percent of GDP by FY2030/31. Over the projection horizon, debt would begin to trend down. In the two years that elapse before the next storm in the scenario, losses are zero, assuring that over the 5-year cycle, average annual losses match the estimated 1 percent of GDP observed historically. Through the FY2020/21, bilateral and multilateral loan disbursements would be constrained only to the remaining amounts on existing projects; in the long run, new loans are assumed at 1.1 percent of GDP per year. Long-term bond issuance to fund capital expenditure would be limited to EC$68.2 million each year, reflecting expected CIP bond placements and long-term issuance in markets. Additional amounts are expected to be funded through T-bills, assumed to be issued at legal limits through FY2020/21, before tapering off from waning investor appetite. Page 19 However, in the presence of potential natural-disaster related expenses, debt levels would reach 69 percent of GDP by FY2030/31. The benefits from reduced public sector indebtedness would be blunted from higher liquidity risks, as the share of short-term instruments would grow. Fiscal Projections: Financing Constrained Scenario (percent of GDP, fiscal years) Debt, by Maturity (percent of GDP, fiscal years) Public sector debt (rhs) Primary balance (lhs) Potential storm-induced debt (rhs) Primary bal. w/ potential storms (lhs) Overdrafts, Payables, and Others T-Bills 1/ Medium & Long-Term 1/ Original maturity of one year or less. In contrast, staff recommended a multi-year fiscal adjustment plan that takes into account the occurrence of natural disasters Under staff’s projections, a front-loaded cumulative adjustment effort of 3 ⅓ percent of GDP would be needed over the next four years to achieve the ECCU debt target of 60 percent of GDP by FY2030/31. In this scenario, if there are no natural disasters during this period, the debt target would be reached by 2025/26. Staff recommended the adjustment rely more on current expenditures, which have lower multipliers. In particular, the scenario envisages only a modest effort in the next fiscal year of ⅓ percent of GDP—in light of the elections—by improving cost recovery associated with public events. In each of the next three years, the adjustment would be 1 percent of GDP. In its proposed package of measures, staff saw room for important savings from anchoring growth in the wage bill solely to inflation and by reducing public employment through attrition. Additional measures could include freezes of central government grants to organizations and of the envelope for government employee transportation allowances, higher healthcare fees, and the elimination of non-targeted food and LPG subsidies. In particular, in light of the substantial openness of the ECCU economies, fiscal multipliers are estimated to be zero for current expenditures and revenues, and 0.3 for capital expenditures. For more information, see Gonzalez-Garcia, J. A. Lemus, and M. Mrkaic, 2013, “Fiscal Multipliers” in The Eastern Caribbean Economic and Currency Union: Macroeconomics and Financial Systems, ed. A. Shipke, A. Cebotari, and N. Thacker, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. Page 20 Recommended Adjustment Scenario 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2030/31 Baseline (no policy adjustment) scenario: Public sector debt Financing constrained scenario: Public sector debt Staff's recommended adjustment scenario: Total adjustment measures of which: Expenditure items Compensation items Wage growth anchored to CPI inflation Attrition Transfers/grants and contributions Make public events financially viable Revise cost recovery fees in healthcare Other grant freezes Eliminate remaining non-targeted food subsidies Goods and services Capital expenditures Reprioritize social expenditure capital projects Revenue items Eliminate non-targeted LPG subsidy Reduce customs tax expenditures Primary balance in the absence of natural disasters Primary balance with periodic disasters Public sector debt Staff highlighted the advantages of the recommended adjustment plan. The financing-constrained adjustment would allow capital projects to be implemented opportunistically when financing materializes, but it lacks transparency and transfers fiscal control from policymakers to markets. The quality of spending would suffer because high-impact projects in new infrastructure and disaster preparedness would likely be sacrificed in favor of more rigid expenditure commitments in the capital budget. In light of the already limited share that high-impact projects have in capital expenditures, additional reductions would further weigh on potential growth and add to vulnerabilities. Instead, under staff’s recommended adjustment, a credible commitment to sustainable policies would buttress investor confidence and give the authorities greater control over fiscal operations. It would preserve a larger capital Page 21 budget envelope, which could be reprogrammed towards higher-impact projects to mitigate key bottlenecks and raise potential growth, including in the context of a strengthened public investment management framework. Lastly, even under the occurrence of natural disasters, debt would remain sustainably on a downward trajectory to the ECCU-wide debt target. Capital Expenditures (percent of GDP, fiscal years) Capital expenditures under staff's recommended scenario Capital expenditures under financing constrained scenario Capital Expenditures, FY2015/16 Social programs Other projects Constituency Development Program Tourism marketing & promotion New infrastructure Resistence to natural disasters DFCs Infrastructure maintenance or repairs Authorities’ views. The authorities acknowledged that adjustment would be necessary, without committing to any specific course of action. They also saw merit in considering natural disaster related expenses in their fiscal planning. They expressed interest in staff’s recommended adjustment scenario and noted their intention to review it carefully. In discussions on the specific adjustment measures, the authorities agreed on the need to maintain control over employment levels and costs, and to consider streamlining non-targeted subsidies as a component of a broader initiative to strengthen means-testing and social safety net programs. With regard to the proposed reduction of tax exemptions, they were concerned by the possible impact on St. Lucia’s ability to attract FDIs in light of the strong tax competition at the regional level. Continuing fiscal structural reforms would support the adjustment effort Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts on fiscal structural reforms, and encouraged further steps to improve efficiency and sustain the adjustment effort . Over the past year, the authorities have approved revised procurement legislation, strengthened cash management procedures, and restructured the operations of Inland Revenue Department, which could help raise tax compliance. With respect to cash management procedures, enhanced daily sweep arrangements have already begun to yield sizable savings, further aiding the fiscal adjustment effort. Along with these welcome improvements, staff saw scope to continue implementing public financial management (PFM) reforms. In particular, technical arrangements for the adoption of a modernized chart of accounts have been completed, but final approval is still pending. Full implementation would also advance other PFM areas, including financial reporting. Other priorities include resolving the backlog of public financial statements and strengthening the timeliness of income tax refunds. The new CIP warrants a prudent approach . In addition to the financial integrity risks associated with the CIP, vulnerabilities arise from potential fiscal dependence on these revenues, which can be volatile and subject to sudden stops. The annual cap on approved citizenship Page 22 applications would be a strong device for containing these risks, and adjustments to this cap should be made carefully. Further, receipts received under the contributions to the St. Lucia National Economic Fund should be used either to reduce debt or for well-designed infrastructure investment aiming to boost potential growth and reduce natural disaster vulnerability. Similarly, the government securities option of the program should be administered in a manner that neither circumvents the attainment of the ECCU debt target, to which the authorities have committed, nor adds to the government’s debt rollover risks. Staff noted that one option to reduce these risks would be to roll over maturing short-term debt instruments, which have grown substantially in recent years, into these longer-term securities. Additional regulations or legislation to contain the use of these revenues along these lines may be beneficial, and could be taken up in the context of fiscal responsibility legislation.