The modest expansion of bank credit has been coupled with some tightening of regulatory lending requirements. The current pace of overall credit expansion remains moderate by historical standards, with credit to the private sector having increased from 52.6 percent of GDP in 2014 to 54.3 percent of GDP in 2015. While continued monitoring by the regulatory authority will be needed, banks have been required to apply tighter standards. These include the ECCB regulation, effective since March 2015, lowering the lending limit on an unsecured loan from 100 to 50 percent of the borrower’s salary. Moreover, the new ECCB regulation on appraisal and valuation has introduced a minimum of two criteria for collateral appraisals, such as the market appraised value and the typically used replacement cost method. Banks have also tightened conditions on mortgage loans for members of the diaspora. Nonetheless, banks’ competition for good loans has intensified, lowering rates and fees and prompting the extension of maturities and credit limits in some banks. Full implementation of the new insolvency law should help curtail NPLs. Further strict monitoring of non-bank financial institutions will support financial stability in St. Vincent and the Grenadines, the regional leader in non-bank supervision. The Financial Services Authority (FSA) has continued to strengthen the supervision of the non-bank financial sector by formalizing a risk based supervisory framework, which is operational and should be published once technical impediments are addressed. Moreover, the FSA expects draft regulations, including on governance, to be formally approved by end-2016. The authorities have strengthened supervision of credit unions, which feature prominently in the local economy , with a loan portfolio representing 68 percent of their total assets at end-June 2015 and a 21 percent share in total assets of the financial sector in 2015. Since end-2013, they have gained many small borrowers from banks, including for consumer loans, and increased their total share of the market for bank and non-bank loans. Credit unions’ lending terms are softer than those of banks and they are not as proactive in repossessing nonperforming assets. The FSA is appropriately continuing to strengthen supervision, improve governance, and closely monitor and address developments in these institutions, including efforts to recover debt and reduce operating costs and NPLs. The authorities have issued binding prudential guidelines for the insurance sector which is relatively stable. These guidelines address the governance and compliance relative to statutory deposits and insurance funds. They also aim to lower concentration of risks by promoting portfolio diversification. To mitigate the transmission of shocks caused by financial interconnectedness, a swift adoption and entry in operation of the regionally harmonized Page 21 insurance law is needed. The law would provide for the establishment of an ECCU common insurance and pension market under the supervision of a single regional independent regulator. The offshore banking sector is subject to frequent on-site inspections. The FSA has completed its reporting framework for risk-weighted capital and is working with offshore banks to have it fully implemented along with increasing their capital. De-risking has increased the cost of maintaining correspondent banking relationships, with no significant impact on domestic activity. Complying with de-risking requirements has increased the cost for local financial institutions of maintaining correspondent relationships with foreign banks. While some foreign banks have discontinued banking relationships that could be clearly identified as third party transactions, this has impacted mostly the off-shore sector. The domestic commercial banking sector did curtail some of its money services agency business, but this impacted only very small traders and some remittance flows. To mitigate reputational risks for the national financial system, the FSA is currently strengthening the AML/CFT in line with international standards and introducing improvements in the data-entry management of the offshore sector. Furthermore, the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) software has been fully implemented at the IRD and the authorities plan to start sharing information after signing the OECD multilateral tax convention on the automatic exchange of information in August 2016.