The recovery from the global financial crisis was hampered by a series of natural disasters, sluggish global demand and slow implementation of key infrastructure projects. The rebounding US growth and construction of the international airport, launched in 2008, contributed to the recovery of economic activity. However, there were setbacks from the damages caused by natural disasters in 2010, 2011 and at end- 2013. Moreover, the pace of execution of large investment projects has been impacted by capacity and financing constraints. Real GDP Growth Rates at Factor Cost (In percent) St. Vincent and the Grenadines United States Hurricane Tomas Christmas floods April floods Sources: IMF staff estimates. The government is banking on completing game-changing projects, notably the airport in 2016 and geothermal energy to boost growth over the medium-term. Beyond their potentially sizeable growth impact, the authorities expect other benefits. In particular, the airport is expected to yield revenue, while the geothermal project will likely contribute to stable electricity prices and enhance St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ reputation as an ecological tourism destination. The authorities seek to strengthen the macroeconomic policy framework to optimize the impact of these infrastructure projects on competitiveness and growth. In this context, three key policy areas have been identified in the 2016 budget address. First, to effect a credible and sustainable medium-term fiscal consolidation, the authorities plan to accelerate fiscal reforms, notably in revenue administration and public financial management. Second, they plan to build on ongoing efforts to continue reforming the financial sector and improve access to credit for businesses; and third, they plan to embark upon structural reforms to improve the business environment and build climate resilience. Prime Minister Gonsalves’ new electoral mandate provides a timely opportunity to embark upon macroeconomic and structural reforms to anchor strong and sustainable growth. The Prime Minister and his democratic socialist Unity Labour Party (ULP) won a fourth consecutive five-year term in the December 2015 election. Page 10