Economic activity is expected to recover over the medium term, in particular as the new airport becomes operational . After an estimated 1.1 percent growth rate in 2014, growth is projected to pick up modestly to 2.1 percent in 2015 on a pickup in tourism, agriculture and enhanced implementation of much-needed rehabilitation and reconstruction projects. The baseline scenario is predicated on the authorities’ intention to reach a primary surplus of 2 percent of GDP by 2019. The expected recovery in tourist arrivals, in particular from North America, will help the economy to converge to a higher level of output. Investment related to tourism is expected to pick up once there is a greater degree of confidence on the timing of the airport coming into operation, currently expected by 2016 under the staff’s baseline scenario. Tourism should also be boosted by an upgrading of existing tourism facilities and declining energy prices. Agriculture should also pick up, notably the banana sector as the cultivated area is expanded and mandatory certification standards for export to the UK are implemented. Risks to growth are to the downside in the short term but to the upside over the medium term . In the short term, weak implementation could slow the airport and other public capital projects, although debt levels would be lower than projected. There is also a significant increase in the domestic financing requirement for 2015 that could constitute a challenge in view Page 12 of recent indicators of a reduction in appetite for domestic longer-term securities. Persistent weakness in external demand could also slow growth, as could the potential for a reduction of concessional financing associated with Venezuela’s PetroCaribe arrangement. Natural disasters remain a critical source of potential shocks, but staff’s baseline builds in some conservatism by incorporating past natural disasters in calculating potential output. Staff also sees its assumptions regarding the airport’s impact on growth as relatively cautious. The Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) indicates that St. Vincent’s risk of external debt distress remains moderate under the baseline The baseline assumes that the authorities generate primary surpluses averaging 2 percent of GDP over the medium term, in accordance with their policy intentions under the RCF/RFI. Capital expenditure gradually falls from 7 percent of GDP in 2015 to 5 percent in 2017 as flood rehabilitation and reconstruction winds down. Domestic arrears (which are included in domestic debt figures) gradually decline and are assumed fully eliminated by 2018. The baseline also assumes significant external and domestic financing in 2015 and 2016 to finalize the airport. Under these assumptions, public sector debt would fall to 75 percent of GDP by 2020, down from a peak of 79.1 percent in 2017 (Tables 9 and 10). This would bring St. Vincent and the Grenadines to the ECCU debt-to-GDP target of 60 percent only by 2031.