Near-Term Fiscal Framework Despite the new tax policy measures provided in the 2016 budget, staff projects that higher interest expenses are expected to leave the fiscal position unchanged from 2015 (Box 1). The baseline projection is informed by the policy measures provided in the 2016 budget, adjusted by staff projections for the tax revenue yields, execution of the capital budget according to expected financing, and implementation of the wage bill based on attrition. Staff projects that higher revenue and grants will contribute to both a higher primary balance and additional primary current outlays for health, pensions and operating the international airport. Staff projects that the overall fiscal deficit will be 2.1 percent of GDP in 2016 despite the improved primary balance, due to a higher interest rate on a new bilateral loan and the cost of servicing the portion of PetroCaribe financial flows previously omitted from official public debt statistics. Total Debt Service (Percent of GDP) Growing debt service obligations are placing a strain on the government’s cash flow and the provision of public services. Debt service obligations are projected to grow to 7½ percent of GDP in 2016, from 6½ percent of GDP in 2013, as historically large amortization payments on external debt are due in 2016 and over the medium-term, and interest payments are projected to grow (table 3). Moreover, the stock of arrears should decline, with CARTAC assistance, until it is completely eliminated at end-2017, helping to boost private sector activity. Sources: National Authorities Domestic amortization External amortization 2016 proj. Interest The overall fiscal balances in 2015 and 2016 are fully comparable to one another. This is because the budget is on a cash basis and, under the moratorium expiring at end-June 2016, no interest was paid on the portion of PetroCaribe financial flows not previously included in public debt statistics. Page 16 Box 2. Fiscal Projections in 2016 Grants; 1.2 Tax Revenue; 23.6 Tax Revenue; 24.1 Primary balance; 0.1 Primary balance; 0.4 Grants; 2.5 Nontax Revenue; 2.0 Wages and salaries; - Wages and salaries; - Goods and services; - Goods and services; - Transfers and subsidies; Transfers and subsidies; Capital expenditure; - Capital expenditure; - 2016 Projections Capital revenue, 1.3 Nontax Revenue; 1.8 s w o l f t d B s w o l f t O t d B Sources: St. Vincent National Authorities; Ministry of Finance; and Fund Staff Calculations. St. Vincent and the Grenadines: 2015 Outturn and 2016 Projections (In percent of GDP) The 2016 budget provides for additional revenue measures that broaden the tax base and raise excise duties and fees. Staff projects that the revenue from these measures will contribute to improving the primary balance while funding more current outlays, with higher interest costs expected to absorb the primary savings. Tax measures include a broadening of the VAT base and increases in excise duties, property taxes and fees related to motor vehicles. The authorities have aptly streamlined the relatively extensive list of goods which are VAT-exempt or zero-rated and adjusted the property tax rates. They also have appropriately raised excises on beverages, and increased fees concerning motor vehicles. Staff project that these measures will yield 0.5 percent of GDP in 2016 and 0.7 of GDP in 2017 and over the medium- term, when their full year effect materializes. Staff expects the higher tax revenue to compensate for lower capital revenue relative to 2015 and contribute to both a higher primary balance and higher primary spending. Based on staff’s projected revenue and grants of 28.7 percent of GDP in 2016 (a gain of 0.8 pp of GDP relative to 2015) and projected implementation of budget outlays, the primary balance is envisaged to improve from 0.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 0.4 percent of GDP in 2016, with the higher projected revenue and grants mostly absorbed by additional primary current spending. Staff projects the higher primary spending to be entirely directed to current outlays , including for the scaled up operational needs of the new airport and the higher wage bill. In particular, 0.5 pp of GDP in additional subsidies and transfers (relative to 2015) are expected to be needed in 2016 to fund, notably, the entry in operations of Argyle International Airport, and higher pension and health expenditures. Meanwhile, however, the authorities intend to contain the increase in wage bill to 0.1 pp of GDP— following the generalized wage increase of 1½ percent in January 2016— by continuing to restrain filling positions in non-priority sectors. Staff projects capital spending to be reduced by 0.2 pp of GDP (according to projected available financing), despite a new allocation of ½ pp of GDP for the government’s equity investment in the geothermal project, as capacity constraints continue to hamper the full implementation of the capital budget. The projected gain in primary balance between 2015 and 2016 is envisaged to be fully absorbed by higher interest expenses. The rise in interest costs is mainly driven by an increase in the cost of foreign debt, notably a higher interest rate on a bilateral loan and the cost of servicing the additional PetroCaribe debt. St. Vincent and the Grenadines: Primary Fiscal Balance vs. Interest Payments (In percent of GDP) 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Proj. Primary balance Interest Overall balance Source: St. Vincent National Authorities, Fund Staff Calculations. Page 17 Medium-Term Fiscal Framework More ambitious fiscal consolidation is needed over the medium-term to meet the authorities’ public debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2030. The baseline scenario is projected to result in the public debt overshooting the target. The medium-term primary surplus is projected to reach 1.6 percent of GDP by 2019 and result in a debt to GDP ratio of 71.3 percent of GDP in 2030. This reflects the projected full year impact of current revenue measures, and assumes continued expenditure restraint and no more natural disasters. Public Debt: Active and Baseline Policy Scenarios, with and without Natural Disasters (percent of GDP) Debt (Baseline, no natural disasters) Debt (Baseline, with natural disasters) Debt (Active, no natural disasters) Debt (Active, with natural distasters) Source: Fund staff estimates. Assumes that natural disasters occur at 5-year intervals, lowering GDP growth in the first year and causing a 3-year primary balance deterioration associated to fiscal costs. Furthermore, if natural disasters materialize at their historical magnitude and frequency, staff projects that public debt would be even more elevated , at 85.9 percent of GDP in 2030. This is based on historical data indicating that average annual damages from natural disasters in St. Vincent and the Grenadines are 1.2 percent of GDP, of which about ¾ have typically been the responsibility of the government. Frequency of Natural Disasters since 1990 (pct. deviation from median number of disasters/person; top 25 independent countries) Average Annual Losses from Disasters, 1990-2013 (pct of GDP; top 25 fund members) Tuvalu Dominica Vanuatu American Samoa Antigua and Barbuda Tonga Micronesia Fed States St Vincent and the Grenadines Marshall Is St Lucia St Kitts and Nevis Guam Seychelles Grenada Bahamas Samoa Belize Fiji Solomon Is Barbados Iceland Kiribati Comoros Djibouti Cape Verde Is Samoa St. Kitts and Nevis Grenada Haiti Antigua and Barbuda Guyana Maldives Tonga Belize Tajikistan St. Lucia St. Vincent and the Grenadines Bahamas, The Lao PDR Georgia Cambodia Chile Fiji Dominica Liberia Oman Pakistan Jamaica Dominican Republic Mauritius Madagascar Others Other Caribbean Others Other Caribbean St. Vincent and the Grenadines Sources: EMDAT; World Development Indicators; and Fund staff estimates. Sources: EMDAT; USAID; WDI; and Fund Staff Estimates. Against this backdrop, the government would need to target a higher primary surplus over the medium-term to meet its public debt target, especially given recurrent natural disasters. A primary surplus reaching 3.3 percent of GDP by 2019 and sustained over the long-term is deemed adequate to help the authorities achieve their public debt target in 2030, even if natural disasters materialize. This would require well-specified tax and expenditure policy measures with annual yield of about 1.7 percent of GDP beyond the projected yield from the government’s current policies, including to provide 0.9 percent of GDP to address natural disasters. Page 18 A credible plan for medium-term fiscal consolidation is needed, anchored by well-specified measures to further broaden the tax base and restrain expenditure (Annex VI). In particular, it would be helpful to: i. ii. iii. Streamline ad hoc tax concessions and other tax incentives. This would boost tax revenue by recovering currently foregone revenue and facilitating the revenue administration, through a simplified application of the tax code and the tariff. While the foregone revenue of discretionary customs duties concessions at end-2015 is estimated at 1.8 percent of GDP, the overall revenue foregone from all customs concessions is estimated at 4.8 percent of GDP and the revenue loss from all tax incentives have been assessed near 7 percent of GDP. Continue to restrain the wage bill , particularly since real wages of public sector employees have increased by 45 percent between 2000 and 2014, resulting in the second highest public sector wages relative to productivity in the ECCU. This could be achieved through attrition and containing future wage increases. Improve the sustainability of the public service pension system and the National Insurance Service. Expenditure on pensions and retirement benefits have grown from 2½ percent of GDP in 2011 to 3 percent of GDP in 2015 and is expected to keep rising, since the five pension systems of public servants are all non-contributory and unfunded. This risks undermining the medium-term fiscal position, which can be addressed by implementing parametric reforms among the options suggested by the actuarial analysis published in If fiscal policy included financial defenses against natural disasters, this would help prevent resulting increases in public debt to GDP (Annex V). Financing the rehabilitation, reconstruction and immediate response to a natural disaster is particularly challenging when funding depends on international partners if concessional funds are scarce. Natural disasters may contribute to raise the public debt to GDP ratio, as the authorities may be pressured to either turn to more expensive financing sources or delay reconstruction and postpone the growth recovery. Self- insurance against the risk of natural disasters alleviates this dependency on external resources. Proactive implementation of structural reforms is also critical to support fiscal consolidation. The National Economic Advisory Council, to be established by end-July, may be helpful in monitoring progress in these reforms, particularly if their announcement includes the government’s commitment to a timetable and key milestones for the completion of measurable actions. Specifically: Reforms in revenue administration need to be accelerated and sustained . Following the recent appointment of the Comptroller of the Customs and Excises Department (CED), it is essential to The VAT in St. Vincent and the Grenadines is markedly less efficient than in neighbor countries (Figure 3) which suggests there is much scope for improving revenue by reforming the revenue administration. Page 19 hire the staff needed to spearhead the reforms. To improve the cross-checking of tax returns by the CED and the IRD and timely reception of compliance information, issuance of a single Tax Identification Number (TIN) per taxpayer must be finalized without delay and upgrade of information technology needs to continue. The efficiency of public spending needs to be improved. Adopting the draft Procurement Bill would be a key milestone. This requires clarifying its provisions to facilitate its application— based on expertise already provided by the World Bank. Improving control over transfers to public entities starts with enforcing requirements for their timely financial reporting. To prevent the accumulation of new budgetary arrears, it is critical to strengthen the Ministry of Finance’s capacities in internal audit, financial management information systems and cash management. An accountability framework for public sector employees would also eventually need to be in place to provide traction for these reforms. Additional Fiscal Measures (relative to the baseline scenario) (annual differences between the active and baseline scenarios, In percent of GDP) Active Policy Scenario Tax Revenue Measures • Taxes on International Trade (VAT) - (streamline ad-hoc exemptions) • Taxes on International Trade (Import duties) -(streamline ad-hoc exemptions) • Improve control over the issuance of the Tax Identification Number (TIN) at the Inland Revenue Department and strengthen enforcement of the use of the TIN at the Customs Department. • Customs and Inland Revenue Departments to sign the Memorandum of Understanding on their enhanced cooperation and start joint audits by June 2016. • Strengthen enforcement capacities and raise penalties for non-compliance • Penalize brokers who are not compliant with paying their customs duties by cancelling their import license. • Adopt the Customs Management Act and implementing regulations • Improve appeals mechanism • Rationalization of tax concessions granted through special legislation Expenditure measures • Contain wage bill by limiting wage increases and retrenching and redeploying public sector employees rather than net increase in hiring • Tighten expenditure commitment controls • Strengthen oversight of public entities by enforcing the requirement for them to produce timely audited financial statements. • Improve the Public Sector Investment Plan, with more systematic analysis of projects and their recurrent cost implications • Adopt and enact the Procurement Bill and implementing regulations Difference in Primary Balances (Active minus Baseline) Source: IMF staff calculations. Adopting a legal framework for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), would help limit their contingent fiscal liabilities. Several PPPs are currently envisaged or under way, including the geothermal, marina, and agriculture projects. There is a risk that negotiations with private partners Contracts with private service providers to operate the upcoming airport are not PPPs but concession contracts of much shorter duration (about three years), which include performance bonds. Page 20 culminate in direct and implicit guarantees leading to eventual budgetary liabilities, with negative impact on fiscal balances. The government can set overall limits on accumulated PPP liabilities by establishing a codified enunciation of PPP principles providing safeguards against possible contingent liabilities—including on-lending to PPP partners combined with undue sharing of risk. This may strengthen the government’s negotiation position with private partners.