The real effective exchange rate shows signs of overvaluation, but the fact that tourism is lagging behind neighboring countries in the ECCU currency union suggests other factors are at play in the country’s competitiveness (Box 2) . A combination of measures is needed to improve competitiveness and growth. Box 2. Competitiveness and External Sustainability International reserves 20% of M2 3 months of imports 1 StDev of FDI International Reserves Adequacy CGER-type methodologies show signs of overvaluation of the real effective exchange rate (REER). The macro-balance (MB) approach shows overvaluation of 63 percent, and the external sustainability (ES) approach indicates that stabilizing the net foreign asset position of St. Vincent would require a real depreciation of 30 percent. On the other hand, the equilibrium real exchange rate approach suggests there is no misalignment. At the ECCU level, the various CGER- type methodologies indicate the real exchange rate is overvalued by 4 to 32 percent. However, the large overvaluation appears exaggerated On average over the last decade, almost 80 percent of the current account deficit has been financed by non-debt creating flows, notably FDI and capital grants, with FDI not included in CGER as an explanatory variable. It is likely the deficit would be much smaller in the absence of these large inflows, as in 2000-01. An apparent loss of competitiveness compared to the rest of the ECCU suggests the importance of factors other than the exchange rate. Tourist arrivals are still below the 2004 level in St. Vincent, while tourism has recovered almost to pre-crisis levels in the rest of the ECCU. Supply factors appear important as St. Vincent lost over 9,000 potential airline passengers per year when a major U.S. airline moved its hub from Puerto Rico to Miami, with the existing airport unable to accommodate the now larger planes required, in contrast to Caribbean destinations with larger airports. St. Vincent: Stayover Tourist Arrivals (12-month moving sum; December 2004=100) Sources: Caribbean Tourism Organization, ECCB and IMF staff calculations. ECCU-8 St. Vincent and the Grenadines c e c e c e c e c e c e c e c e c e c e Page 17 Box 2. Competitiveness and External Sustainability (Concluded) Enforcing Contracts Paying Taxes Getting Credit Resolving Insolvency Starting a Business Permits Getting Electricity Trading Across Borders Ease of Doing Business Dealing with Construction St. Vincent ECCU Caribbean Ease of Doing Business Ranks (Out of 189 countries) International reserves (imputed) have remained above 3 months of imports since 2012. This is equivalent to 1 standard deviation of FDI, and 20 percent of M2. This indicates that the level of reserves is in general adequate for the proper functioning of the Vincentian economy. St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ business climate rankings have broadly lost ground, in line with the region. St. Vincent ranks 103rd out of 189 countries on the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators, compared to 61 st out of 178 countries in 2007 The worsening of the ranking does not necessarily reflect an absolute deterioration in the business environment, but suggests reform progress has not kept pace with the rest of the world. In particular, more efforts are needed to improve access to credit, registering property, and resolving insolvency. _______ The Doing Business rankings have undergone important methodological changes and increases in coverage of indicators and countries, so the comparison of rankings through time is not straightforward. Nonetheless, it gives a broad indication of a country’s relative progress. The authorities’ growth strategy is three pronged . First, while the new airport is the linchpin of the tourism strategy (Box 3), other elements include the development of a Maritime and Hospitality Institute and the introduction of minimum standards for tourism sector operators. Second, educational services for export are being developed, including offshore medical schools (there are currently four, with a total of over 600 students) and a new Community College program to teach English as a Second Language. Third, agriculture is being revived after the recent string of natural disasters. Staff welcomed the overall strategy, further advocating fostering closer collaboration between tourism and agriculture to reduce the import needs of hotels and restaurants. Protecting Minority Investors Registering Property Staff recommended keeping labor costs in line with productivity gains to enhance competitiveness. In this context, staff welcomed the introduction of annual labor surveys starting in 2015 to track unit labor costs and productivity and inform policy decisions. Given the influence of the public sector collective bargaining agreements on private sector wages, it will be important for the government to contain wage increases. Page 18 Box 3. Estimated Economic Impact of the International Airport The coming into operation of Argyle International Airport is likely to constitute a turning point for the Vincentian economy. Construction commenced in August 2008 and the authorities expect the airport to become operational by mid-2015. The total cost is estimated at EC$700 million (US$260 million), about ⅓ of 2014 GDP. The airport is expected to affect potential output directly (via higher stay-over arrivals and new tourism-related investment) and indirectly (via spillovers to construction, financial intermediation, agriculture and manufacturing). Recent studies suggest tourist arrivals from advanced economies to small islands increase dramatically in response to the addition of direct flights . The literature (see e.g. Culiuc, 2014) shows that economic development in peripheral regions benefits extensively from direct connections to main global economic hubs. This is particularly true for small island states since the high level of competition in the tourism industry makes these countries very sensitive to the introduction of direct flights. Staff estimates that a 1 percent growth in tourist stay-over arrivals would lead to a 0.4 percent increase in real GDP . This is despite the relatively low direct contribution of tourism to total GDP (6.2 percent of GDP in 2013), since the total economic contribution of tourism to GDP is estimated to be considerably higher (26.2 percent). This is consistent with estimated results for other Caribbean islands (see Croes, 2011, and Ridderstaat, Croes and Peter, 2013). In turn, staff estimated in a simple regression model that a 1 percent change in tourist arrivals would lead to a 1.6 percent increase in tourism value added. The results are robust to different econometric specifications. Staff anticipates that the airport could increase tourist arrivals by 10 percent yearly over the three years following its completion, with a cumulative impact on real GDP up to 4.2 percent . Based on discussions with air carriers, the authorities expect to add up to eight direct flights: six from North America and two from Europe. In order to account for downside risks, staff’s assumption was considerably more conservative, with one direct weekly flight added in each of 2015, 2016, and 2017. While growth in stay-over arrivals may be curbed by a limited supply of rooms and delays in construction projects, historical data suggest there is potential to accommodate up to a 38 percent increase in tourist arrivals with the current room capacity. _______ References: Culiuc, A., (2014). Determinants of International Tourism. IMF Working Paper, 14/82. Croes, R. (2011). Measuring and Explaining Competitiveness in the Context of Small Island Destinations. Journal of Travel Research , 50 (4). Ridderstaat, J., Croes, R., and Nijkamp, P., (2013). Tourism and Long-run Economic Growth in Aruba. International Journal of Tourism Research , 16 (5). It is important to reduce the cost of energy to maintain competitiveness. The high cost of energy is related primarily to the difficulties of achieving economies of scale in power generation, particularly in a multi-island context. For the most part, the full costs of imported Page 19 energy are passed on to consumers so that price signals are effectively transmitted to end users, and the plant and equipment used to generate electricity is reportedly fairly modern and efficient. Thus, the main prospect for reducing the cost of energy appears to be the development of alternative energy sources, most notably geothermal, which is currently under active study (hydroelectricity is expected to remain an important part of the energy generation mix). At the moment, the scope for solar power and natural gas appears to be limited until more cost effective methods of production are developed, while staff agreed with the authorities’ view that the potential for switching to liquefied natural gas (LNG) for electricity generation is currently limited, given the lack of infrastructure in the region. Staff welcomed the authorities’ actions to explore geothermal generation and promote the use of solar energy, and anticipate that, if implemented, the authorities’ energy action plan could cut electricity prices by almost ½ in the medium term. Staff welcomed initiatives to ease the costs of doing business and increase training for small and medium-sized enterprises. The customs department has implemented the ASYCUDA World platform to adopt a risk-based management system. This should help reduce clearance times and reduce costs of enforcement. However, staff urged the authorities’ to continue streamlining clearance times as they increased during the transition period. In addition, there is need for legislation to codify and unify procurement procedures, in order to give businesses greater certainty and a more level playing field. The authorities agreed with staff on an urgent need to speed up the execution of the Banana Accompanying Measures (BAM) project to significantly increase productivity in the agricultural sector. The program, sponsored by the EU, focuses on increasing banana, fruit, vegetable and livestock production by improving the agricultural infrastructure, promoting commercial production and marketing activities, expanding access to credit, promoting good land use practices and environmental management, developing agro-business incubators and strengthening public-private partnerships in the agro-business value chain. Implementation has been very slow (only EC$2 m have been spent out of EC$35 m) because of procurement delays.