The FSA has played a critical role in stabilizing the Building and Loan Association (BLA), but continued vigilance is needed. The authorities point to initial successes in the unfreezing of deposits and the turning of a profit by the BLA as significant steps on the path to its full regularization. Nonetheless, they recognize that NPLs remain high at EC$61 million (as of November 2014) out of EC$280 million of total assets, and that there is an urgent need to improve the credit administration process. Staff welcomes the consolidation of the credit union sector and encourages the FSA to enhance supervision . Credit unions perform meaningful social roles for their members, as demonstrated by their high rate of penetration in St Vincent and the Grenadines. The FSA has actively promoted consolidation of the credit union sector in order to improve efficiency and stability through economies of scale and diversification of the deposit base. On the other hand, the expansion of the credit unions’ role in financial intermediation, often at the expense of banks, requires improvements in risk-based supervision to adequately address credit unions’ risk profiles and minimize systemic financial risk. In particular, the FSA should evaluate whether it is appropriate for credit unions to engage in noncore activities such as business lending, given that they are afforded certain benefits vis-à-vis commercial banks, notably, exemption from corporate income taxes. The FSA noted that it has been paying closer attention to credit unions, conducting onsite examinations on all of them over the last two years as input into the recapitalization and consolidation process. Staff welcomed the Authorities’ intention to fully support the creation of the Eastern Caribbean Finance Service Authority (ECFSA) . The regional authority, which is expected to become fully operational in 2015, will supervise insurance companies and pension funds within the region. In addition, staff advocated the formation of a credit bureau to reduce lending institutions’ costs of due diligence, thereby facilitating access to credit. The authorities have reiterated their support for the regional bank resolution and restructuring strategy. They also concurred with staff that potential risks to financial stability from banking sector challenges in other ECCU members should be closely monitored.