Competitiveness St. Vincent and the Grenadines: Doing Business Ranking (2015) Accelerating structural reforms to buttress competitiveness is essential to leverage the growth-enhancing impact of the airport and geothermal projects. Areas reported as key constraints by private sector representatives are the short supply of skilled labor in certain niche areas, access to affordable credit and electricity, and lengthy trade procedures. Lifting these constraints require to: Overall Resolving Insolvency Enforcing Contracts Trading Across Borders Paying Taxes Protecting Minority Investors Getting Credit Starting a Business Dealing with Construction Permits Getting Electricity Registering Property ECCU Average Worst Best Source: World Bank Doing Business Indicators, 2015. St. Vincent and the Grenadines Promote human capital and align labor costs with competitiveness gains. St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ hiring costs relative to worker productivity are among the highest in the region (Annex II), reflecting the cumulative increases in salary for public sector employees and its influence on private sector compensation. To lift labor productivity, the newly established Hospitality Institute—once fully operational— can help upgrade the work force’s skills to match business requirements. Furthermore, future extension of training to maritime tourism activities would be beneficial, particularly since St. Vincent and the Grenadines is particularly well-suited for yachting, with higher value-added than cruise tourism. Finally, the tourism industry is improving its operations to meet the government’s new minimum standards, aiming for full compliance by end-2017. Enforcement will be critical in that regard. These measures aim to Page 22 support the recovery of St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ tourism nearer pre-crisis levels (Figure 2). Facilitate the private sector’s access to affordable credit and predictable electricity tariffs. Introducing the new insolvency law in 2014 helped improve St. Vincent’s Doing Business ranking. To address remaining areas of concern, the authorities plan to appoint an Office of Private Sector Development. Access to affordable credit by small businesses remains a priority. To reduce credit risk and improve accessibility, progress in credit facilitation through the formation of a credit bureau—as part of a CARICOM initiative—is needed. Concerning access to electricity, geothermal energy is expected to reduce the variability in electricity tariffs over the long-run. Accelerate the adoption of trade facilitation measures. Structural inadequacies and administrative efficiencies of the Kingstown Port and the Customs and Excises Department need to be addressed to meet the targets established by the authorities in the implementation of ASYCUDA, including to reduce the maximum clearance time, and accelerate initiatives to strengthen the links between ASYCUDA and the Port Authority. In particular, this would involve sharing information in a single manifest, merging the information needed by the Port in real time and producing automated receipts. There are signs that the real effective exchange rate (REER) is overvalued. Most estimates of misalignment of the real exchange rate point to an overvaluation (Annex II). These estimates remain highly uncertain, however, since balance of payment statistics are currently being revised throughout the ECCU. Following improvements in the ECCB’s survey to gather data, exports of travel services appear to have been underreported to date, suggesting that the current account balances may be stronger than currently reported. Since climate change presents unique challenges, the policy agenda to improve climate resilience would benefit from faster implementation. St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ preparedness for hurricanes has improved, as have building codes, roads’ designs and housing stocks. The authorities’ comprehensive disaster management approach, developed with multilateral partners, is being reviewed by Cabinet. It includes the legal and regulatory framework supporting upgrades in the physical infrastructure, building codes, and the data for land management. It needs to be adopted and enacted without delay. Floods reconstruction capital spending also needs to be prioritized among budgetary outlays. St. Vincent and the Grenadines made resolving insolvency easier by introducing provisions for a rehabilitation procedure to facilitate the continuation of the debtor’s business during insolvency proceedings and allow creditors greater participation in important decisions during the proceedings; and establishing a public office responsible for the general administration of insolvency cases. St. Vincent and the Grenadines ranks at the bottom of the list in the “Resolving Insolvency” subcomponent of the Doing Business indicators for methodological reasons. Particularly, the country has no record of cases involving a judicial reorganization, judicial liquidation or debt enforcement procedures which triggers a score of 0. However, the Doing Business report highlights the new Law as a positive development. Page 23