(In percent of GDP, policies discussed under the RCF/RFI compared to no policies) Fiscal Measures and Expected Savings: Baseline Scenario Revenue measures Rationalize tax exemptions Improve tax compliance (VAT) Implement CED/IRD DMP 1/ The authorities have made some progress in implementing policies outlined at the time of the RCF/RFI . Tax compliance has improved significantly, including due to the implementation of e-filing of income taxes, and an arrears monitoring and management system has been developed. The wage bill as a percent of GDP is intended to begin to decline in 2015. Progress has been limited on rationalizing tax exemptions and limiting transfers to state-owned enterprises (Text table). Under the baseline policies scenario, the authorities intend to start fiscal consolidation in 2016, once rehabilitation and However, nearly half of the domestic financing requirement in 2015 is to clear arrears, and is intended to be met through issuing domestic government securities. Staff outlined to the authorities an explicit disaster scenario (see below). Source: Fund staff estimates 1/ Custom and Excise Dept., Internal Revenue Dept., Data M atching Project. Expenditure measures Contain the wage bill Limit transfers to SOEs For the latest DSA, please refer to Country Report No. 14/360. The 2015 budget (calendar year) has not yet been introduced and has not been seen by staff. Page 13 reconstruction efforts are well advanced, bringing the primary balance to a surplus of 2 percent of GDP by 2019 with a mix of revenue enhancing measures and expenditure constraint. Measures contained in the authorities’ LOI Progress to date for the RCF/RFI Revenue measures: i. Rationalize existing tax exemptions; ii. Implement of the recommendations of the Report on the Data Matching Project between Customs and Excise Department (CED) and the Inland Revenue Department (IRD); Enhance tax compliance for the VAT; iii. Expenditure measures: iv. Contain the wage bill by 0.4 of GDP by 2019 by restraining employment growth; Limit transfers to Public Corporations; Implement a pension reform Establish an arrears monitoring and management system. v. vi. vii. Revenue measures: i. ii. Limited progress; Progress at the CED, limited progress at IRD; iii. Capacity and frequency of onsite examinations and audits have been enhanced at IRD; Expenditure measures: iv. v. Expected to start in 2015; Progress on limiting subventions but limited progress on transfers; Limited progress: draft legislation is ready and the government is still defining the scope of the reform; Progress: establishment of a database and a tracking system. vi. vii. Public Sector debt (Percent of GDP) Staff emphasized the need for a stronger medium-term fiscal effort to reverse the rise in the debt to GDP ratio and build much needed fiscal space . The ratio of gross public debt as a percent of GDP has risen nearly 20 percentage points since 2007, and it will be critical to arrest and reverse that increase once the period of high capital expenditures associated with the airport and flood rebuilding ends. The criticality of the task is underscored by the risks to growth, especially from natural disasters (see below), but also due to the potential loss of the preferential arrangement on energy financing via PetroCaribe. The fiscal effort should incorporate the full clearance of government arrears, thus removing an important headwind to business activity. Baseline Active scenario Active scenario with a natural disaster in 2016 Baseline 2012 Art. IV Baseline RCF/RFI Aug. 2014 Additional fiscal consolidation can be credibly delivered. In particular, staff recommended consolidation that would yield a primary surplus of 3 percent of GDP by 2018. This would bring forward the meeting of the ECCU debt target to 2024. Such an “active” scenario Page 14 (In percent of GDP, active policy measures compared to no policies) Fiscal Measures and Expected Savings: Active Scenario Revenue measures Rationalize tax exemptions Improve tax compliance (VAT) Implement CED/IRD DMP 1/ would include bringing down the wage bill by an additional one percent of GDP beyond the baseline over the next four years, via some blend of wage and hiring restraint. In addition, staff proposed reducing transfers and subventions to public corporations by an additional ½ percent of GDP over the same period. At the same time, efforts need to be made to improve the rate of implementation of the capital budget. On revenues, there needs to be greater enforcement of existing tax laws, including ensuring that institutions that benefit from tax exempt status receive those exemptions only on those activities specifically granted under the law. Additional fiscal consolidation would be needed if a new natural disaster were to hit St. Vincent and the Grenadines. Staff and the authorities discussed a scenario in which a somewhat larger than average-sized natural disaster hits in 2016. Based on an emergency policy response in line with past experience, and an additional 0.5 percent of GDP fiscal effort, staff projected that the public debt-to-GDP ratio would reach 60 percent of GDP by 2026 instead of 2025. Expenditure measures Contain the wage bill Limit transfers to SOEs Limit subsidies Source: Fund staff estimates 1/ Custom and Excise Dept., Internal Revenue Dept., Data M atching Project. The authorities broadly agreed on the need to build fiscal buffers and were open to considering a range of fiscal measures to do so, although they did not commit to specific timetables for adoption Reducing tax exemptions: There is scope to eliminate tax exemptions on non-wage sources of income, such as rents. In addition, credit unions’ exemption from corporate taxation could be limited to their core activities as originally intended, rather than being given blanket exemptions even as they expand into commercial bank-like activities. Increasing customs charges: Customs charges could be increased from 4 percent to 6 percent, generating an estimated EC$ 16 million annually. The probability of at least one damaging natural disaster over the next 5 years is estimated at 52.3 percent, with average damages calculated at 3.5 percent of GDP. However, in the context of a risk analysis, staff modeled an event that would have damages of 5.1 percent of GDP. Such a scenario assumes the government responds to the disaster with increases in capital expenditures and in transfers, subsidies and tax exemptions for affected households, in line with past experience. It also assumes donors increase grants by 0.4 percent of GDP in 2016 and 2017. The immediate impact on GDP growth would be a reduction from 3.1 percent to 2.2 percent. Under this scenario, the Government would need additional consolidation measures starting in 2018 to reach a primary surplus of 3 percent of GDP in 2019. These could include additional efforts beyond the active policies scenario to reduce the wage bill by a further 0.3 percent of GDP and increase taxes on licenses and stamp duties by an extra 0.2 percent of GDP. Page 15 Imposing a broad hiring freeze: The authorities intend to keep the size of the civil service unchanged in 2015, with the exception of creating a small number of additional positions in the customs service and police. Wage rates are intended to remain virtually flat. Increase information sharing between IRD and CED: Upgrading IRD’s IT system is required in order to be able to share taxpayers’ information with the CED. This is expected to enhance VAT receipts. Enhancing the legal capacity of revenue agencies and the National Insurance Service (NIS): Revenue agencies lack the legal capacities to enforce payment of fines and judgments, while the NIS lacks the legal capacity to enforce the collection of contributions. The authorities intend to support capacity development in these agencies. Making self-employed contributions to the NIS compulsory: Risks to the NIS’s long-term sustainability include declining contributions, a falling number of contributors and limited investment opportunities. Staff emphasized that such contributions of the self-employed should be compulsory, to recover contributors lost since the global financial crisis as more self-employed move into the informal sector. While the authorities agreed in principle, they argued that enhancing the legal capacity of the NIS was a higher priority in the short-term, to recover past-due contributions. Settling arrears: Clearing arrears would likely improve the culture of tax compliance in the long run. In view of arrears owed by the private sector on their tax obligations, the authorities are considering a systematic netting of obligations via exchanges of checks. Where arrears will not be cleared expeditiously in cash, the authorities would issue debt securities, as they did in 2013 and 2014. Staff urged the authorities to implement recent TA recommendations to formulate a well-specified medium-term framework to anchor fiscal adjustment . While the authorities produce multiyear budget estimates, estimates for the outer years are mere incremental adjustments to current budget year figures. Staff also encouraged the authorities to explicitly incorporate the risk of future natural disasters in their framework. While the authorities agreed in principle, they did not indicate a timeframe for the implementation. While welcoming the recently implemented parametric reforms of the NIS pension system, staff advocated further reforms. In particular, a separate public service pension system needs to be merged into the NIS to ease the long-term burden on public finances. The authorities agreed and intend to go forward with the reform, but noted that existing participants need to be grandfathered. Page 16