The new airport, now foreseen for completion in 2016, is expected to sustain the near- and medium-term economic recovery. Designed to accommodate larger jets, the airport’s envisaged impact on growth over the medium- term is sizeable. However, staff’s medium-term growth forecast remains cautious. Growth is projected to increase to 2.2 percent in 2016, owing to a pickup in construction, and reach 3.1 percent over the medium-term, as tourist arrivals are boosted by greater airlift capacity and construction expands tourism infrastructure. Meanwhile, structural measures are expected to improve agricultural productivity, boosting the synergy between the hospitality and agriculture sectors , with locally grown food increasingly meeting the needs of tourists and the local population. The buoyancy of the tourism, agriculture and construction sectors will spur financial credit to the private sector, particularly if supported The new airport will allow direct flights from the main tourism source markets; the US, the UK and Canada and its overall construction cost is estimated at US$223 million or ⅓ of 2015 GDP. Its estimated growth impact was presented in Box 3, country report no. 15/259, page 15. This additional 0.9 percentage point of growth in real GDP is estimated to correspond to an additional influx of stayover tourists by 2¼ percent, which is cautious given recent developments. Page 13 by structural reforms to improve access to information on borrowers and the resolution of impaired assets. The current account deficit is expected to narrow gradually , despite the projected slight recovery of oil prices, as tourism inflows increase and food imports decrease. Additional imports to supply tourism services are expected to be financed by FDI. The geothermal energy project may potentially further raise long-term growth (Annex IV), and position St. Vincent and the Grenadines as an environmentally friendly tourism destination. However, medium-term growth projections abstract from the project. Risks to the outlook are balanced . Downside risks pertaining to natural disasters and a deterioration of the terms of the PetroCaribe financing remain as stated during the 2014 Article IV consultation. Risks of a sharp currency appreciation have increased, as have the risk of negative spillovers from oil-exporting partner countries such as Canada and Trinidad and Tobago. Risks from intensifying financing constraints could also emanate if the government does not adopt a credible medium-term fiscal framework or if financial services are reduced due to “derisking” activities of global and regional banks. Upside risks relate to the persistence of the recent lower energy prices and the opening of the new international airport spurring substantial investments in the tourism sector. Moreover, once geothermal energy enters in operations, significant savings from lower electricity tariffs could contribute upside to growth, particularly if oil prices increase over the long term. Page 14 Box. 1. Risk Assessment Matrix Source of Risk Upside risks: Risk Likelihood Persistently lower oil prices High Successful implementation of the geothermal project. Medium (Medium- Term) Rating Medium (Medium -Term) Medium (Medium -Term) Increase in tourism activity boosted by the new airport. High Medium Downside risks: Surge in the US dollar High High (Short- Term) Deterioration in the terms or level of PetroCaribe’s financing High High Impact Channel Improvements of both external and fiscal balances. Reductions in electricity costs and savings on oil imports. Increase in fiscal yields and private investment. Stronger external balance. A strong US dollar results in a strong EC dollar eroding price competitiveness relative to non-US markets. Government and BOP financing would be curtailed. Sharp asset price decline and decompression of credit spreads Medium Medium (Short- Term) Increase in external financing costs to the government. Natural disaster Medium (Short- term) High Low growth and worsening of fiscal and external balances. Policy Advice Allow pass-through of international prices, but use the opportunity to adjust excise taxation on automotive fuels. Monitor developments, including for emerging contingent fiscal liabilities. Assess fiscal burden implications related to the airport. Accelerate structural reforms to buttress competitiveness. Improve competitiveness of the tourism sector and diversify tourism-source markets. Prepare contingent sources of financing in case the agreement ends abruptly Manage PetroCaribe flows prudently. Maintain a prudent debt profile to reduce financing costs. Adopt a credible medium-term fiscal framework. Raise primary surplus to build buffers and work with the World Bank and CDB to build resilience to climate change. Strengthen and implement the AML/CFT framework in line with international standards to minimize risks. Loss of correspondent banking services significantly curtails cross-border payments, trade finance, and remittances. May depress tourism arrivals, remittances, FDI and bank lending. Reduced financial services by global/regional banks (“de-risking”) Medium High High High Slowdown in oil-exporting partner countries (Canada and Trinidad and Tobago) due to lower oil prices. The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. “Short term” and “medium term” are meant to indicate that the risk could materialize within 1 year and 3 years, respectively. Diversify tourism base and consolidate the fiscal position to reduce financing needs. Page 15