St. Vincent and the Grenadines is likely to experience more natural disasters due to climate change. Small island states are more vulnerable to natural disasters than other countries. Moreover, the effects of climate change will be felt more strongly in small islands such as St. Vincent and the Grenadines that have large portions of their populations and infrastructures on the coastline. Accordingly, staff welcomed the authorities’ emphasis on measure to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and urged them to increase insurance coverage (Box 4). In addition to ongoing programs supported by the World Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank, the authorities are developing programs to improve emergency response capabilities and enhance the robustness of physical infrastructure (e.g. bridges, coastal and river defenses and slope stabilization). Also, the government is relocating houses where necessary, enforcing compliance Page 20 with building codes and rezoning areas found to be at risk. The authorities purchased additional insurance from the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF). However, they expressed some reservations about purchasing further insurance, noting that the parametric nature of the insurance means that some potentially devastating events might not be covered. Box 4. The Economic Impact of Climate Change in St. Vincent and the Grenadines On current trends, average global temperatures are expected to increase by over 2  C by the end of this century, leading to rising sea levels, higher intensity and devastation of hurricanes, and more severe droughts and floods . These changes are of particular concern for small islands that have most of their population and infrastructure on the coastline. The likely increase in hurricane intensities will exacerbate the impacts of disasters, resulting in lower growth rates, and higher debt levels . On average, a severe natural disaster in the ECCU (defined as one that affects more than 1 percent of the population) is estimated to reduce growth by close to 2 percent of GDP the year the disaster strikes, and increase debt by about 5 percentage points over 5 years (Acevedo 2014). Coastal erosion is already a significant issue in St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and will get worse with rising sea levels. It is estimated that in parts of the country as much as 1.5 meters per year are already lost to the sea. Much of the road network and population, and an estimated 90 percent of buildings are near the coastline, as are tourism facilities, which are vulnerable to rapid beach erosion. The costs of relocation to safer areas are likely prohibitive. St. Vincent and the Grenadines derives many economic benefits from its forests and mountains; however, there have been no systematic efforts to measure them. These include that mountain catchments are used to store water and to distribute it using gravity, resulting in the lowest water tariffs in the ECCU. Additionally, about 20 percent of electricity generation is from hydroelectricity. However, these benefits are being impaired by changing weather patterns, with a longer dry season and a rainy season with fewer rainy days but of higher intensity. Furthermore, the higher frequency of natural disasters has slowed forest regeneration, negatively impacting the water cycle. Although it is difficult to quantify the current benefits of the ecosystem, and the potential costs of disrupting it, it is clear that climate change could impose a significant cost on St. Vincent and the Grenadines . Hence, adaptation and mitigation measures, and building physical resilience, are vitally important for growth and development. ___________ Reference: Acevedo, 2014, “Debt, Growth, and Natural Disasters: A Caribbean Trilogy,” IMF Working Paper 14/125. CCRIF only recently started offering coverage for excessive rainfall events, which the authorities purchased in 2014. However, the coverage would have fallen far short of the actual damages in December 2013, with the maximum payout in case of excessive rain being only US$0.8 million. For example, a slow-moving tropical storm would probably not be covered, even though it might cause considerably more damage than a fast-moving level one hurricane. The Ministry of Agriculture plans to partner with the FAO to conduct a study to quantify the economic benefits that the country derives from its forests. Page 21