The 2016 budget poses risks despite ongoing efforts to strengthen tax administration and treasury management. Given lower oil revenues and transfers from South Sudan, the targeted deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP will be difficult to achieve. Full spending of budget appropriations would bring it close to 3 percent of GDP, implying sizable recourse to CBOS financing. In the short term, fiscal consolidation is needed to curb monetization of the deficit and contribute to the external adjustment. Limiting the 2016 deficit to 1.9 percent of GDP would be consistent with manageable domestic financing. This would require, like last year and in the first quarter of 2016, containing spending on current goods and services, and prioritizing capital spending. In response to exchange rate adjustment, current subsidies could be maintained in the short term to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable, offset by the corresponding revenue gains. Mobilizing additional non-oil revenues—especially by expanding tax bases—will also be important. While current tax administration reforms will help, they would need to be accompanied by tax policy measures. In the medium term, domestic revenue mobilization will be critical to generate fiscal space for investment and social spending. Despite recent improvements, tax revenues remain low by international standards. Measures to raise revenues would include further rationalizing exemptions, ceasing to grant new tax holidays and phasing out existing ones, introducing a presumptive tax for small businesses, reforming gold taxation, increasing personal and business income tax rates and their progressivity, and continuing to strengthen customs and tax administration. Adjusting the customs exchange rate in tandem with adjustments in the official rate would boost tax collections, while gradually phasing out fuel subsidies would create space for targeted pro-growth and pro-poor social spending. Over time, targeting a gradual reduction in the nonoil primary balance would lower dependence on uncertain oil revenues. Continued efforts are needed to strengthen public financial management. Recent progress to introduce a treasury single account (TSA) should be sustained by (i) strengthening budget formulation and planning, with emphasis on revenue projections and the recently established macro-fiscal unit; (ii) improving the preparation of the medium-term fiscal framework and incorporating it into budget planning; (iii) expanding the coverage of the TSA; and (iv) deploying an integrated financial management system. Page 21 Authorities’ Views The authorities acknowledged the challenges posed by low tax revenues for fiscal management. In the short term, they plan to achieve their policy targets by cutting spending to offset revenue shortfalls. Faced with sizable development needs and insufficient external financing, the authorities will rely on domestic financing to cover deficits. To raise revenue, they increased last year the income tax rate (from 15 percent to 30 percent) on cigarette producers and recently introduced royalties on gold production. In line with their Five-Year Program, they plan to expand tax bases—including by reducing exemptions and introducing electronic collection of VAT and other taxes—rather than increase tax rates. They believe that increasing the effective tariff and VAT rates on imports by adjusting the official exchange rate would not increase customs revenues significantly because of high import-price elasticity. The authorities plan to improve the quality of spending and continue to enhance PFM They will continue to liberalize fuel prices to reduce subsidies. At the same time, they will provide more resources to social programs and productive sectors, including agriculture and infrastructure. Also, the authorities are strengthening the TSA and expanding it to include all government ministries and departments. They also introduced electronic payment systems for salaries and are strengthening internal and external audit.