Sudan is a low-income fragile country facing significant domestic and international constraints and large macroeconomic imbalances. Decades of internal conflicts and U.S. sanctions have undermined economic stability and growth. While the start of oil production in 1999 triggered rapid growth that tripled per capita income within a decade, Sudan lost the bulk of its oil exports and related budget revenues following the secession of South Sudan in 2011. Gradual policy adjustment supported by financial assistance from Gulf countries restored some degree of economic stability and helped prevent a drop in real incomes. Looking forward, strong policies, normalization of relations with creditor countries, the lifting of sanctions, and debt relief are needed to achieve macroeconomic stability and unleash Sudan’s potential. Economic stabilization efforts have borne some fruit. Since 2012, the authorities have launched reforms to adjust to the loss of oil revenues. Measures included exchange rate adjustments, subsidy reductions, fuel price hikes, and tax increases. Tax collections and public financial management were strengthened, and social spending was increased to mitigate the impact of the adjustment on the poor. The reforms, supported by a Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) in 2014, helped reduce the fiscal deficit, slow money growth, ease inflation, and support growth. The authorities’ recent five-year reform plan for 2015–19 continues in the same direction. However, large imbalances persist and growth remains below potential. Five years after the secession of South Sudan, adjustment to the loss of oil revenues is work in progress. Low tax revenues (Box 1) constrain growth-enhancing public infrastructure and social spending. Monetization of the budget deficit and large quasi-fiscal activities (QFAs) put sizable pressure on bp Revenues, Expenditures and Fiscal Balance (in percent of GDP) Oil revenue Non-oil revenues Expenditures Fiscal balance Source: Sudaneseauthorities Page 11 liquidity creation. The virtually fixed official exchange rate contributes to foreign exchange distortions and shortages, and low import tax collections. Actions against violations of U.S. sanctions since mid-2014 contributed to the withdrawal of correspondent bank relations (CBRs), which hampers foreign trade and investment and weighs heavily on growth. Absence of debt relief limits access to official external financing. Box 1. Tax Revenue Mobilization Sudan’s tax revenues are among the lowest in low- and lower-middle income countries (LLMICs) . Tax revenues represented only 6.3 percent of GDP compared to 12 percent of GDP on average in fragile LLMICs in 1995–2015 (figure). With little improvement over the period, this gap has been increasing. Tax collections have yet to adjust to the loss of oil revenues following the secession of South Sudan. Oil revenues, which averaged 8 percent of GDP in 1995–2011, financed the bulk of government expenditure and made it unnecessary to raise tax collections. After the secession, oil revenues (including transit fees and transfers from South Sudan) dropped to 2.2 percent of GDP in 2012–15, and are expected to drop further to less than 1 percent of GDP in 2016 on account of low global oil prices. At the same time, despite efforts to strengthen tax administration, tax revenues increased only marginally in percent of GDP in 2015 due to low imports and an overvalued official exchange rate. This limited the available fiscal space and constrained pro- growth investment and poverty-reducing social spending. Sudan’s tax revenue is lower than expected at its income level. In general, tax revenues are positively correlated with GDP per capita. In particular, a non-oil producing country with a median income per capita of $1,520 (at PPP exchange rates) should raise tax revenues equivalent to 12.2 percent of GDP on average. In contrast, Sudan with an income of $3,920 collected only 6.2 percent of GDP in 2015— comparable to much poorer countries such as Afghanistan and the Central African Republic. Sudan’s tax collection efficiency is relatively low. VAT efficiency—measured by the revenue collected in percent of GDP divided by the standard tax rate—is only 0.19 per percentage point, placing Sudan below the 25th percentile of the distribution and well below the median of 0.37. While at 17 percent its VAT rate is similar to its peers (in the range of 15–18 percent), the low efficiency suggests large tax exemptions and/or weaknesses in tax administration. Z ô K H Y CARBurundiLiberia Malawi Eritrea Guinea TogoMadagascar Guinea-BissauComorosKiribatiMaliHaitiSierra LeoneAfghanistan Zimbabwe NepalChadCôte d'Ivoire Yemen SudanRep.of Congo Selected Countries. Tax Revenues and GDP per Capita 1/ (In percent of GDP and U.S. dollars) 1/ The GDP per capita at PPP (current U.S. dollars). Data for year 2015 or latest available. Red dots areoil-exporter countries.Source: WEO (IMF) ,WDI (WB). Median country : $1,580/ 12.2percent Page 12 Box 1. Tax Revenue Mobilization (concluded) Furthermore, Sudan has one of the lowest direct tax revenues among LLMICs, collecting only 0.6 percent of GDP. This is explained by low personal and corporate income tax rates, high exemptions and tax holidays, and low compliance due to weak administration. There is significant scope to raise tax revenues in Sudan. Out of 36 African LLMICs, Sudan ranked 34th in terms of tax effort, with a tax revenue gap of 6.1 percent of GDP (Torres, 2016). The study estimated the tax gap for 135 countries, controlling for country characteristics such as GNI per capita, imports, oil and gas exports, demographics, and political participation. The results suggest that Sudan should be able to increase its tax ratio by 6 percent of GDP, especially by raising tax collections on income and goods & services by 2.3 percent and 2.8 percent of GDP, respectively. ______________________ Torres, Jose, “Revenue and Expenditure Gaps: A Cross-Country Analysis,” 2016 (Forthcoming), IMF. Domestic and international efforts to resolve internal conflicts and address the difficult humanitarian situation are underway . The U.N. counts 3.1 million internally-displaced persons and about 360,000 refugees (many from South Sudan), and provides humanitarian support to some 5.4 million people (15 percent of the population). Armed conflicts have been endemic in some areas of Darfur, South Kordofan, and Blue Nile states, and a 21,000-strong UN-African Union (AU) peacekeeping force has been stationed in Darfur since 2007. The government launched a national dialogue in 2015, but the process was boycotted by key opposition parties and armed rebel groups. In early 2016, a roadmap for peace was launched under the auspices of the AU with support from the international community, but has yet to be agreed by all parties. In May, the government held a referendum on the permanent administrative status of Darfur and in June declared a unilateral cessation of hostilities in South Kordofan and Blue Nile. Implementation of the recommendations of the last Article IV has been mixed (Box 2). Current spending was contained, including through initial steps to reduce fuel subsidies. However, the limited response thus far to ongoing tax administration reforms has delayed fiscal consolidation and constrained monetary control. Importantly, no progress was made towards greater exchange rate flexibility. Z cc K z q Z z oo z ô & nd nd .I Page 13 Box 2. Response to the 2014 Article IV Consultation Key Recommendations Exchange rate: greater exchange rate flexibility No progress. The CBOS adjusted the official exchange rate by only 2 percent in July 2015 while the gap with the parallel market rate widened to 122 percent in mid-June 2016. International reserves declined. Fiscal policy: fiscal consolidation through revenue mobilization and restrain of current spending, including a gradual phase-out of fuel subsidies Limited progress. While current spending was contained, the drop in oil revenues and slow progress in increasing non-oil revenues led to a widening deficit. Monetary policy: tighter monetary policy Limited progress. Inflation declined from 25.7 percent at end-2014 to 14.3 percent in June 2016, partly on account of lower food prices. At the same time, reserve money growth was higher than expected due to central bank financing of the government and agriculture. Structural policy: improve the business climate and invest in human and physical capital Limited progress. In the absence of relevant reforms, Sudan’s ranking in the 2016 World Bank Doing Business Survey dropped one position to 159th among 189 countries. Low domestic revenues constrained social spending and public investment.