supporting broad-based growth. In particular, the emphasis was on: Discussions focused on policies and reforms to restore macroeconomic stability and Fiscal consolidation—through revenue mobilization and retrenchment of current spending, including a gradual phase-out of fuel subsidies—should continue, accompanied by increased public investment and social spending. Tightening monetary policy and further lowering central bank financing of the government to help further lower inflation. Greater flexibility of the official exchange rate to reduce the parallel market rate premium, improve the availability of foreign exchange, enhance competitiveness, and help build reserves. Strengthening bank supervision to enhance banking penetration and improve banks’ competitiveness and resilience. Improving the business climate to bolster private sector-led growth. Page 14 Pursuing Fiscal Consolidation The authorities’ fiscal consolidation plan is advancing but continued efforts are needed to achieve the goal. The non-oil primary deficit (NOPD) is targeted to decline by 1.4 percentage points of GDP to 1.5 percent of GDP in 2014. This will help limit the overall fiscal deficit to 1 percent of GDP, down from 2.3 percent of GDP in 2013. As a result, central bank financing of the fiscal deficit is expected to drop to 0.4 percent of GDP in 2014, from 0.7 percent of GDP last year (Tables 4, 5, and 6). These objectives are supported by:  Enhanced revenue mobilization. Under their economic program, the authorities aim at raising total revenue to 10.9 percent of GDP in 2014 (against 9.2 percent of GDP the previous year) reflecting the full-year effect of the reform measures taken in September 2013, including substantial increases in domestic fuel prices; these are estimated to yield additional revenue of about 1.2 percent of GDP. The authorities also plan additional measures, although their impact will be felt in 2015 and beyond, to reduce tax exemptions, reform the taxation of gold-related activities, and improve tax administration. In this context, a tax and customs reform committee established in March began reviewing tax exemptions and the application of the VAT, and, more broadly, to improve tax policies and practices. Recommendations are expected to be reflected in the 2015 budget;  Streamlined expenditure. Current spending is projected to be limited to 11 percent of GDP, mainly by containing the wage bill and subsidy increases, while public investment and social spending are each expected to increase by 0.3 percentage points of GDP to mitigate the negative impact of ongoing subsidy reforms on the most vulnerable. Staff underscored the importance of continued streamlining of nonpriority spending and containing the wage bill to curb inflation. Rationalizing fuel subsidies remains key to achieving medium-term fiscal sustainability, along with strengthening social safety nets (Box 2). In the first half of 2014, fuel subsidies amounted to 1 percent of GDP due to an unusually warm weather that led to increased fuel consumption, and are expected to reach close to 2 percent of GDP by end-year. In March 2014, Fund technical assistance recommended further steps to reduce fuel subsidies, including the adoption of a flexible fuel pricing mechanism, while improving social safety nets with better targeting of social assistance to the most vulnerable, and systematic monitoring and evaluation of the social safety net system. Page 15 Box 2. Fuel Subsidies Reform Sudan can no longer afford to maintain large fuel subsidies. Before the secession of South Sudan, fiscal revenues from the oil sector financed direct and indirect subsidies to fuel prices. The secession resulted in the loss of about 60 percent of those revenues. Rising international oil prices has also put upward pressure on subsidies. Fuel subsidies in Sudan are costly, regressive, and inefficient. Direct subsidies amounted to about 2 percent of GDP in 2013, despite a 162 percent average-weighted increase in the prices of fuel since June 2012. (Box 2 Figure 1) The total fiscal cost is more than twice as high when tax exemptions and special tax rates for fuel products are included. The poorest quintile of the population received only 3 percent of the total subsidy in 2011 (Box 2 Figure 2). Subsidies provide an inefficient social protection and crowd out high-priority public expenditure. Also, relatively low fuel prices in Sudan could encourage smuggling of fuel to neighboring countries and promote overconsumption of energy (Box 2 Figure 3). The authorities have used part of the fiscal space created by reduced subsidies to bolster social safety nets (SSNs). They reinforced the Social Initiative Program, including the Cash Transfer Program (CTP), health insurance for the poorest, microfinance, rural women’s empowerment program, and others (Box 2 Table). Considering the bottom three income quintiles in Sudan received only 26 percent of total fuel subsidies in 2011 or 0.3 percent of GDP, cash compensation for the income loss of poor population could be achieved at a cost of less than 1 percent of GDP a year. Removing fuel subsidies is a part of a broad reform strategy. The authorities plan to gradually phase out fuel subsidies by 2019, including by adopting a flexible pricing mechanism. This should be accompanied by a communication campaign that highlights the cost and inequity of current subsidies. The authorities should also review the current SSN programs and develop, with assistance from the World Bank and other donors, a comprehensive medium- to long-term social protection strategy. Page 16 Looking ahead, continued fiscal consolidation is vital to securing macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability . Accordingly, staff recommended a zero primary fiscal balance in 2015, about the same level as in 2014, but rising to a primary fiscal surplus of about 1 percent of GDP by 2019 to put the ratio of the domestic public debt to GDP on a declining path (Table 7). This will require reducing the non-oil primary deficit by mobilizing more revenue while ensuring the fairness of the tax system and shifting government expenditure towards social and investment spending. Strengthening public financial management is necessary to strengthen budget planning, execution, and monitoring. Reforms will need to be centered on the development of a medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) to enhance macroeconomic management and facilitate the implementation of poverty reduction policies. Other key reforms include implementing the Treasury Single Account and effective budgetary controls, linked to a credible cash plan, to prevent arrears, and improving the public accounting system. These should be supplemented by improving within- year budget reporting and transparency, including by publishing quarterly revenue and spending data. The authorities would benefit from continued Fund technical assistance. This will help the authorities improve gold taxation, streamline tax incentives, and enhance the efficiency of the tax system over the medium term. Technical assistance will also continue bolstering public financial management, including by helping complete the banking infrastructure that will support the transfer of funds to the Treasury Single Account and prepare an MTFF. Authorities’ Views The authorities agreed that fiscal consolidation is critical for restoring macroeconomic stability. They reiterated their commitment to their fiscal program for 2014 and to continued fiscal consolidation over the medium term. The authorities expect that the ongoing tax and customs reforms will help mobilize additional revenue, and confirmed their intention to phase out fuel subsidies over the next five years. At the same time, the authorities committed to strengthening social safety nets to protect the most vulnerable segments of the population to avoid the recurrence of the social discontent and violence that followed the September 2013 fuel price increase. They will continue to enhance their PFM reforms, including the MTFF. The authorities welcomed continued Fund technical assistance. Looking ahead, the authorities agreed in principle to continued fiscal consolidation in 2015, as recommended by staff, but they were not yet ready to discuss a full- fledged budget and supporting measures with the staff. Such a discussion will take place during the forthcoming mission for the third review under the SMP. Improving Monetary Policy Credibility Monetary policy should be geared to reducing inflation. Despite improvement in the government’s fiscal position, unsterilized gold purchases by the central bank led to faster reserve money growth than targeted by mid-2014. To help reduce inflation, the central bank should mop up the large excess reserves, reduce unsterilized gold purchases, and refrain from using the parallel Page 17 exchange rate for these purchases. Staff encouraged the central bank to continue using reserve money as nominal anchor—instead of the official exchange rate—given that most private sector foreign exchange transactions are conducted at the parallel market rate. Bringing inflation under control will require greater de facto central bank independence. The monetary policy framework has been hampered by fiscal dominance since the secession of South Sudan. The fiscal consolidation path initiated this year has led to an improvement in fiscal performance and a corresponding reduction in central bank financing, which has reduced reserve money growth. In order to enhance monetary policy credibility, staff encouraged the authorities to enhance the operational independence of the central bank and to mandate it to maintain price stability. In this regard, the central bank should continue to gradually reduce its monetization of the budget deficit, and cease quasi-fiscal operations, such as the provision of foreign exchange at the official rate to the government for fuel and wheat imports. Staff also encouraged the central bank to develop a communication strategy to improve transparency and help anchor inflation expectations. The institutional framework of monetary policy management should be strengthened. Enhanced coordination between the central bank and the ministry of finance would improve liquidity forecasts and management. The recently established interbank money market, once fully operational, will improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and banks’ liquidity management and may help dampen inflationary pressures in the future; nevertheless, its success will first hinge on the central bank ability to reduce excess reserves in the system. To address excess liquidity, a 20 percent cap on banks’ holdings of government and central bank securities should be relaxed. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed that tightening monetary policy should help reduce inflation. They are committed to limiting central bank financing of the budget to the level agreed under the program, reducing unsterilized gold purchases by the central bank to contain reserve money growth, and continue using reserve money as the nominal anchor. The authorities are considering relaxing the cap on banks’ holdings of government and central bank securities, but are concerned that such a measure may crowd out private sector credit. They noted that the provision of foreign exchange at the official rate for fuel and wheat imports was temporary and is aimed at avoiding social discontent. They requested Fund technical assistance on improving foreign exchange management. The cost of quasi-fiscal activities, including the purchase of gold at the parallel market exchange rate and the sale of foreign exchange at the official market rate to finance fuel and wheat imports, amounted to 0.7 percent of GDP during the first half of 2014. To promote interbank activities and reduce banks’ excess reserves, the authorities recently established a “liquidity management fund” to encourage interbank activities. Banks are required to contribute a total of SDG 750 million in proportion to the size of their deposits, of which 60 percent is in the form of government securities and the remainder in cash. Banks can borrow overnight from this fund with a 0.1 percent fee, to cover liquidity shortages. Page 18 Enhancing Exchange Rate Flexibility Sudan faces large and unsustainable external imbalances. Staff’s external stability assessment points to significant overvaluation of the currency and problems with external competitiveness (Annex 1). This conclusion is also supported by the wide gap between the official and parallel market exchange rates, which was 65 percent in the third quarter of 2014, before narrowing to 47 percent in mid-November. Despite two step devaluations in 2012 and 2013, high inflation has fully eroded the initial real depreciation of the exchange rate. Greater exchange rate flexibility is essential to reducing external imbalances, enhancing competitiveness, and building up international reserves. Given the shortage of foreign exchange on the official market, the parallel market has nearly completely replaced the official market as a source of foreign exchange for private transactions. Staff urged the authorities to rapidly adjust the official exchange rate in order to reduce the overvaluation of the currency. Closing the gap would remove an implicit tax on exports, rationalize imports, and reduce quasi-fiscal costs. Staff stressed that with continued fiscal consolidation and tight monetary policy stance, and given that most of the economy already operates at the parallel market rate, devaluation of the official rate is unlikely to result in higher inflation. Authorities’ views The authorities reiterated their commitment to gradually close the gap between the official and parallel market rates, but are reluctant to provide a specific timeframe. They expressed readiness to make gradual monthly adjustments to the official exchange rate. This, together with an expected appreciation of the parallel exchange rate driven by robust agriculture exports and increased foreign exchange receipts from oil transit fees later in the year, would help close the gap and reduce quasi-fiscal losses. In their view, the official rate is a strong determinant of the parallel market rate, and they fear that any rapid change in the former would only impact the latter without closing the gap, as had happened in the past two years. Financial sector policies The financial system in Sudan is dominated by the banking sector and operates under Islamic principles. At end-2013, there were 37 banks, including two established during the year, which accounted for 90 percent of the financial sector assets. Monetization and financial intermediation are low, with broad money at only 21 percent of GDP and credit to the private sector at a low 10.4 percent of GDP at end-2013. Inter-bank transactions are limited, although there is an informal inter-bank market, Qard Al Hassan, whereby banks lend to each other without charging any fees. Page 19 Text Figure 5. Broad Money, end-2013 (In Percent of GDP) Text Figure 6. Domestic Credit to Private Sector, end-2013 (In Percent of GDP) Banking sector soundness indicators remain positive. The capital adequacy ratio exceeded the required 12 percent at end-2013 (Table 8). Although there were modest declines recently in the ratios of liquid assets to total assets and liquid assets to short-term liabilities, banks’ liquidity remains comfortable. The ratio of NPL declined from 7.6 percent at end-2011 to 4.0 percent in September 2014. The CBOS has taken several measures to improve the performance of the banking sector. It started implementing best practices in banking supervision, which included the CBOS divesting from some public banks, and improving and upgrading the regulatory and institutional framework. The authorities have also taken a number of actions to broaden access to banking services, which included simplifying the procedures for opening bank accounts, encouraging banks to open new branches and setting up a credit registry system. As a result, since end-2013, 32 new bank branches were opened, and 37 new ATMs and about 200 cash points located in supermarkets were installed. In addition, the CBOS is preparing to introduce mobile banking. The authorities are continuing to upgrade the AML-CFT framework. Following the passage of the amended AML-CFT law in June, the CBOS established, with IMF technical assistance, an upgraded AML/CFT circular to enhance preventive measures requirements for the financial institutions under its supervision. A robust supervisory framework would enhance the effectiveness of the AML/CFT regime and further actions are required to exit the Financial Action Task Force’s monitoring process. Stronger bank supervision and privatization are needed to improve banks’ competitiveness and resilience. Key recommendations include: (i) continuing the implementing of best practices in bank supervision, inspection, and enforcement; (ii) the CBOS to divest its remaining interests in commercial banks; and (iii) the completion of the restructuring plan for Omdurman bank is also important. Authorities’ views The authorities generally agreed with staff’s assessment of the financial sector. They acknowledged that further efforts are needed to bring bank supervision in line with best practices. They welcomed technical assistance from the Fund to this end. The authorities also pointed to Page 20 progress on the banking sector review, which is being finalized. They intend to gradually privatize their share-capital in banks and have requested Fund assistance in this effort.