Performance in the second quarter of 2014 was broadly satisfactory: all June quantitative targets under the SMP were met, except for the indicative target on reserve money (LOI, Attachment I, Table 1). Central bank NDA was contained and NIR was on target. Tax revenue, the non-oil primary deficit, and social spending over-performed, and, as a result, domestic and central bank financing of the central government were well below targets. However, reserve money growth at 8 percent in the year-to-June exceeded the 6.2 percent target, owing to unsterilized gold purchases by the central bank. The authorities have also adjusted the official rate by 3 percent starting in September to narrow the gap between the official, and the parallel market exchange rates. They intend to gradually continue this adjustment process. End-December targets were adjusted. The quantitative benchmarks and targets, except for the domestic financing of the central government and net international reserves have been revised taking into account improved revenue collection and contained spending. The end- December ceiling on net domestic financing of the central government and the floor on net international reserves have been revised taking into account projected lower external financing. The Page 24 completion of the structural benchmark on the restructuring of Omdurman Bank is now envisaged in December, instead of November. Efforts to keep the structural reform agenda on track are continuing, with delays in some areas but early achievements in others (LOI, Attachment I, Table 2). Early achievements include the extension of the GFSM 2001 classification to all states and issuance, in January, of a directive to close all central government accounts in commercial banks. The tax audit manual has been distributed to the relevant departments and training started at end September, and the establishment of appropriate IT systems is also under way. Further, an amended AML/CFT law was enacted. However, there were some delays. The committee, set up in March to review tax exemptions and enhance collections, finalized its report in October instead of June, and work is still ongoing to strengthen the penalty procedures for noncompliant taxpayers. Similarly, the restructuring plan for Omdurman Bank is still under preparation and should be finalized before year-end. The authorities agreed that the current SMP, which ends in December 2014, has provided them with a framework to address their economic challenges. However, they have yet to decide on proceeding with a new SMP for 2015, and plan to discuss the way forward with the staff during the third review of the SMP.