The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) confirms that Sudan continues to be in debt distress. Both public and external debt ratios remain high, and most of the external debt is in arrears. Debt ratios would be higher with GDP valued at the parallel exchange rate (Table 3). Consistent with the results of past DSAs, Sudan’s external debt is assessed to be unsustainable. All external debt indicators breach their indicative thresholds under the baseline scenario, and many of them stay above the thresholds throughout the time horizon of the analysis. It is therefore critical for Sudan to follow sound economic policies, including a prudent borrowing strategy that minimizes non-concessional borrowing and relies instead on grants and concessional financing, and to continue garnering support for debt relief. Sudan is eligible for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, but has yet to meet all the requirements. Debt relief hinges on normalizing relations with international creditors, including the Fund (Box 4). The authorities should continue to reach out to creditors to garner support for debt relief and avoid selective servicing of bilateral debt. Staff advised the authorities to extend, together with South Sudan, the “zero option” to avoid a complex and protracted apportionment of external debt. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue to strengthen cooperation with the Fund on policies and payments. Sudan’s arrears to the Fund declined to about SDR 969 million at end-June 2016 following payments of $10 million each in 2014 and 2015, and $5 million in the first half of 2016. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue to make payments that are at least sufficient to cover Sudan’s obligations falling due, make payments regularly, and increase them in line with improvement in Sudan’s payment capacity. The so-called “zero option” is a 2012 agreement between Sudan and South Sudan whereby Sudan retained all the external liabilities after the secession, provided that the international community gave firm commitments to deliver debt relief within two years. In September 2014, both countries agreed to extend the agreement until October 2016, after which, in the absence of debt relief, Sudan could seek to apportion external debt between the two countries. Page 24 Authorities’ views The authorities reiterated their commitment to reaching out to international creditors, making quarterly payments to the Fund totaling $10 million per year, and cooperating with the Fund on policies. They were disappointed by lack of progress toward debt relief and noted that the absence of resolution complicated the extension of the “zero option,” which they consider a sovereign decision. Box 4. Path to Debt Relief Sudan is eligible for debt relief under the HIPC initiative, but has not yet met all the qualifications. Importantly, it still needs to obtain assurances from bilateral official and commercial creditors that they are willing to consider providing debt relief. As of now, Sudan meets the following conditions for the HIPC initiative: Sudan faces an unsustainable debt burden that cannot be addressed through traditional debt relief mechanisms; and It has developed an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP) document. Sudan’s I-PRSP was assessed by the staffs of the IMF and the World Bank and was discussed by both Boards in September 2013. Sudan is currently developing a full PRSP. To reach the Decision Point, Sudan would still need to undertake the following: Obtain assurances of support for HIPC debt relief from a large majority of creditors representing at least 70 percent of HIPC-eligible debt; Establish with the IMF an adequate track record of strong policy performance in the period leading up to the Decision Point, under an SMP judged by the Executive Board to meet the policy standards associated with upper-credit tranche arrangements; and Clear its arrears with the IMF, and have a fully financed plan and a timetable to clear arrears with the World Bank and the African Development Bank to restore its eligibility to borrow from these sources. The resources required for the IMF's participation in the HIPC Initiative have not yet been identified. As the costs to the IMF for providing debt relief to Sudan were not included in the original costing estimates for the HIPC initiative, additional financing will need to be secured when Sudan is ready to clear its arrears and embark on the HIPC initiative.