The secession of South Sudan had a significant impact on the Sudanese economy. Between 2010 and 2012, annual oil production dropped from 168 million barrels to 38 million barrels, budgetary oil revenues from 11.5 percent of GDP to 1.5 percent of GDP, and oil exports from US$11 billion to US$2 billion. These substantial economic and financial losses affected all sectors of the economy and resulted in slower growth, inflation rising to high double digits, and deteriorating fiscal and current account balances (Table 1). Text Figure 1:. Oil production, 2010-14 (In million barrels) ‐ 2014 proj. To adjust to the new economic situation, in 2011 the authorities developed a three-year emergency plan and implemented some corrective measures in June 2012 and September 2013. The September 2013 measures included increases in domestic petroleum prices by 67–75 percent, unification of multiple official exchange rates and a step devaluation of the unified rate by about 22 percent. The adoption of these measures was facilitated by improved relations with South Sudan and the resumption of oil production in mid-2013. However, there was civil unrest, including the loss of life, in reaction to some of the reforms. Text Figure 2. Budgetary oil revenue (In percent of GDP) 2014 proj. (In billions of US$) Text Figure 3. Oil Exports, 2010-14 Despite progress in implementing adjustment policies, economic performance through end-2013 was mixed. Growth started to recover in 2013 but remained sluggish, weighed by poor harvests and lower gold production. Inflation accelerated to 42 percent by end-December, reflecting the September exchange rate devaluation and increase in fuel prices. Fiscal performance was better than expected due to improved tax and custom collections. Reserve money growth decelerated to 20 percent at end-2013 (from 47 percent a year earlier), largely reflecting lower gold purchases by the central bank. The gap between the official and parallel market exchange rates dropped to about 47 percent. Gross international reserves declined to US$1.6 billion—about 1.9 months of imports (Table 2). 2014 proj. See IMF Country Report No. 12/298 for a summary of the 2012 measures. Page 10 Macroeconomic performance has been improving gradually in 2014. Economic activity has been recovering owing to a rebound in gold extraction and growing manufacturing, trade, and services sectors. On the fiscal front, the budget deficit dropped to 0.4 percent of GDP (against 1.2 percent the previous year) by mid-year, curbing government recourse to central bank financing. The current account deficit is also estimated to have narrowed to 2.7 percent of GDP in H1 2014 from 4.6 percent of GDP in H1 2013, following last September’s exchange rate devaluation and the fiscal consolidation efforts. Inflation, which peaked at 47 percent in July, declined to 39 percent in September thanks to a good agriculture harvest and the drop in the parallel market exchange rate. The parallel market exchange rate premium has declined considerably (by 18 percentage points since August 2014). This decline has been principally due to an appreciation of the parallel market rate following increased agricultural exports and increased supply of foreign currency on the parallel market, but also a devaluation by 3 percent of the official exchange rate; it stood at 47 percent in early November. Text Figure 4. Exchange Rates, 2010-14 Jul-13 Feb-14 Sep-14 Jan-10 Aug-10 Mar-11 Oct-11 May-12 Dec-12 Gap btw. CBOS and parallel rate (in %, RHS) Commercial Banks Buying Rate The outlook for the remainder of 2014 remains favorable. Non-oil growth is projected at 2.9 percent as gold extraction is expected to be strong and agriculture to rebound owing to favorable weather. Inflation is expected to decelerate to 29 percent by year-end as the one-off effects of the September 2013 fuel price increases dissipate, monetary policy is tightened, and food price declines owing to the expected good harvest. The fiscal deficit is projected to narrow to 1.0 percent of GDP (0.2 percentage points better than previously projected) on account of improved revenue collection and tight expenditure control (Table 3). The current account deficit is expected to narrow to 6.5 percent of GDP on account of continued fiscal consolidation. CBOS Buying Rate Parallel rate The outlook for 2015 has improved . An anticipated good agriculture harvest and continued robust gold production are expected to strengthen economic growth to about 3½ percent. Continued tight monetary policy should help reduce inflation to 21 percent. The overall In the second quarter of 2014, a series of exogenous events—the uncertainty associated with the conflict in South Sudan, the breakdown of correspondent banking relations with international banks, and floods that reduced food supply—and the injection of excess liquidity by the central bank through unsterilized gold purchases depreciated the parallel exchange rate and increased inflation. Sudan has two official exchange rates. First, there is the “indicative” rate set by the central bank. Second, there is an “official” rate set by the central bank within ± 4 percent of the indicative exchange rate and applied to government transactions. The difference between the “official” and the “indicative” rates is now less than 2 percent. Commercial banks and foreign exchange bureaus are required to set their rates ± 4 percent of the indicative exchange rate. In practice, commercial banks trade at the upper part of that band. Page 11 fiscal deficit is projected to remain broadly unchanged relative to 2014, thus limiting government recourse to central bank financing. This, together with greater exchange rate flexibility, should help contain the current account deficit to about 6 percent. Implementation of the authorities’ adjustment program should help restore macroeconomic stability and improve growth prospects over the medium term. Driven by agriculture, minerals, and oil, growth is expected to accelerate gradually to about 4.7 percent in 2019. With prudent macroeconomic policies, inflation is expected to fall to single digits by 2017. The external current account deficit is expected to gradually narrow toward sustainable levels (Table 1). However, the external debt overhang and the large arrears, along with U.S. sanctions, will continue to hinder access to external financing and weigh on growth prospects. Risks are largely tilted to the downside. Downside risks include the fragile domestic security and political situation, regional tensions, and global risks (see Risk Assessment Matrix). Public discontent with the costs of the economic reforms in the wake of the 2015 presidential elections and a setback to the national dialogue could complicate the domestic political situation and weaken the reform effort. The breakdown of correspondent bank relations, if sustained, could weigh on trade, investment, and growth prospects. On the upside, a lasting peace agreement in South Sudan would help the recovery of oil production there and result in higher transit revenues for Sudan. In the event of a crisis in Sudan, spillovers would be mainly in the surrounding region. Sudan’s integration with the region and the global economy has been stunted by sanctions and its unsustainable debt position. Spillovers from a possible deterioration of economic conditions in Sudan would mostly affect the immediate neighbors, especially South Sudan, which relies heavily on oil pipelines and food supply routes in Sudan. Page 12 Sudan: Risk Assessment Matrix * Potential Deviations from Baseline Relative Likelihood Impact if Realized Policy Responses Source of Risks Global 1. Protracted period of slower growth in advanced and emerging economies High Heightened risk of fragmentation/state failure in the Middle East, leading to a sharp rise in oil prices, with negative spillovers to the global economy Medium 3. Sustained decline in energy prices, triggered by deceleration of global demand and coming-on-stream of excess capacity (medium- term) Medium Regional 4. Oil production in South Sudan declines owing to civil conflicts High 5. Heightened tensions between Sudan and South Sudan Low to Medium Medium Deteriorating external balance. Rising pressure on the exchange rate and reserves. Lower growth. Medium Lower growth Rising unemployment and inflation Widening fiscal imbalances Medium Lower export receipts but also lower import bill. Rising imbalances. Resource sectors’ growth slows Rising unemployment. High Rising imbalances and inflation Growing parallel foreign exchange market. Loss of reform momentum. Low to Medium Rising military spending. Higher budget deficit Higher risk of monetization of the budget deficit. Rising inflation Greater exchange rate flexibility would help maintain external stability and prevent reserve losses. Declining revenue and lack of fiscal space would likely require pro-cyclical spending cuts. Weakening commodity prices and the widening output gap would facilitate faster disinflation.  Greater exchange rate flexibility will help reduce external pressures. Strengthen social safety nets. Meet fiscal imbalances with spending rationalization.  Greater exchange rate flexibility will help reduce external pressures. Improve competitiveness and social safety nets. Strengthen non-resource revenue mobilization.  Greater exchange rate flexibility will help reduce external pressures. Tight monetary policy will control inflation. Meet fiscal imbalances with spending rationalization and revenue effort.  Fiscal slippages will need to be addressed through higher revenue or spending cuts in nonpriority areas. Monetary tightening to keep inflation in check.  Domestic 6. Heightened social tensions and fiscal slippages owing to 2015 Presidential elections Medium to High Medium to High Rising imbalances and inflation. Growing parallel foreign exchange market. Fiscal slippages linked to election spending should be offset by equivalent cuts in nonpriority spending. Tight monetary policy will control inflation. Strengthen social safety nets.  High 7. Sustained breakdown in correspondent bank relations High Lower supply and higher cost of Drop in exports and imports.  imports fuelling inflation.  Foreign exchange shortage  Outreach efforts to remove sanctions.  * The Risk Assessment Matrix (RAM) shows events that could materially alter the baseline path (the scenario most likely to materialize in the view of IMF staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective assessment of the risks surrounding the baseline (“low” is meant to indicate a probability below 10 percent, “medium” a probability between 10 and 30 percent, and “high” a probability between 30 and 50 percent). The RAM reflects staff views on the source of risks and overall level of concern as of the time of discussions with the authorities. Non-mutually exclusive risks may interact and materialize jointly. Page 13