Improving the business environment will be key to support the private sector and strengthen economic growth. Sudan is at the bottom twentieth percentile of the 2016 Doing Business rankings. Weaknesses include access to credit, international trade, and investor protection. Addressing these issues by streamlining regulations and liberalizing trade and foreign exchange markets would, together with macroeconomic stability, encourage greater private sector investment and job creation. Furthermore, better public infrastructure (including water and electricity provision) and improved human capital would support private sector development, strengthen growth, and help address the persistently high unemployment rate—at 22 percent in 2015, with higher rates for the youth and women (see Annex II on challenges of inclusive growth and policy options). Staff welcomed plans to launch the preparation of the 2016–20 Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). Social safety nets should be expanded and their targeting improved, especially the cash transfer program which currently supports about 500,000 households (20 percent of the poor). Furthermore, strengthening other social programs, including education and health services, is essential to improve social outcomes, expand opportunities, and raise productivity. Authorities’ views The authorities regretted that sanctions and the withdrawal of CBRs raised formidable obstacles for the business environment and poverty reduction efforts . Despite these obstacles, the authorities’ evaluation of the interim poverty reduction strategy (2012–14), completed recently with World Bank assistance, confirmed that pro-poor spending had increased. The authorities have also launched: Initiatives to improve the business environment, including the automation of tax collection to reduce transactions costs and information campaigns to seek inputs from investors on reforms to encourage investment. The authorities also established a high-level committee to review land Page 23 laws and regulations to facilitate investment. They are encouraging the expansion of bank branches and the development of microfinance, and are strengthening the credit registry of the CBOS to improve access to credit. The preparation of a full PRS incorporating specific policy measures, through a consultative process involving domestic stakeholders and external partners. A household survey, to be completed this year, will document Sudan’s poverty profile. In the meantime, the authorities expanded education and health services to the poor, and plan to expand the coverage of the cash transfer program to 600,000 households in 2017, while strengthening its management and targeting, with World Bank support.