Monetary policy should be tightened and instruments to manage liquidity be further developed. Monetary policy is burdened by the government’s large financing needs and by QFAs that lead to sizable liquidity injections. These, and a shortage of liquidity management instruments, undermine the central bank’s ability to control reserve money. In response, the CBOS should continue to adhere to existing limits on advances to government, curtail QFAs by limiting gold purchases to levels consistent with reserve money and international reserve targets, discontinue financing of agriculture, and develop Sharia-compliant securities. To enhance transparency, the CBOS should report all lending to government (including payments of letters of guarantees and wheat subsidies) and QFAs as credit to government. Building on progress to date, the CBOS should continue to upgrade its capacity to supervise and mitigate financial stability risks. Priority areas include: (i) modernizing the framework to deal with weak banks, including by limiting access to “lender of last resort” support to solvent banks, expanding the range of resolution regimes, and empowering CBOS to initiate resolution processes; (ii) divesting CBOS’ equity in commercial banks; (iii) strengthening CBOS’ capacity for financial stability analysis; and (iv) continuing to enforce limits on net foreign exchange positions to mitigate risks stemming from foreign currency mismatches. Moreover, the CBOS should continue to strengthen risk-based AML/CFT supervision. Page 22 Authorities’ views The authorities remain committed to their monetary targets . Reserve money growth slowed in the first quarter of 2016 on account of lower QFAs. Moreover, the monetary policy framework was strengthened by the launch of the Liquidity Management Fund in 2014, which reduced CBOS liquidity support for commercial banks. The CBOS will continue to buy gold as an important source of foreign exchange and to reduce smuggling. The authorities noted that despite the strains caused by sanctions and the withdrawal of CBRs, the health of the banking sector has improved —banks are liquid, return on assets is high, and NPL ratios have declined. The banking sector’s net open foreign exchange position is at manageable levels, in line with regulatory limits. The authorities were committed to strengthening the AML/CFT framework, but regretted that sanctions were undermining its effectiveness by encouraging a shift to cash-based and informal transactions.