Debt sustainability analysis Sudan continues to be in debt distress. Both public and external debt ratios remain at high levels (91 percent and 79 percent of GDP, respectively), and most of the external debt is in arrears. In line with the results of past Debt Sustainability Analyses (DSAs), Sudan’s debt is unsustainable. All external debt indicators breach their indicative thresholds under the baseline scenario, and many of those remain above the thresholds throughout the 20-year projection period. It is therefore critical for Sudan to follow sound economic policies, continue garnering support for debt relief, avoid selective debt servicing, and minimize non-concessional borrowing. As of end- June 2014, nonconcessional external borrowing for development projects was limited to US$147 million, with an average grant element of 26 percent. There was no additional nonconcessional external borrowing between June and September 2013. Staff noted that any new borrowing would eventually need to be treated as part of any comprehensive debt relief workout to restore external debt sustainability. The total budgeted amount for social spending in 2014 more than doubled compared to 2013 to SDG 2 billion (or 0.4 percent of GDP). Zakat is the practice of taxation, prescribed by Islam, imposed upon Muslims based on accumulated wealth and distributed to poor Muslims; the Zakat Fund is not part of the government budget. These loans were provided by bilateral official creditors and Arab multilateral development institutions. Page 22 Prospects for debt relief Debt relief prospects are predicated on normalizing relations with international financial institutions, and establishing a track record of cooperation with the IMF on policies and payments. While Sudan has met some of those requirements (Box 3), further efforts are needed to reach the Decision Point under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative. At this stage, it is not possible to assign a firm timeline for the fulfillment of all the remaining steps, which mainly depend on the result of the bilateral outreach to creditors. Staff advised the authorities to continue to: (i) reach out to all their external creditors, jointly with South Sudan, to secure their participation and support for the debt relief process; and (ii) continue to strengthen cooperation with the Fund on policies and payments, including through the ongoing SMP. Staff welcomed the recent decision by Sudan and South Sudan to extend the “zero option” to October 2016. Box 3. Path to Normalization of Relations and Debt Relief Sudan is eligible for debt relief under the HIPC initiative, but has not yet met all the qualifications. The normalization of relations with external creditors, including the Fund, other multilateral institutions, and bilateral creditors, is a key pillar of the requirements for debt relief, requiring efforts in specific areas for each class of creditor. As of now, Sudan meets the following conditions for the HIPC initiative: Faces an unsustainable debt burden that cannot be addressed through traditional debt relief mechanisms; Has developed an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP) document. Sudan’s I-PRSP was assessed by the staffs of the Fund and the World Bank and was discussed by both Boards in September 2013, and In 2012 Sudan reconciled its external debt as of end-2010 in order to determine its HIPC eligibility. The reconciliation expires at end-2014. A new debt reconciliation exercise will have to be conducted when Sudan nears the Decision Point. To reach the Decision Point, Sudan would still need to undertake the following: Obtain assurances of support for HIPC debt relief from a large majority of creditors representing at least 70 percent of HIPC-eligible debt; Whereas Sudan has already done 14 SMPs with the Fund, it would still need to establish with the IMF a track record of strong policy performance for at least six months in the period leading up to the Decision Point, which could take the form of an SMP judged by the Executive Board to meet the policy standards associated with upper-credit tranche arrangements; and Clear its arrears with the Fund, and have a fully financed plan and a timetable to clear arrears with the World Bank and the African Development Bank in order to restore its eligibility to borrow from these sources. The resources required for the IMF's participation in the HIPC Initiative have not yet been identified. As the costs to the Fund for providing debt relief to Sudan were not included in the original costing estimates for the HIPC initiative, additional financing will need to be secured when Sudan is ready to clear its arrears and embark on the HIPC initiative. Page 23 Sudan’s arrears to the Fund totaled SDR 977.7 million at end-October 2014. Sudan made payments totaling about US$7.5million (SDR 4.9 million) thus far this year as agreed under the SMP. They intend to make the remaining quarterly payment to reach a total of at least $10 million in 2014. Staff encourages the authorities to make payments to the Fund that are at least sufficient to cover obligations falling due, make payments regularly, and to significantly increase them as Sudan’s payment capacity improves. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff’s assessment and advice. They agreed with the results of the DSA. They expressed dissatisfaction with the slow pace of the debt relief process, but remained hopeful that the international community will support Sudan for a fast-track debt relief. They underscored that the extension of the “zero option” was a goodwill gesture, and that in the meantime they would step up their outreach efforts to creditors, including through the joint approach. They agreed to minimize non-concessional borrowing as agreed under the SMP and indicated that they will borrow on the best terms possible to invest in priority agriculture, energy, and infrastructure projects. Data are broadly adequate for surveillance and program monitoring, although the