Exchange rate flexibility would support fiscal and monetary policies to reduce external imbalances. Macroeconomic stability will require tight fiscal and monetary policy, but will remain elusive without greater flexibility of the official exchange rate, with a view to significantly reducing the parallel market premium. Moreover, widening (or eliminating) the band for the commercial bank rate would help liberalize the foreign exchange market for banks. These reforms will help strengthen competitiveness, increase FDI, and promote inclusive growth. Efficient operation of a more flexible foreign exchange regime would require developing an interbank market and strengthening reserve management, including by establishing rule- and market-based interventions. Staff presented an illustrative scenario with adjustment of the official exchange rate accompanied by a tighter policy mix. In this scenario, growth would likely be slower and inflation higher in the short term due to the impact of devaluation on imports, prices, and customs receipts. However, macroeconomic performance would improve over the medium term as the elimination of foreign exchange distortions would improve competitiveness and encourage FDI. In staff’s view, the inflationary effects of official exchange rate devaluation would be manageable, as most prices already reflect the parallel rate. The revenue gains from the devaluation may be significant, as imports would be valued at a higher exchange rate, increasing the import tax base. Measures to mitigate the impact of exchange rate adjustments on the poor are critical for the success of reforms . Staff proposed maintaining temporarily the subsidy regime for fuel and wheat to allay concerns over the social impact of greater exchange rate flexibility. The higher subsidy costs could be covered by the revenue gains from the devaluation. The CBOS should use all available instruments to forestall second-round effects of exchange rate adjustment on inflation. Authorities’ views The authorities shared staff’s assessment regarding the need to reduce external imbalances, but prefer a more incremental approach than proposed by staff’s illustrative scenario . They considered large exchange rate adjustments destabilizing—both economically and Page 20 socially—and premature without sufficient foreign exchange reserves to prevent overshooting. In their view, a flexible exchange regime is a long-term objective. They expressed concern about the inflationary impact of exchange rate adjustment, its effectiveness given price-inelastic commodity- based exports, and the risk of the social unrest that followed the September 2013 devaluation. Their reform strategy, as per the Five-Year Program, is to gradually allow the private sector to use the parallel foreign exchange market to import key commodities, and to gradually adjust the official rate and diversify exports in the medium term. In the meantime, the authorities anticipated continued foreign aid from Gulf countries to cover financing gaps.