Low commodity export prices, economic sanctions, and lack of policy buffers, will continue to jeopardize macroeconomic stability and constrain growth, requiring continued external assistance. Staff expects growth to slow to about 3 percent in 2016 as crop production returns to normal levels after good harvests last year. Inflation could increase owing to the lagged effects of the parallel exchange rate depreciation and wearing out of the positive impact of good harvests on food prices. Despite a recovery of gold exports along with the improved outlook for world prices, the current account deficit is expected to remain high and international reserves low in the absence of progress towards greater exchange rate flexibility and sufficient fiscal and monetary policy adjustment, even if the external financial support anticipated by the authorities materializes. In 2017 and beyond, staff expects growth to remain at 3.5 percent and largely reliant on agriculture—with attendant spillovers to other sectors—as low domestic savings, sanctions, and limited access to external financing weigh on investment. The overvalued official exchange rate and foreign exchange restrictions will also weigh on trade and economic activity despite anticipated foreign direct investment (FDI) in agriculture. Inflation will likely remain elevated as insufficient fiscal consolidation continues to weaken monetary control. The external position will remain weak, with a financing gap of $1.3–1.9 billion per year that will need to be covered by foreign aid, allowing international reserves to hover around $1 billion (1 month of imports). The outlook is subject to significant downside risks . The large and persistent external financing gaps over the medium term, if unfilled, could lead to disorderly adjustment, depressed economic activity, and rapid inflation. Mitigating these risks while maintaining the fixed exchange rate regime will require significant fiscal and monetary adjustment. Other downside risks include lower oil receipts from South Sudan; reduced FDI and remittances from the Gulf; and continued withdrawal of CBRs. Progress with the national dialogue and the roadmap for peace is an upside risk.