Sudan is a fragile state weighed by a heavy debt burden and an unsettled domestic and regional political environment. These problems, together with limited revenue mobilization, have been constraining Sudan’s growth prospects and poverty reduction efforts. The economic and financial situation worsened following the secession of South Sudan in 2011. The domestic conflicts in Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile, and Darfur states and the new conflict in South Sudan threaten domestic and regional stability. U.S. sanctions, which were recently extended for an additional year, are also creating uncertainties. Sudan’s external debt, most of which dates back to the 1970s, is unsustainable. External debt, at the end of 2013, was estimated at US$45 billion (78 percent of GDP)—most of which, including its debt to the IMF, is in arrears. The unresolved arrears, combined with U.S. sanctions since 1997, rule out access to most sources of external financing, including concessional borrowing. Sudan has had 14 Staff Monitored Programs (SMPs) since 1997. These programs provided the authorities with comprehensive frameworks to design and implement policies and reforms to address their economic challenges. They helped the authorities stabilize the economy through tight fiscal and monetary policies and supported the modernization of tools to manage the economy, including through reforms in monetary policy operations, tax policy, and public financial management. These programs also facilitated the provision and sequencing of technical assistance from the Fund and others. Sudan’s economy has yet to recover from the shock of South Sudan’s secession three years ago. Sudan has been heavily dependent on oil since the late 1990s: the oil sector provided sizeable budget revenues and a major share of the country’s foreign exchange receipts. The secession of South Sudan in 2011 took away three-quarters of oil production, half of fiscal revenues, and two-thirds of the international payments capacity. As a result, the economic situation deteriorated significantly, resulting in the buildup of large economic imbalances. A first attempt was made in June 2012 to address the economic imbalances through a package of corrective measures. Nevertheless, the outcome for 2012 was mixed while the reform process was interrupted in 2013 with the adoption of a budget void of any significant reform measures in support of the needed fiscal consolidation. In September 2013, the authorities embarked on a stabilization program the success of which hinges significantly on improvements in the domestic and regional political Sudan has been in arrears to the Fund since July 1984. See the 2012 Article IV consultation (IMF Country Report No. 12/299; September 7, 2012) for an elaborate discussion. Page 7 environments. The program’s objective is to restore macroeconomic stability, strengthen social safety nets, and lay the groundwork for sustainable growth. In parallel, the authorities expect that the national dialogue in Sudan initiated earlier this year and the return of peace in South Sudan will ensure the continuation of oil flows. The authorities consider their stabilization program supported by the SMP a basis for a track record towards debt relief from international creditors, which is crucial for sustaining growth and the adjustment process. The recent breakdown in relations with correspondent banks has complicated international financial and trade transactions (Box 1). During the second quarter of 2014, most foreign banks stopped transacting with Sudanese banks following the US$8.9 billion penalty levied in June 2014 by the U.S. authorities on BNP-Paribas for violating the U.S. sanctions on doing business with Sudan and other countries. As a result, the foreign exchange market tightened and the parallel exchange rate weakened significantly. Box 1. The Recent Breakdown in Correspondent Bank Relations In recent months, Sudanese banks have experienced a breakdown in their correspondent relations with foreign banks . This comes as a result of the prosecution by the U.S. of BNP Paribas in early 2014 for breaking U.S. sanctions against Sudan and other countries. Foreign and local entities based in Sudan are reporting difficulties and delays in processing foreign exchange transfers to and from Sudan. As a result, trade has been adversely affected, and the shortage of foreign exchange in Sudan has worsened . Export receipts are being delayed. Importers are unable to obtain trade financing (e.g., letters of credit) or transfer payments. Embassies, international organizations, and other entities based in Sudan—who are all exempt from sanctions—are affected by foreign correspondent banks’ refusal to process foreign exchange transactions. The June and September payments to the IMF were received with long delays as a result of this situation. If the breakdown in relations with correspondent banks continues, it is likely to have a considerable negative impact on the economy: (i) growth will be affected because exports and imports will decline. The lower imports of foodstuffs, intermediate goods, and raw materials will result in lower domestic consumption and production; (ii) inflation will rise as a result of shrinkage of supplies and higher cost of imports; and (iii) shortage of foreign exchange will contribute to depreciation of the exchange rate on the parallel market, thereby fueling inflation and undermining macroeconomic stability. These adverse developments will impact the poor and the most vulnerable segments of the population, and will most likely increase poverty rates in Sudan. In June 2014, BNP Paribas pleaded guilty to violating U.S. sanctions on doing business with Sudan and other countries and was fined US$8.9 billion by the U.S. authorities. Page 8 The political environment has improved somewhat with progress on the national dialogue. In August 2014, the leaders of the Umma Party and the Sudan Revolutionary Forces (both opposition) signed a declaration in Paris calling for, among other things, an end to the fighting in the two border states and the adoption of democratic and peaceful principles to foster political change. This was followed in early September 2014 by an agreement on the principles of the National Dialogue in Addis Ababa between the Paris Declaration group, representatives of the National Dialogue 7+7 Committee, which comprises seven each representatives from the opposition and the ruling National Congress Party (NCP), and the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP). This agreement was followed by the release of some political prisoners. The armed conflict in South Sudan, which erupted in December 2013, persists. The conflict has affected oil production there and forced many South Sudanese to seek refuge abroad. Sudan has granted unrestricted access to its territory to refugees from South Sudan and has received more than 100,000 of them so far. The UN relief agencies have been assisting the refugees. The authorities have started implementing an outreach strategy with South Sudan under the auspices of the AUHIP to garner support for debt relief. Sudan and South Sudan, together with the African Union (Tripartite Committee), developed an outreach strategy and an action plan to help garner support for debt relief, which was supported by the June African Union summit. In September, members of the Tripartite Committee held a briefing for key external creditors in Khartoum to discuss the need for debt relief, which was followed by a briefing by the Minister of Finance to the diplomatic community on Sudan's economic policy implementation and the need for debt relief to support the implementation of poverty reduction policies. These briefings were followed by meetings with the donor representatives in Washington during the Annual Meetings. Furthermore, the two countries recently agreed to extend the “zero option” to October 2016. The authorities’ policies since the last Article IV consultation have be en broadly in line with Fund recommendations. Notable achievements include improving revenue mobilization, containing expenditure, and unifying the official exchange rates. However, monetary policy management remains weak, including the central bank’s involvement in quasi-fiscal operations, and the business environment still needs to improve. Sudan and South Sudan in September 2012 reached the so-called “zero option” agreement whereby Sudan would retain all the external liabilities after the secession of South Sudan, provided that the international community gave firm commitments to the delivery of debt relief within two years. Absent such a commitment, Sudan’s external debt would be apportioned with South Sudan based on a formula to be determined. Page 9