Improving the business climate is essential for achieving high and sustained growth. Sudan’s business climate, as measured by the 2014 World Bank Doing Business survey, is ranked 149 among 189 countries—in the lowest quartile of all surveyed countries as in previous years. Key weaknesses include difficulties in obtaining licenses, accessing credit, and trading across borders. Addressing these weaknesses, fighting corruption including by mobilizing AML measures, and strengthening the judiciary would help improve the business climate. Increased investment in human and physical capital is needed to help boost growth and make it broad-based . Sudan lags in the areas of human development and public sector capacity, as evidenced by the UNDP’s 2012 Human Development Index (Sudan ranked 171 out of 186 countries) and the World Bank’s 2012 Country and Policy Institutional Assessment (Sudan is classified as a weak performer). Addressing these weaknesses requires improving the prioritization of public expenditure with increased allocations to the education and health sectors. Improving infrastructure—electricity, roads, and railways—and strengthening regional connectivity are also critical for improving productivity and access to markets, and for lowering transportation costs. Unemployment is a persistent problem, especially for women and the youths In the unemployment rate was estimated by the World Bank at 14.8 percent of the labor force (20 percent for women and 24 percent for the youth), with little change since 1991. Labor participation was estimated at about 54 percent (76 percent for men and 32 percent for women). To reduce unemployment, investment in skill-formation activities for the unemployed is important. Providing equal opportunities to women in these activities could significantly boost labor participation and economic growth. Reforms in the agriculture sector, which supports nearly 70 percent of the population, will also help in employment generation (Annex 2). Protecting the Most Vulnerable Improving the efficiency of the social safety net is critical to protecting the most vulnerable. Sudan’s social indicators compare unfavorably with regional comparators. Phasing out fuel subsidies should be accompanied by measures that shield the poorest and help middle-income groups to adjust . The authorities intend to increase the number of beneficiaries of the cash transfer These indicators should be interpreted with caution because of the limited number of respondents, limited geographical coverage, and standardized assumption on business constraints and information availability. U.S. sanctions against Sudan also generate additional costs and difficulties for international trade and foreign direct investment. The WB is currently providing technical assistance to Sudan to improve the targeting, payments and monitoring mechanisms of the social safety net. Page 21 program to 500,000 families in 2014 (410,000 as of September 2014), complemented by private programs such as the Zakat Fund, which benefits 4.5 million households. 49. Work is underway to prepare a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) with donor support. The project structure is in place and a household budget survey will be completed by March 2015 to serve as a base on which to develop the poverty reduction strategy. The authorities will use a broad and inclusive consultation process to prepare the PRSP. In the meantime, the authorities are implementing policies identified in the I-PRSP. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with staff on the importance of advancing pro-poor policies. They are committed to providing assistance for the neediest as evidenced by the implementation of the I-PRSP, their social commitments under the SMP, and the policy initiatives aimed at shielding the poor and vulnerable from the costs of the reforms. Nevertheless, the authorities noted that their efforts are constrained by the limited resources and expressed hope that fast-track progress on debt relief would unlock concessional resources that would boost pro-poor programs.