The Budget Bill for 2016 targets a deficit just under 1 percent of GDP. New initiatives in the budget of 0.6 percent of GDP include spending on housing construction subsidies, welfare, education, and migrant integration. These new initiatives are funded by reduced tax deductibility for dwelling repairs and improvements, higher energy taxes, and a gradual tapering of the amount of the earned income tax credit as income rises. Rises in sickness leave benefits and migration-related spending are about ¼ percent of GDP in 2016 and capital gains revenues are projected to decline from high levels in 2015. Nonetheless, consolidation in other areas means the budget targets a deficit of 0.9 percent of GDP in 2016, the same level as projected for 2015. The fiscal stance is appropriate and additional expenses related to migration should be accommodated in the near term. The structural balance in 2016 is projected to be little changed from 2015, at about -0.7 percent of GDP. This broadly neutral fiscal stance is appropriate given the need to avoid impeding monetary policy efforts to raise inflation. A rise in expenses owing to migration inflows exceeding budget assumptions—perhaps around ½ percent of GDP in 2016— should be accommodated in the near term and funded over time as part of achieving medium-term fiscal targets. Investments in helping migrants gain jobs will reduce costs in the medium term and maximize their contributions to growth in the long run. Discretionary fiscal stimulus is not warranted given solid growth prospects, but full operation of the automatic stabilizers should be allowed. Maintaining balance over the cycle is sufficient to safeguard Sweden’s fiscal buffers, entailing a need to raise the fiscal balance over the medium term. The long standing fiscal target of a 1 percent of GDP surplus over the cycle has enabled a reduction in public debt to a relatively modest level, at 44 percent in 2015. The government has proposed to lower the target to balance over the cycle, which would allow growth to erode the debt ratio over time. This fiscal target should be reviewed periodically to keep it consistent with a prudent level of public debt or net worth. Its coverage could be narrowed to exclude the defined contribution pension system so that the central government balance need not be adjusted to offset variations in the pension balance. Fiscal policy should support a rebalancing of the housing market. Sweden’s tax system strongly favors debt-financed home ownership, benefitting higher income households disproportionally. Raising property tax would be preferred, but given the political difficulties a package of other measures should be adopted in a broadly fiscally neutral manner: Phasing out mortgage interest deductibility would ease demand gradually. Deductibility from income tax liabilities of 30 percent of interest costs (21 percent above SEK 100,000) currently costs about ½ percent of GDP. A number of European counties have eliminated tax deductibility in recent years or are in the process of phasing it out. This is an ideal time to start phasing out deductibility in Sweden given low interest rates and the robust housing market. A gradual reduction, such as by 5 percentage points annually, would have little drag on growth, as the estimated impact on house prices is modest, at about 4 percent over eight years, while debt declines about 5½ percent over 11 years (Box 2). Page 20 Examples of Phasing Out Tax Deductibility of Mortgage Interest Denmark From To Reduction Finland From To Netherlands Ireland Spain Elimination From To From To From To Rate of deductibility (in percent) Timing Sources: Selected issues papers for Denmark and Netherlands, country authorities for Finland, and IMF Country Report No. 15/1. Adjusting capital gains taxes would enhance effective supply. Households have accumulated significant gains on their primary residences that discourage turnover as their housing needs change. Raising the threshold for deferring capital gains taxes on primary dwellings would facilitate more efficient use of existing dwellings. Supporting construction of affordable rental property in locations with jobs. The 2016 budget allocates 0.1 percent of GDP annually to subsidizing such construction, where this additional supply is expected to have small price impacts (Box 2). Indeed, this support likely needs to be expanded and combined with reducing housing supply impediments (section E). Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed that a broadly neutral fiscal stance is appropriate and noted their intention to accommodate additional migration-related costs in the near term. The budget for 2016 sets out a gradual rise in the fiscal balance in the medium term and they welcomed the support for targeting balance over the cycle. The Government has so far not favored reducing mortgage interest deductibility, partly to avoid risks of a “hard landing” in the housing market.