Sweden’s economy is performing well overall. GDP rose by 3 percent y/y in 2015 H1, picking up from 2.3 percent growth in 2014. The sources of H1 growth were balanced, with domestic demand up by 2.8 percent reflecting solid private consumption and rising residential investment, while services-led exports rose by 4 percent y/y. Continued robust job growth, at 1.3 percent y/y in the first three quarters, helped bring the unemployment rate down to 7¼ percent in Q3, from around 8 percent in recent years. Key Economic Indicators, 2001-2015 (Index: 2008Q2=100, left; Percent, right) Employment GDP Unemployment rate, right Large migration inflows with effects on the labor market and on the budget; Yet Sweden faces a number of intertwined economic challenges: Rapid housing price increases associated with rising household indebtedness; and Low inflation and weakened inflation expectations. Migration inflows have risen sharply. At over 1½ percent of the population—with most being asylum seekers—estimates for migrant inflows in 2015 greatly exceed historical experience. Prospective inflows are highly uncertain, with current projections for 2016 at about 1¼ percent of the population, and inflows could remain high in later years. Government spending on refugees (introduction program and transfers to municipalities) is budgeted to rise from 0.3 percent of GDP in 2014 to about 0.7 percent by 2017, but supplementary spending of ¼ percent of GDP was recently proposed for 2015 and larger additions are expected in 2016 and thereafter. Sweden’s framework for integrating refugees into the labor market is well developed (Box 1), but the process is often lengthy. This challenge overlaps with the issue of high unemployment of the low skilled. Net Migration and Asylum Seekers (Percent of total population) Unemployment Rates of Vulnerable Groups (Percent of respective cohort, age 15-74) Asylum seekers Net migration flows Projection Total Foreign born Low skilled Sources: Eurostat, Statistics Sweden, and Fund staff calculations. Sources: Eurostat and Fund staff calculations. Page 10 Box 1. Migration Flows and the Integration Framework for Asylum Seekers Migration to Sweden has led to an increasingly diverse population. Net immigration to Sweden dates back to the 1930s and gross inflows have been rising over the years, reaching 1.3 percent of the population in 2014, up from ¾ percent in the early 2000s. Over that period, the share of foreign-born persons has risen from 11¾ to 16½ percent of the population. Swedish migration policy has a strong humanitarian dimension, with peaks in migration inflows coinciding with wars and unrest elsewhere. Relative to its population, Sweden receives more asylum seekers than any other EU country. Migration Flows (Percent of population) Greek political instability - 1967-74 Latin America political instability - 1970s Bosnian War - 1992-95 Syrian Conflict - 2011 Asylum Seekers, 2014 (Percent of population) Afghanistan civil war - 1989-92 Iraqi war - 2003 Gross inflows Net inflows W H X Y Z H Sources: Eurostat and Fund staff calculations. The composition of migrants to Sweden is changing. The share of those seeking asylum (and family reunification) is rising; in 2014, asylum seekers comprised about two-thirds of total migrant inflows, up from about one-third in 2010. The majority of asylum seekers in recent years come from Eritrea, Somalia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Kosovo, Albania, and Serbia, with Syria the largest source since 2012. In 2015, unaccompanied minors—primarily from Afghanistan—are more than 20 percent of total asylum seekers, up from about 8 percent over recent years. Sweden has a well-developed framework for integrating refugees—the introduction program. Eligibility is restricted to asylum seekers who have received a residence permit as refugees, quota refugees, or other persons in need of protection, aged 20–64 years (or 18–19 years without parents living in Sweden) and their relatives. An introduction interview by the Public Employment Service (PES) assesses their experience, education, and ambitions in order to develop an “introduction plan” which can last up to 24 months. The plan has three main activities that should occupy participants full-time: (i) Swedish language training; (ii) employment preparation, such as the validation of education and professional experience; and (iii) social studies to provide a basic knowledge of Swedish society. Participation in the program is voluntary, but an introduction benefit is conditional on participation. Participants who find work are a ble to continue to claim the introduction benefit alongside their wages for six months, after which the benefit is reduced in proportion to the time spent working. The PES can assist refugees with an introduction plan in finding accommodation at a location where it considers the chances of obtaining work or education are good. Nonetheless, rising asylum seeker inflows are stretching administrative capacity and leading to policy adjustments. Recent reports are for average daily inflows over 1,500 persons with the number of asylum seekers reaching about 160,000 in 2015 on updated estimates, up from 83,300 in the earlier official forecast. The average processing time for residency permits has doubled from an average of 108 days in 2012 to 220 days during Q1–Q3 2015. The authorities have announced that they would issue temporary residence permits for limited period, allowing for a later review of residency—with exceptions including unaccompanied minors and families with children who would continue to receive permanent residence permits. More recently border controls were established—migrants seeking asylum can enter Sweden only if they register on entry. Page 11 The housing market shows imbalances, with double-digit price gains as the urban population outpaces construction, pushing up household debt from already high levels. Dwelling price rises accelerated to 16 percent y/y in September, led by apartment price increases exceeding 20 percent in Stockholm and Gothenburg. Housing supply is constrained by construction impediments and rent controls while demand is bolstered by population growth and urbanization, rising income and financial savings, and historically low interest rates. Households need to borrow more at higher house prices, with mortgage credit growth of 8 percent y/y in September lifting household debt to 176 percent of disposable income (195 percent including housing associations). House Price and Mortgage Credit Growth (Y/Y percent change) All dwellings Apartments Mortgage credit Housing Completions and Change in Population (Housing units) Housing completions Population increase, right Persons Inflation has been below the 2 percent target for some years, dragging on Sources: Statistics Sweden, Valueguard, and Fund staff calculations. expectations and potentially impacting wage negotiations. Core inflation (HICP excluding energy and unprocessed food) averaged 1.2 percent y/y in the first ten months of 2015, up from only ½ percent in 2013–14. Declining resource utilization during 2011 to mid-2013 was a key driver of low inflation, exacerbated by external factors including commodity price falls, low euro area inflation, and past krona appreciation. Low inflation fed into inflation expectations, with 2-year expectations hitting their lowest level since 2000 in January, at 1.2 percent. Wage indicators have also slowed and employers have questioned using the inflation target as a basis for the coming negotiations on two-thirds of collective bargaining agreements, normally in force for three years. Inflation (Y/Y percent change) Inflation Expectations CPI HICP excl. energy and unprocessed food HICP 2-year 5-year Sources: Eurostat, Statistics Sweden and Fund staff calculations. Sources: TNS Prospera and Fund staff calculations. Page 12 Monetary Instruments (Percent, left; SEK bil., right) Signaling its commitment to the inflation target, the Riksbank introduced negative rates and a QE program in February 2015. After reaching 0 in October 2014, the repo rate was cut in three steps in 2015 to -0.35 percent in July. Purchases of government bonds total SEK 135 billion in 2015, some 20 percent of the outstanding stock or 4 percent of GDP. Noting an upward trend in inflation figures, yet a modestly lower outlook for growth and inflation in 2016 compared with its earlier projections, the Riksbank kept rates on hold in October, while extending bond purchases until mid-2016 by a further SEK 65 billion. It emphasized its readiness to do more if inflation prospects deteriorate, potentially including foreign exchange intervention if problematic market developments threaten the upturn in inflation. 1/ Orange bars represent the cumulative amount of government bonds that the Riksbank has already purchased by October 2015. QE (SEK bn ,right) Repo rate Stibor 3M These challenges are arising in a difficult political context. The minority government in power since October 2014 failed to pass its first budget proposal. New elections were avoided by reaching the “December agreement” with opposition parties excluding an anti-immigration party and one other party. However, this agreement recently collapsed when a small party decided to exit. At this stage it appears that the government’s budget for 2016 will be passed but political uncertainties have risen.