Growth is expected to moderate, with inflation rising towards the target only gradually, and residential investment remaining relatively high. Strong domestic demand growth in 2015–16 was aided by expansionary monetary policy and rising spending on migrants. Yet most of the monetary easing took place in 2015, public consumption growth is expected to be significantly lower in 2017, and very high growth in residential investment is expected to slow in the face of resource constraints, so domestic demand and GDP growth is expected to cool from 2017. Nonetheless, residential investment recently reached 5 percent of GDP compared with a 25-year average of 3 percent, and the high level of housing prices is expected to sustain a high level of construction in coming years unless land supply and other supply-side constraints become binding. Export growth is expected to remain at moderate levels consistent with prospects for trading partner growth. The output gap turns positive from 2016, feeding into a renewed inflation pick up from 2017, yet core HICP inflation takes three years to approach the target. Despite solid growth and rising employment, the unemployment rate is projected to stop declining after 2017 as newly arrived migrants start to join the labor force but take a number of years to gain jobs (Box 2). 2-year 5-year Inflation Expectations Sources: TNS Prospera and Fund staff calculations. Page 12 At the same time, household debt is expected to keep rising in the medium term as banks are well placed to meet rising household credit demand. The acceleration in housing prices that began around 2013 was principally driven by a combination of growth in incomes and financial asset holdings and lower interest rates. The impact of population growth and urbanization is evident in the rapid increase in apartment prices in the main cities. The financial sector does not appear to be a key driver of this residential property cycle, with household credit growth lagging the acceleration in housing prices and remaining well below the pace of those gains. As a result, although household debt has risen relative to income, it has fallen relative to household assets. Based on past patterns of household balance sheet adjustment, households are expected to seek higher debt in coming years. Banks are well placed to supply this credit as they enjoy solid profitability despite negative interest rates and have buffers over capital requirements (Table 6). See Giang Ho, 2015, “Housing Supply Constraints in Sweden,” Sweden Selected Issues, IMF Country Report No. 15/330 (Washington). Household debt is found to adjust over time especially to developments in the value of collateral, see Rima A. Turk, 2015, “Housing Price and Household Debt Interactions in Sweden,” IMF Working Paper, WP/15/276 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). 201020112012201320142015201620172018Sources: Riksbank, Monetary Policy Report, September 2016. Household Debt to Disposable Income Forecast Debt to total assets Debt to housing assets, rightSources: Sveriges Riksbank and Fund staff calculations. Debt Ratios il ……… il & & Page 13 Macroeconomic vulnerabilities related to the distribution of household debt could build even if financial stability is maintained . The recent rise in dwelling construction is welcome to address shortages and support labor mobility and productivity. But many past episodes of debt accumulation to finance property investment warn about stability risks. The FSAP findings suggest the banks are largely resilient to potential solvency shocks, although they are very reliant on wholesale funding (Box 3). Nonetheless, a rise in the share of highly-indebted households would increase macroeconomic vulnerabilities. Although the distribution of household debt-to-disposable income (DTI) ratios has shifted out relatively modestly in recent years, the shares of new mortgage borrowers with DTI ratios above 600 percent rose by 7 percentage points from 2011 to reach 17 percent by 2015, and the share over 450 percent rose 16 percentage points to 37 percent. This suggests the share of highly indebted households could rise more rapidly going forward. Such rising vulnerabilities would exacerbate the impact on Sweden if downside risks are realized, with potentially significant spillovers to the region (see also Box 4): External risks Sweden is highly exposed to external shocks including through banks’ high share of wholesale funding and strong trade linkages with Europe including the UK. Weak growth in major advanced and emerging economies would impact primarily via lower exports, while economic fallout from political fragmentation in Europe, including uncertainty associated with post-Brexit arrangements, could weigh on investment. The adverse impact on Sweden’s growth and inflation would be greater if the nature of policy responses in these major economies resulted in a significant appreciation of the krona. Based on detailed regional data from the National Board of Housing and Planning, a shortage of 140,000 units is estimated, equivalent to 3½ years of dwelling construction at the recent rate of completions. Using Swedish household level data, Flodén and others (2016) find a large effect from interest rates on household consumption via a cash-flow channel. The estimated marginal propensity to consume is around unity or even higher in response to changes in interest expenses. So highly indebted households reduce consumption by several percentage points more in response to a one percentage point increase in the household interest rate than households with little debt. > Page 14 Housing risks The market seems to be cooling off from the high price levels reached last fall. A gradual increase in housing supply is expected to moderate prospective rises in housing prices rather than resulting in a significant decline. Nonetheless, Swedish house prices are historically high, at some 40 percent over their 20-year average relative to income, implying potential for a significant fall with a likely recession-like impact on consumption and unemployment. Authorities’ Views. The authorities shared a similar macroeconomic outlook, although they projected lower investment growth as it was already high by historical standards, and the Riksbank considered inflation would likely rise more rapidly. While housing supply shortages reduced the likelihood of a significant fall in prices, the authorities shared concern about the implications of trends in household debt levels and composition for macroeconomic stability.