To raise inflation and inflation expectations the Riksbank eased further in 2016 using unconventional monetary policy (UMP) tools. The repo rate was cut by a further 15 bps in February to -50 bps. Additional bond purchases were also announced, bringing total purchases to about 37 percent of government bonds by end 2016, amounting to some 6 percent of GDP. Moreover, the pool of eligible assets for these purchases was expanded to include inflation-indexed bonds, signaling the See analysis by Gustafsson and others (2015). QE (SEK bn ,right) Repo rate Stibor 3M Monetary Instruments 1/ (Percent, left; SEK bil., right) Sources: Sveriges Riksbank and Fund staff calculations.1/ Orange bars represent the cumulative amount of government bonds that the Riksbank has already purchased by July 2016. Page 15 capacity for further action. Since these purchases began, nonresident holdings of Swedish government bonds have declined by almost 25 percent, equivalent to about 40 percent of total bond purchases, but more recent purchases are mainly from residents. Combined use of UMP instruments has enhanced the impact on yields, with limited side effects on banks to date and mixed readings regarding the impact on bond market liquidity. Repo rate cuts and commitments to keep rates low have most effect on the short end of the yield curve while asset purchases directly compress term premia. Deploying a package of all three measures shifted yields down by at least 50 bps at all maturities since end-2014. Moreover, the strong pass-through into the cost of the wholesale funding of banks has helped mitigate adverse impacts from negative interest rates on Swedish bank profitability (Box 5), although these effects should continue to be closely monitored. Although the National Debt Office considers that the large volume of bond purchases contributes to increased use of its repo facility, the Riksbank notes that market interest in its regular auctions remains strong, suggesting scope for further purchases. UMP Impact on the Swedish Yield Curve Yields have fallen broadly in a parallel across the The initial 20 basis point drop in the curve reflected curve since UMP adoption in February 2015. falls in both expected short rates and term premia. Subsequent declines in the curve reflect further QE …and announcements of more negative policy announcements squeezing term premia… rates that reduced expected future short rates. Based on a Gaussian dynamic term structural model following Joslin and others (2011). Expected future short rates Term premium Sources: Fund staff calculations. Effect of the QE Announcement on the Yield Curve Expected future short rates Term premium Effect of Negative Rate Announcement on the Yield Curve Sources: Fund staff calculation. 22.512345678910Year Dec-14 Jul-16 Yield Curve (Percent)Sources: Bloomberg and fund staff calculation.Note: Based on zero-coupon bond yields and Nelson-Siegel-Svensson method. nn Page 16 The Krona has been broadly stable despite easy monetary policy in the major currency areas. Since February 2015, the Riksbank’s monetary stimulus has kept Swedish yields roughly in line with German Bunds, despite the ECB’s monetary easing. Given the strong correlations between yield differentials and the exchange rate, this has supported broad stability of the Swedish krona during 2015–16. Although the Riksbank signaled its readiness to intervene at the foreign exchange (FX) market if necessary, in practice no FX purchases have been made. Inflation is expected to rise, but the return toward the target will likely be gradual. range of forecasting tools indicate inflation will gradually rise over time, although at a slower pace if euro area inflation does not rise as projected. Yet, there is uncertainty about how quickly resource pressures will feed into inflation. Wage setting is one source of this uncertainty, as wage growth remains relatively low despite rising indicators for labor shortages. A spillover from sluggish growth in euro area wages may play a role, as wage discussions in Sweden’s industrial sector—which traditionally leads the national wage rounds—pay close attention to maintaining competitiveness. Contracting out work to foreign companies has also helped contain the impact of labor shortages in some areas, most prominently in the construction sector. The Riksbank’s projection for inflation to rise more rapidly partly reflects a greater rise in firms’ margins than staff expects. The expansionary monetary stance therefore needs to be maintained for some time. An unwinding of the monetary expansion should await clear confirmation that tightening resource utilization is translating into a durable rise in inflation, and any unwinding should be at a measured pace that accepts a broadly symmetric risk of inflation being above or below the target. In case inflation prospects and expectations were to weaken, further rate cuts would be appropriate, although such an easing would need to be accompanied by heightened vigilance regarding household debt vulnerabilities and preparedness to tighten the macroprudential stance. Bond purchases could be extended while continuing to monitor debt markets. Sweden’s external position is moderately stronger than the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals and desirable policies so foreign exchange intervention should V illi Page 17 remain a last resort. The current account surplus of 5 percent of GDP reflects a number of factors including measurement issues (Appendix II). Taking these factors into account, the surplus modestly exceeds staff’s view of the norm for Sweden, hence the krona is assessed to be moderately undervalued. In that context, FX intervention should be a last resort after exhausting other instruments, being limited to averting a decline in inflation owing to rapid Krona appreciation. A parliamentary review of the Riksbank law should be used to strengthen Sweden’s monetary and financial stability arrangements. Given the communication challenges from the immediate positive impact of the policy rate on the headline CPI, the inflation target should be in terms of the internationally comparable HICP. Greater symmetry in inflation targeting would be desirable, with inflation (CPI with fixed interest rates) below the target for over 70 percent of 12-year period prior to the GFC. Even as the Finansinspektionen (FI) is the designated authority for macroprudential policies, the Riksbank’s role in financial stability should be put on a firmer legal footing, including in relation to systemic financial risks and emergency liquidity provision (FSSA ¶66). Authorities’ Views. The Riksbank broadly agreed with staff views on the monetary and exchange rate policy. The authorities will continue monitoring developments in the financial markets and institutions closely for potential adverse effects from UMP. The authorities endorsed the recommendation to clarify the Riksbank’s financial stability mandate.