The legal framework for macroprudential policies should be fixed to enable timely action, a priority that is heightened by prospects for household debt to keep rising. The recent introduction of amortization requirements on new mortgages came after long delays, revealing shortcomings in the process for the FI to adopt new macroprudential tools that it considers to be justified primarily on macroeconomic stability grounds. Accordingly, the law should be amended to remove uncertainties around FI’s macroprudential powers and provide FI with a toolbox that can be used to address systemic risks in a timely and effective manner (FSSA ¶38). Experience in a range of countries suggests approaches to providing effective oversight by governments and parliaments while achieving timely authorization of new tools. The coming review of the Financial Stability Council (FSC) should seek to structure its operations to most effectively support FI’s fulfilment of its macroprudential mandate. The FSC has provided a valuable forum for sharing information. Joint work on risk analysis and on the design and impact assessment of potential measures should be expanded. To foster cooperation among the authorities involved, and to take full advantage of Riksbank expertise in the assessment of macrofinancial risks, the FSC should have the power to make recommendations, preferably with the FI having a responsibility to comply or explain (FSSA ¶39). FI needs to step up supervisory intensity. FI is responsible for supervising some of the largest and systemically important banks in the Nordic region. But analysis by FI of its resources assigned to the banking sector compared with other supervisors finds a resource gap of approximately 45 percent. FI resources should be expanded to achieve an appropriate frequency of inspections (FSSA ¶48). Moreover, delays in introducing regulations while relevant legislation and ordinances are being amended should be minimized to support FI’s capacity to safeguard stability. A leverage ratio can provide a useful backstop to risk-based capital requirements. Reflecting the strong capital buffers of Swedish banks, stress tests suggest that their solvency is resilient under a severe scenario where a slump in global growth is associated with a sharp rise in unemployment and a large fall in housing prices. Yet, the exercise also illustrated the challenges of modeling tail risks in Sweden. It is therefore welcome that FI has proposed a new supervisory approach to risk weights on corporate exposures. Timely adoption of a leverage ratio as a backstop would further safeguard against model and measurement errors (FSSA ¶24). FI has previously adopted a ceiling on LTV ratios under its consumer protection mandate and a floor on mortgage risk weights under its mandate for financial stability, but it lacks a legislative mandate for macroeconomic stability. See first chapter of Selected Issues. In May 2016 the FI announced a new supervisory method on IRB models for corporate exposures. Corporate risk weights are expected to rise to over 30 percent, raising capital requirements by about 2.5 percentage points (see Sweden FSSA Technical Note on Stress Testing, 2016). Page 21 To address systemic liquidity issues in foreign currency, a further tightening of FX liquidity requirements should be evaluated. Swedish banks, excluding subsidiary banks in the region, had about 50 percent of GDP in short-term external debt at end 2015. Banks have improved their FX liquidity following the global financial crisis, with liquidity coverage ratios (LCRs) in U.S. dollars and in euro well above 100. Nonetheless, in case market funding is interrupted, banks could need sizable FX liquidity support, in part because some of banks’ liquid assets are held in securities that may not be widely traded in a crisis such as covered bonds. Taking into account the time that may be required to replenish foreign reserves by borrowing or to access central bank swap lines, and the desirability to have a buffer for contingencies, it would not be appropriate to reduce Sweden’s existing reserves of 11 percent of GDP. The adequacy of reserves could be further assured by monitoring an extended (three-month) LCR in U.S. dollars and euros (FSSA ¶46) and ensuring that an adequate portion of banks’ high quality liquid assets can be sold on the market in a crisis. Sweden plays a central role in the highly interconnected Nordic-Baltic financial system requiring close coordination in supervision, liquidity support, and resolution. Sweden hosts four of the largest publicly-listed banks in the Nordic region, with assets amounting to about 120 percent of Nordic region GDP, including Nordea which is a top-3 bank in Denmark, Finland, and Sweden. Swedish banks also account for large shares of total bank assets in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Regional cooperation on financial stability should therefore be enhanced, building on the Nordic-Baltic Macroprudential Forum established in 2011 (FSSA ¶36). Memoranda of Understanding under discussion between the regional supervisors should entail full access to supervisory information including participating in on-site inspections. In parallel, cooperative agreements among the relevant authorities are needed regarding potential liquidity support and to ensure financial stability in all countries is protected in event of resolution. Authorities’ Views. Recognizing the deficiencies in the legal framework for macroprudential policies, the Finance Ministry is analyzing options to clarify FI’s mandate in this regard. Although the authorities aim to make best use of the FSC, it is not possible under Sweden’s constitution for the FSC to make recommendations to FI entailing a comply or explain obligation. The budget for 2017 provides additional resources to FI, and these would be reviewed once again at the next budget. While the Riksbank supports the FSAP’s call for timely adoption of a leverage ratio as a backstop, FI considers that steps to make risk weights more robust better address model risk concerns. FI also notes that a leverage ratio, should it be constructed as a minimum requirement, would remove most of the current capital buffers. On banks’ FX liquidity, FI noted that Swedish LCR implementation exceeds international norms, and already is focused on requirements in foreign currency. The Riksbank, however, supported consideration of a further tightening of FX liquidity regulation. The authorities agree on the need to continue strengthening regional coordination in supervision, liquidity, and resolution. See second chapter of Selected Issues. Page 22