Inflation has been persistently below target, driven by a combination of external and domestic factors. “Flight to safety” dynamics in financial markets, together with relatively higher interest rates in Sweden, contributed to a strong appreciation of the and lowered import prices. In 2013, even as appreciation eased, declines in global oil and food prices created additional disinflationary pressures. Domestic inflation also slowed, in part reflecting the indirect impact of lower energy prices on transportation services inflation. Moderate nominal wage growth along with slightly stronger productivity growth, helped bring aggregate ULC growth down from 2.7 percent in 2012 to 1.4 percent in 2013, reducing cost-push pressures on inflation (see Figure 2). Low Inflation in Sweden: What’s Driving It? Page 12 Staff analysis suggests that inflation will converge back to the two-percent target, but there is uncertainty around the baseline. A Philips curve model confirms that the forces to lift inflation from its current low level are in place, including dissipating external disinflationary pressures and a pick-up in growth supported by very low interest rates (see Box 2). However, the speed of convergence back to the target depends on the pace of domestic growth and external developments, including in particular oil price and exchange rate dynamics. As long as inflation remains low, the presence of increasing financial stability risks forces monetary policy into a difficult balancing act. A reduction in interest rates tends to depreciate the and raise domestic demand, which should increase inflation. At the same time, lower policy rates are associated with a reduction in mortgage rates, higher overall mortgage credit growth, and a shift from fixed to variable interest rate mortgages. For example, a simple VAR exercise suggests that, over a two-year period, a 50 basis point decrease in the policy rate increases the ratio of debt to disposable income by about 2 percentage points and the share of variable rate mortgages in the total mortgage stock by about 5 percentage points. This increases financial stability risks, particularly in an environment where buoyant expectations in the housing market invite speculative price dynamics. The balance between price and financial stability can change. The policy rate Fuel & heating Transportation (rhs) Transportation and Fuel Price Inflation (Percent)Sources: NIER, Statistics Sweden, and Fund staff calculations.Notes: Transportation inflation is on RHS scale to better illustrate the comovement with fuel price inflation, though the latter is more volatile. 1997m3-2004m121997m3-2006m121997m3-2008m121997m3-2010m121997m3-2013m12 Unexplained/Own Inflation Expectations Industrial Production gap NEER Euro Area infl (ex. Energy) Oil Swedish Inflation: VAR Variance Decomposition (Share of variance in percent) Sources: Eurostat, Haver Analystics, Statistics Sweden, and Fund staff calculations.Note: This illustrates the variance decomposition of a VAR estimated over sample periods of increasing length, with sample periods ending in 2004m12, 2006m12, 2008m12, 2010m12, and 2013m12, respectively (all start in 1997m3). As the sample length increases the share of the variance explained by different variables changes, providing an indication of what factors are driving recent inflation changes. 1.52.02.53.03.52012Q12013Q12014Q12015Q12016Q12017Q12018Q1 External downside scenario External upside scenario Domestic downside scenario Domestic upside scenario Baseline Simulated Inflation Paths under Different Scenarios (Y/Y percent change)Source: Fund staff calculations.Note: Figure plots the stimulated inflation paths using the median model from the ones forming the baseline range. Variable rate mortgage credit growth Fixed rate mortgage credit growth Percent change in total mortgage credit (rhs)Sources: Fund staff calculations.Note: This chart depicts the impulse response functions following an exogenous 60 bp negative shock in the Stibor rate, which is equivalent to a 50bp decrease in the repo rate. Total mortgage credit growth is calculated based on the March 2014 variable and fixed rate mortgage stocks as starting points, and applying the credit growth rates separately to the corresponding stock of mortgages. Monetary Policy and Mortgage Credit Page 13 cuts in December 2013 and July 2014 have reaffirmed the Riksbank’s commitment to achieving its inflation objective. However, while effective macroprudential policies must be the first line of defense, a substantial rise in financial stability risks—such as a further acceleration in house price increases and mortgage credit growth—might mean interest rates will have to rise sooner than otherwise to help contain financial vulnerabilities. This only adds to the urgency of implementing a comprehensive set macroprudential policy measures to contain rising household credit. While monetary policy can “lean against the wind” to help subdue mortgage growth, higher interest rates than warranted by macroeconomic conditions alone are an economically costly instrument, as the cost of credit would increase for all borrowers, including firms. Instead, successfully addressing financial stability risks with macroprudential measures would allow monetary policy to more freely pursue its inflation target. The authorities agreed that low inflation and rising financial stability concerns are pulling monetary policy in different directions. They welcomed further inquiries into the external and domestic sources of low inflation, including the role played by monetary policy. At the same time, they shared the view that the repo rate was not the first-best policy instrument to address financial sector risks and that, to ensure financial stability, macroprudential and fiscal policies required continued attention—especially given the recent reduction in policy rates.