The Swedish labor market has become increasingly polarized and the rise in migration inflows could initially raise unemployment. Sweden has enjoyed a rise in the labor force participation in recent years, in part reflecting rising female participation (Box 4), and also higher participation among young, older, and foreign born workers. However, job creation since 2007 has been largely focused on higher skilled workers, leaving those with low skills with an unemployment rate of 19 percent. Although employment of the foreign-born has risen substantially, their A forthcoming IMF staff paper (Chen and Columba, 2015) finds welfare benefits from using a combination of tools. Page 23 unemployment rate is also high, at 16 percent. These gaps relative to total unemployment of 7¼ percent are relatively wide in Sweden, in part reflecting high entry-level wages (75–80 percent of average wages) and strict employment protection for regular contracts. Historically, the employment rates of migrants have risen toward the high level of Swedes, but the integration process is lengthy, taking about 10 years to reach an employment rate of 60 percent. Hence the large migration inflows could result in a significant rise in unemployment unless the pace of integration can be improved (see Chapter I of the selected issues paper). Job creation should be facilitated by reforms that better adapt the labor market to the evolving composition of the labor force. The social partners should ensure that entry-level wages are not a barrier for groups with high unemployment to enter the labor market. Options include enhancing wage flexibility at the firm level or special wage scales for those needing on-the-job training. Social supports and tax credits would cushion disposable incomes. Strict employment protection for regular contracts results in high implicit minimum educational and skill requirements that form non-wage barriers to regular contracts which may have greater impacts on foreign-born workers. Employment protection law should be reviewed to ensure that such exit costs do not deter firms from hiring new entrants with sufficient skills. Providing training more aligned with employer needs would better enable vulnerable groups to gain jobs and early active labor market support should be targeted to cases of high long-term unemployment risk. The effectiveness of public job matching services needs improvement, including by expanding contacts with employers, especially as combining wage subsidies with better matching would enhance their employment benefits. Faster integration of refugees into the labor market would maximize their contributions to the Swedish economy. As discussed in Box 1, Sweden has a well-developed introduction program for refugees. The authorities are seeking improvements, such as the “fast tracks” initiative for migrants with skills in occupations where there is a shortage, and they are changing the reception system to designate municipalities to receive refugees based mostly on job opportunities. Further efforts to expedite the residency permit, educational assessment, and skill validation processes, are needed in view of rising numbers. Expanding employment programs for youth that combine work and training, such as the vocational introduction employment program, to also cover newly arrived refugees could help them gain their first job quickly and build needed skills. Authorities’ views. The authorities agreed on the importance of enhancing training and job matching. However, they noted that the relatively low take up of some wage subsidies raises doubts as to whether wage floors are the only barriers to hinder the employment of vulnerable groups. They noted that the impact of employment protection was mitigated by temporary contracts with low protection. Social partners had differing views. Labor unions stressed the importance of protecting minimum wages—at least 75 percent of average wages—as a key pillar of Sweden’s social model and considered that use of employment subsidies should be expanded, including to higher skill jobs. Employers noted the relatively small share of low skill jobs available in Sweden, pointing to the need to ease wage compression both within and across sectors, to help the low skilled and migrants gain jobs. See Giang Ho and Kazuko Shirono, “The Nordic Labor Market and Migration,” forthcoming IMF staff working paper. Page 24 Box 4. Female Labor Participation and Senior Management Representation W Z Sources: International Social Survey Programme and Fund staff calculations. Attitude Towards Women Working (Principal component of answers to survey questions) Policy efforts in Sweden have achieved high female employment. Policies such as parental leave, subsidized child care, and scope for shorter working hours for parents with young children have made it easier for women to enter the workforce and return following childbirth. Similar to other Nordic countries, attitudes toward women working in Sweden are also markedly more positive than in other European countries. In 2014, female labor force participation among the 25 to 54 year olds stood at 88 percent in Sweden, well above the European Union average of 81 percent. And the gender gap in wages of 13 percentage points is lower than the EU average of 16 percent. Unlike other advanced European countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, women in Sweden are much less likely to participate in the labor force on a part time basis. Gender equity in participation rates and hours worked could lift Sweden’s potential output by 6 percent. Based on a simple analysis in a forthcoming paper, the room for output gains from gender equity is smaller in Sweden than in most countries given the already high female employment rate. Yet, shifting from part-time to full-time work could still raise potential output notably over time. Female representation in managerial roles falls short despite relatively high participation in corporate boards. Female representation in management (27 percent) is below the EU-27 average (33 percent), despite a higher share of women on supervisory boards (26 versus 16 percent for the EU-27). Moreover, segregation by gender across sectors and occupations is more pronounced in Sweden than in other countries (European Commission, 2013). Higher female employment in senior managerial positions could yield significant additional economic benefits by improving firm productivity. Firm-level analysis in a forthcoming staff discussion note finds that higher female participation in senior management is associated with better firm financial performance on average. The positive correlation between firm profitability and the share of women on corporate boards/management is particularly pronounced in sectors with a higher prevalence of women in the labor force, such as the services sector. Sweden has scope for improvement. Among firms with at least two members in senior management, only 42 percent have at least one woman in a senior position. In addition, the average share of females in total senior management and board members is also less than 20 percent across all firms. To comply with the European Commission’s proposed 40 percent objective of females in board positions of listed companies, Denmark, Finland, Netherlands, Norway, and Spain have adopted a legal quota for female board members., but such a quota has not been adopted in Sweden. Sources: Orbis and IMF staff estimates. Averages based on firms reporting that members of senior management and board total are at least two, and without missing information on total assets, earnings before interest and taxes, or the gender of members of senior management and board. At least one woman in a senior position, share of firms Women in senior positions, average share across firms Women in Senior Positions in 2013 H W X Z W Page 25