Minimum amortization requirements on new mortgages became effective in June, which will help cement the progress made in recent years. The FI’s Swedish Mortgage Market report indicates amortization of mortgages with an LTV of 70–85 percent rose from 0.8 percent of principal in 2011 to 1.3 percent by 2015. New mortgage borrowers are required to make annual repayments of at least 1 percent of the debt principal for mortgages with LTV over 50 percent, and at least 2 percent for those with LTV above 70 percent. The direct macroeconomic impact of higher amortization is contained as only new borrowers are affected. As amortization net of refinancing is key to containing the development of household debt vulnerabilities the adequacy of these minimum amortization rates should be reviewed annually. The macroprudential stance was also tightened by raising the counter-cyclical capital buffer to 2 percent effective March 2017, even as the credit-to-GDP gap has declined substantially in recent years. But the current conjuncture calls for broader efforts to lean against the evolving risks. Income and population drivers of housing demand are expected to remain strong in Sweden and interest rates may remain exceptionally low for some years. Hence, even with the recent rise in construction (less than 1 percent of the total dwelling stock annually), the potential for a renewed increase in housing prices remains. The resulting upward pressure on high-DTI borrowing would not The CPI with fixed interest rates is subject to significant fluctuations in imputed components such as depreciation while the HICP includes only observed prices of goods and services (see Riksbank Studies, September 2016). While nearly all mortgages with LTV above 70 percent were being amortized, average repayments were only 1.3 percent of debt, below the new 2 percent requirement. For mortgages with LTV of 50–70 percent, only 51.2 percent were being amortized, by an average of 0.9 percent of the debt. Page 18 be contained by the current framework of an LTV ceiling (85 percent), minimum risk weights (25 percent) on mortgages, and minimum amortization requirements. A sustained rebalancing of housing demand and supply in order to moderate the trend rise in housing prices is therefore key to protecting the financial resilience of households over the longer term. New macroprudential tools also have a significant role to play in containing the rise in vulnerabilities over the medium term. Rebalancing housing demand and supply requires deep reforms of Sweden’s poorly functioning housing market, that would have broader benefits including for labor mobility: Sustaining the increase in housing supply. Maintaining an adequate supply of land that is ready for development is needed to sustain the recent welcome rise in construction, requiring more transparent, standardized, and timely municipal land sale and planning procedures. Expanded budgetary support for affordable rental housing—currently at 0.1 percent of GDP— would also help enhance supply while avoiding an increase in household debt. Tax reform to reduce demand and incentives for debt financing. A first-best approach would be to raise the very low ceilings on property tax to broaden the tax base in a progressive manner. The low interest rate environment makes it ideal to also phase out the tax deductibility of interest payments. The proposal to temporarily remove the threshold for deferring capital gains tax on a primary residence would promote more efficient use of existing dwellings. Phasing out rent controls is key. Long queues for rental apartments leave new entrants little option but to buy, “lock-in” effects from rent controls hinder the efficient use of housing, and the incentive is to build tenant-owned rather than rental housing. Phasing-out rent controls while protecting vulnerable households through the housing allowance and exempting all new construction from controls would reduce housing imbalances. In addition, the macroprudential toolkit should be reinforced by a DTI limit. Banks report that they are taking household DTI into account in mortgage origination, with some having internal thresholds that are resulting in a larger share of loan applications being rejected. Signs of a tightening of lending standards are seen in average LTVs on new mortgages declining to 68.3 percent in 2015, from around 70 percent in 2012–14. However, banks that are competing with each other are unlikely to fully internalize the macroeconomic risks of having a large share of highly-indebted households in their loan-by-loan origination decisions. Reflecting such concerns, a mortgage loan-to-income (LTI) threshold that only a minority of borrowers may exceed has been adopted in the UK and Ireland and a DTI is under consideration in New Zealand. A study by FI of the Rent controls are strictest in Sweden among European countries according to a European Commission index. Page 19 macroeconomic effects of the DTI limit suggests that a cap of 600 percent of disposable income, with exemption of 15 percent of mortgages, would slow the rise in household debt while having modest negative effect on growth. A limit on the share of high DTI loans should be adopted soon in order to: Lean against growth in the share of households with high DTI ratios while allowing some flexibility for individual household circumstances. This would contain increases in the interest sensitivity of consumption and protect households’ resilience to income losses in a recession. Automatically reduce LTVs on high DTI loans when housing prices rise faster than incomes, providing larger buffers for a potential adjustment in house prices. Make lending responses to house price increases somewhat less elastic than relying solely on an LTV ceiling, helping to dampen the potential for an upward credit-price spiral. In view of the lengthy process to adopt new tools, the FI should initiate the adoption of a DTI limit soon, but a final calibration of the DTI limit could be deferred until the tool is authorized to take into account developments including experience with the amortization requirement. An approach based on risk weights and close supervision could allow more timely implementation than a regulated DTI limit. Other countries have applied higher risk weights for mortgages above certain LTV thresholds. Following a similar approach, FI could raise the risk weight for the portion of mortgages exceeding a certain DTI threshold to be considerably above the current floor of 25 percent or it could adopt a capital surcharge on such loans. Such measures would clearly signal that banks should contain the volume of high-DTI lending. It would be important to support such a signal with regular supervisory monitoring and engagement on the scale of such lending by each bank. But if these signals and supervisory efforts are not sufficiently effective a regulatory limit on DTI would be needed. Authorities’ Views. The authorities are alert to housing supply challenges, noting that recent improvements in construction permitting would streamline processes for buildings of a similar design. However, gaining consensus on raising the property tax is unlikely and political support for the present rent setting system is strong given concerns that reforms would bring high rents and reduced security of tenure. The government considers there needs to be political consensus with opposition parties to hold discussions on reducing mortgage interest deductibility. The Government and FI prefer to first assess the impact from the amortization requirement before taking further measures. The FI will continue to study a range of options regarding household DTI limits, with the Riksbank noting that implementation of such tools is urgently needed, where regulation would have a more certain impact on containing risks. Analysis by van Santen and Ölcer (2016) finds that household’s gross income averages 40 percent more than disposable income. This suggests that 600 percent of disposable income in Sweden is equivalent to 430 percent of gross income, making the former threshold broadly comparable to that in the UK of 450 percent of gross income. For example, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand raises standardized mortgage risk weights from 35 to 50 percent if LTV is over 90 percent, in Luxembourg, the risk weight goes from 35 to 70 percent for amounts exceeding an LTV of 80 percent, and in Switzerland, a risk weight of 100 percent is applied for loan tranches above an 80 percent LTV. Page 20