Solid growth appears likely in the near term with inflation rising over the medium term. Growth in domestic demand is expected to be supported by easy monetary conditions, reinforced by additional migration-related government spending. Exports are also strengthening, especially of services, aided by a pickup in external demand. Overall, growth of about 3 percent y/y is projected in 2015 and 2016, easing to 2½ percent in the medium term. A range of indicators show declining slack in the economy, with solid growth expected to broadly close the output gap in 2016. A positive gap in later years is reflected in core HICP inflation rising to about 2 percent in 2017. Macroeconomic Indicators (Y/Y percent change, unless noted) GDP Domestic demand Exports Trading partner GDP Unemployment rate (percent) Output gap (percent of potential GDP) Core HICP inflation (e.o.p, percent) Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook, Statistics Sweden, and Fund staff calculations. Page 13 However, house prices could continue rising from already high levels. Sweden’s house price-to-income ratio is 32 percent over its 20-year average, which is high relative to other OECD countries. Yet estimated models of house prices find that much of this deviation is accounted for by rising net financial wealth, migration, and low interest rates (Box 2), with housing prices estimated to be about 5½ percent above their long-term equilibrium, or 12 percent assuming real interest rates at more normal levels. Despite these signs of varying degrees of overvaluation, house price gains could well continue to exceed income growth given the rise in urban population relative to housing completions—the net share of households expecting house prices to rise is at record highs and low mortgage interest rates (averaging 1.6 percent recently) make larger mortgages more affordable. House Price to Disposable Income Per Capita (Percent deviation from 20 year average) J H Z W Sources: OECD and Fund staff calculations. Household Interest Rate and House Price Expectations (Percent, left; Share of households balance, right) Interest rate expectations 2 year's time House price expectations, right 1/ Sources: SEB, Sveriges Riksbank, and Fund staff calculations. 1/ Net share of households expecting house prices to rise. Distribution of Debt-to-Income Ratios for New Mortgage Borrowers (Share of households, percent) Macroeconomic vulnerabilities would build as a larger share of households become highly indebted against expensive housing. The share of new mortgages with debt-to-income (DTI) ratios of 300–450 percent has risen in recent years, and the share with DTI over 450 percent is high at 29 percent. Continued house price gains would likely raise these shares as house purchasers take on larger debts relative to income while still meeting the 85 percent loan-to-value (LTV) ceiling. The further house prices and household debt rise relative to income, the greater is Sweden’s vulnerability to a prolonged recession after a shock owing to wealth effects and debt deleveraging. The experiences of Denmark and the Netherlands after the global financial crisis are indicative, although household debts and house price deviations appear to have been greater in these countries in 2008 than yet seen in Sweden. Sources: Finansinspektionen and Fund staff calculations. Note: The figure shows debt-to-income ratios based on households' total debt. 1/ Ratio based on disposable income, i.e., after tax. Above 600 Such a rise was evident ahead of the Irish crisis; while over 90 percent of Irish mortgages were previously below 350 percent of income, by 2006-07 more than half were above that threshold (see Figure 4 in Consultation Paper 87). Page 14 Box 2. Housing Valuation and Policy Impacts Broad trends in Swedish housing prices are largely accounted for by fundamental factors and the value of housing is a key determinant of household debt. forthcoming IMF staff working paper (Turk, 2015) finds the main drivers of real housing prices are disposable income, financial assets net of debt, real mortgage rates after tax deductions, and net migration. In parallel, household debt is driven by the value of the housing stock as well as real after-tax mortgage rates. Contribution of Fundamentals to Housing Prices (All variables demeaned) Real disposable income per capita Housing stock per capita Real after-tax mortgage rate Real net financial assets less liabilities per capita Net migration per capita Fitted house price Note: All variables are demeaned. Source: Fund staff calculations. Real housing prices and household debt are estimated to be moderately above equilibrium. Estimation of a three-equation model (for housing prices, household debt, and residential investment) suggests that housing prices and household debt are above their long run equilibrium level by about 5½ and 6¼ percent respectively. Yet, real mortgage interest rates are some 1½ percentage points below their average since 2000 and could potentially rise in the medium term. Under this scenario, the combined effect of the valuation gap and interest rate reversal is a decrease in housing prices and household debt by 12 and 11 percent respectively. The analysis also finds that past house price gains fuel borrowing that in turn bolsters house prices, with a potentially disruptive eventual return to equilibrium. Model simulations indicate that the impact of phasing out tax deductibility of mortgage interest is manageable. A gradual elimination of mortgage Impact of Phasing Out Tax Deductibility on Real Housing Prices (Percent deviation from baseline) interest deductibility—cutting the 30 percent deduction by 5 percentage points per annum—is expected to lower housing prices by about 4 percent over 8 years, with household debt declining 5½ percent over 11 years. These modest estimated impacts partly reflect the current low level of interest rates, making this a good time to phase-out deductibility. Even at somewhat higher interest rates, the macroeconomic impact of phasing out mortgage interest deductibility would be manageable in the context of housing price trends due to rising income and net financial assets. Impact of Increasing Housing Supply on Real Housing Prices (Logs) Maximum decrease of 4 percent relative to baseline after 8 years. Source: Fund staff calculations. Quarters Expanding the supply of housing would have a small and gradual impact on prices. The government plans to bolster construction, to bring the cumulative increase in the housing stock to 250,000 dwellings over the medium term. Reaching this target is estimated to require 60,000 additional dwellings than in the baseline, a 1.3 percent addition to the housing stock, which is estimated to reduce real housing prices by only 1.4 percent by 2020. Cumulative real housing price decrease of 1.4 percent Model From 2017 to 2019, annual addition of 20,000 dwellings to construction Source: Fund staff calculations. Page 15 Such a rise in vulnerabilities would exacerbate downside risks to Sweden’s outlook in the medium term from a range of potential shocks (see also the Risk Assessment Matrix): External activity risks Weakness in euro area or emerging market activity, potentially associated with commodity price falls, would weigh on Swedish exports and growth. Krona appreciation, perhaps due to expanded QE in the euro area, would reinforce this impact. Domestic vulnerabilities could amplify the impact of such shocks, especially if continued low inflation left monetary policy with little space. International financial risks More volatile global financial markets could raise credit spreads on Swedish bank funding. Such costs would over time be passed into lending rates, dragging on demand and perhaps impacting the housing market. Bank Funding Structure, 2014 (In percent of total funding) Germany Netherlands United Kingdom Sweden Domestic risks Although risks of a housing price correction seem modest for now, they would escalate if double-digit house price rises continue. There are also risks to the outlook for unemployment from the wide range of possible migration inflows, and the extent to which such unemployment would be structural is unclear, increasing inflation uncertainties. Money Market Sources: Bankscope and Fund staff calculations. Long-Term Deposits Authorities’ views The Swedish authorities shared broadly similar macroeconomic projections. They also had rising concerns around the high rate of housing price increases but had varying views about the scale of the associated macroeconomic vulnerabilities, with the Riksbank most concerned on this front. The authorities also saw a similar range of external and domestic risks.