Swedish banks appear healthy, but risk weights on some assets should be reviewed. Capital adequacy and profitability ratios are solid and funding structures close to Basel III requirements, although Swedish banks have a relatively high share of debt securities due in less than 1 year. However, strong regulatory capital ratios benefit from declining risk weights as internal ratings based models are partly driven by low default rates in recent years. It is therefore welcome that the Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA) is reviewing risk weights on corporate loans. Capital Ratios of Major Banks CET1 ratio 1/ CET1 ratio without internal models 2/ 1/ With banks' reported risk weigths. 2/ Excluding risk-weight reduction driven by the transition to internal models. Macroprudential policies have been strengthened in recent years, but macroeconomic vulnerabilities can increase as house prices rise. In 2010 the FSA established a Loan-to-Value (LTV) ceiling of 85 percent, with new mortgages having an average LTV of 70 percent in 2014. But Page 21 households can take on more debt relative to income as house prices rise, even if prices rise above sustainable levels. There is a framework in place to contain risks of mortgage default. Yet macroeconomic vulnerabilities increase with the share of households with high debt to income (DTI) ratios, as their disposable income is more sensitive to interest rate fluctuations. Moreover, if house prices decline, such households would face a larger fall in their net wealth relative to income and a higher risk of debt overhangs relative to their assets. Macroprudential Instrument Status Instrument Countercyclical capital buffer * Capital conservation buffer Systemic risk buffer Additional buffer for systemically important inst. Mortgage risk weight floor Liquidity coverage ratio (all currency, usd, euro) Loan-to-value Sources: FSA, Riksbank, and Fund staff calculations. *To be raised to 1.5 percent in June 2016. Percent A Debt-to-Income (DTI) limit would safeguard financial resilience while containing the drag on growth, but it cannot substitute for housing market reforms. Rather than rationing credit that is still growing at a single digit pace, such limits would aim to avoid a further rise in the share of high DTI loans, which is already sizable. The DTI limits set for the UK (450 percent) and Ireland (350 percent) allow a portion of new mortgages (15 and 20 percent respectively) to exceed these thresholds. Following a similar approach in Sweden would allow the limit to be calibrated such that few households would face an additional constraint on the amount of their borrowing at the outset. To the extent that house price gains continue to outpace income, the limit would affect more borrowers over time, protecting their resilience in part by reducing their LTV ratio. Such effects would be focused on the main centers, especially Stockholm, where house prices are highest. The much delayed amortization requirements should also be implemented. Discussions in recent years around mortgage amortization appear to have contributed to a change in culture, with 68 percent of new mortgage loans being amortized in 2014, up from 42 percent in 2011. The FSA proposed a regulation in November 2014—for minimum amortization of 2 percent of the original loan when LTV is over 70 percent and 1 percent when LTV is over 50 percent—but this was later withdrawn after a court questioned the FSA’s mandate. In September the authorities proposed legislation authorizing the FSA to adopt an amortization requirement for consultation, with the specific FSA regulation subject to government approval, completing these steps by around mid-2016. As most mortgages with a higher LTV are already amortizing, the impact on demand is expected to be small, and effects on debt will be gradual as only new mortgages would be covered. Banks stress test each mortgage borrower and are being conservative by using interest rates of 7-8 percent despite mortgage rates below 2 percent. FSA stress tests (The Swedish Mortgage Market 2015) find households to be resilient to a range of shocks. During the banking crisis in the early 1990s the rise in mortgage arrears was small, where the Swedish Enforcement Authority contributes to the robustness of household debt service. A recent paper finds 38.7 percent of mortgages have DTI over 400 percent of disposable income and 22.4 percent have DTI over 500 percent. These ratios are not directly comparable to those for the U.K. and Ireland, which are based on gross income. A limit covering all mortgage originators in Sweden would help limit leakages. The comprehensive coverage of the private credit bureau could enable all household debt to be covered, containing substitution into unsecured debts. One of the banks indicated that it was applying its own DTI limit of about 500 percent on new mortgages. Page 22 It is nonetheless important to cement recent progress on amortization by putting the regulation in place. The adequacy of debt amortization should be kept under review. It is essential that the framework for macroprudential policies be strengthened to enable timely action with suitable checks and balances. The FSA was assigned responsibility for macroprudential policy in 2013. But, as became evident in the case of amortization requirements, its legal mandate for financial stability and consumer protection does not ensure it can take certain measures principally aimed at protecting macroeconomic stability. The resulting stop and go process of adopting amortization requirements has generated market uncertainties. Especially in the current circumstances, there is an urgent need to strengthen the FSA’s legal mandate to deploy a range of macroprudential tools to address risks in a timely and efficient way. If targeted macroprudential tools are delayed, banks’ capital buffers may need to be further increased. Regional cooperation on financial stability issues, especially for large cross-border banks, should be enhanced. Nordea, a major bank in the region, plans to change to a branch structure. With Nordea’s assets outside Sweden amounting to over 100 percent of the country’s GDP, it will be essential to establish robust cross-border cooperation and information sharing between the Swedish, regional, and European authorities, with respect to supervision, depositor protection, and resolution arrangements. Authorities’ views. The authorities are monitoring housing market and household debt developments situation closely. At this juncture, they favor assessing the impact of amortization requirements before taking further steps given uncertainty around the impacts of macroprudential measures. A DTI limit is among a number of tools that could be considered. The FSA noted that they presently have several macroprudential tools at their disposal which can be used if the financial stability is threatened or for consumer protection purposes. Also the legal mandate for the FSA to implement an amortization requirement is being strengthened. There is an ongoing discussion on the need to further strengthen the FSA legal mandate to implement macroprudential tools. The Riksbank believes that further measures and tools are urgently needed and that housing market reforms are key. The authorities are monitoring Nordea’s plans to change to a branch structure carefully and they agreed on the importance of continuing the well-functioning close supervisory and resolution cooperation both within the region and Europe.