The budget for 2017 targets a continuation of a small deficit. Migration-related spending almost doubled to about 1.5 percent of GDP in 2016 despite lower than assumed refugee inflows. But the budget is expected to record only a small deficit owing to strong revenue performance and lower than expected spending including on healthcare. Looking to 2017, migration-related spending is expected to rise modestly as introduction program costs rise when refugees obtain residence permits and settle in municipalities. New initiatives of about 0.5 percent of GDP include education and active labor market measures together with expanded elderly and child care. These are only partly covered by a new bank tax, higher taxes on chemicals and energy, and state income tax. A reversion to a more normal revenue performance also contributes to the expected small decline in net lending to -0.3 percent of GDP in 2017. A modestly expansionary fiscal stance is appropriate in the near-term given the need to accommodate temporarily high migration-related spending. In 2015 the Fund recommended that swings in migration-related expenses should be accommodated in the near term and funded over time as part of achieving medium-term fiscal targets. Over 2015–17, the decline in the structural balance is estimated to broadly match the 0.8 percent of GDP increase in migration-related spending. As a result, the structural balance adjusted for the exceptional element of migration-related spending is about -¼ percent of GDP in 2017, little changed from 2015. Although the primary goal is to use Sweden’s strong fiscal position to limit the need for fiscal adjustment efforts in response to needs that are partly temporary, the resulting fiscal easing supports growth and employment to a modest extent, complementing monetary policy efforts. The proposed revisions to the fiscal framework will continue to safeguard Sweden’s fiscal buffers. With effect from 2019, the surplus target is to be reduced from 1 percent of GDP to 0.33 percent of GDP in view of the reduction in Sweden’s debt to 43 percent of GDP in 2015. A debt anchor at 35 percent of GDP is a new element, serving as a benchmark consistent with the surplus target rather than an additional operational target, with the government required to explain deviations of more than 5 percent of GDP from this anchor. Staff’s debt sustainability indicates that public debt is on a downward path toward the new anchor (Appendix II). This new debt anchor is V dg ill cc Page 23 valuable considering the importance of Sweden’s strong fiscal position for cushioning potential shocks, such as potential liquidity needs of the large financial sector. In practice, these targets should be achieved over periods sufficient to avoid a procyclical fiscal stance. Fiscal policy has room to cushion the economy if needed and there is also room to help address structural challenges while still adhering to the revised fiscal framework. On a no policy change basis, the structural balance is expected to reach 0.6 percent of GDP by 2019, somewhat above the new medium-term target (Text Table). Public debt is expected to be only a little above the 35 percent target. This strong fiscal position allows full operation of automatic stabilizers and for proactive stimulus in adverse scenarios, which is particularly valuable at a time when monetary policy space has decreased. This outlook also indicates that there is some room for new initiatives in coming years in migration and housing, along the lines discussed in Sections B and E, while still observing the new fiscal targets. Such investments may have significant up-front costs, but will yield longer-term benefits as more refugees become net contributors to the public finances and as improved housing supply facilitates mobility and employment. As highlighted by the Fiscal Policy Council, it would be important to frame such initiatives within a credible medium-term plan. Authorities’ Views. The government’s approach to fiscal policy is indeed to accommodate the temporary element of migration-related costs. While recognizing these costs, the Fiscal Policy Council, considered that 2017 budget should be less expansionary given Sweden’s position of the business cycle. The authorities noted that there was broad political consensus on the proposed revised fiscal targets, and there was flexibility to observe them while avoiding overly rapid adjustment.