The outlook is for accelerating growth. Real GDP growth is projected to strengthen further, to about 2.6 percent in 2014 and about 2.8 percent in 2015. Exports are expected to pick up along with euro area growth and global trade, but private consumption and investment should provide most of the dynamics, while fiscal policy is set to consolidate. With the output gap fully closing, staff expects inflation to gradually rise to around 1½ percent in 2015, as disinflationary pressures from falling imported prices dissipate and wage growth picks up. Financial instability is a key downside risk. Household debt ratios have continued to rise and remain particularly high among indebted lower-income households, and the share of new mortgages with a variable rate has increased from over one half in 2012 to more than two thirds in 2013. While many households show large net asset positions, a significant share of assets is illiquid. As a consequence, adverse shocks to interest rates, house prices, or income could quickly translate Core Tier1/Risk exposure amount Core Tier1/Total assets Swedish Major Banks' Core Tier1 Capital Ratios and Tier 1 Capital in Relation to Total Assets Page 8 into lower consumption, employment, and growth, and ultimately impact the banking system, especially if these shocks occurred at a time of high global funding stress. Sweden’s large and regionally connected banks are also vulnerable to a sudden increase in financial tensions in the wider Nordic region or to surges in global financial market volatility. Conversely, financial instability in Sweden would quickly spread to other Nordic and Baltic countries. (See also the Risk Assessment Matrix, Box 3.) Low inflation and moderating global trade also pose risks. An extended period of very low inflation could cause longer-run inflation expectations to fall significantly below the inflation target. This, in turn, could act as a drag on growth if households and firms defer expenditures in anticipation of lower prices in the future. At the same time, rising oil prices or a depreciation of the could help lift Swedish inflation above the baseline. Geopolitical tensions could lead to lower external demand. The authorities broadly agreed with staff on the outlook and the risks. They saw a recovery driven by private domestic demand and a gradual increase of inflation to the Riksbank’s target of 2 percent, with risks stemming from lower external demand and financial instability related to high household debt. The authorities, however, also noted upside risks from stronger than currently anticipated global growth.