Sweden’s economy has re-gained speed. Following a moderate slowdown in 2011–12, GDP growth reached 1.6 percent in 2013, driven by accelerating private consumption in the second half of the year. This lifted real GDP at end-2013 to nearly 15 percent above its 2009 trough, compared to the EU average of less than 4 percent. Consistent with this robust performance, various methodologies point to a narrowing output gap, estimated to average about -¾ percent of potential GDP in 2013. Unemployment has remained high, reflecting largely structural factors. Despite solid employment growth of around 1 percent in 2013, driven mostly by strong employment growth in the services sector, an even stronger expansion of the labor force resulted in the unemployment rate remaining flat at around 8 percent, well above its pre-crisis level of around 6½ percent. The increase in the labor force reflected both past reforms and Sweden’s growing immigrant population. The increase in unemployment has been borne disproportionately by the young, the low-skilled, and the foreign-born. Combined with a reduced responsiveness of unemployment with respect to growth (i.e., Okun’s law), this suggests that much of the increase in unemployment is structural. Despite accelerating domestic demand, inflation has continued to decline. Headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation averaged 0 percent in 2013 and declined slightly to -0.2 percent in the first half of 2014. Core inflation, measured as CPI with constant mortgage Headline CPI includes mortgage interest costs in its consumption basket. The Riksbank’s preferred measure of inflation is CPI at a fixed mortgage rate (CPIF), which averaged 0.9 percent in 2013 and 0.4 percent in 2014:H1. FIN DEU ITA NLD ESP SWE GBR Recent GDP Developments (Index: 2007Q4=100) Sources: Haver Analytics and Fund staff calculations. Actual Predicted (growth rates) Predicted (output gap) Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations.Note: Based on a regression of the change in (level of) unemployment on GDP growth (output gap) during 1998-2013. Cyclical vs. Structural Unemployment CPI CPIF 1/ CPIF excl. energy HICP TargetSources: Eurostat, Haver Analytics, Statistics Sweden and Fund staff calculations. "Core" inflationmeasure Inflation (Y/Y percent change) 1/ CPI at fixed mortgage rate. Page 6 rates and excluding energy, averaged 1.1 percent in 2013 and 0.6 percent in the first half of 2014. In part, low inflation reflected imported global price trends and the continuing strength of the , a moderate depreciation during the second half of 2013 notwithstanding (see Box 1). Service sector inflation in particular has slowed since early 2013, partly due to second-round effects of declining fuel prices on transportation costs. Favorable unit labor cost (ULC) developments in services, with productivity improvements roughly compensating for nominal wage growth of around 2 percent in 2013, also reduced pressure on prices (see Figure 2). While inflation expectations have drifted downward, they remain relatively well-anchored at the policy horizon. The large and positive external balance largely reflects structural factors. The current account surplus reached 6.4 percent of GDP in 2013, a moderate increase from 6 percent in 2012. Among the structural factors are the very large financial sector and pension and household savings patterns, which are consistent with Sweden’s population aging dynamics. These trends have been reinforced by social protection reforms since the mid-1990s. In addition, Swedish investment income rose in 2013, on account of high returns from equity assets and low interest payments on debt liabilities, as did net trade in services, driven by an increase in merchanting trade. The moderate depreciation of the exchange rate helped as well. Overall, staff estimates the to be broadly in equilibrium, with Sweden’s strong external position reflecting mostly structural factors (see Box 1). Housing prices and household indebtedness have increased from already high levels. Reflecting strong demand fueled by low interest rates, as well as structural factors such as ongoing urbanization and insufficient housing supply, house price increases have picked up again, at about 7½ percent annual growth for single-family homes and nearly 13 percent for tenant-owned apartments in the first half of 2014. Household credit growth remained equally strong, pushing household indebtedness to almost 175 percent of disposable income in 2013, and over 190 percent Population aged 45-64 (percent of total) Current account (percent of GDP, rhs) Current Account and Demographics Single-family dwellings Tenant-owned apartements Composite index Housing Prices (Index: January2005=100)Sources: Sveriges Riksbank and Fund staff calculations. Debt Debt (incl. tenant-owner associations) Expectations of housing prices, rhs Sources: SEB, Sveriges Riksbank and Fund staff calculations. Note: The debt ratios are expressed as shares of household disposable income. House price expectations are defined as the share of households believing housing prices will rise less the share of households believing they will fall. Swedish Household Indebtedness and Housing Price Expectations Page 7 if debt from tenant-owned housing associations is included. Amortization rates are very low, with about 40 percent of households having increased or failed to reduce their debt stock in 2013. Recent data indicate that debt ratios are particularly high for indebted lower-income households who are especially vulnerable to income, interest rate, and house price shocks. Economic policies have supported the recovery and strengthened the resilience of the large banking sector. In particular: Financial sector reforms continued. The authorities have rolled out Basel III measures ahead of schedule, including implementing systemic risk buffers and plans to impose counter-cyclical buffer and strengthen liquidity coverage ratios (LCRs), in addition to increasing mortgage risk weights. However, with assets close to four times GDP, the Swedish banking sector is large and leverage ratios are low, having improved little in recent years. Monetary policy has been supportive while stressing financial stability risks. The Riksbank reduced the repo rate by 25 basis points in December 2013 and a further 50 basis points in July 2014, setting it at 0.25 percent, but highlighted the growing tension between addressing low inflation and further fueling household borrowing. Fiscal policy remains expansionary for now. Net lending is projected to increase to -1.9 percent of GDP in 2014, up from -1.3 percent in 2013, primarily on account of lower revenues. Given strengthening growth, this implies—at least in hindsight—a procyclical structural expansion of about ½ percent of potential GDP.