The Riksbank’s shift to unconventional measures from February has generated a firmly stimulatory monetary stance. The negative repo rate is about 3 percentage points below its historical average in real terms. Lending and deposit rates for households and firms have declined broadly in line with the repo rate, but have remained positive aside from deposits of large corporations. Swedish QE has further lowered the yield curve, with negative yields on government bonds out to about 5 years, and yields on banks’ covered bonds have moved down roughly in parallel. The “shadow rate” illustrates the lower repo rate consistent with the impact of QE on the yield curve. As of October, the krona has depreciated by 4 percent in nominal effective terms from its 2014 average, further contributing to easy monetary conditions. Monetary Policy Stance Real repo rate 1/ Real shadow rate 1/ 2/ Exchange Rates (Index: 2010=100) 1/ Based on a 6-month moving average of core HICP inflation. 2/ The shadow rate is calculated following Wu and Xia (2015). Real Effective Exchange Rate Nominal Effective Exchange Rate Sources: IMF Information Notice System, Riksbank, and Fund staff calculations. This stimulatory stance is appropriate as the urgency of returning inflation to the 2 percent target has increased. As noted, inflation expectations fell significantly in the three months to January 2015, with 2-year ahead inflation expectations down to only 1.2 percent. Allowing low inflation to persist would pose increasing risk to the credibility of the inflation target, damaging its effectiveness in promoting macroeconomic stability including through steady functioning of the wage formation process. This consideration has become particularly important as a collective bargaining round beginning at end 2015 will set floors on nominal wage increases, usually in force for a three year period. Hence, even as concerns around housing price and household debt vulnerabilities rose, it was appropriate for monetary policy to not “lean against the wind”. Although monetary stimulus adds to pressures on housing prices and household debt, low interest rates are estimated to account for a small part of the rises in recent years, whereas allowing low inflation to persist could also undermine stability, including by likely requiring a more extended period of low interest rates. The net interest margin of major banks in the first nine months of 2015 was higher than the same period last year, even as the major banks report some impact from not fully passing on negative interest rates to depositors. Page 17 Core Inflation Projections (Y/Y percent change) Such a stance should continue until core inflation is durably close to target. From an average of ½ percent y/y in 2014, core HICP inflation has risen to 1.4 percent y/y in recent months, partly due to krona depreciation. Resource utilization has been rising since mid-2013 and will further increase in view of solid growth prospects, underpinning a pick up in domestic inflation, with staff projecting core HICP inflation at about 2 percent by end 2017. This inflation outlook suggests no major change in monetary instruments is needed at this stage. The recent extension of QE into 2016 was appropriate to maintain the current expansionary stance. Phillips curve model Riksbank forecast HICP excl. food and energy inflation CPIF excl. energy inflation Sources: Eurostat, Riksbank, Statistics Sweden, and Fund staff calculations. The Riksbank should remain ready to do more. Although recent inflation out-turns are positive, some downsides to the inflation outlook remain. Appropriately, the Riksbank is prepared to make monetary policy more expansionary if needed, where it has a number of options. The repo rate can be cut further, as indicated by Danish and Swiss policy rates at -0.75 percent, although the impact on lending rates may weaken as banks are reluctant to charge depositors. Even as it extended government bond purchases, the Riksbank indicated that it can purchase more securities; making covered bonds eligible for purchases would greatly expand the pool of assets, though there may be signaling issues given concerns about appearing to fuel housing prices. The option to launch a lending program via the banks for companies also remains. Foreign exchange intervention should be a last resort after other instruments are exhausted considering Sweden’s strong external position and the undervaluation of the krona (Box 3). CPI Inflation and Interest Rates A revision of the inflation measure targeted would have significant advantages. The target adopted by the Riksbank is in terms of Sweden’s CPI, which includes mortgage interest costs. Repo rate cuts therefore result in a notable immediate fall in headline CPI inflation. Absent declines in interest rates, headline CPI inflation would have averaged about 0.9 percent y/y rather than 0 in recent years. Recognizing these issues, in practice the Riksbank focuses on a CPI measure with fixed interest rates when setting monetary policy. But having a target in terms of the internationally comparable HICP would reduce communication issues and enhance credibility. CPI with fixed interest rates Contributions from interest rates CPI inflation Repo rate Sources: Statistics Sweden, Sveriges Riksbanks, and Fund staff calculations. Authorities’ views . The authorities shared the same perspective on the monetary policy stance. The Riksbank noted that it had called for macroprudential measures to address vulnerabilities. Any change in the inflation measure targeted was best considered once inflation was back at target. Page 18 Box 3. External Assessment External Balance Assessment (EBA) Methodologies, 2015 REER gap (percent) (percent of GDP) Methodology CA gap The External Balance Assessment (EBA) methodology suggests that in 2015 the krona is substantially undervalued. Since the beginning of 2015, the Riksbank shifted to negative rates and a QE program to combat low inflation. This led to an 8 percent depreciation of the real effective exchange rate (REER) as of August 2015 compared with the average for 2014—which has partly reversed with recent appreciation. As a result, the REER gap has widened from 2014, when the krona was assessed to be moderately undervalued. A number of factors are important when evaluating Swed en’s external position: Demographic and institutional factors tend to influence the current account in Sweden but can be difficult to capture fully in a cross-country approach such as the EBA. Sweden’s high saving rate, which is not unusual for an aging society, is reinforced by pension and welfare reforms since the mid-1990s including a shift to a defined contributions pension scheme and a decline in transfers. Other structural factors shaping Sweden’s current account are not reflected in the EBA-estimated EBA CA Analysis EBA REER (index) Analysis EBA REER (level) Analysis Staff Assessment Source: IMF World Economic Outlook and Fund staff calculations. 1/ CA and REER gaps: Minus indicates undervaluation. The 2015 year average REER is calculated using actual REER through August 2015, and holding the August 2015 REER fixed through December 2015. The krona is freely floating and there are no policy distortions impacting the current account. 0 to 5 -11 to -1 gap. Sweden operates as a regional financial center for the Nordic region (with banking assets over 400 percent of GDP, of which about 170 percent of GDP in assets are outside Sweden) and the country plays a significant role in merchanting trade. Both characteristics have been shown to lead to persistently larger current account balances, with merchanting trade in particular having accounted for a substantial share current account dynamics in the past decade. Statistical issues raise some doubts about the current account position . The Swedish net IIP is near balance at -0.3 percent of GDP in 2014, with gross external liabilities at 294 percent of GDP. But the increase over time in the net IIP is generally smaller than the cumulative current account balances, although this is in part explained by negative valuation effects. Taking these factors into consideration, staff assesses the krona to be undervalued by about 10 percent, as a significant part of the Swedish current account surplus is structural. Staff assesses Sweden’s adjusted current account norm to be around 2½–6½ percent of GDP, implying a current account gap in the range of 0 to 5 percent of GDP in 2015. As a result, the REER gap is assessed to be in the lower end of the -11 to -1 percent range in 2015, considering the EBA REER analysis. This undervaluation is expected to be temporary, with the krona likely to appreciate once the monetary easing cycle ends. Staff assesses that the monetary policy stance is consistent with Sweden’s inflation targeting framework, and expects monetary conditions to begin to normalize once core inflation is close to the target. The timing for the krona appreciating toward its fundamental value is uncertain, but it could happen as early as 2016 under the Riksbank’s forecasts. Reflecting, in part, the temporary nature of the krona weakness, staff projects only a modest rise in the current account in 2015 followed by a slow decline over the medium term. The current level of foreign currency reserve holdings appears broadly appropriate. Reserves stood at US$50.5 billion in September 2015, equivalent to about 40 percent of Swedish banks’ short term foreign currency liabilities. In view of the high dependence of Swedish banks on wholesale funding in foreign currency, and the disruptions in such funding that have occurred at times of international financial distress, maintaining adequate foreign currency liquidity buffers is prudent. Page 19