A number of financial reforms are on the way. The authorities have announced plans to further improve banks’ capital buffers, including raising minimum mortgage risk weights to 25 percent at the end of 2014 and introducing Basel III measures such as systemic risk and countercyclical capital buffers. This should help to further improve the balance sheets of Swedish banks. However, reflecting very low borrowing costs and strong expectations that house prices will continue to increase, household credit has picked up again recently and, under current policies, is projected by the Riksbank to continue rising in 2014 and 2015. Macroprudential policies focused more directly on mortgage demand stand a better chance of curbing credit growth. Further measures on the credit supply side are likely to have limited additional impact, not least given banks’ favorable funding conditions and the low mortgage rates they allow. On the demand side, following an agreement with the Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA), banks are committed to encourage new customers to agree to voluntary amortization plans. However, with no sign of credit slowing down, real progress might require the gradual introduction of mandatory amortization requirements. Such regulation has been enforced, for example, in Singapore in 2012, where new mortgages have to be amortized within 35 years. A gradual introduction of a debt service-to-income (DSTI) limit, combined with a lower binding loan-to-value (LTV) cap, would further help contain mortgage demand. The LTV cap of 85 percent is relatively generous compared with that in many other advanced economies. Nevertheless, in 2013, about 10 percent of households have taken on supplementary unsecured loans that were in part used to help finance house purchases. In addition, given rising housing values, even a more binding LTV cap might not keep debt-to-income ratios from rising. This suggests that adding a DSTI limit to the Swedish macroprudential toolbox could help keep debt at sustainable levels. It would tie households’ debt to their income level, independent of house values, Macroprudential Policies in Sweden: An Overview Source: Fund staff calculations. RiskDemand Side MeasuresPossible Repercussions Illustration of Demand Side Measures Highand rising household debt Lower LTV cap Introduce DSTI requirement Increasein unsecured loans Lengthenamortization period Limits on maximum amortization periods Limits total debt Limits amor. period Tax measures(property tax, tax deductability on mort. payments) Page 10 and could work as an automatic stabilizer that helps contain excessive increases in credit (and asset prices) relative to income, further reducing household vulnerabilities. Mortgage interest tax deductibility contributes to high household debt by providing an incentive to accumulate debt and keep it at high levels. As a result, many Swedish households are more leveraged and vulnerable to economic or financial shocks than they would otherwise be. A gradual reduction in mortgage interest deductibility—as is, for example, being done in Finland— would reduce this distortion. A longer-term solution to rising house prices and mortgage levels will require alleviating housing supply constraints. Insufficient housing supply growth is a fundamental factor behind the rise in residential property prices, especially in metropolitan areas, where ongoing urbanization and immigration trends boost demand. This has resulted in higher housing prices, driving up the size of mortgages. While some steps have been taken, containing house price pressures will require a continuing effort to expand the stock of affordable housing and further reforms to zoning, permitting, and the rent-setting process. Public infrastructure investments, coordinated with municipalities, would also make private housing investments more attractive. Recent progress notwithstanding, there is scope for additional measures to increase the resilience of Sweden’s banking system . This includes: Capital. While the average core Tier I risk- weighted capital ratio rose from 11.8 to 16.8 percent between end-2010 and end- 2013, most of the improvement reflected changes in average risk weights, in part driven by the introduction of new risk models. The average leverage ratio (measured by core Tier 1 capital as share of total assets) has increased only slightly from 3.6 percent to 3.9 percent, which remains low in comparison to other large banking systems. A higher leverage ratio requirement, such as the 5 percent minimum leverage ratio requirement proposed by the U.S. Federal Reserve, would ensure a more substantial increase in shock-absorbers. Introducing the countercyclical capital buffer at or close to 2½ percent—the maximum value subject to international reciprocity—would also help. Liquidity. Over half of Swedish bank funding comes from wholesale sources, consisting mostly of relatively short-maturity covered bonds and certificates. According to the Riksbank’s measure of Currently, mortgage interest costs up to 100,000 (in excess of capital income) can be deducted at a 30 percent income tax rate, with amounts over that deducted at a 21 percent rate. Core tier 1 ratio, December 2010Change in core tier 1 capitalChange in average risk-weightsChange in total assetsCore tier 1 ratio, December 2013 Development of Major Swedish Banks' Core Tier 1 Capital Ratios, Basel III Note: The intermediate columns show how different factors have contributed to the change in weighted average of Swedish major banks' core Tier 1 capital ratios between December 2010 and December 2013. Lower average risk weights contributed largest part of the increase, which was partly driven by the implementation of advanced internal ratings-based models. Page 11 structural liquidity, the resulting maturity mismatch has improved only marginally in recent years and remains low compared to other European banks. Rapid progress towards fulfilling the Basel III Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) requirement at 100 percent would help in this regard; and introducing a minimum LCR requirement in Swedish could add to banks’ ability to withstand a short-term liquidity squeeze. The size and regional orientation of Sweden’s banks makes cross border cooperation essential . The coordinated Nordic approach to raising mortgage lending standards in Norway—with the Swedish and Danish authorities ensuring the compliance of local bank branches—marks important progress towards the necessary macroprudential cooperation in the highly integrated regional banking market. The implementation of the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) should allow the completion of the work of the Nordea Crisis Management Group (CMG) and facilitate a binding ex-ante burden sharing agreement. Retaining the option of Sweden joining the Banking Union would keep the door open to further improving the level of regulatory and macroprudential cooperation and coordination across the Nordic-Baltic region. The authorities broadly concurred with staff’s assessment of financial vulnerabilities and stressed that measures were under way to address them. They saw household indebtedness as high both from a historical and international perspective. However, they also noted that the ongoing push for higher capital and liquidity standards—often well in advance of the Basel III timetable—should help contain emerging risks. There was also support for the call for demand-side measures, with the Riksbank and the Ministry of Finance emphasizing the need to make further progress on improving the amortization culture. The FSA argued that to assess whether further policy action would be warranted, the effects of the already implemented measures, such as increased risk weights and voluntary amortization plans, needed to be evaluated first.