Recent reforms and relatively strong GDP growth have fostered employment—but unemployment remains high especially among vulnerable groups. The introduction of an Earned-Income Tax Credit (EITC), reforms to disability insurance, and enhanced Active Labor Market Programs (ALMPs) have resulted in a substantial expansion of the labor force. Increased immigration inflows have added to these dynamics. Despite solid employment growth overall, unemployment rates have risen markedly among the low-skilled, especially youths, foreign-born, and older workers while they have remained low among others, suggesting that much of the rise in unemployment is structural. Vulnerable groups Non-vulnerable groups Sources: Statistics Sweden and Fund staff calculations.Notes: Vulnerable groups are individuals born outside of Europe,over the age of 55, or with low educational attainment. Unemployment Hourly earnings (manufacturing) Average labor productivity (manufacturing) Earnings and Productivity Growth (Percent change) Sources: Haver Analytics, National Institute of Economic Research and Fund staff calculations. Page 14 Further reforms can help accelerate and sustain the transition of vulnerable groups into employment. The Swedish wage formation process has contributed to creating one of the most compressed wage distributions among OECD economies. While Sweden’s collective bargaining institutions have, on average, delivered wage growth in line with productivity, a narrow wage range can limit employment opportunities at the lower end where unemployment is most pronounced. Here, social partners have an important role to play—for example, by exploring ways to increase wage flexibility at the firm level. They, and the government, can also help the young and the low-skilled add to their human capital. For example, developing vocational training programs that are aligned with employers’ needs would allow these groups to gain better-paying, higher- productivity jobs. An expansion of training-based ALMPs can also help in this context. Addressing structural housing market constraints will facilitate labor mobility and improve financial stability. High urbanization rates and immigration flows have added to high and rising demand for housing and boosted residential property prices. Meeting this demand will require expanding the supply of affordable housing , including by tackling well-known problems with zoning regulations and adjusting the rent setting mechanism, which can prevent the efficient allocation of the existing stock of properties and, by keeping the average rent below market levels, limits incentives for the construction of rental properties. Exempting new construction from rental regulations for longer than is currently the case would help. Tax reforms also have a role to play. The capital gains tax acts as a deterrent to moving and complicates the efficient allocation of the existing stock of housing. A reform in this area could be complemented by an increase in the property tax on private residences. Property taxation, reduced in 2008 to a municipal property fee capped at 0.75 percent, is below the values in many other advanced countries, such as up to 4 percent in the U.S. and up to 3 percent in Denmark. The Swedish Labor Market—Responding to Global Challenges See Boverket Market Report (Fall 2013). Net Immigration, 2012 (Percent of total population)Sources: World Development Indicators and Fund staff calculations. Urban Population, 2012 (Percent of total population) Sources: World Development Indicators and Fund staff calculations. Page 15 The authorities shared staff’s concern over high unemployment and housing market rigidities. They were concerned over the high level of unemployment and how vulnerable groups are affected. The authorities noted that the persistent recession, combined with an expansion of the labor force, has contributed to the relatively high unemployment rate. However, there were differing views among the authorities on whether the high level of unemployment is mainly cyclical or structural. On housing, the authorities agreed with the need to address supply constraints and noted several measures they had already taken and that over time are expected to increase housing supply. However, in this context, they saw little scope for substantial tax reforms in the near term.