The appreciated franc will weigh on growth during 2015–16, but the economy is expected to recover over the medium term . Staff and consensus forecasts expect real GDP growth to slow to around ¾ percent and 1¼ percent in 2015 and 2016, respectively, mainly due to weaker net exports (Table 1). Unemployment is expected to rise only modestly (peaking at 3½ percent in 2015), as widespread use of short-time working arrangements in Switzerland lessens the adverse impact of weaker demand on unemployment. The output gap, almost closed at end- 2014, is projected to widen in 2015. Over the medium term, this gap is expected to close and growth is expected to rise gradually as the economy adjusts to the shock and as increasing divergence between Switzerland’s monetary policy stance and that of some other major advanced economies (due to a gradual increase in policy rates in the latter) helps ease appreciation pressure on the franc, supporting recovery of external demand. Inflation is projected to trough in late 2015 before becoming slightly positive over the medium term Headline inflation is projected to fall near -1½ percent by late 2015, as the gradual pass-through from franc appreciation and lower commodity prices reaches peak effects. As these one-off effects dissipate, inflation is projected to gradually rise back into positive territory by early 2017. Assessing where exactly inflation will stabilize in the medium term is difficult, in part due to the lack of market-based measures of inflation expectations. However, if one assumes that real yields are similar to those in other safe havens (Germany, UK), then Switzerland’s nominal government bond yields—which have recently set world-record lows (Figure 4)—imply that markets expect inflation to be roughly 1 percent 3–4 years from now. Euro Area Germany Switzerland USA Real Effective Exchange Rates--Unit Labor Cost Basis (January 2010=100)Sources IMF International Financial Statistics. Page 16 Similarly, an analysis of the recent relationship between core inflation and the output gap shows that the Phillips curve crosses the vertical axis at around ½ percent, implying that steady-state inflation expectations are anchored around that level. Taking both considerations into account and assuming unchanged monetary policy, staff project medium-term inflation in the range of ½–1 percent (Table 1), an outcome consistent with the SNB’s definition of price stability of “less than 2 percent” inflation. However, this central scenario is subject to important risks (see Annex 2 for further discussion of key risks). Risks related to low inflation . One key risk is that operating in an environment of very low inflation may prove more challenging than assumed in the central scenario. In particular, low levels of inflation may make it difficult for monetary policy to reduce the real interest rate as needed to ensure full employment, given constraints on further significant reductions in nominal interest rates (i.e., “a liquidity trap”). Moreover, this risk may be higher than in previous periods due to the global drop in equilibrium real interest rates over the last decade. Such difficulties arising from low inflation may become especially acute if various risks to external demand (see below and Annex 1) are realized. Low equilibrium rates of inflation also imply low equilibrium nominal interest rates, posing challenges for some sectors such as defined-benefit pension plans and life insurers, and may make relative wage and price adjustments more difficult due to resistance to nominal wage and price cuts. Uncertainty about EU relations and immigration . Last year’s vote to move away from the free movement of labor with the EU has created substantial uncertainty about medium-term growth prospects, as such a move may reduce labor force growth, restrict firms’ ability to recruit personnel, increase the fiscal challenges of population aging, and reduce Swiss firms’ access to EU markets if existing cooperation agreements with the EU are revised. This uncertainty may also weigh on investment (see later section for further discussion of this issue). Global economic environment . This risk goes in both directions. On one hand, downside surprises to global growth and further bouts of market risk aversion (e.g., due to a protracted period of turmoil in Greece or geopolitical events) could fuel franc appreciation and deflationary pressures and reduce growth. On the other hand, growth in Europe and other advanced economies could also surprise on the upside (e.g., due to a larger-than-expected boost from lower oil prices), supporting a more competitive franc, faster Swiss growth, and a quicker exit from deflation. y = 0.18x + 0.45R² = 0.23-1.5-1.0 Switzerland: Core Inflation and Output Gap (Correlations between CPI(t) and output gap(t-1), 2000–14)Source: IMF staff calculations. f l t i o ( r o r r c t ) Output Gap (percent of potential ) Page 17 Financial Sector The banking sector is highly globally interconnected; the largest banks (UBS and Credit Suisse) remain highly leveraged in comparison with most other global systemically important banks and still have large investment banking operations. Consequently, they could be a source of outward spillovers and remain vulnerable to inward spillovers from instability in global financial markets. Housing Market Though it has cooled recently, Switzerland’s house prices have had a rapid run-up over the last decade, and mortgage debt is high as percent of GDP (see later section for more details). The economy could thus be vulnerable to a sharp decline in house prices, which would weaken household balance sheets and impede growth. Such a decline would also adversely affect the banking and insurance industries, with their large respective exposures to the mortgage market and real estate. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of macroeconomic developments and risks . They agreed that the franc was now overvalued. They also agreed that the sharp appreciation of the franc has depressed growth prospects in the short run and presents a challenge for the export sector, especially in those industries where the market power of Swiss firms is limited. On the low-inflation environment, they noted that domestic inflation was still positive and viewed the current deflation as a transitory phenomenon, driven by lower energy prices and currency appreciation, and projected inflation to move back into positive territory over the medium term. On spillovers to Eastern Europe from the franc’s appreciation, the SNB noted that the authorities in Eastern Europe had been aware of risks related to franc-denominated mortgages for some time.