Switzerland continues to take measures to strengthen its financial sector more generally, including with respect to key FSAP update recommendations (Annex 4) . Such efforts are important not only for Switzerland, but also to promote global financial stability, given the prominent role of the Swiss banking and insurance sectors. Still, the FSAP update was concluded only a year ago, and many of the reforms are work in progress. Thus, continued efforts are needed to further strengthen the post-crisis transition to a safer financial sector. The authorities are therefore encouraged to complete the financial sector reform agenda, as laid out in last year’s FSAP update . The TBTF policies (discussed above) and policies to contain the potential build-up of risks in the domestic real estate and mortgage markets (discussed below) are important policy areas in this regard. Other priority measures going forward include the following. Continue to refine FINMA’s use of external auditors . FINMA has taken regulatory measures to strengthen its guidance to external auditors. This is encouraging, and implementation must be forceful to validate the work of the auditors and ensure supervisory harmonization across entities. FINMA also reports that it has intensified its direct supervisory activities, including on- site inspections, and resources will be redirected to further strengthen these supervisory activities. However, more resources for FINMA may still be needed, as pointed out by the FSAP and for which there are no plans. The use of external auditors could also be strengthened by paying auditors from a FINMA-managed, bank-financed fund rather than by the bank that is being audited to avoid conflicts of interest, and by periodically rotating auditing firms. Overhaul deposit insurance . The governance of the deposit insurance scheme should be reformed to make it more independent by substantially limiting the influence of the banking industry in its board. Dedicated ex ante funding with a back-up line of support should also be built up to strengthen access to funds and confidence in case of bank failures. The Brunetti Page 25 Report has encouraging recommendations in this direction, and the authorities should take steps to reform the scheme accordingly. In addition, deposit insurance funds should be made available to finance resolution measures on a least-cost basis. Authorities’ views The authorities emphasized that they are taking many steps for financial sector reform and that many of the FSAP update recommendations would be implemented . Regarding banking supervision, FINMA explained that they are working hard to further strengthen the management of the use of external auditors. They do not see a need for a substantial increase in the overall resource envelope unless new statutory tasks are assigned to FINMA. Rather, further reallocation within FINMA would be sufficient. FINMA agreed that reforming how external auditors are being paid to reduce conflicts of interest could be helpful, but was more skeptical about the benefit from mandatory rotation of auditors, as it is an oligopoly market with few firms available. On deposit insurance, the Federal Council has taken note of the Brunetti Report and will decide on how to proceed with the expert group's recommendations at a later date.