The Swiss economy grew steadily in 2014 . Output expanded by 2.0 percent, driven by strong external demand and private consumption (Table 1, Figures 1–2). Solid growth narrowed the output gap to around -0.3 percent, with capacity utilization nearing its historic average. The unemployment rate stabilized at 3.2 percent. In 2015, the outlook shifted following the exit from the exchange rate floor The floor of 1.2 francs per euro, which had been in place since 2011, faced little pressure for most of 2013–14. However, in late 2014 the Swiss National Bank (SNB) started intervening heavily to defend the floor in response to increased capital inflows arising from a combination of events, including anticipation of the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing program and geopolitical turmoil in Europe. In response, in December 2014 the SNB announced a cut in the interest rate on SNB deposits from zero to -0.25 percent (effective January 22, 2015), but significant interventions were still required to maintain the exchange rate floor. At the same time, the franc’s depreciation against the dollar since mid-2014 had reduced the likelihood of franc overvaluation, raising risks that further intervention would ultimately result in losses on the SNB’s balance sheet, which was approaching 90 percent of GDP. In addition, the SNB was concerned that, once the magnitude of its interventions became public, speculation about exit from the floor would mount, fueling a vicious cycle of rising inflows and a rapidly growing balance sheet. In this context, the SNB decided that the costs of maintaining the floor were no longer worth its benefits. The SNB thus exited from the floor on January 15, 2015. It also announced a cut in its effective policy rate from -0.25 percent to -0.75 percent (effective January 22, 2015). The policy rate applies on deposits at the SNB that exceed a high threshold (for domestic banks, the threshold is 20 times a bank’s required reserves as of the reporting period ending November 19, 2014; minus (plus) any increase (decrease) in cash held). In this way, the effect of negative interest rates on bank profits is limited, while still creating incentives at the margin for agents to shift out of franc deposits and thereby depreciate the franc. Following significant intervention (purchases of roughly CHF 40 billion, or 6 percent of GDP) during the subsequent two weeks, the franc has since hovered between 1.00 and 1.10 per euro, with limited intervention since end-January. Staff estimate based on weekly changes in SNB sight deposits. Page 6 Figure 1. Switzerland: The Long View, 2000–15 Sources: Haver Analytics; InformationNotice System; State Secretariat for Economic Affairs;and Swiss National Bank. Consumption Construction Fixed investment Net exports Inventories and others GDP Contribution to Real GDP Growth (percent)Growth has remained robust since the global crisis... Secondary income Primary income Services Goods Current account Current Account Balance (percent of GDP)...while thecurrent account surplus has shrunk. Unemployment rate (left scale) Employment growth (right scale) Labor Markets Employment has grown moderately, contributing to low unemployment rates... NEER REER Effective Exchange Rates (index 2010=100)...withthe franc appreciating in the post-crisis period , partly reflecting safe-haven inflows. General Government Confederation Fiscal balances have been strong... FiscalBalance (percent of GDP) Confederation Cantons Communes Social Security General Goverment Debt (percent of GDP) ...resulting in lower debt. Page 7 Figure 2. Switzerland: Recent Economic Developments, 2011–14 Sources:Haver Analytics; Swiss Federal Statistical Office; Swiss Institutefor Business Cycle Research; and Swiss National Bank. -6-4-202468-6-4-202468Mar-11Dec-11Sep-12Jun-13Mar-14Dec-14 Switzerland United States European Union Output Growth (quarterly percent change, SAAR)Growth picked up in the second half of 2014... 46810Mar-11Dec-11Sep-12Jun-13Mar-14Dec-14 Private consumption Fixed assets Construction Real Consumption and Investment (quarterly percent change, SAAR, 3qma) ...mainly driven by consumption and investment in fixed assets... Mar-11Dec-11Sep-12Jun-13Mar-14Dec-14 Consumer sentiment (left scale) EU-compatible consumer confidence Consumer Confidence Consumer confidence has been soft.. Mar-11Dec-11Sep-12Jun-13Mar-14Dec-14 Outlook, job security (left) Outlook, unemployment (right) Labor Market Outlook (percent, SA) ...with rising concern about job security. Mar-11Dec-11Sep-12Jun-13Mar-14Dec-14 Balance (right scale) Total exports Total imports Trade (millions of 2010 CHF)...while the trade balance remains in surplus. Jan-07Jan-09Jan-11Jan-13Jan-15 KOF leading indicator Manufacturing PMI (right scale) Leading Indicators High-frequency indicators show weakening activity following the franc's appreciation. Page 8 Following the appreciation, near- term growth indicators have weakened After exhibiting modest growth during 2012– 14, KOF survey indexes of the current and future business climate have declined sharply following the exit from the exchange rate floor, as has manufacturing PMI. The current climate index has sunk to its lowest level since the 2009 recession. Inflation has fallen deeper into negative territory . The strong franc, together with lower oil prices, drove headline CPI inflation down to -0.9 percent in March 2015, with positive inflation for domestically produced goods (0.3 percent) being more than offset by sharply negative inflation for foreign goods (-4.3 percent). Measures of underlying inflationary pressures were similarly contained at end-March—core inflation was -0.2 percent, and unit labor cost growth remained muted near zero (Figure 3). The initial effects from negative interest rates and the exit from the exchange rate floor on the financial sector appear to have been fairly limited . The stock market and stock prices for major banks have returned to levels similar to those before the immediate sharp drop following the exchange rate floor exit (Figures 4-5). Similarly, CDS spreads for the major banks have not moved much. However, it is too early to clearly see what the full effects will be. The large global banks foresee some fairly small negative effects, but are taking measures to adjust; some business segments will also benefit due to the increased FX market activity. The effect of negative interest rates on banks’ profits is mitigated by the fact that (i) the rate applies only on deposits at the SNB over a high threshold (20 times reserves) and (ii) banks are passing on the negative rates to wholesale depositors. However, these effects vary across banks, such that some specific smaller banks may be more adversely affected. Business Climate Business Plans Manufacturing PMI (right scale) Switzerland: KOF Business Survey Indices Source: HaverAnalytics. Policy rate Time deposits (3 month) Saving depositsSource: Swiss National Bank. Switzerland: Retail Deposit Interest Rates Page 9 Figure 3. Switzerland: Selected Monetary Indicators, 2010–14 Sources:HaverAnalytics; Swiss FederalStatistics Office; and Swiss National Bank. 1/ Nominal rate minusinflation. Inflation (y/y percent change) CPI inflation Core inflationInflation is falling sharply... Inflation by Component (y/y percent change) CPI CPI domestic CPI foreign ...as falling foreign CPI continues to put downward pressures on overall CPI. Real Lending Rates Current account advance facilities Investment loans with fixed interest rates Mortgages with fixed interest rates Real lending rates have edged up due to lower inflation. Unit Labor Costs (y/y percent change)Meanwhile, domestic inflationary pressures have also weakened. Interest Rates Policy rate Real policy rate 1/ Against this backdrop, the SNB has cut the policy rateto negative territory. CPI Foreign Inflation and Exchange Rates (y/y percent change) CPI foreign G&S CHF/Euro (level, right scale) ForeignCPIhas fallen along with exchangerate movements. Page 10 Figure 4. Switzerland: Selected Financial Indicators, 2010–15 Sources: Bloomberg;and Datastream. CHF/USD CHF/EUR Foreign Currency Exchange Rates (Units) The franc appreciated sharply following the SNB's decision to exit from the floor on January 15... Overall Financials Stock Market Indices (Index)...and Swiss stock indices fell, but have since recovered. Switzerland Germany United States 10-Year Government Bond Yields (Percent)Swiss sovereign bond yields remain the lowest in the world... Switzerland Germany United States 5-Year Soverign CDS Spreads (Units)...and Swiss sovereign CDS spreads are also low. 1-Month LIBOR 6-Month LIBOR 12-Month LIBOR Short-Term Interest Rates (Percent)Interbank interest rates are currently negative... 2.03M1Y3Y5Y7Y9Y12Y20Y30Y50Y Sovereign Yield Curve (Percent)...so are longer-term interest rates all the way out to 12-year maturities, as of late April. Page 11 Figure 5. Switzerland: Indicators for Global Systemic Banks, 2006–15 Sources: Bankscope;Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations.1/ Switzerland numbers are for Credit Suisse and UBS. "Other"includes Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, HSBC, JP Morgan Chase, Barclays, BNP, Bank of America, New York Mellon, Goldman Sachs, Mitsubishi, Morgan Stanley, Royal Bank of Scotland, Bank of China, BBVA, BPCE, Crédit Agricole, ING, Mizuho, Nordea, Santander, Société Générale, Standard Chartered, State Street, Sumitomo, UniCredit, Wells Fargo, Commerzbank, and Lloyds. CHE Other Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets Loans-to-depositsLiquid assets-to-deposits and short-term borrowings CHE Other Loans-to-Deposits and Liquidity CHE Other Wholesale Funding (Percent of total funding) UBS Credit Suisse (right scale) Equity Prices UBS Credit Suisse CDS Spreads CHE Other RWA to Assets Page 12 The most affected parts of the financial sector are likely life insurers and private banks Life insurers have been under pressure due to a low-yield environment for several years now, forcing them to make significant adjustments. As a result, they actually recorded stronger positions, on average, in FINMA’s latest Solvency Stress Test (based on end-2013 data) relative to two years earlier. Still, the recent drop in yields will create further challenges for life insurers, and the authorities should remain vigilant and support consolidation as needed. The same applies to private banks, which have significant revenue in foreign currency, but most of their costs in Swiss franc. Moreover, private banks were already facing pressure from international initiatives aimed at increasing transparency (e.g., the automatic exchange of tax information and AML/CFT-related initiatives). So far, the fallout on smaller Swiss private banks from the policy changes in 2015 appears to have been more limited than initially feared, but the situation must be continuously monitored. The appreciation of the franc also had outward spillovers Franc appreciation affected several economies in Eastern Europe with a sizeable stock of franc- denominated housing loans, notably Croatia and Poland, where such loans accounted for 6.3 and 7.7 percent of GDP, respectively. In general, the immediate macroeconomic impact of the franc’s appreciation appears somewhat limited and is partly offset by lower franc interest rates; however, the Croatian government temporarily prevented pass-through to borrowers by fixing the applicable exchange rate at the pre-appreciation parity while a permanent solution is being negotiated between banks and borrowers. The contained effect is also partly due to actions by supervisors in some Eastern European countries to halt the provision of new franc-denominated mortgages in recent years and to manage related risks. Hungary mandated the conversion of all FX mortgages into domestic currency in November 2014. The exit from the exchange rate floor might also have modest effects on aggregate demand in other countries. In particular, the appreciation of the franc might increase external demand in trading partners, though such effects are likely to be modest given the relatively small size of the Swiss economy (only 0.5 percent of global GDP on a PPP basis). Any positive effects on aggregate demand in trading partners may also be at least partially mitigated by higher interest rates in these countries due to lessened SNB intervention to defend the floor.