Background Exposure to real estate by lenders and borrowers is high, notwithstanding a relatively low home ownership rate of 45 percent. After 10 successive years of increases that raised house prices by a cumulative 40 percent, prices stabilized in Q2:2016 and the pace of mortgage lending has gradually eased to around 3 percent. This reflects a series of macroprudential measures introduced during 2012–14, including “self regulatory” measures by banks that were adopted in response to moral suasion by the authorities. The increase in the countercyclical capital buffer on mortgages from one to two percent in 2014, a temporary increase in mortgage interest rates in 2015 and some slowdown in population growth also helped to stabilize house prices. More than 80 percent of banks’ domestic loans are mortgages (including to corporates), and among new mortgages, about a third have loan to value (LtV) ratios of 75 percent or more. Insurance companies and pension funds have shifted asset allocations toward real estate in search of higher returns. Non-mortgage credit is declining. At about twice disposable income, household debt is one of the highest among OECD countries, although financial assets are several times larger and the total rate of nonperforming loans is a very low 3 percent. Switzerland: Domestic Bank Loans, 2016 (Billions of CHF - total equals 166 percent of GDP) Household mortgages Other Mortgages Other Loans Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Household Debt in Selected OECD Countries (Percent of gross disposable income; 2015 or latest ) L D L O K D Source: Haver Analytics. H C W B G F P C G F L B U U D The Swiss systemically-important global banks (G-SIBs) (Credit Suisse and UBS) continue to increase capital buffers . In response to the evolving business and regulatory landscape, in recent years these banks have reduced leverage by shrinking their balance sheets (from a combined 6½ times to 2¾ times GDP) and raising capital, and have shifted toward wealth and asset management where profits have been resilient. However, the operating environment for banking remains challenging. As with other G-SIBs, share prices of the large Swiss banks have fallen Key self-regulatory measures are: buyers must acquire a minimum upfront equity stake of 10 percent in the property through use of own funds (rather than borrowed funds or Pillar 2 or 3 pension assets); mortgages must be paid down to two-thirds of the value of the property within 15 years; and banks are required to value real estate at the lower of market value or purchase price. Banks may still issue mortgages that do not meet these and other self-regulation requirements if they set the risk weight on the entire mortgage to 100 percent. Page 18 sharply in recent years, although some recovery has occurred since mid-2016. In July 2016, the Swiss authorities began implementing stricter too-big-to-fail (TBTF2) regulations for their G-SIBs, and which are more conservative than Basel minima, requiring them to have sufficient capital to absorb operating losses and adequate debt capital to fund an orderly resolution. Staff’s views Elevated household debt and banks’ concentrated exposure to mortgages could amplify macroeconomic shocks, and new measures should be readied and supervision further strengthened. House prices relative to income have grown significantly since the great recession, and while prices have recently stabilized, price to income ratios remain stretched. Average debt per borrower is very high given the relatively low rate of home ownership. A prompt response will be needed if greater competition in credit markets further bids down interest rates and spurs a resurgence of mortgage lending or an acceleration of house prices. The response should target the build-to-rent segment where activity is currently brisk and where larger risk weights and/or faster amortization relative to owner-occupied properties is appropriate to reflect the international tendency for higher default and loss rates on these loans. Greater recourse to legally-binding regulation in preference to banks’ self-regulation could ensure any needed changes are implemented in timely manner and that uniform standards apply to all mortgage providers. The stepped up frequency of on-site inspections by the supervisor, FINMA, across all types of banks— including cantonal banks, as recommended by the 2014 FSAP—is welcome. Further progress is warranted to refine supervisory arrangements for external bank audits, including to ensure arm’s length financial relations between banks and auditors providing supervisory services on behalf of FINMA. Switzerland: House Price to Income and House Price to Rent Ratios (deviations from period averages, in percent) Price to rent ratio Price to income ratio 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Sources: OECD; and IMF staff calculations. OECD Countries: House Price to Rent Ratio and House Price to Income Ratio, (deviations from period means, percent) Min Average Max CHE Price to Income Price to Rent Price to Income Price to Rent Ratio Ratio Ratio Ratio Sources: OECD, Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Calculated as deviation of the latest observation from the average for the respective period. The authorities adopted enhanced leverage requirements in July 2016 to address the TBTF problem. The regulations, referred to as TBTF2, require the G-SIBs to raise leverage ratios to 5 (against Basel III’s requirement of 3) and the total loss absorbing leverage ratio to 10 percent (or 28.6 percent of risk-weighted assets), with linear phase- in by end-2019. The Basel III minimum is 18 percent of risk-weighted assets, and to be reached by January 2022. As regards FINMA’s reliance on external auditors, the 2014 FSAP recommended rotating auditing firms, providing them more guidance on their supervisory focus, avoiding actual or perceived conflicts of interest with supervised banks by remunerating them from a FINMA-managed, but bank-financed fund, rather than the audited bank directly compensating the audit firm. Page 19 31. The new Swiss G-SIB regulations appropriately reflect the systemic risk characteristics of these banks. The establishment of Swiss holding company structures for the Swiss G-SIBs will help ensure the survivability of core operations critical to the Swiss financial system. The large size of these banks relative to the Swiss economy and their potential role in global risk propagation warrant the requirements on leverage ratios and too-big-too-fail regulations that are more stringent than minimum international standards. This will also help safeguard the Swiss economy from inward spillovers. Attention should also be given to risk weights used in internal ratings-based models and greater disclosure of weights as part of the forthcoming revision to Basel requirements could help to strengthen credibility. Authorities’ views 32. Downward pressure on mortgage lending rates could encourage excess supply of investment properties. The revision of the self-regulation rules for mortgage lending (approved by FINMA), the activation and increase of the sectoral CCB targeting risks in the domestic mortgage and real estate markets and the permanent adjustment of risk-weights for high loan-to-value mortgage loans have all helped to stabilize house prices. Tax incentives favor high mortgage debt, but at the same time lead to large financial assets for the same individuals, thereby mitigating financial stability risks. Mandatory amortization and the 20 percent own-funds down payment requirement also partly offset financial stability risks. Moreover, the widespread application of conservative mortgage affordability tests (using an interest rate of 5 percent plus an additional 2 percentage points for taxes and maintenance) and comfortable LtV margins provide buffers in case interest rates rise or house prices decline. However, institutional and private investors—in search of higher yielding assets—have increased activity in build-to-let properties, where prices are vulnerable to higher interest rates or slower immigration. A significant premium on risk weights for investment property mortgages relative to owner-occupied mortgages would be appropriate under new Basel guidelines. FSAP recommendations on onsite bank supervision and auditing are constructive. While continuing to pursue a risk-based supervision model, FINMA has increased the frequency of onsite inspections across all supervised entities by 10 percent, in line with FSAP recommendations. On the FSAP recommendation regarding the use of audit firms as extended arms of the supervisory authority, measures to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the regulatory audit framework are being assessed, inter alia by introducing the direct mandating of audit firms by FINMA. New regulatory measures solidify the position of the Swiss G-SIBs, but the systemically important domestic banks (D-SIBs) and transparency of risk weights require further attention The recently implemented stricter capital standards are crucial to reduce the likelihood of spillovers among G-SIBs and from the G-SIBs to the domestic economy thereby increasing financial stability. Reflecting the long phase-in periods, it will take several years to bring the gone-concern capital buffers to the prescribed regulatory levels. To further reduce systemic risks, gone-concern capital requirements for D-SIBs are necessary. Discussions about the implementation of such regulations are currently taking place. Finally, greater transparency on risk weights, expected to be required by the new Basel standards, would be an important improvement. Page 20