Despite measures taken by the authorities, risks in the mortgage and housing markets continue to build. To address growing imbalances, in 2012 and 2013, the authorities tightened lending requirements and increased banks’ capital buffers for mortgage risk (Box 1), but the effects appear to have been small so far. House price increases have slowed down somewhat, as prices for owner occupied apartments, which had grown by about 6 percent per year on average since 2008, grew at 4.3 percent (year-on-year) in the second half of 2013. However, limited cooling off effects can be seen in mortgage lending growth (where mortgages to buy-to-let companies accelerated in 2012–13), or in quantitative lending standards. Box 1. Measures to Address Developments in the Housing and Mortgage Market New minimum requirements drawn up by the Swiss Bankers Association recognized by FINMA, effective mid-2012: Down payment of 10 percent of the lending value of the property from the borrower's own funds, which may not be obtained by pledging or early withdrawal of Pillar 2 pension assets; Mortgages must be paid down to two thirds of the collateral value within a maximum of 20 years. FINMA tightened rules for risk-weighting new and renewed mortgages for banks applying an internal ratings-based approach, effective 2013. Federal Council measures, effective 2013: Mortgages that do not comply with the new minimum standards are allowed, but subject to a risk weight of 100 percent; Mortgages exceeding 80 percent of the property value will have a risk weight of 100 percent applied to the part of the loan exceeding the 80 percent threshold. On SNB’s proposal, the Federal Council activated the Counter Cyclical Capital Buffer (CCB). The CCB applies to risk-weighted positions associated to residential property mortgages in Switzerland. The CCB was activated to a level of 1 percent CET1 capital by end–September, 2013 and raised to 2 percent in January 2014 (to be fulfilled by end-June, 2014). The measures taken to address developments in the mortgage and housing markets are welcome, but have been only partially successful. The recent CCB hike was appropriate, but its impact may not be sufficient given the comfortable capitalization relative to prudential Page 13 requirements across the domestically oriented banking sector. In addition, existing self-regulation measures have not been very effective as quantitative lending surveys show no or limited reduction in debt-to-income ratios (DTIs) or loan-to-value ratios (LTVs). Although the household sector has substantial financial assets, data on the distribution of wealth and mortgage debt across households are not available, so there are concerns that vulnerable households may be taking on excessive debt. Direct regulatory measures targeting affordability and loan-to-value ratios should also be considered. In an environment where interest rates are likely to remain very low, stronger measures targeting mortgage demand are needed. If agreement with the industry to tighten self- regulation (in particular, faster amortization and larger cash down payments) cannot be achieved, then it would be important to introduce direct regulation on maximum DTIs and LTVs. Parallel measures to curb mortgages to income-producing real estate companies should also be put in place, while supervisors should continue to use Pillar II measures pro-actively to address concentration and interest rates risks. In addition, tax deductibility of mortgage interest should be reduced or eliminated. The authorities’ view The authorities agree that imbalances have continued to expand though they consider that the measures taken have had some calming effects. Continued concerns were behind the recent decision to increase the CCB. The authorities also agreed on the need for further action targeting the demand side and informed that measures on affordability were under discussion, including with respect to the buy-to-let segment. If appropriately tight measures could not be implemented through self-regulation, direct regulation was an option. On the other hand, political support for a reform of the taxation of mortgage interest was seen as elusive.