The Swiss authorities have undertaken various prudential measures over the last three years aimed at reducing housing-related risks . Swiss household debt (mainly mortgages) is high by international standards, and mortgage debt has been rising steadily since 2008, in tandem with a buoyant housing market (Figure 7). To reduce related financial stability risks, the authorities have undertaken a number of prudential measures, including strengthened bank “self-regulation” standards approved by FINMA, effective September 2014 (Box 2). These measures appear to have had some effect, as housing and mortgage markets show some signs of cooling . The growth rate of residential real estate prices has eased both for owner-occupied apartments and single family houses, including in areas, such as Lake Geneva, that previously saw rapid house price growth (Figure 7). Mortgage growth has also decelerated, although this effect is less pronounced (text chart). Similarly, price-to-rent and price-to-income PP NN DD Source: HaverAnalytics. HouseholdDebt (Percent of gross disposable income; 2014 or latest ) Owner-occupied apartment prices Single-family home prices MortgagesSources: Haver Analytics; and Swiss National Bank. Switzerland: House Price and Mortgage Growth (Real growth rates, y/y percent change) Page 26 ratios have started to stabilize (Figure 7). The percent of new mortgages for owner-occupied real estate with loan-to-value ratios exceeding 80 percent have also been on a declining trend. As the authorities have taken a range of measures to address the risk of a build-up of imbalances in the housing and mortgage markets, it is difficult to clearly disentangle which have been the most effective. However, the consensus view among the authorities and banks was that the required down payment from the borrower's own funds (not funded by using pension savings) has perhaps been the most important measure. Box 2. Measures to Reduce Housing- and Mortgage-Related Risks Revised minimum requirements for mortgages, drawn up by the Swiss Bankers Association and approved by FINMA, effective mid-2012 Mortgages must entail a down payment of at least 10 percent of the lending value of the property from the borrower's own funds, which may not be obtained by pledging or early withdrawal of Pillar 2 pension assets. Mortgages must be paid down to two-thirds of the lending value of the mortgage within a maximum of 20 years. FINMA tightened rules for risk-weighting new and renewed mortgages for banks applying an internal ratings-based approach, effective 2013 Federal Council measures, effective 2013 Mortgages that do not comply with the new minimum standards are allowed, but subject to a risk weight of 100 percent. Mortgages exceeding 80 percent of the property value will have a risk weight of 100 percent applied to the part of the loan exceeding the 80 percent threshold. On the SNB’s proposal, the Federal Council activated the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) . The CCB applies to risk-weighted positions associated to residential property mortgages in Switzerland. The CCB was activated to a level of 1 percent (to be met in the form of CET1) capital by end– September 2013 and raised to 2 percent in January 2014, to be fulfilled by end-June 2014. Amended minimum standards for mortgage financing issued by the Swiss Bankers Association and approved by FINMA, effective September 1, 2014 The amortization period for repayment down to two-thirds of the lending value of the mortgage was shortened from 20 years to 15 years. Moreover, the loan must now be repaid in regular tranches of an equal amount from the start. Stricter use of second incomes when assessing financial sustainability. For future lending, real estate values must now be based on the market value or the purchase price, whichever is lower. Page 27 Figure 7. Switzerland: Housing Markets, 1980–2014 Sources: State Secretariat for Economic Affairs;Swiss National Bank; IMF Global House Price Index; and Haver Analytics. Rental apartments Single family homes Business and office Owner occupied apartments Real House Price Indices (1970=100) Real houseprices have risen steadily over the last decade... Mortgages (percent of GDP) Nonetheless, households' mortgagedebt continues to rise as a percent of GDP... Single family home Owner occupied apartments Price-to-Income Ratio (Q4 1992=100) ...as are price-to-income ratios. Single family home Owner occupied apartments Price-to-Rent Ratio (Q4 1992=100) However, there are tenative signs that price-to rent ratios may be stabilizing... Other liabilities Mortgage Real estate Other financial assets Currency and deposits Net worth Household Net Worth (percent GDP) ...though their net worthis 5 times GDP. Switzerland Zurich area Eastern Central Northwestern Berne area Southern Western Geneva area Real House Price by Selected Regions (2000=100) ...especiallyin Geneva. Page 28 However, the cooling of mortgage-related risks is still tentative and partial . Mortgage debt is high and still rising as a percent of GDP, and loan-to-income ratios on new mortgages have not yet declined. It is thus important to continue monitoring housing and mortgage-related risks closely and to fully enforce existing regulations and minimum standards, especially given recent interest rate cuts for SNB sight deposits, which could re-ignite mortgage demand. If risks are not reduced or re-accelerate, tighter and more binding prudential measures, such as explicit limits on the percent of new mortgages that can exceed a given debt-service-to-income and/or debt-to- income ratio should be adopted. Likewise, efforts to address concentration and interest-rate risks, as identified by the SNB in its most recent Financial Stability Report, may need to be stepped up via Pillar 2 measures, including, if necessary, additional capital charges. Authorities’ views The authorities believe their measures have had some effect, but are still concerned, as imbalances are still large and have not fallen substantially . Consequently, they agree that further policy action may be warranted, in particular to target affordability and the income-producing real estate sector. However, they also emphasized that the effects of measures are lagged, as can be seen from the experience in recent years, and it is therefore appropriate to let the measures announced in mid-2014 work through the system first. The SNB, furthermore, explained that, if imbalances appear set to increase further, an upward adjustment of the CCB could be proposed. FINMA also emphasized that they carefully analyze interest rate and concentration risks of banks and that they in several instances have taken action to reduce risks in individual institutions.