The economy weathered relatively well the sharp appreciation that followed the exit from the exchange rate floor. Activity was dented in early 2015 by the abrupt strengthening of the franc. However, growth subsequently returned, aided by the flexibility of firms and the labor market, to reach 0.8 percent for the year, although this was less than half the pace of 2014. Unemployment edged up to 3.3 percent and the output gap widened to 0.8 percent of potential GDP by the end of the year. The external sector held up well despite the currency shock, aided by some redirection of exports from the euro area (where competitiveness had been eroded) toward countries with currencies linked to the dollar (where Swiss products had gained competitiveness), although profit margins at some companies were sharply squeezed. The drop in the price level helped to cushion domestic spending. The appreciation in early 2015 led to a discernible fall in inflation, but the impact on the current account was muted:  After remaining flat the previous year, consumer prices fell by 1.1 percent in year-average terms (1.3 percent on a year-on-year basis) in 2015. Prices of domestic products dipped only Page 10 marginally (consistent with the limited widening of the output gap), but import prices fell sharply, reflecting the appreciation of the franc and the drop in world energy prices.  The current account surplus widened by 2½ percentage points to reach 11.3 percent of GDP in 2015. The increase reflects mainly the improved terms of trade from lower oil prices, the resilience of exports in key sectors and a larger income balance owing to a wider interest rate differential between foreign and domestic financial assets. Economic performance has continued to firm during 2016 . Both domestic and external demand have supported the pickup in growth. Deflation continued to unwind as the effect of the early-2015 appreciation dissipated and the Swiss franc remained broadly stable against the euro, with prices in September 2016 decreasing by 0.2 percent over the previous year. Medium-term inflation expectations, which fell sharply in response to the appreciation, have stabilized at (positive) 0.5 percent alongside the pickup in actual inflation. With activity gradually strengthening, the output gap continues to narrow. Swiss interest rates have fallen and the yield curve has flattened in tandem with other advanced economies, although the franc has appreciated more than most other currencies Yields on Swiss government bonds fell and the franc strengthened sharply following the exit from the exchange rate floor and shift to negative policy rates in late 2014-early 2015. Sovereign yields across all maturities (the longest dated is 50 years) became negative, although longer rates again turned positive in recent weeks. After appreciating by about 15 percent against the euro in early 2015, the franc has steadied in recent months, representing a 12 percent depreciation relative to its strongest level, while the REER has depreciated by 5 percent, although this is still 6 percent stronger than before the exit from the exchange rate floor. As in other countries, equity prices have been supported by low interest rates, although the benchmark SMI index is down 8.5 percent so far this year, possibly reflecting the large share of banks in the index.