Switzerland has long run high current account surpluses . Over the last 15 years, Switzerland’s current account surplus has averaged around 10 percent of GDP (Table 2 and Figure 6). However, these surpluses are in some ways misleadingly high because they are driven by non- traditional flows, such as merchanting activities, commodity trading, financial and insurance services, and net FDI earnings (Annex 1), that are highly affected by the operations of large multinationals, financial firms, and wealthy foreigners for whom Switzerland is a desirable destination to centralize income and assets—reflecting Switzerland’s economic stability and tax competitiveness, among other factors—but whose savings may not be fundamentally Swiss. For example, Swiss multinational Page 13 firms are often partly owned by foreigners through portfolio shares. Thus, a part of these companies’ retained earnings really belong to foreign shareholders, generating an upward statistical bias to the current account of about 3 percent of GDP. Similarly, Switzerland, like other low-tax economies that host large multinational corporations and their affiliates, is susceptible to attempts by those firms to minimize their taxes by booking profits in the country, thereby inflating net exports and net investment income, though such effects are difficult to quantify. Staff views Switzerland’s external position as having been broadly in line with fundamentals in 2014, though this assessment is subject to high uncertainty The External Balance Assessment’s (EBA) current account regression methodology suggests a current account norm for Switzerland of about 6¾ percent of GDP, reflecting Switzerland’s financial center structure, demographics, and high per capita income. This norm is slightly below preliminary estimates of Switzerland’s cyclically-adjusted current account surplus in 2014 (7½ percent of GDP), implying a slightly strong current account and slight undervaluation of the exchange rate. However, the EBA methodology does not fully take into account the special factors and anomalies in Switzerland’s current account statistics discussed above. In addition, estimates of REER overvaluation in 2014 based on EBA methodologies (text table) suggest a moderate degree of overvaluation not undervaluation. The lack of a trend in Switzerland’s net international investment position (NIIP) to GDP ratio over the last 10 years (Table 2) also suggests that Switzerland’s large current account surpluses do not result in explosive dynamics for the NIIP, whose large size is partly explained by the volatility of capital flows. Adjusting for these considerations, staff assesses a current account gap for 2014 centered close to zero. However, the uncertainty band is wide, with the estimated gap ranging from -3½ percent of GDP to 2½ percent of GDP, reflecting the significant uncertainty introduced by the various idiosyncrasies of Switzerland’s external statistics (Annex 1). Similarly, staff assesses the franc to have been broadly in line with fundamentals in 2014, with this assessment also subject to significant uncertainty. The increase in Switzerland’s NIIP is less than its current account surplus in part because of the statistical bias noted in paragraph 8. In particular, the retained earnings of Swiss multinational corporations boost Switzerland’s current account, but not its NIIP because the foreign portfolio investment (FPI) claims of non-Swiss shareholders on the firm rise in value to reflect the retained earnings. ModelOvervaluation (percent)Index11.2Level12.6 Source: Staff estimates. Switzerland: EBA REER Analysis, 2014 Page 14 Figure 6. Switzerland: External Accounts and Exchange Rates, 2000–14 Sources: SwissNational Bank; and Haver Analytics. Secondary income Primary income Services Goods Current account Current Account (percent of GDP)The current account surplus dropped in 2014... Investment income Labor income Primary income balance Primary Income Balance (percent of GDP) ...due to a reductionin the investment income balance... Private Public Secondary income balance Secondary Income Balance (percent of GDP) ...as well as the private-sector secondary income balance. Official reserves (U$ bil.) SNB sight deposits (CHF bil.) Official Reserves and SNB Sight Deposits The SNB hadto intervene heavily starting in late 2014, leading to exit from the exchange rate floor in January 2015. Total Manufactures Chemicals Travel Pharma (right scale) Despite the past appreciation, Swiss exporters have maintained competitiveness generally well. Share of Swiss Total Exports (percent of world total exports) Current account Capital transfers Net direct investment Net portfolio investment Net other investment Net errors and omissions Reserves (-sign, increase) Balance of Payments (billions of CHF; 3QMA; positive signs indicate cash inflows)Reserves have increased sharply in periods of increased uncertainty and capital flow volatility. Page 15 The appreciation in early 2015 is likely to weaken the external position and to have left the franc overvalued . As of April 2015, the REER has appreciated by about 10 percent relative to its average 2014 value. This appreciation is likely to reduce net exports due to lessened competiveness and has likely left the franc overvalued. This overvaluation partly reflects a policy gap of insufficiently easy monetary policy—simple Taylor rules suggest an optimal policy rate well below current levels—which in turn reflects various operational challenges associated with unconventional monetary policy (see monetary policy discussion in the next main section).