The recovery is expected to be robust. Looking ahead, in the baseline scenario recovering external demand and a stable exchange rate will provide impetus to exports and investment, while private consumption growth will moderate somewhat in line with modest real wage developments. Page 8 The economy should grow at 2.1 percent in 2014 and 2.2 percent in 2015, while inflation should continue to rise gradually and the output gap will progressively close. Risks to the outlook stem from spillovers from international developments, the domestic mortgage market, and the large financial sector. A strengthening in the global recovery would bring positive spillovers through higher external demand. Negative spillovers might arise if exit from UMP is disorderly and causes surges in global market volatility, leading to renewed safe haven inflows and forcing the SNB to intervene again. Protracted turmoil in emerging markets might also rekindle the attractiveness of Switzerland as a safe haven, as might a re-emergence of financial stress in the euro area because of significant policy slippages or adverse economic shocks. A domestic source of risk is the mortgage market, where imbalances have been building since 2007 though at a slower pace than in typical housing bubble episodes (Figure 3). Domestically-oriented banks are especially vulnerable given their high and relatively undiversified exposure to domestic mortgages. Stress tests performed in the FSAP Update found these banks to be well capitalized under all scenarios, including a housing crash scenario. However, the analysis was limited by the lack of access to supervisory data on individual banks, and hence could not assess individual bank vulnerabilities. In addition, despite progress the two large banks remain highly leveraged and interconnected . FSAP stress tests indicate that these banks comfortably exceed capital requirements under all adverse scenarios when applying the phase-in of Basel III rules, but under the most severe macroeconomic scenario capital ratios could fall below the 7 percent threshold under a fully implemented Basel III capital definition. As the banks are globally interconnected, they are a potential source of outward spillovers and vulnerable to inward spillover from instability in global financial markets. The FSAP analysis finds that these risks are contained at the moment, and outward adverse spillovers measured as the contribution of the Swiss large banks to the vulnerability of other global banks have decreased significantly in recent months. Possible financial-sovereign spillovers are also a concern given the large size of the financial sector relative to the economy. In addition, some cantonal banks have explicit funding guarantees and are large relative to the cantonal economy. Stress tests conducted as part of the FSAP indicate that existing capital buffers in the banking sector should be sufficient to absorb losses from severe macroeconomic shocks, suggesting limited fiscal contingent liabilities. The FSAP analysis also finds that contagion from banks to sovereign seems contained at present, owing to stronger capital buffers, fading concerns about tail events in the euro zone, and lower risk aversion among investors. Concerning the risk of illiquidity, See Risk Assessment Matrix below for details. Under a fully implemented Basel III capital definition, breach of the CET1 ratio of 7 percent threshold would trigger the conversion of contingent capital and recovery measures according to the Swiss framework. See also Selected Issues Paper for the 2013 Article IV Consultation: “Outward Spillovers from Swiss G-SIBs in Times of Financial Stress.” Page 9 almost all banks satisfy the LCR requirement thanks in part to the unusually high amount of deposits at the central bank. The authorities’ view The authorities were more sanguine than staff on the baseline scenario, but agreed about the main risk factors. Growth forecasts were aligned for 2014, but a stronger acceleration was envisaged in 2015. The authorities agreed with staff that growth prospects are subject to considerable uncertainty in light of economic developments in the euro area and emerging markets against the backdrop of exit from the unconventional monetary policies in major advanced economies.