The Swiss economy has regained momentum, but monetary and exchange rate conditions have not normalized. While growth is healthy and the pass-through from past appreciation has mostly run its course, inflation is still only barely positive. Though no foreign exchange market intervention has taken place since 2012, the currency has remained close to the floor imposed by the Swiss National Bank (SNB) in 2011 to contain deflationary pressures, notwithstanding improved market confidence toward the euro area and tapering in the United States. With the policy rate at zero and abundant excess liquidity, imbalances in the mortgage market continue to build though at a somewhat slower pace than last year. In the medium term, aspects of the current economic model will be questioned . The role of Switzerland as a center for global wealth management is being challenged by the progressive erosion of bank secrecy. Under international pressure, the authorities need to reform parts of the current system of corporate taxation, which de facto give favorable tax treatment to income from foreign operations and have helped attract many multinational corporations. A recent popular vote approved curbs on immigration, putting in jeopardy the free movement of labor agreement and, possibly, broader cooperation agreements with the European Union (EU), by far Switzerland’s largest trading partner. Lower immigration would also accelerate population aging. The large banking sector is resilient and considerable regulatory reforms have been implemented after the crisis . The size and reach of the financial sector extend well beyond the Swiss borders, as the country is host to some of the largest and most globalized banks and insurance companies in the world. The 2014 FSAP Update finds that the position of the financial sector has improved markedly since the Global Financial Crisis, and recommends additional measures to strengthen the regulatory framework, prudential oversight, and the safety net to further improve the soundness and resilience of the system.