Switzerland’s fiscal rule has helped it maintain low deficits and debt . In place since 2003, Switzerland’s “debt brake” rule requires that the federal government budget be in structural balance ex ante and that any ex post overruns be made up by running structural surpluses in subsequent years. Parliament can temporarily suspend the debt-brake rule in cases of “exceptional financial requirements” (e.g., war, severe recession) by a simple majority vote in both houses, but this option has rarely been invoked. The federal rule and similar rules for cantons have helped keep the budget in balance and helped limit general government gross debt to 46 percent of GDP at end-2014 (Tables 4–5, Annex 3). The mission recommended continued compliance with the rule in the central scenario Suspending the rule in response to the mild growth slowdown envisaged in the central scenario would set a precedent that could undermine the rule’s ability to restrict fiscal irresponsibility over Page 20 the longer run. In addition, exchange rate overvaluation suggests that relying more heavily on monetary, rather than fiscal, easing to boost demand should lead to better external balance. Fiscal multipliers may also be small in Switzerland given its openness. However, fiscal policy should do what it can to support demand . In the central scenario, fiscal automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully, as allowed by the rule. The authorities should also avoid budgeting overperformance against the rule in 2016, as this would add an unnecessary contractionary impulse. If a deep or prolonged recession materializes, discretionary fiscal easing should be employed to support growth and inflation and avoid overburdening monetary policy. Such easing could be achieved by temporarily suspending the rule under established procedures. Pension reforms will help address longer-term fiscal challenges . Population aging is projected to substantially increase fiscal costs related to pensions over the longer run. To help address this challenge, the government has submitted a comprehensive reform proposal to parliament. The reform includes measures to equalize retirement ages for men and women and to reduce the rate at which pension savings are converted into pension annuities by reducing this conversion rate from 6.8 to 6.0 percent per annum. In addition, the government has proposed to increase VAT rates by 2 percentage points by 2029 to ensure more stable funding for the pension system. Such reforms will help ensure the sustainability of the social safety net and its continued availability for future generations. In relation to the second pillar, staff recommended reducing the minimum guaranteed return on invested assets, as such returns have become more difficult to achieve in the low interest-rate environment (Box 1). Switzerland has prepared a comprehensive corporate tax reform (Corporate Tax Reform III) . Switzerland has faced international pressure in recent years to reduce the favorable tax treatment provided to multinational corporations in many cantons. In this context, the authorities have developed a corporate tax reform, expected to be submitted to parliament this summer and implemented by 2019, that intends to reform special tax regimes that give more favorable treatment to income from foreign operations than income from domestic operations. As this will in some cases result in a net revenue loss, the federal government has proposed to provide fiscal support to cantons to assist the reform—the current estimate of the needed transfer is approximately ¼ percent of GDP. Staff welcomed efforts to reduce distortions in the corporate tax code and encouraged the authorities to finalize the reform in ways that are consistent with ongoing international initiatives to counter base erosion and profit shifting. Authorities’ views The authorities emphasized the value of the fiscal rule and the importance of pension and corporate taxation reforms . The authorities agreed that automatic fiscal stabilizers should operate freely and saw no need for discretionary fiscal stimulus, including because the expected growth slowdown was expected to be limited. The authorities also indicated that they did not expect budgetary overperformance to occur either this year or next. They instead emphasized the importance of structural fiscal reforms, especially those related to pensions and corporate taxation. On the minimum guaranteed rate of return, the authorities noted that it is reviewed each year on a regular schedule and the next review will be undertaken in the autumn of 2015. Page 21 Box 1. Guaranteed Rate of Return in Swiss Pension Funds The Swiss pension system consists of three pillars . The first pillar is universal old age, survivors, and disability insurance. Currently, the age of retirement is 65 years for men and 64 years for women. It is a pay-as-you-go system, financed by contributions from employees and employers (both pay 4.2 percent of the employee’s income). The second pillar consists of fully funded, occupation-based pension plans. These are compulsory for employees and financed by both employees and employers. Contributions depend on the rules of the individual pension fund, but the contribution of the employer must be at least as large as the contribution of the employee. The third pillar includes private voluntary pension schemes. Guaranteed nominal rate of return Swiss pension funds that operate in the second pillar are required to provide their members with a guaranteed rate of return on members’ invested assets. The rate of return is not constant and is determined administratively each year. During 2003– 09, the average nominal required rate broadly matched the average yield on 10- year Swiss government bonds. However, after 2010, the required rate has not declined in line with declines in headline inflation, resulting in a large increase in required real returns. In 2015, the real guaranteed return stands around 3 percent—by far the highest in the last decade. Consequences of the high required rate of return . A too-high guaranteed rate of return risks the insolvency of pension funds and may also encourage them to take excessive risks. It could also lead to refunding, in which both employers and employees are required to pay additional funds and/or pension benefits are reduced to restore solvency. Policy advice . In the short run, consideration should be given to lowering the nominal guaranteed rate of return when it next comes up for review later this year to bring it more into line with market yields. Eventually, consideration could also be given to linking the nominal guaranteed rate of return more closely and automatically to market-based measures of achievable returns. Required Nominal Return CPI Inflation Required Real Return 10-year bond yieldSources: CreditSuisse; and IMF staff calculations. SwissPension Funds: Required Return Page 22