Further monetary easing would support economic adjustment and reduce risks . The output gap is expected to widen in the near term, and the negative rates for both core inflation and 10-year bond yields suggest significant risks of a protracted period of low inflation. In this context, monetary easing would helpfully limit the growth slowdown, reduce risks of inflation expectations becoming anchored at low levels, and lessen exchange rate overvaluation. However, with the policy rate already at -0.75 percent, room for further conventional easing appears limited . The policy rate should remain at its current negative level for now, as this helps ease franc appreciation pressures and encourages domestic consumption and investment. However, additional deep policy rate cuts could risk adverse nonlinear effects, such as increased cash hoarding. This in turn could reduce financial intermediation and weaken monetary transmission mechanisms. In this regard, the SNB has appropriately intensified the monitoring of depositors’ behavior. So far there are few signs of significant cash hoarding. Monetary easing could instead be achieved via a pre-announced program of asset purchases Purchases of foreign assets could help directly address deflationary pressures arising from the overvalued exchange rate. The amount of foreign-asset purchases could be preannounced (e.g., billion per month, to be continued until further notice) and adjusted as necessary to achieve inflation objectives. Compared to the previous approach of setting the exchange rate floor, fixing the quantity of foreign-asset purchases would not unduly suppress exchange rate volatility, thereby reducing the risk of a “one-way bet” in the market. Fixing the quantity also avoids an unlimited commitment of the SNB’s balance sheet. Compared to the current approach of ad hoc interventions, pre-announced interventions might help signal monetary dovishness, thereby raising inflation expectations, spurring franc depreciation, and further supporting higher inflation. Purchases of domestic assets could also be considered. However, the scope for such purchases is more limited, given that domestic yields are already very low (yields are negative out to 12- 1.2Jan-14Apr-14Jul-14Oct-14Jan-15Apr-15 Core inflation (y/y) 10-year gov. bond yield Switzerland:Core Inflation and Bond Yields Source:Haver Analytics. Switzerland: Currency in Circulation (Year-on-year growth; percent)Sources: Haver Analytics; IFS; and Swiss National Bank. Page 19 year maturities as of late April) and given the limited supply of domestic assets. In particular, the outstanding stock of federal government bonds is only 12 percent of GDP. The SNB could also further enhance communication and the articulation of its monetary policy framework . The SNB’s decision to abandon the floor has created some uncertainty about its monetary policy framework going forward. The SNB could therefore helpfully elaborate on its medium-term monetary policy objectives. More specifically, it may be useful to indicate a preference for moving inflation back near the upper end of the target range (i.e., closer to 2 percent) over the medium term, given the benefits to re-anchoring inflation expectations at higher levels to avoid the complications of operating monetary policy at low levels of inflation. The SNB’s capital buffers should be kept in line with risks . The SNB’s balance sheet is likely to remain large for a prolonged period, with large fluctuations in mark-to-market profits (Table 3). Although a central bank’s main objective is to achieve price stability, not maximize profits, the SNB could nonetheless encounter reputational problems if it incurred a large capital deficiency. To reduce related risks to the SNB’s operations and independence, the SNB should continue to prioritize provisioning over transfers to its distribution reserve and maintain a prudent profit distribution policy. Authorities’ views The SNB agreed with much of staff’s analysis, but preferred to see how the outlook develops before taking further monetary policy action . The SNB agreed that monetary conditions were too tight, the franc was overvalued, and preannounced purchases of foreign assets was one option for further monetary easing. However, the SNB wanted to allow more time to see how the outlook develops in both Switzerland and elsewhere in Europe before taking further monetary policy action. On the communication strategy, the SNB did not see a strong case for announcing a preference for moving inflation back near the upper end of the target range (i.e., closer to 2 percent) over the medium term. The SNB considers inflation in the range of 0–1 percent to be consistent with its monetary policy framework and, therefore, does not share staff’s risk assessment.