The TBTF Banks and Cross-Border Resolution The two large banks continue to strengthen capitalization and restructure their business models, but the leverage ratios remains low compared to other large global banks. In 2012, both banks stepped up their plans to build high-quality capital, and initiated strategic restructuring away from parts of investment banking to less capital-intensive wealth management. The banks are also revising their corporate structure, operations, and business lines to adapt to the still evolving new regulatory landscape, especially in the U.S. and the U.K., where they have important activities, and divergent approaches by regulators are an obstacle to the global management of liquidity and capital. At end-2013 both banks were already above the 10 percent There is cross-country evidence that DTI limits can be effective in curbing real estate and mortgage booms (e.g.; Lim, Columba, Costa, Kongsamut, Otani, Saiyid, Wezel, and Wu, 2011, “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences,” IMF Working Paper No. 11-238; Igan and Kang, 2011. “Do Loan-to-Value and Debt-to-Income Limits Work? Evidence from Korea”, IMF Working Paper No. 11-497; Kuttner, and Shim, 2013, “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a panel of 57 economies,” BIS Working Papers No 433). Page 14 minimum CET1 capital ratio in the Swiss Too-Big-Too-Fail (TBTF) legislation to be met by 2019. The progress in increasing the leverage ratio, however, has been slower; both banks are below the fully- implemented Swiss minimum leverage ratio and lag behind most other large global banks based on other leverage measures (Figure 5). On the other hand, the liquidity position is strong, with the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) exceeded at end-2013. Both banks were profitable in 2013, but potential costs from various legal risks (e.g. mortgage mis-selling and aiding tax evasion in the United States, illegal trading activity in LIBOR and foreign exchange markets) weighed on the results. Given the special risks posed by their size, the two large banks should rapidly bring their leverage ratio in line with that of other major international banks. In light of the size of the two large banks relative to the economy, the authorities should ensure that minimum requirements in terms of leverage are more ambitious than minimum international standards both in terms of level and of the quality of capital. For the large banks, the current Swiss total capital leverage ratio minimum is above the envisaged 3 percent Basel. However, a substantial portion of the Swiss requirement can be held as CoCos, which are not necessarily Tier 1 capital. In addition, the ongoing examination by FINMA of how risk-weights in internal models differ from those under the standard approach is welcome, and model approval decisions should be reviewed in cases where such differences are large. In this context, FINMA should be commended for demanding higher risk weighted assets for operational risk from the two large banks. Making the TBTF resolution regime robust and workable cross-border should be a priority to ensure financial and economic stability. Work should continue with the banks and key host authorities to finalize a viable strategy that would make the largest banks resolvable without government support. Reaching a cooperation agreement with the U.S. and U.K. authorities, the two key jurisdictions for the Swiss TBTF banks, would be a very welcome achievement. The authorities’ view The authorities emphasized that capital regulation will remain tighter than international standards. On the regulatory leverage ratio, the authorities noted that Switzerland is ahead of the field as it already has a minimum leverage ratio in place. It was furthermore noted that as the Basel III definition of leverage is finalized, it will be ensured that the objective of having tougher rules than international minimum standards will be met. The authorities confirmed that they are actively working with, the U.K. and U.S. authorities on cross-border resolution under the “single point of entry” principle, with negotiations for a binding cooperation agreement planned to commence later this year. Banking Supervision and Deposit Insurance Banking supervision, in particular of domestic banks, need to be further strengthened, including by shoring up resources. The FSAP Update found a high level of compliance with Basel Core Principles and pointed to significant improvements in recent years. However, it also noted that FINMA operates with resources well below those of other supervisors. FINMA could usefully provide Page 15 more guidance to external auditors (which conduct most onsite banking supervision) as to what is needed, ensure greater harmonization across supervised entities, and complement the auditors’ work with more “deep dives” on selected issues. Auditing firms should furthermore be periodically rotated (at least every five years) and not be paid by the supervised entities, but rather from a FINMA-administered fund. Increased resources for FINMA are needed so it can intensify its supervision of smaller and medium-sized domestically focused banks, particularly in light of risks from large exposures to the domestic mortgage market. The Swiss deposit insurance system needs substantial reform. The FSAP Update indentified a number of weaknesses, and proposed several areas for improvement to bring the system in line with emerging international best practices, including greater transparency to depositors on coverage conditions, commitment to faster payouts, ex ante financing in a dedicated fund, and the fund to have powers to take action other than bank closure when there is a cheaper alternative. The authorities’ view The authorities believe that supervision is adequately funded and executed, and saw prospects for deposit insurance reform as limited. FINMA stressed that the track record demonstrated that the currently applied risk-based approach to performing supervisory reviews with experienced and skilled staff had been successful. There was nonetheless agreement that domestically oriented banks deserved close attention, and in this context it was pointed out that Pillar II measures had been taken on an individual banks basis, including capital surcharges for institutions with higher interest rate or concentration risks. On deposit insurance, the authorities agreed that aspects of the current system could be improved, but pointed to a recent reform effort that failed to muster sufficient political consensus. E. Medium-Term Prospects: Immigration, Population Aging, and