Switzerland’s two global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) have continued their strategic adjustments, and their balance sheets appear strong by many metrics. Both banks have met the 10 percent minimum CET1 capital ratio required under Swiss Too-Big-To-Fail legislation well in advance of the 2019 deadline and are in line with or comfortably above the average ratio for other G-SIBs. Both banks are above the Liquidity Coverage Ratio minimum of 100 percent, effective in 2015 in Switzerland, and had, based on a not-yet-final methodology, estimated Net Stable Funding Ratios above 100 percent as of spring 2014. The NSFR is not yet part of Swiss regulation but planned to be introduced in 2016. Both banks have remained profitable in 2014, though substantial provisions for litigation and regulatory issues (e.g., those related to foreign-exchange market manipulation, U.S. and other cross-border tax matters, and legacy issues related to the sale of residential mortgage-backed securities and U.S. mortgage crisis fines and penalties) weighed on the results. However, there are still important areas for further improvement, as identified by last year’s FSAP (Annex 4) These banks’ leverage ratios are above current regulatory minima. However, their ratios remain low by international standards (Table 6, Figure 5, and text chart). Given the risks to the Swiss economy posed by the large size of these banks, the authorities should tighten minimum leverage ratio requirements for G- SIBs to ensure that they are more ambitious than international minima and that the quality of capital is aligned with or more demanding than international standards. In addition, the authorities should encourage the large banks to further strengthen their capitalization, including multi-year plans to increase their leverage ratios, and promote conservative dividend policies to bolster the capital base. The current Swiss Too-Big-To-Fail framework was to a large extent formulated before many of details of Basel III had been worked out; consequently, some capital definitions are not aligned. Dividend plans compared to earnings per share are fairly high for the Swiss G-SIBs compared to other G-SIBs, although part of the dividends will be scrip dividends (dividends paid in shares, which does not deplete capital). CHEEuropeUSSources: Bank Reports; and IMF staff calculations. G-SIB Basel III Tier 1Leverage Ratios, 2014Q4 (Median, Percent) Page 23 The authorities should also vigilantly challenge risk weights from internal ratings-based models and increase banks’ disclosure requirements regarding capital-weights to enhance transparency and bolster understanding of, and credibility in, banks’ soundness and business strategies. Continued action is needed to improve the resolvability of the G-SIBs through strengthened cross-border coordination and further restructuring. Given the global reach of these banks, reaching agreements with partner supervisors is critical. While both banks have made structural changes, including by organizing through holding companies, and have updated their global recovery and resolution plans in 2014 to improve their resolvability, this process needs to continue to further improve resolvability. The authorities must also continue to proactively address operational risks by intense supervision of risk management practices and provisioning, to avoid and mitigate effects from negative surprises related to, for example, trading activities and investigations of tax evasion or money laundering. Encouragingly, the authorities are moving to address these concerns One important element is the follow-up to recommendations related to Too-Big-To-Fail (TBTF) in the December 2014 report of the “Group of Experts on the Further Development of the Financial Market Strategy,” or the “Brunetti Report”. Recommendations included recalibration of capital requirements and adjustments to capital quality, and the Federal Council has instructed the Federal Department of Finance (FDF) to formulate concrete legislative proposals in this area. The details are yet to be worked out, but it is generally expected that that requirements on capital ratios, including leverage, will be set high, and that capital quality will be adjusted to be at least as stringent as international standards. The authorities are adopting international standards related to increased disclosure regarding risk weights and are involved in international initiatives to strengthen standards further. This is welcome, but in the possible absence of significant progress internationally, the Swiss authorities should stand ready to take the lead and heighten disclosure requirements. Regarding resolution, the authorities are cooperating with foreign supervisors and expect to conclude cooperation agreements on crisis management with the Crisis Management Group members for the Swiss G-SIBs. This would be an important step, but the details remain to be seen and assessed. “Group of Experts on the Further Development of the Financial Market Strategy—Final Report” https://www.news.admin.ch/message/index.html?lang=en&msg-id=55545 Page 24 Authorities’ views The authorities generally agreed with staff’s assessment and recommendations, but stressed caveats on several issues . Support appeared broad among the authorities for raising the leverage ratio to more ambitious levels and for increasing public disclosure requirements for risk weights in internal risk models. FINMA also emphasized that it is closely monitoring the calculation of risk weights and has taken action when shortcomings have been observed, including by introducing multipliers and a moratorium on capital-reducing model changes. FINMA agreed with the need for banks to continue building capital, but cautioned that an overly conservative dividend policy might hinder banks’ ability to attract equity capital. On resolvability, the authorities fully recognize that the work to make the G-SIBs resolvable is not finished, but stressed that progress in recent years has been substantial. On conduct risks, FINMA explained that related supervision and enforcement efforts are being stepped up, which in combination with large investments in these banks to control these risks could help reduce adverse events going forward.