Staff’s views Growth is expected to remain on a recovery path, and to stabilize at a moderate 1¾ percent over the medium term . For 2016, GDP is forecast to increase by 1.5 percent, with inflation approaching zero by year end. The pickup in growth is projected to gradually close the output gap, returning inflation to the middle of the target band. However, inflation is expected to remain below levels in key trading partners, facilitating a steady reduction in the REER. The underlying external position in 2015 was moderately weaker than implied by medium-term fundamentals and desirable policy settings (see Box 2). External demand is likely to make a smaller contribution to growth than in the past owing to the more subdued outlook for global trade, leading also to some narrowing of the current account surplus. Page 11 Risks to this outlook for the Swiss economy, while two sided, maintain a negative skew (Annex II). On the positive side, a faster than envisaged pace of world growth could materialize if consistent and comprehensive policy frameworks were widely adopted, thereby providing a boost to Switzerland’s large export sector. However, several adverse global factors—a further decline in the trade content of world demand, increased political risk and inward-looking policies, and an unmooring of inflation expectations that raises forward-looking real interest rates—would weaken demand from abroad. In addition, a resurgence of global financial market volatility or a further loosening of monetary policy by a major central bank could trigger renewed capital inflows into Switzerland, appreciating the already overvalued franc and denting GDP growth. Elevated household debt and banks’ concentrated exposure to mortgages could amplify shocks, especially if unemployment were to increase sharply on a sustained basis. Renewed concerns about the financial health of large cross-border banks could spill over to the domestic economy given their interconnectedness and large size relative to Swiss GDP. In addition, Swiss-EU economic relations could be affected in the event no mutually acceptable solution is found in the ongoing discussions regarding immigration. Authorities’ views The recent positive momentum of the Swiss economy is expected to continue, supported by sustained global demand and the waning effects of the past appreciation Growth is expected to reach 1.5 and about 1.8 percent, respectively, in 2016 and 2017, with both exports and the domestic demand experiencing an upward trend. Continued population growth due to net immigration—although at a somewhat slower pace than in recent years—is also expected to support growth. Strengthening activity is projected to raise inflation to 1 percent by end 2018, gradually reverse the slight pickup in unemployment that occurred since 2015 and eliminate the negative output gap. However, not all industries have benefitted equally from the recovery, and profit margins at a large number of companies have come under pressure, consistent with the SNB’s assessment that the Swiss franc remains significantly overvalued. Risks to growth remain tilted to the downside . Given the very open Swiss economy, external shocks would directly impact economic growth. Key external risks include a downgrading of global growth or a resurgence of financial market volatility. Switzerland also faces a number of domestic risks, including the possibility that a timely agreement on curtailing immigration is not achieved. A sustained increase in unemployment that spills over to house prices is a tail risk. Further downward pressure on global interest rates, if sustained for an extended period, would pose a significant risk to longer-term financial stability. Page 12