Overall, the Swiss current account surplus remained large in 2013, but its exact size will not be known until later in the year (Figure 4). Preliminary estimates of the current account balance for 2013 indicate a surplus of 13 percent of GDP, a 3.4 percent of GDP increase over 2012. The goods balance improved slightly, consistent Share of Switzerland in Total Goods Imports by Country Group (Percent) with a resumption of the post-crisis increase in Switzerland’s share of the emerging and developing economies’ market, but this was offset by softer services exports (including merchanting receipts). The bulk of the current account increase is accounted for by net investment income, which is highly volatile and subject to large downward revisions (averaging 5 percent of GDP over the last two years). To reflect likely downward revisions, staff estimates a current account surplus of around 9½ percent of GDP for 2013. Advanced economies Emerging and developing economies World Source: Direction of Trade Statistics. 1/ Q1  3 2013. While the assessment remains difficult due to accounting and other anomalies, staff views the current account as broadly in line with fundamentals. Model-based analysis suggests that a large the current account surplus is consistent with Switzerland’s high per capita income, financial center structure, and demographics. In addition, no distortions that would result in excessive saving or insufficient investment are evident, and, as noted in past consultations, the surplus is somewhat larger than the norm, but this divergence can be accounted for by various anomalies that tend to overstate the surplus. For instance, merchant services, i.e. services by international commodity trading companies based in Switzerland, have become important over the last decade, contributing around 3 percent of GDP to the current account surplus in recent years, though some of these companies have only limited activities in Switzerland. Second, Swiss Page 10 multinationals firms are often partly owned by foreigners through portfolio shares. Thus, a part of the retained earnings of these companies, which form a large component of Swiss current account receipts, should be attributed to foreign shareholders, rather than counted as domestic income. Third, cross-border shopping, i.e. direct purchases by households while abroad or mail/courier deliveries from abroad, may not be fully reflected in imports. Finally, Switzerland, like other low-tax financial centers that host large multinational corporations and their affiliates, is susceptible to attempts by those firms to minimize their taxes by booking profits in the country, which would result in inflated net exports. However, quantifying this factor is not possible for now. The franc still remains moderately over-valued, reflecting the legacy of the large real appreciation during 2008–11. The assessment reflects the estimated 7 percent overvaluation according to the External Balance Assessment methodology, broadly unchanged since last year. The REER-ULC has appreciated by 2.6 percent since end-2012, and cumulatively by 1.3 percent since end-September 2011 (i.e. the first “post-floor” month). With negative inflation differentials vis-à-vis trading partners disappearing and the nominal exchange rate appreciating in line with the appreciation of the euro over the last 12 months, the over-valuation is no longer correcting itself. On the other hand, this moderate overvaluation is no longer having a significant negative effect on overall external sector performance. If safe haven flows reverse as the crisis effects wane, the real exchange rate overvaluation should reverse. The authorities’ view The authorities broadly concurred with staff’s assessment of the current account and real exchange rate. They agreed that movements in the Swiss current account—due to its special structure and the various anomalies affecting it—were difficult to interpret and compare with global norms, and did not necessarily mirror developments in the real exchange rate. They also noted that the current account statistics will change substantially with the adoption (in June 2014) of the BPM6 methodology. The authorities’ stress that depending on the estimation methodology, the franc’s overvaluation, which they saw as still burdensome for the export-oriented manufacturing sector, may be larger than the 7 percent IMF assessment.