Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy Background Switzerland: Sight Deposits and Exchange Rate (Millions of CHF) Change in total sight deposits (rhs) EURCHF exchange rate Since eliminating the exchange rate floor in early 2015, the SNB has pursued a two-pronged approach to monetary policy. The SNB’s price stability objective is defined as inflation between 0 and 2 percent. To achieve this goal, the interest rate on sight deposits placed at the SNB is currently set at minus 0.75 percent, the midpoint of the target range for three-month Libor (minus 1.25 to minus 0.25 percent), and which has been kept unchanged since January 15, 2015. The SNB also intervenes in the foreign exchange market, periodically purchasing large amounts, as well as smaller quantities on a more frequent basis. This combination of tools is intended to reduce the attractiveness of Swiss franc-denominated assets, thereby easing appreciation pressures. Jan-15 Apr-15 Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations. Jan-16 Apr-16 Jul-15 Oct-15 Jul-16 Oct-16 13. Compared with other major central banks, the SNB’s policy interest rate is the most negative and, relative to GDP, its balance sheet is the largest Despite the very low rate, the negative interest differential against the ECB policy rate has narrowed considerably to 0.35 percentage points from about 1½–2 percent prior to the GFC. Moreover, with the negative policy rate applying only to balances above elevated exemption thresholds (tiering), the effective policy rate is considerably less negative than the marginal rate, bringing it close to the current ECB policy rate. The SNB’s balance sheet has expanded to 110 percent of GDP, a 90 percentage point increase since the beginning of the GFC. Interest Rate Gap (3-Month Rate) Euro Area: Money Market Interest Rate Switzerland: Interbank Offered Rate Difference Jan-00 May-03 Sources: Haver; and IMF staff calculations. Sep-06 Jan-10 May-13 Aug-16 The amount of intervention is reflected in changes in sight deposits at the SNB and currency in circulation. Changes in sight deposits are bi-directional, although FX purchases for intervention dominate. For banks, negative rates apply on deposits exceeding 20 times minimum required reserves. Currently, aggregate reserves exceed this threshold by about 40 percent (CHF120 billion or 20 percent of GDP). Arbitrage opportunities have reportedly encouraged almost all banks to exhaust their buffers. Page 13 Total Assets of Major Central Banks (Percent of GDP) SNB FED ECB BoJ Jan-07 Source: Haver. Jan-09 Jan-11 Jan-13 Jan-15 Jun-16 Staff’s views Negative Policy Interest Rates (percent) Switzerland Denmark Sweden Euro Area Japan Sources: Bloomberg and Haver Analytics. Note: As of October 2016. The SNB’s two-pronged policy approach and accommodative stance are appropriate to the challenges facing the Swiss economy, and have helped avert a prolonged slowdown and sustained deflation:   The negative interest differential against major currencies is consistent with the Swiss franc’s role as a safe haven currency, which constrains policy independence. Relying on a negative marginal rate helps to deter new inflows by encouraging banks to transmit negative rates to large investors, while shielding their retail depositors. This also helped preserve banks’ profits, which depend on the effective policy rate. However, the move to negative rates has not been sufficient to preserve the interest rate differential with major central banks, contributing to persistent inflow pressures. Foreign exchange purchases are warranted to address Switzerland’s below-potential output, overvalued REER and sub-par inflation that is largely exchange rate driven. Moreover, FX purchases were effective in preventing a sharp appreciation following the Brexit vote, despite a large jump in inflows, although smaller, higher-frequency purchases are also expanding the SNB’s balance sheet. Some refinements could improve the assignment of policy tools and simplify communications . The negative interest rate differential should be calibrated so as to discourage persistent inflows that can cause prolonged deflation and weaken activity. On the other hand, exchange rate purchases should be reserved primarily to respond to episodic inflow surges to prevent sudden, large exchange rate appreciations. Some widening of the current effective interest rate differential—either by lowering the marginal policy rate or the exemption threshold—should therefore be considered to reduce the need for frequent small-scale interventions. This would also Banks also initially shifted costs to borrowers by raising mortgage lending rates, although rates have since decreased. Page 14 slow the increase in the SNB’s already-large balance sheet, which continues to trend upward relative to GDP and is subject to valuation changes that can affect public finances. However, operational and stability considerations could at some point limit the room for maneuver . Competition between banks and other lenders could over time bid down bank lending rates, thereby increasing risk taking while also pushing a wider set of deposit rates into negative territory. This could raise incentives for cash hoarding and erode a key source of bank funding. In addition, portfolio diversification can reduce but not eliminate valuation risks on the SNB’s balance sheet. Over the longer term, accommodating some gradual appreciation, as was the case prior to the GFC, should be considered. Beyond monetary policy, structural reforms should be considered to narrow the large domestic saving-investment gap and reduce savers’ home bias. Authorities’ views The SNB’s expansionary two-pronged monetary policy is working well . With credit continuing to grow at a moderate pace, and the Swiss franc still significantly overvalued, the exchange rate is the primary transmission channel for monetary policy. The negative policy rate has worked well in Switzerland, with the parallel decline in key market rates signaling the effectiveness and credibility of the policy tool. Tiering has helped limit the impact of negative rates on banks’ profits, thereby avoiding the need for banks to pass along these rates to smaller depositors. There is little indication of cash hoarding. FX purchases are an important complement to negative policy rates, facilitating the absorption of large safe haven inflows and also avoiding the need to further widen the interest differential vis a vis other major central banks. Utilization of these two instruments is appropriately balanced at present. Room is available to ease further, but monetary policy alone cannot support the real economy for an extended period . Keeping interest rates at very negative levels for a long time could eventually encourage cash hoarding and excessive risk taking. Moreover, while there is no upper limit to the size of the SNB’s balance sheet, and portfolio diversification has safeguarded its value, currency exposure is a risk. Nonetheless, there is room to lower the policy rate further, if needed. However, addressing the economy’s structural shortcomings is beyond the scope of monetary policy. Fiscal Policy Background Switzerland’s long-standing fiscal rule has led to a decline in public debt . The “debt brake” rule, introduced in 2003, requires a balanced cyclically-adjusted federal budget on an ex ante basis, and in case of ex post spending overruns, offsetting structural surpluses are expected in subsequent years. The rule, together with conservative frameworks at other levels of government, has delivered a significant reduction in general government debt, which stood at 46 percent of GDP at end 2015 (Annex III). Moreover, outturns have tended to exceed the targeted balanced structural position. Page 15 20. Several fiscal reform initiatives are in the pipeline . Options for meeting the fiscal costs of aging—including equalizing the retirement age for men and women and raising VAT rates (currently among the lowest in Europe)—are being discussed by parliament. Eliminating preferential tax treatment of foreign companies currently offered by several cantons is underway by unifying rates for all firms within a canton. The new corporate tax rates are expected to average 14–15 percent, and would likely lead to some revenue loss. Staff’s views 21. Switzerland has ample fiscal space in view of its negative borrowing costs, moderate and declining public debt and broadly balanced general government finances. The current federal-level debt brake rule allows automatic stabilizers to dampen the business cycle and provides flexibility for extraordinary spending in the event of “exceptional financial circumstances.” With about 70 percent of general government spending occurring outside the boundaries of the rule, the rule may not in practice significantly impede the use of fiscal space. Despite a goal of structural balance, the rule is implemented in a somewhat tighter manner and could benefit from some refinements in its application A tendency to not fully spend budget appropriations and a conservative approach to estimating potential output have led to systematic ex post structural surpluses that have accumulated to 4 percent of GDP since 2003. With some two-thirds of the budget pre-committed as transfers to other levels of government, spending compression is focused on the remaining relatively narrow set of categories, including education, which can have implications for longer-term growth and competitiveness. With fiscal policy providing less support than envisaged under the rule, additional pressure is also placed on monetary policy. Reducing within-year underspending or permitting underspent amounts to be used the following year by allowing symmetric operation of the rule’s ex post provision would alleviate this issue. On the other hand, increased transfers to the cantons to partially compensate them for CIT reform-related revenue loss will further squeeze other federal spending. In the event of a prolonged downturn or deep recession, a discretionary fiscal stimulus would provide essential support to economic activity . Moderate public debt, negative borrowing costs and broadly balanced budgets suggest the presence of ample fiscal space to respond with a discretionary stimulus in the event of a sizable negative output gap. Supporting the economy by temporarily setting aside the rule is permitted under the “exceptional financial circumstances” clause, and would avoid overburdening monetary policy. The authorities’ proactive approach will help address challenges to pension system sustainability . With average life expectancy of 83 years, raising retirement ages for men and women (currently 65 and 64, respectively), together with increasing VAT rates, is essential to generate new resources to help fill the expected deficit in the first pillar, pay-as-you-go pension system. Additional pressure is being felt in the private second pillar scheme where the legally-mandated minimum An absolute majority of both chambers of the Swiss parliament is required to increase the expenditure ceiling according to the exceptional financial circumstances clause. Page 16 conversion rate used to translate accumulated savings into an annuity is too high relative to long-term interest rates and life expectancy. In addition, despite a reduction last year, the guaranteed interest rate used to compound contributions remains too high. Lowering both the mandated conversion rate and the compounding rate—by indexing them to a long-term sovereign bond—would reduce the risk of contingent fiscal liabilities and help ensure the sustainability of the social safety net. Authorities’ views Fiscal policy in Switzerland follows a prudent approach that simultaneously delivers debt reduction and economic stabilization . Since the GFC, fiscal policy has supported growth through a healthy pace of infrastructure investment and solid growth in education spending, while also providing temporary targeted support to employment following the 2015 appreciation. As a result, the domestic-oriented economy is performing well. This situation contrasts with that of several other countries where, owing to high public debt, governments have pursued fiscal austerity that necessitated unconventional monetary easing to compensate for weak government demand. The debt brake rule, which enjoys broad popular support, has led to a significant reduction of nominal debt, annual underspending is a modest 0.3 percent of GDP, and there is no need at present for higher fiscal spending. The debt brake rule has flexibility in extraordinary times to provide additional stimulus, which the authorities have shown a readiness to use under appropriate conditions The “exceptional circumstances” clause has been previously invoked and will be used again in 2017 for migration-related spending. In general, fiscal stimulus is most effective when domestic absorption is weak, while monetary policy is best suited to respond to external shocks or when the export sector is under pressure. Medium-term fiscal challenges can be addressed without an undue increase in taxes To stabilize pension system finances, Parliament is expected to agree by early 2017 a combination of a higher retirement age for women and an increase in the range of 1–1½ percentage points in the VAT rate, which will be earmarked for the Old-Age and Survivors’ Insurance. Following full phase-in of the corporate tax reform in 2019, corporate tax rates are likely to be reduced in the majority of the cantons, and while rates levied on foreign companies will increase marginally, other factors will continue to ensure Switzerland remains an attractive foreign investment destination. Page 17