Domestic macroeconomic conditions do not call for a monetary tightening yet and the risk of resumption in safe haven inflows remains considerable. Although both core and headline inflation turned slightly positive at end-2013, the recent inflation decline in other advanced economies and especially the euro area is exerting downward pressures on prices. Also, with the internationally open labor market stronger domestic activity may not result in wage and price pressures (though future curbs on immigration may change this in the medium term), while the money multiplier remains very low. On the other hand, sizable risks remain of renewed pressures on the franc through a return of safe haven inflows triggered by external events (see Para. 12). Without the floor, such pressures would translate in a sharp nominal appreciation and a return of deflation. Page 11 The floor should remain in place for now to guard against deflationary risks. Going forward, an appropriate strategy should balance the need to keep inflation expectations well anchored against the risk of an excessive tightening of monetary conditions through renewed exchange rate appreciation. Achieving this objective will require careful calibration of unconventional policy instruments. In an upside scenario, where the global recovery takes hold and confidence in the euro area solidifies, past safe haven flows would revert, potentially pushing the franc well above the floor. In this scenario, concerns about deflation would be muted, so there would be no need for a large depreciation to drive up inflation. A large depreciation would also be questionable from a multilateral perspective given the balanced external position. Thus, in this scenario the SNB should gradually reduce its holdings of foreign exchange reserves, supporting this strategy with clear communication to avoid market disruption and adverse outward spillovers. As the recovery takes hold, if inflation threatens to move above comfortable levels, then the SNB should raise the policy rate. This may become necessary even if the balance sheet has not returned to its pre- crisis level. In a more challenging global environment, where exit from UMP by major advanced countries is disorderly, downside risks to the euro area materialize, or the EM sell-off develops into a full- blown crisis, safe haven inflows may return and a premature exit from the floor would likely result in a sharp appreciation and renewed deflationary pressures. In this scenario, the SNB should keep the floor in place and consider imposing a negative interest rate on bank excess reserves to discourage inflows. Negative interest rates might also help address deflationary pressures that may arise from adverse domestic shocks . The impact of negative rates on the economy would need to be carefully monitored, and macroprudential measures may have to be reinforced to prevent an exacerbation of mortgage market imbalances. Risks from the large SNB balance sheet need to be mitigated. These risks were recently underscored as the SNB announced a sizable valuation loss on gold holdings, triggering the first suspension of profit transfers to the Confederation and cantons in recent memory. While the build- up of risk provision was stepped up in 2011, it has not kept pace with the increase in the balance sheet. Going forward, provisioning should receive priority over transfers to the distribution reserve. The authorities’ view The SNB continues to see the exchange rate floor as essential to guarding against the risk of deflation. It noted the recent multiple downward revisions to its inflation forecast, For more details, see 2013 Selected Issues Paper, “SNB’s Balance Sheet Risks and Policy Implications.” Page 12 attributing them to weaker euro area inflation and a very protracted pass-through from past appreciation. The SNB agreed that negative interest rates on banks’ excess reserves were a possible tool to be deployed if safe have inflows resumed on a significant scale. With regard to the management of its balance sheet and associated risks, the SNB viewed current profit distribution arrangements as sufficiently protective of its capital.