Background Weak revenue collection has affected the level of expenditure, and spending efficiency has been low in certain sectors. Tanzania’s public expenditure was below the average for LICs in recent years, with the gap being larger for investment spending. As mentioned above, weak commitment controls and unrealistic budgets in recent years have led to intra-year expenditure adjustments affecting investment and arrears accumulation. Staff analysis suggests that Tanzania performs poorly in education and investment spending efficiency while health spending efficiency appears to be in line with the average for LICs (Box 2). Average efficiency does not mean that there are no issues with the quality and availability of services, which may be affected by a range of factors. As Box 2 underscores, there is significant scope for progress, even in the health sector. Page 22 Staff’s views (Percent of GDP) average EAC average LMICs Total expenditure (percent of GDP) average LICs Government Total Expenditure, 2010-14 Improving spending efficiency would help reduce spending pressures. Better outcomes could be obtained with the same amount of spending. As discussed in Box 2, possible reforms include improving resource allocations in the education and health sectors and linking them to performance. Improving the efficiency of public investment becomes even more critical in a context where the authorities plan to raise capital expenditure substantially. An initial assessment of the public investment management process suggests a need to strengthen project appraisal and implementation capacity. Arrears prevention requires sustained reforms in public financial management (PFM) in addition to credible budgeting. More realistic budgets, tighter commitment controls, and improved cash management are critical to avoid arrears accumulation and budget adjustments in the course of the fiscal year. Staff also urged the authorities to settle arrears to pension funds as soon as possible. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly concurred with the assessment and stressed that a number of reforms were underway. They noted that expenditure efficiency during the implementation of FYDP I was affected by inadequate prioritization and stressed that FYDP II addressed this issue. The authorities also reported the recent launch of the comprehensive public investment management manual, which is expected to help improve the efficiency of capital expenditure. On expenditure arrears, they underscored that recent data suggest a much better outcome so far than in past years. Arrears will continue to be settled next year, thanks to significant budget allocations for this purpose. An expert has been hired to enhance the IFMIS, which will enable to track multi-year commitments over the life cycle of the budget. This will ensure proper budgeting of the required resources, and further improve the integration of the medium-term expenditure framework into the annual budget process. A new public awareness A recent TA mission recommended improving budget credibility by cabinet committing to the fiscal framework early in the budget cycle, subjecting revenue forecasts to independent review, greater analysis and debate on selected budget items, identifying all contract commitments for the budget year and period of the medium-term expenditure framework, and presenting separately new and ongoing activities. The mission also suggested strengthening the cash flow planning process using rolling three-month cash flows and quarterly expenditure ceilings and monthly cash releases. In the area of commitment controls, the authorities should initiate a public awareness campaign notifying suppliers that orders without a system-generated order number will not be honored. A range of technical recommendations were also made to use IFMIS better and increase its coverage, including the requirement for all orders to be processed through IFMIS, with a mandatory control against commitment ceiling releases. Page 23 campaign will be launched to warn suppliers that orders not generated through IFMIS will not be honored. The settlement of arrears to pension funds has been postponed to end-2016 to ensure the legitimacy of arrears to be cleared, in light of the very large amounts involved. The principle of clearing these arrears, however, remains. Box 2. Benchmarking and Efficiency of Public Spending in Tanzania Public spending has broadly stabilized in the recent years and remained below the level of comparator countries. A lackluster revenue performance, combined with declining donor assistance and difficulties in securing external financing, has constrained public spending growth. Further, the need to maintain fiscal discipline in the face of revenue and financing shortfalls led to expenditure cuts that fell disproportionally on capital expenditure, thus weakening the composition of spending. Total public expenditure in Tanzania stood at 19.5 percent of GDP on average in 2010–14, well below the EAC average (24.5 percent of GDP), while capital expenditure was the lowest in the region. There is a significant room to improve public spending efficiency. The latter was assessed using the data envelopment analysis (DEA) approach on a sample of 34 LICs with data for the period 2010–14. The efficiency score of Tanzania for health spending is estimated at 0.86 close to the sample average, using the health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE) to measure the health outcome. Eliminating remaining inefficiencies (i.e., bringing the score to 1) could raise HALE from 53 to 60 years with the same level of spending. Using school enrollment rates as the education outcome, the efficiency of education spending in Tanzania is about a third lower than in the most efficient LICs. Similarly, Tanzania ranks low in the efficiency of public investment, with the efficiency gap estimated at about a third for overall infrastructure quality. Reforms to improve the allocation of resources in the health and education sectors and strengthen public investment management institutions would help Tanzania improve public spending efficiency. In the health sector, existing reports highlight the need to align staffing of healthcare centers and the provision of drugs to demand and performance, address the shortage of skilled staff, tackle low productivity of staff and the high degree of absenteeism, and strengthen the information management system to better monitor health indicators and performance of healthcare centers. In the education sector, reducing the large disparities of students to teacher ratios across districts, improving the quality of primary education, and improving teachers’ skills are essential. It is important that spending on tertiary education does not crowd out that of lower education levels, whereas student loans should be better targeted and their repayment enforced. Strengthening public investment management institutions would be critical to improve the selection, appraisal, management and evaluation of projects. Page 24