Financial sector development and economic growth have been mutually reinforcing. Indicators of financial development show that Tanzania’s experience is similar to other countries in the region, though there is scope for further progress given the country’s level Page 16 of development. In response, the authorities have focused on fostering financial stability to engender confidence in the system, allowing the private sector to leverage on innovations such as mobile banking that enhance financial inclusion. Indeed, indicators of credit availability and financial inclusion display an upward trend. The growth in mobile banking transactions has been especially rapid, rising from TSh 25.2 billion in 2008 to TSh28.9 trillion in 2013. The authorities and private sector agents see these developments as supporting investment, economic efficiency, and output growth. In order to support the prudent expansion of mobile banking and money platforms, the authorities are working on regulations to ensure financial stability. A new Payments System Act has been drafted to make the BoT’s supervisory role over mobile payment platforms more explicit, and is expected to be tabled at the next parliamentary session. Indicators of Financial Development Access Accounts per thousand adults, commercial banks Number of branches per 100,000 adults, commercial banks Depth/Size Domestic bank deposits (percent of GDP) Private credit (percent of GDP) External position Consolidated foreign claims of BIS-reporting banks (percent of GDP) Stability Private credit to deposits (percent) Liquid assets (percent of deposits and short- term funding) Actual Expected median Kenya Uganda Statistical estimates of the expected median value of the financial development indicators are generated by the FinStats tool created by the World Bank. The tool selects a peer group based on the level of economic development, population, demographic characteristics, the global cycle and other special characteristics (e.g., whether the country is an oil exporter or an offshore financial center) and provides the median values of each indicator for the peer group. Note: The data refer to 2012. Sources: Tanzanian authorities, World Bank. The authorities have made progress in regulatory and supervisory reform. The Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) update of June 2010 recommended several actions, such as addressing data gaps to strengthen the oversight of banks, developing credit information tools to mitigate systemic credit risk, and improving the framework for dealing with banking crises. Progress to date includes collaboration committees of relevant supervisors and Page 17 policymakers for effective surveillance and crisis management/resolution, as well as the establishment of a credit reference database and bureaus. Further reforms are under way (Box 5). Tanzania has substantially addressed its Action Plan agreed with FATF to address weaknesses in its AML/CFT framework . The last action item under the plan agreed with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)—a set of amendments to legal provisions to strengthen provisions to seize terrorist assets—received its final parliamentary reading in November 2013 and was duly enacted in mid-December. Regulations to make the revisions operational were issued soon thereafter. Tanzania may be removed from the list of jurisdictions that are subject to FATF’s monitoring process after an on-site visit by FATF to confirm implementation of the reforms. To make the AML/CFT framework more efficient, the authorities are also undertaking a national assessment to identify the key risks. Ultimately, this will make it possible to adopt a more flexible set of measures, in order to target resources more effectively and apply preventive measures that are commensurate to the nature of risks.