Background The business environment remains challenging. In the 2016 World Bank’s Doing Business survey, Tanzania ranks 139 out of 189 countries and lags behind its regional peers such as Kenya, Rwanda, and Uganda. Getting credit, paying taxes, and trading across borders are mentioned as the biggest issues. The perception of corruption has increased in recent years, while the perception of government effectiveness has decreased. Corruption has directly affected public finances: for instance, corruption at the Port of Dar es Salaam led to significant tax evasion and lower revenue; corruption in the private placement of a bond in 2013 increased Page 28 financing costs to the government. In addition to the possibility of potential contingent liabilities, the IPTL case and related court proceedings have also likely increased perception of risk by investors. More broadly, corruption has negatively impacted the business climate, with likely negative implications for investment and growth. Tanzania: Doing Business Indicators 2016 Ranking Source: World Bank, Doing Business Indicators. Tanzania could become a major producer and exporter of natural gas in the next decade. Recently discovered offshore natural gas, assuming it is exploited, could lead to multi- billion dollar foreign investment in the next 5–10 years and make Tanzania one of the largest exporters of natural gas in the region by the mid-2020s. Potentially significant revenue from natural gas (whose size is highly sensitive to a number of parameters, particularly gas prices; see Selected Issues Paper) could play a critical role for the development of Tanzania, if well managed. The financial sustainability of the public electricity utility, TANESCO, has not been achieved yet, affecting its credibility as an energy purchaser. TANESCO still has a large amount of arrears to gas and electricity suppliers (0.7 percent of GDP in early 2016). A large independent electricity producer (SONGAS) recently decided to shut down partially its operations as a result of TANESCO’s inability to clear its arrears; other investment decisions could also be affected. Despite this context, TANESCO requested a small tariff decrease for the spring of 2016, and a larger one for 2017, anticipating a significant improvement in its financial situation reflecting favorable developments in its production mix. Staff’s views A rekindling of reform efforts will be needed to foster further structural transformation and sustain high productivity growth and investment (Box 3). Staff supported the new government’s plan to play a facilitating role for private sector-led growth, by creating a better environment for business and job creation, including through better The U.S. authorities’ ruling concerning FBME Bank presents additional reputational risk to the effectiveness of the country’s AML/CFT regime. Page 29 infrastructure (for energy and transportation in particular), access to finance and land, and education and job training. Given that over 70 percent of the population is involved in agriculture, modernizing this sector will help raise income, free labor resources for other sectors of the economy, and could foster the development of certain industries, such as food processing. Staff also argued that Tanzania could significantly benefit from the completion of the EAC common market and urged the authorities to push for the removal of non-tariff barriers in the region. Decisions will need to be made and implemented quickly to ensure the sustainability and development of the energy sector. The investment decision has not yet been made by potential investors in the offshore gas sector, as a number of critical issues related to the legal, tax, and regulatory environment have not been resolved. Staff welcomed the new authorities’ plan to re-engage with the investors to facilitate reaching the investment decision. Further improving the financial sustainability of TANESCO is critical to provide incentives for the existing producers of gas and independent power producers to expand their activities. Staff urged the authorities to finalize and implement the strategy to address TANESCO’s arrears and to reconsider the planned tariff decreases until TANESCO’s financial situation allows it. Staff welcomed the new authorities’ strong drive against corruption. Staff underlined that anti-corruption and anti-money laundering laws and their corresponding penalties should be fully applied to any established corruption cases. Strengthening transparency will also help reduce the incidence of corruption. Page 30 Box 3. Productivity, Growth, and Structural Reforms 1/ Tanzania experienced macroeconomic stabilization and significant structural change over the last three decades, including two major waves of reforms, first in the mid-1980s and more importantly in the mid- 1990s. Staff analysis shows that both reform waves were followed by total factor productivity (TFP) and growth spurts. Over the recent period, growth remained strong with high investments to address infrastructure gaps, but TFP growth decreased. Table 1. Tanzania: Basic Growth Accounts (Annual average growth rates) GDP Capital 1/ Labor 1/ TFP Source: IMF staff calculations. 1/ Contributions to GDP growth. The lower TFP performance coincided with a less strong reform drive in recent years. Certain indicators suggest that recent progress has been limited in a number of priorities areas, with even a deterioration of certain aspects of public governance (e.g., control of corruption) and overall government effectiveness. The business environment is challenging, even by regional standards. Vigorous reforms are needed to sustain high growth and foster further structural transformation of the economy. While higher investment is welcome, particularly in a country with a low capital stock, a growth model relying mostly on capital accumulation is less durable than one also underpinned by TFP improvements. In emerging Asian countries which achieved sustained high growth, TFP growth contributed more to GDP growth than in Tanzania in recent years. There seems to be considerable room for productivity improvements through sustained structural and institutional reforms, which would support continued diversification of the economy. Table 2. Growth Accounts: Cross Country Comparison (Annual average growth rates) Tanzania Korea China VietNam Thailand GDP GDP per labor Labor input Human capital Capital per labor TFP Per capita GDP (US$) Beginning year Ending year Sources: IMF staff calculations; and Lee and Hong (2010). 1/ See Chapter I of the Selected Issues Paper. Page 31 Authorities’ views The authorities stressed that the growth strategy laid out in FYDP II was broadly consistent with staff’s recommendations , with its focus on further structural transformation and a facilitating role for the government in this process. With regard to the EAC integration process, they noted that the first implementation phase of the common market is currently being assessed by the regional authorities, with a view to drawing lessons for the next steps. The authorities reiterated their intention to maintain close engagement with potential investors in the offshore gas sector.