Prudent policies and macroeconomic stabilization have underpinned the strength and resilience of Tanzania’s economic performance over the past decade. Despite the global financial crisis of 2008-09, the food and fuel price shocks of 2007–08 and 2011–12, and the energy crisis of 2011, real GDP growth has proved resilient, averaging 7 percent over the past decade. The poverty headcount in mainland Tanzania declined from 33.6 percent of the population in 2007 to 28.2 percent in 2011/12, but remained relatively high in rural areas, where job creation was insufficient to absorb a young and growing labor force. Macroeconomic performance under the three-year Policy Support Instrument (PSI, July 2010–June 2013) and the Standby Credit Facility (SCF, July 2012–April 2014) has been broadly satisfactory. Box 1 presents a summary of Tanzania’s policy response to the key recommendations in the 2011 Article IV consultation. During the next few years, policymakers will need to manage and meet expectations stemming from three main sources, while preserving fiscal and debt sustainability: a. Public investment in infrastructure is seen as key to strengthening competitiveness and removing growth bottlenecks The authorities’ “Big Results Now” (BRN) initiative envisages ambitious infrastructure investment that, after further prioritization, needs to be fully integrated into the budget process, while safeguarding critical social expenditures. b. Over the next decade, Tanzania has good prospects of becoming a major producer and exporter of natural gas . This is beginning to generate expectations that greater spending is warranted by likely future revenues. However, a final decision on whether to develop a large-scale liquefied natural gas (LNG) project using offshore gas resources may not be made by the natural gas companies until 2016, with production to begin no earlier than 2020. Beyond keeping expectations in check until such uncertainty is resolved, decisions made in the next few years on the contracts and the framework for the management of natural resources revenues will have long-term implications for whether the ensuing benefits will accrue to all citizens. c. Political factors may engender additional spending pressures . Uncertainties stem from the ongoing review of the constitution, including the relationship between mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar, which might have significant economic and fiscal implications. General elections will be held in October 2015, when President Kikwete’s second and last term in office expires. Against this background, undertaking reforms will likely require even greater resolve. In the 2011/12 Household Budget Survey, poverty was estimated at 33.6 percent in rural areas, 4.2 percent in Dar es Salaam, and 21.7 percent in other urban areas. The results of the 2007 and 2011/12 surveys are not fully comparable, owing to methodological changes. Page 6