Background Tanzania’s tax revenue, at about 13 percent of GDP in 2015/16, is low by international standards. This reflects to a significant extent poor VAT performance. Staff analysis suggests that the tax revenue gap in Tanzania was about 4 percent of GDP in 2009–13, and assuming an unchanged tax potential would still be about 2–3 percent of GDP presently (Box 1). Box 1. Tax Revenue Gap in Tanzania Tanzania’s tax revenue performance lags behind that of comparable countries. Tanzania had a tax-to- GDP ratio of 11.9 percent of GDP in 2011–13, well below the average of EAC countries (13.1 percent of GDP) and that of LICs (14.7 percent of GDP). This reflects to a significant extent poor performance in VAT collection. While EAC countries collected an average of 4.4 percent of GDP in VAT revenue in 2011–13, Tanzania only managed to achieve 3.3 percent of GDP. The VAT revenue underperformance appears to be driven by a low tax productivity associated with administrative inefficiency, low taxpayer compliance, and policy gaps. Tax revenue (percent of GDP) average EAC average LICs average LMICs Tax revenue to GDP Ratio, 2011-13 (percent) The estimation of the tax capacity suggests that there is a considerable scope to raise revenue in the medium term. Using the peer analysis and the frontier approach on a sample of 32 LICs with data during 1994–2013, Tanzania’s tax capacity is estimated at 15-16 percent of GDP in 2009–13, that is about 4 percent of GDP above the average tax revenue ratio during the same period. Assuming an unchanged tax capacity, and in light of the increase in the tax revenue ratio in 2015/16, the gap has been reduced to 2– 3 percent of GDP. The draft budget includes an allocation of close to 1 percent of GDP for the standard gauge railway project. The latter is expected to be financed mostly through a public-private partnership, with a total cost reportedly of about US$8 billion (about 16 percent of current GDP). Page 21 Staff’s views Raising more revenue will be critical to reconcile the government’s investment priorities with fiscal sustainability. Closing the tax revenue gap will require sustained and deep reforms, both in tax policy and tax administration. Although the new VAT law implemented from July 2015 is a good step forward, more needs to be done to further streamline exemptions and improve the refund mechanism. There is also significant revenue mobilization potential through the elimination of corporate income tax holidays and exemptions, the regular adjustment of specific excise rates, and development of property taxation. In the areas of tax administration, the need to step up reforms is pressing. Areas for policy actions include cleaning up the taxpayer registration and accounting, upgrading the IT system and strengthening compliance risk management. Authorities’ views The authorities agreed with the need to raise revenue collection and pointed to ongoing initiatives in this area. FYDP II aims to increase domestic revenue by fighting tax evasion, streamlining exemptions, widening the revenue base, and strengthening the capacity of revenue collecting agencies. In the area of tax administration, a plan was prepared following the recent diagnostic mission. The authorities have also started considering tax policy reforms in a broad range of areas (including VAT, corporate income tax, excises, and property taxation), and discussions are expected to continue in the coming months before a strategy is adopted by end-2016.