Preserving Stability Background The financial system in Tanzania is dominated by banks. Financial markets, on the whole, are shallow and less developed though a few markets (the interbank and foreign exchange markets) exhibit greater liquidity and depth. Banks are generally well-capitalized and profitable. However, there is wide variation within the system: a few large banks have shown strong financial performance but other banks, primarily smaller foreign-owned banks and community banks, exhibit low profitability and poor asset quality. State-owned banks also have relatively high non-performing loan (NPL) ratios. Tanzania stands out in its large number of banks (57). The level of financial development has improved in recent years, though at a gradual pace. A broad measure of financial development suggests that the development of institutions has improved over time but that of markets has lagged. Among institutions, there has been notable improvement in access, particularly for households. The expansion of mobile money and banking is a key driver of this positive development. While nearly two-thirds of adults now have access to formal financial services, the picture for firms is less positive: in the 2013 World Bank enterprise survey, almost 44 percent of firms in Tanzania claimed to face difficulties in accessing finance, the highest proportion in the EAC, with small and medium enterprises facing particularly acute challenges. Further, the level of financial development in Tanzania is lower than might be expected for a country at its current level of income and similar fundamentals, with market development particularly lagging. Finally, financial efficiency is relatively low in Tanzania, with for instance high lending rates. Improving financial development would likely yield higher growth and greater stability. Based on recent cross-country empirical work done at the IMF, Tanzania stands to benefit substantially from greater financial development. By bringing the level of development up to expected levels given Tanzania’s economic and demographic characteristics, empirical estimates suggest that growth could be higher by up to 1 percent and less volatile. Improving financial market development in Tanzania would also facilitate macroeconomic policy implementation. The monetary transmission mechanism is weak and seems to have weakened, rather than strengthened, in recent years. There appears to be little correlation between short-term (market) rates and longer-term retail rates, probably reflecting See the Selected Issues Paper (SIP) on macro-financial issues. Mobile money transactions have grown rapidly in Tanzania. They amounted to nearly 52 percent of GDP in 2015, up from just 0.2 percent in 2010. See Sahay, R., and others, 2015, Rethinking Financial Deepening: Stability and Growth in Emerging Markets (IMF Staff Discussion Note No. 15/08) and Chapter 3 of the April 2016 Regional Economic Outlook for sub-Saharan Africa. Page 25 interest rate volatility in the interbank market. The lack of market development also adversely affects fiscal policy by reducing the authorities’ capacity to raise domestic financing at a reasonable cost and run counter-cyclical policies in response to shocks, and raises risks such as rollover risks. S. Africa 2013 Namibia 2011 Zimbabwe 2014 Kenya 2013 Lesotho 2011 Botswana 2009 Tanzania 2013 Uganda 2013 Swaziland 2011 Nigeria 2012 Ghana 2010 Malawi 2014 Zambia 2015 Mozambique 2014 Tanzania 2009 Financial Inclusion Formal Informal Excluded Mobile money transactions Percent of GDP KEN TZA UGA Source: IMF Financial Access Survey. Tanzania: Estimated Gap in Financial Development and Impact of Closing the Gap Tanzania’s level of financial development, encompassing institutions and markets, lags EAC peers as well as levels expected given its income and demographic characteristics Closing this gap and moving from the observed level of development to that predicted by fundamentals could substantially increase growth in Tanzania ) ( h w g P G i b i C MUS SYC NAM TZA predicted KEN TZA UGA RWA Financial development index Sources: Sahay and others (2015); IMF (2016) Staff’s views Achieving further financial development supporting growth will require prudent credit expansion and other measures. While the short-term relationship between economic growth and credit appears relatively weak, the link may be stronger in the long run. Further, as the financial system deepens, the link is expected to strengthen. Rapid credit growth, while Page 26 likely a needed ingredient of financial development, may lead to potential vulnerabilities in the financial sector. So far, the recent rapid rise in credit appears to be well-supported by economic conditions: The credit-to-GDP ratio, while rising, has not deviated from historical trends. Nevertheless, there are developments in some sectors that bear monitoring. In particular, lending to real estate (reflecting lending to activities related to commercial properties), while small, has been growing rapidly. Further, some lending for property-related activities is not adequately captured by the data as it is classified as personal loans by commercial banks. Mortgages, which are a new and small part of overall lending, have increased in recent years. While risks appear to be contained, the BoT should monitor the situation closely and stand ready to take swift action, including imposing or adjusting prudential limits. Beyond credit growth, financial development will require improving further access, particularly for businesses, and reducing high borrowing costs, which reflect a range of issues typically found in LICs (e.g., imperfect information and slow resolution of disputes by the judicial system). Micro- and macro-prudential oversight needs to be further strengthened, in parallel with the development of the financial system. Moving forward with the planned increase in capital requirements may support a gradual consolidation amongst banks. Some banks continue to have high levels of NPLs. A more proactive approach is required from the supervisory authorities to work with commercial banks on reducing NPLs. The overall stability of the banking system would be enhanced by the BoT tackling more forcefully the two small banks reporting negative capital. Enhanced AML/CFT supervision of banks could help address risks from potential loss of correspondent banking relations. With regard to mobile money, the BoT should continue to work on achieving full pass-through of deposit insurance coverage for individual mobile money accounts, addressing operational risks, and stepping up contingency planning. A key first step to develop financial markets is for the BoT to further increase its emphasis on short-term interest rates. By more directly focusing on stabilizing short-term rates, including through open market operations and implementing structural reforms (e.g., required reserve averaging, ensuring that the Lombard window can always be accessed and at a rate that does not follow short-term market fluctuations), the BoT could reduce interbank rate volatility, foster the development of the interbank market, and strengthen the interest rate channel of monetary policy transmission. The eventual move to an interest-based monetary policy would complete this process. Forecasting and policy analysis capacity needs to be further developed and integrated more systematically into the decision-making process. Further work is needed to improve liquidity forecasting at the BoT and commercial banks, for instance to better anticipate seasonal patterns in government flows, which would be helped by reducing and eventually eliminating central bank advances to the government. An option, for instance, would be to bring the loan-to-value ceiling on mortgages back to 80 percent (it was recently raised to 90 percent). Page 27 Communication also needs to be further stepped up and improved, both through the regular publication of information and analyses and exchanges with market participants. Fiscal and debt management reforms could play an important role too. Budget credibility needs to improve and to be accompanied by better cash forecasting on the part of the fiscal authorities. This will also allow the authorities to announce and stick to a bond issuance schedule, which ultimately would strengthen the government securities market. Tap sales should be phased out while transparent rules that govern the bidding process in primary auctions should be adopted. Arbitrary changes (changing or even cancelling offered amounts) should be eliminated. Greater communication with financial market participants would also help in setting the stage for a more effective government securities market. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly shared these views and underscored that a number of the recommendations were already being implemented. They noted that sustainable credit growth and better SME access to finance would require better and more easily available information to assess credit risks, as well as improved financial literacy, and they laid out their plans in this area. Implementation of partial reserve averaging is about to be implemented, and both the Lombard facility and the collateral framework will be reviewed with a view to improving them. With TA from the Fund, forecasting and policy analysis capacity is being strengthened. Communication with markets participants has improved significantly since mid- 2015. The recommendations made to improve the functioning of the government debt market are being considered, together with the possibility of further IMF and World Bank TA to implement them. Micro- and macro-prudential oversight is being strengthened. The BoT recently concluded its pilot consolidated supervision exercise on a large domestic bank with some cross-border operations, and additional pilot exercises are being planned. Work is underway to develop a supervisory framework for community banks. The BoT intends to improve its stress- testing model and capacity. It will review the stringency of future stress tests to ensure that both baseline assumptions and tail risks are adequately explored.