Tanzania is likely to become a major producer and exporter of natural gas in the medium term . Significant offshore discoveries have been made over the last 2–3 years, and further exploration is underway. Although gas resources have not yet been declared commercially viable, estimates of discoveries indicate recoverable offshore gas resources of at least 24-26 trillion cubic feet, potentially sufficient for a four-train LNG plant (possibly as a common facility for several upstream gas fields). A final investment decision is expected at the earliest in late 2015 or 2016. Total investment during the development phase could amount to US$20-40 billion, the largest investment ever in Tanzania, with gas production starting after Potentially significant revenue from natural gas could play a transformative role for the development of Tanzania, if well managed . The authorities and the mission discussed the importance of putting in place a sound policy, legal and regulatory framework well before natural gas exploration reaches an advanced stage. These will be reflected in the authorities’ revised gas policy framework, which is expected to address the inter-generational policy question of natural resource wealth management, ensure integration of resource revenue in the budget framework and institutionalize transparency and accountability of spending. Decisions made in the next few years on the contracts and the general fiscal framework will have long term implications for whether the benefits of likely revenues from newly discovered offshore natural gas will accrue to all citizens. Removing policy uncertainty about the fiscal regime would facilitate the final investment decision (see Selected Issues Paper). The Action Plan can be found at http://www.esaamlg.org/userfiles/NATIONAL_AML_STRATEGY_TANZANIA.pdf. The latest FATF statement on Improving Global AML/CFT Compliance: on-going process – 14 February 2014 can be found at http://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/statements/Public-Statement-14-February-2014.pdf Page 18 Box 5. Status of Recommendations from the June 2010 FSSA Update The June 2010 FSSA Update recommendations, covering both bank and non-bank financial sector participants, include proposals to strengthen capital standards in banks; improve credit information systems; create a crisis management framework; develop avenues for long-term financing, including capital markets; and improve international cooperation with financial regulators, both in the region and elsewhere. The authorities have made progress in all these areas. A high-level group, known as the Tanzania Financial Stability Forum (FSF), comprising all financial regulators and other key official stakeholders was established in March 2013 to monitor developments in the financial sector with a view to preserving financial stability. Meeting at least once every quarter, the group will guide the implementation of macro and microprudential measures in response to risks, and formulate and implement crisis management measures. The FSF had its first meeting in November 2013, at which members discussed possible options for a stress testing and crisis management framework for non-banks. Other key developments in regulatory and supervisory policy: The BoT set up a credit reference database and licensed two firms to act as credit reference bureaus, with a third application pending. The Social Security Regulatory Authority was established in March 2011 and is now the primary regulator of pension funds. Minimum capital requirements for commercial banks were raised to TSh 25 billion in February 2014 (TSh 5 billion previously), which most banks have met. The capital adequacy ratios will be further raised from March 2014 by 2.5 percentage points to 12.5 percent for Tier-1 capital and 14.5 percent for total capital. The BoT has entered into information sharing and other cooperative arrangements with financial regulators in members of the EAC, Comoros, Cyprus, Nigeria, South Africa and Zimbabwe, with ongoing discussions with additional countries. The authorities are setting out a framework for consolidated supervision of more complex financial firms, including amendments to the legal provisions that allow regulators to increase oversight of bank holding companies. Draft regulations to support this have been prepared and the authorities envisage being able to submit them for gazetting by June 2014. In line with EAC agreements, further opening of the capital account to investors from other EAC members is envisaged by end-June 2014, extending this to the rest of the world by December 2015. The main operational improvements include: To improve transparency and communication, the BoT has started publishing semi-annual financial stability reports. As part of this, it is improving data collection, including through surveys of credit officers, households and corporates. To address capacity and organizational challenges in banking supervision, the BoT has hired 15 new supervisors since 2010, and training has been stepped up. To further improve the supervision process, greater use of technology, including automated submission of reports by banks to the BoT, has started. Further work is needed to: Improve the frequency and timeliness of data. The BoT’s financial stability reports are issued with some delay (March 2013 is the latest issue available, with September currently in preparation). The publication schedule is being aligned with that of FSF meetings, thereby enhancing timeliness. Improve the stress-testing framework. Fund TA, including to expand stress-testing to pension funds, is being provided. Bolster the deposit insurance fund. Efforts to enhance the operational independence of the Deposit Insurance Board by transforming it into a full-fledged Deposit Insurance Corporation are underway. Page 19