Background The draft 2016/17 budget envisages a large increase in public investment and revenue and targets a deficit of about 4.5 percent of GDP. The tax revenue to GDP ratio is expected to increase by about 1 percentage point, through a strengthening of tax administration and tax policy measures. The nontax revenue to GDP ratio would increase by about 1.5 percentage point, owing to higher contributions of parastatals to the budget (including a large one-off transfer on account of retained earnings) and higher efficiency in the collection of various fees. On expenditure, the draft budget proposes a large change of the composition of spending in favor of investment. Current expenditure would be contained through a hiring and nominal wage freeze and efforts to significantly reduce the cost of running the government. Capital expenditures would more than double as a share of GDP, bringing development spending to about 11 percent of GDP in 2016/17. The budget sets aside about 1.5 percent of GDP to clear budget expenditure arrears. Higher project financing and external nonconcessional borrowing (ENCB) would help finance the investment effort and higher fiscal deficit. In the draft budget, most of the increase in the public investment to GDP ratio would be made possible by higher revenue and current expenditure streamlining, with the higher deficit playing a more limited role. Page 18 Key Development Projects in 2016/17 Budget Total development expenditure of which; arrears clearance Education Energy Health Roads Transportation of which: Railways Airplanes Dar es Salaam Port Water Regions and local governments authorities Billions of shillings Percent of GDP Source: Tanzanian authorities. .Exlcudes projects implemented by regions and local governments. Staff’s views To reduce the risk of further arrears accumulation and absorption capacity problems, staff recommended basing the budget on lower revenue projections. Based on available information, staff’s estimates for tax revenue and nontax revenue are below the authorities’ targets by about ½ percent of GDP each. Most of the difference is explained by the estimated impact of administrative measures. Staff underscored that excessively optimistic revenue and financing projections were one of the main reasons behind the accumulation of expenditure arrears in recent years. Staff suggested lowering revenue projections by 1 percent of GDP in the budget and treating any excess revenue, should it materialize, in a supplementary budget in the course of next year. Lowering revenue would require reducing expenditure commensurately to stick to the deficit target. Staff also noted the importance of subjecting large capital expenditures to proper cost-benefit analysis. In this regard, it expressed concerns about the envisaged purchase of planes for Air Tanzania, at a time when a strategy on what to do with the financially distressed airline has not been adopted yet. Staff otherwise strongly supported the planned reorientation of spending toward capital spending, but noted that the envisaged compression of current expenditure was very ambitious and would require broad-ranging measures and sustained efforts. Staff also stressed that the external financing assumptions were ambitious and would require overcoming the issues that have led to ENCB shortfalls in recent years. In staff’s projection, the tax revenue ratio increases by 0.4 percentage point, half of which on account of tax policy measures presented in the draft budget, and the other half on account of tax administration measures. The nontax revenue ratio increases by 0.9 percentage point: 0.3 percentage point comes from the recording of revenue of the Tanzania Port Authority (with the corresponding spending on the expenditure side), which was not previously recorded in the budget; the increase coming from parastatals proper is about 0.8 percentage point, of which about 0.6 percentage point is the one-off contribution. Page 19 The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) suggests that Tanzania could afford a somewhat higher deficit than programmed for a few years and still keep its low risk of debt distress. In the baseline scenario designed by staff, the investment scaling up leads to higher fiscal deficits for a few years (about 4.5 percent of GDP, as in 2016/17). The completion of the main infrastructure projects would then lead to a reduction of capital expenditures, and with it of the fiscal deficit to slightly below 3 percent of GDP by 2022 consistent with regional commitments to converge toward the East African Monetary Union (EAMU). In line with its medium-term debt management strategy and ongoing discussions with the concerned creditors, Tanzania would rely more than assumed in the previous DSA on borrowing from the regular windows of the World Bank and African Development Bank, whose terms remain much more favorable than international markets’, and on domestic borrowing. Under these relatively prudent assumptions, the updated DSA suggests that while debt vulnerabilities would increase somewhat, the risk of debt distress would remain low. Fiscal risks and debt management needs to be strengthened. Having realistic budgets (including with regard to recurrent costs associated with capital expenditures) and contingency measures should be the first line of defense against fiscal risks. Utilizing PPPs for large infrastructure projects would reduce government borrowing but the related fiscal risks need to be carefully evaluated and reported; this would also require a strengthening of the capacity to manage PPPs. Staff supported the efforts of the authorities to better monitor and manage parastatals and encouraged further disclosure of information in this area. The publication of the Fiscal Transparency Evaluation and annual updating of the fiscal risks statement would also be welcome. Authorities’ views The authorities were confident that the projected revenue increase in the draft 2016/17 budget would materialize. They noted that the pickup in tax revenue collection from December 2015 was a sign that taxpayers took the fight against tax evasion seriously, and expected revenue buoyancy to continue. They also expected a number of tax administration measures, including the implementation of an action plan following the recent Tax Administration Diagnostic Assessment and the rollout of Electronic Fiscal Devices, to lead to a significant improvement in compliance. On nontax revenue, they reported that the increased contributions to the budget had been discussed and agreed with the concerned parastatals. Discussions with these two multilateral creditors are well advanced, and significant project financing was already contracted from the African Development Bank and will start disbursing in 2016/17. The assumptions can be seen as prudent for the following reasons: (i) the authorities might target a lower fiscal deficit than assumed in staff’s scenario beyond 2016/17; (ii) the scenario does not assume a significant growth dividend from the investment scaling up; and (iii) the share of concessional financing is assumed to further decrease. Page 20 The authorities reiterated their commitment to fiscal discipline and indicated that some large projects would be started only after confirmation in the mid-year budget review of adequate preparation and availability of revenue. This would be the case, in particular, for the standard gauge railway for the “central corridor” and the renovation of the Dar es Salaam port. They also underscored that some expenditures would be executed only if the financing could be raised. This was particularly the case for certain capital expenditures, which would be financed through project financing or PPPs. Actual spending might therefore turn out lower than budgeted, which could lead to a lower fiscal deficit than envisaged in the draft budget. The efforts to better monitor parastatals were also an attempt to better manage public resources. The commitment to strengthen debt management capacity remained intact; adoption by cabinet of the new policy and legal framework for debt management was expected by end-July 2016, with the delay of a few months from original plans only due to changes in the structure of the Ministry of Finance and Planning.