Background The external current account deficit is expected to remain high. Tanzania has recorded large current account deficits over the past decade, financed mainly by official flows and FDI. High development and infrastructure needs are expected to continue to lead to large investment-related imports and current account deficits. Empirical analysis suggests that the exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals and desirable policies and that international reserves are adequate. The EBA-lite external sustainability and real exchange rate approaches indicate that the shilling, which was last assessed in 2014 to be somewhat overvalued, is now close to equilibrium (Annex III). The EBA-lite current account approach, however, suggests that Tanzania’s current account deficit is larger than the level consistent with fundamentals and desired policies, implying some overvaluation. This model, however, does not seem to capture well Tanzania’s situation (including substantial imports financed by FDI), as indicated by a very large residual. Moreover, the shilling has not been under significant pressure since mid-2015. According to traditional metrics and a cost-benefit analysis, Tanzania’s reserves at about 3.6 months of imports at end-June 2016 are adequate (Annex III). Staff’s and authorities’ views Staff and the authorities agreed that the real effective exchange rate had moved close to equilibrium and about the need to keep the exchange rate flexible. However, efforts will be needed to expand the narrow export base to reduce external vulnerability. Given other countries’ experiences, allowing exchange rate flexibility is critical to keeping tradable goods and services competitive. Foreign exchange market interventions should be used to smooth excessive volatility in the exchange rate, but not to resist sustained depreciation pressures when they exist. The economy is expected to be increasingly exposed to risks arising from rising recourse to international capital markets, the ongoing capital account liberalization, and commodity price fluctuations, particularly oil prices. To address these risks, further accumulation of reserves is desirable in the next few years; it would also help bring the reserves level closer to EAMU’s convergence criterion of at least 4.5 months of imports. Page 32