The authorities aim at balancing the debt stabilization objective with the need to invest in infrastructure and ensure adequate priority social spending . The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) shows that Tanzania remains at low risk of external debt distress and that the public debt outlook is sustainable, assuming that economic growth remains strong and that the fiscal deficit gradually declines to 4–4½ percent of GDP over the medium term. The authorities noted the difficult choices to be made in prioritizing expenditures and mobilizing additional Page 14 revenues to attain the deficit reduction objective, in light of a gradual decline in grants. They emphasized that the budget is the sole and appropriate mechanism to make priorities operational, including those outlined in the recent Big Results Now initiative. Budget preparations for 2014/15 are under way. The authorities indicated that they would persevere in their efforts to mobilize domestic revenues, including through the upcoming VAT reform. Thus, despite the decline in grants, the budget would aim at a moderate reduction in the deficit compared with the 2013/14 target, while allocating resources for a modest increase in infrastructure investment as a share of GDP and at least maintaining the share of spending on priority social services. The authorities noted that, in view of recent experience, they would strive to maintain revenue projections at realistic levels, so as to avoid the need for expenditure compression during budget execution. They also indicated that the budget would include modest allocations for the benefits of pensioners covered by the pre-1999 reform non- contributory system and for the clearance of longstanding domestic arrears through a centralized process of verification and payment. The discussions also addressed the merits of allocating potential one-off revenues (such as capital gains tax revenues arising from a sale of participation rights in offshore production sharing agreements between two companies) to clearing existing arrears. Consistent with the favorable debt outlook, the authorities planned external non- concessional borrowing to finance infrastructure projects . Under the current SCF arrangement, the ENCB ceiling of US$3,388 million (cumulative from July 2010) was set to permit contracting of US$700 million this fiscal year, consistent with the budget. Out of the allocated amount, US$84 million have been contracted as of February 2014 (the foreign currency portion of a commercial loan contracted by TANESCO). The authorities indicated that they plan to use the remaining amount under the ceiling to finance infrastructure projects, including a gas-based power plant and an airport terminal—both would be implemented over a number of years. The financing contracts for these loans are close to being finalized. More generally, the authorities intend to explore a greater role for the private sector, including PPPs, to finance and undertake infrastructure investment. The authorities also noted the importance of being able to contract additional non-concessional financing—potentially including a sizable upfront bond issuance— during the two months prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year, to avoid delays in executing infrastructure projects. Staff concurred, in view of the positive DSA results, while noting the carry costs involved in pre-financing. The authorities are making progress in debt restructuring discussions with external creditors . Since the last review, staff was made aware of an existing stock of arrears to private external creditors stemming from the lease of planes by Air Tanzania several years ago, whose size is estimated well below 0.1 percent of GDP. In line with the Fund’s Lending into Arrears (LIA) policy, the authorities have demonstrated and intend to continue good faith efforts, through frequent bilateral communication and working out a repayment plan, to reach collaborative agreement with their creditors. Page 15 Disclosure and management of fiscal risks is limited, despite their macroeconomic relevance. Fiscal risks are generally defined as the possibility of deviations of fiscal outcomes from baseline projections. Information regarding some of the most macro-economically relevant fiscal risks is not yet readily available to policymakers or the public (Box 4). Box 4. Monitoring and Managing Fiscal Risks in Tanzania Key fiscal risks in Tanzania stem from the following sources. Macroeconomic shocks . The fiscal implications of potential changes in macroeconomic variables could be significant: in particular, a prolonged decline in the currently high rate of economic growth would considerably worsen debt dynamics. Nevertheless, the debt sustainability analysis suggests that the magnitude of the impact is manageable and is not much different from peers. The DSA prepared and published by the authorities is a helpful start in informing the public about the fiscal implications of macroeconomic shocks. Offshore natural gas . If the presence of commercial quantities of off-shore natural gas is confirmed, large revenues could start accruing to the budget by the end of the decade. On the other hand, the fiscal position would deteriorate if government expenditures were to increase substantially in the expectation of higher revenues from natural gas, and these later turned out to be short of expectations. Public enterprises . Despite major privatization waves during the past two decades, PEs still play a major role. The government has ownership in 215 PEs (including regulatory and policy making bodies) and its shareholdings are valued at US$8.6 billion (TSh 14 trillion). At end June 2013, total outstanding government loans to PEs amounted to 1 percent of GDP and total guarantees were another 1 percent of GDP. Annually parliament receives a comprehensive list of public enterprises and other government agencies, and information on state ownership, guaranteed loans, budget transfers to and dividend payments by PEs. More detailed financial data (balance sheets and income statements) are being collected by the Treasury Registrar but not shared with parliament or the public. Disclosure of more comprehensive information on PEs would allow policy makers to gauge (i) the importance of PEs in achieving public policy objectives; (ii) the need for subsidies, and (iii) the extent to which dividends paid by the PEs are commensurate with their profits and operations. As natural resources gain importance, the financial situation of PEs involved in the sector will merit even further disclosure of information. Public-private partnerships and guarantees . In recent years, guarantees issued by the central government have been relatively limited and have been generally disclosed. Public-private partnerships have also seen little activity, though prospectively this could be an important area as new projects emerge. Government obligations that may not be captured in the fiscal accounts . This includes, for example, off-budget spending by Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) financed by pension funds to construct hospitals, universities, and other projects which were not funded within the budget framework; in several instances, the MDAs are not servicing the debt obligations. This weakens transparency; moreover, the ensuing obligations will eventually need to be recognized as central government debt.