Tanzania has achieved strong growth and macroeconomic stability over the past two decades. This performance was the result of market-oriented reforms and prudent macroeconomic policies. Growth has been driven by construction, services, and basic manufacturing, and the economy has become more diversified. Inflation, while still volatile, has remained moderate. Poverty has decreased but remains high (at 28.2 percent of the population, based on the national poverty line) with a large population of underemployed youth, and despite substantial progress toward the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), Tanzania is likely to have missed about half the 2015 targets (Table 1). Source: National Bureau of Statistics. Real GDP (RHS) CPI (LHS) Progress in implementing past Fund policy advice has been mixed (Annex 1). While macroeconomic management has been able to deliver fiscal sustainability and macroeconomic stability, the quality of fiscal management deteriorated until recently in some areas (e.g., expenditure arrears control) and the pace of reform has abated in recent years. The modernization of monetary policy has made only limited progress in the past two years. The business environment remains challenging and the perception of corruption has increased substantially. As a result, program performance under the PSI has been mixed. The new authorities have an ambitious development and reform agenda. The government aims to make Tanzania a middle-income country with a development plan addressing the country’s infrastructure gap and leading to inclusive growth (see below). The new authorities have also sent strong signals on their determination to reform the government, strengthen the work ethics of the public service, and fight tax evasion and corruption. Data provision is adequate for surveillance and program monitoring. The authorities improved the national accounts and inflation data with Fund technical assistance (TA), including rebasing their benchmark years and expanding coverage. The Accountant General is also making progress on preparing consolidated financial statements for the wider public sector. The authorities intend to participate in the Enhanced General Data Dissemination Standard (e-GDDS) initiative to further enhance data dissemination practices. Staff encouraged them to expand the coverage of government finance statistics, as well as adopt the latest standards in this area. Page 12 Inflation (Annual percentage chage) Headline inflation Food inflation Core inflation