The government’s second Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP II) focuses on economic transformation through industrialization and human development. To facilitate private sector-led growth, the new government aims to address the infrastructure gap, which remains large in Tanzania (see table below for a cross-country comparison), and create a business environment that is conducive to job creation. The government also aims to reduce poverty by improving social services (education, health, housing, water and sanitation), enhancing income security, and promoting social protection. The plan will start being implemented with the 2016/17 budget. Selected Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators of Infrastructure, 2010–14 Access to improved water source (share of population) Access to electricity (share of population) Electricity Generation (Kwh/capita) Quality of roads Quality of overall infrastructure Tanzania EAC LIC's LMIC's Sources: Country authorities, World Bank and World Economic Forum. The macroeconomic outlook is favorable. Growth is projected to remain strong at about 7 percent in 2016, on the back of low oil prices (a positive shock for Tanzania), continued strong growth in certain sectors (e.g., services) and the scaling up of public investment. For the medium term, in the absence of a detailed quantitative macroeconomic framework for FYDP II Page 16 at the time of discussions, staff designed a baseline scenario assuming public investment scaling up. Noting that many of the authorities’ priority investments would require several years to be implemented, staff assumed that capital expenditures would remain high over a few years. The investment effort would help keep growth at about 7 percent during that period; growth would then revert to its 15-year average of about 6½ percent. Inflation is expected to remain close to the authority’s medium-term target of 5 percent, provided that the BoT maintains a tight monetary policy stance. The external current account deficit is projected at around 9 percent of GDP in 2016/17 and to remain elevated the medium term, as the implementation of FYDP II would lead to high capital spending and imports. Tanzania: Selected Economic Indicators Real GDP growth (%) Inflation (yoy, %, end-period) 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 Overall fiscal balance (cash basis, % of GDP) Government capital spending (% of GDP) External current account balance (% of GDP) Gross international reserves (months of next year's imports) Sources: Tanzanian authorities and IMF staff projections. Risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside. Key external risks include the tightening of global financial conditions, which could result in higher financing costs and/or make external budget financing difficult, and a significant slowdown in China and other large emerging markets, which could affect external demand and the financing of key infrastructure investments and thereby growth (Annex II). Domestic risks include the possibility of fiscal slippages due to spending pressures stemming from FYDP II’s implementation, continued challenges to raise the required revenue and financing for the budget, and in the medium term slow reforms that could affect potential growth. Authorities’ views The authorities broadly agreed with staff’s assessment of the economy and outlook but were more optimistic about medium-term growth prospects, which would be supported by the implementation of FYDP II. In light of large public investment needs, the government plans to mobilize additional domestic revenue and utilize public-private partnerships (PPPs) for large infrastructure projects to limit government borrowing and risks to debt sustainability. Page 17