Thailand's Policy Rate Policy stance. While the current monetary stance is accommodative, there is scope for further easing if the recovery is weaker than anticipated. The Bank of Thailand (BOT) cut the policy rate by 25 basis points in November 2013 and March 2014 to support the economy during the period of heightened political unrest, and has maintained the rate at 2 percent since then (Figure 4). Under current policies, the large negative output gap (estimated at -2.8 percent in 2014) is projected to close only gradually. With negative headline inflation, moderate core inflation, and noticeable slowdown in credit growth, further easing may be justified if fiscal stimulus is slow to materialize or if private sector response disappoints. In light of the banks’ tightening of lending standards, in staff’s views a lower policy rate would not exacerbate financial stability risks, including from a rapid acceleration in consumer loan growth. Sources: Haver Data Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Average 2001-2014 January 2015 ) x ( R ) ( R ) ( R Also known as the Super Board and chaired by the Prime Minister, this committee was established in June 2014, to recommend policies, management, and development plans for all SOEs. Page 12 Inflation target. The Cabinet has approved the use of headline inflation instead of core inflation and has set the target for the year-average CPI inflation at 2.5±1.5 percent for 2015. If inflation falls outside the band, the BOT is to provide an explanation for the deviation, its expectation regarding the timing of returning inflation to the target band, and contemplated monetary policy response in an open letter to the Minister of Finance. In fact, as headline inflation turned negative in January, BOT issued a letter in which it ascribed the negative inflation to a sharp one-off fall in oil prices and sought to dispel concerns about generalized deflation by emphasizing the stability of inflation expectations. It also highlighted the positive impact of the terms-of-trade improvement on the economy and the long lags in monetary policy transmission and concluded that its current accommodative stance should help lift headline inflation back within the target band by year-end. Staff welcomes the switch to using headline inflation target, which is likely to facilitate communication with the public by focusing on the most relevant and best understood measure. On the other hand, the focus on the year-average measure of inflation may present communication challenges. In addition, given the lags in monetary policy transmission and the importance of anchoring expectations, setting indicative targets beyond the one-year horizon could be considered. Authorities’ views. The authorities viewed the current monetary policy stance as sufficiently accommodative given the steady path of economic recovery in 2015. They agreed that the cyclical stance of the economy suggested a need for stimulus, but believed that fiscal measures would be the main factor supporting the economic recovery, while the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission may be weakened in the current environment of low interest rate. They were also concerned about unintended consequences of lower rates on financial stability. The authorities explained that setting headline inflation as the monetary policy target would help facilitate central bank communication and therefore anchor public inflation expectations more effectively. In addition, targeting annual average inflation would provide them additional flexibility in dealing with temporary shock, but does not preclude monitoring and, if warranted, reacting to monthly inflation numbers.