Political context. Thailand is going through a political transition. A decade of intermittent political conflict and a succession of exogenous shocks have hampered policymaking and weakened economic performance. A military coup in May 2014 ended large-scale social protests in Bangkok and pacified the country, and a modest recovery has taken place. Nonetheless, there is still some uncertainty as to how the polarization in the political system will be resolved even as the authorities indicate that a new constitution will be approved this year and new elections will take place in 2016. Slower growth. Thailand’s growth rate since the global financial crisis has fallen behind those of its neighbors and below its pre-crisis performance. The reasons include Thailand’s high openness to trade, which exposed it to the global slowdown; large negative supply shocks, in particular, devastating floods in 2011 and the impact of Japan’s Tohoku disaster; slow technological upgrading, with considerable capacity in industries with flagging global demand; the apparent interruption in the flow of workers from agriculture into more productive sectors of the economy; and political instability. Looking forward, a rapidly aging population will generate headwinds to growth. Real GDP (Index, 2007=100) Sources: World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations. Resilience. Despite a series of large shocks, solid fundamentals have helped maintain macrofinancial stability. Thailand has ample international reserves, and the flexible exchange rate has been an effective buffer against balance- of-payments shocks. The fiscal position is prudent and public debt is moderate. Economic institutions are credible. The banking system is well capitalized, profitable and liquid. International Reserves, 2014 (In percent of GDP) Sources: Haver Data Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Way forward. The country’s challenge is to reignite growth both in the short run and in the medium term while maintaining stability. While monetary and fiscal stimulus should support economic recovery in the near term, a medium-term This issue is discussed at length in Isnawangsih and others, 2013, The Big Split: Why Did Output Trajectories, in the ASEAN-4 Diverge After the Global Financial Crisis? IMF WP/13/222. The impact on Thailand was particularly strong because of the dependence of Thailand’s car industry on critical components supplied by Japanese manufacturers. Page 6 strategy is needed to tackle structural challenges and reinvigorate inclusive growth. To address these issues, the government has embarked on a comprehensive reform agenda that cuts across many areas, including education, healthcare, social inequalities, infrastructure investment, and other policies to enhance growth, regional integration, and governance (Appendix I).