Financial landscape. Thailand’s financial landscape has changed since the global financial crisis. The financial sector in Thailand is large, with assets near 359 percent of GDP. Commercial banks assets account for 128 percent of GDP, higher than in Indonesia and the Philippines (Appendix VIII). Growth in non-commercial banks financial assets has outpaced that of commercial bank assets since 2008. As a result, while commercial bank credit-to-GDP ratio increased from 99 percent in 2007 to 128 percent in 2013, total financial institution credit rose from 154 percent of GDP to 197 percent in the same period. In particular, non-commercial-banks, including SFIs and non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), provided almost 60 percent of household loans. Moreover, credit cooperatives, as a whole, have become a non-negligible player, with their assets equal to 13 percent of total credit of commercial bank and SFIs in 2013 (Figure 6). Financial Sector Assets and Bank Assets (In percent of GDP) Commercial banks Financial institutions Financial sector (Emerging economies) Sources: Bankscope; Bloomberg Ltd.; and Bank for International Settlements. Note: All financial institution assets include assets of commercial banks and non-commercial banks; financial sector assets include all financial insitution assets, stock market capitalization, and debt securities. Asia Page 15 Credit Standards (Last 3 months, 0+=easing) Interconnectedness. The interconnectedness among financial institutions on both the domestic and external fronts has risen. For instance, other depository corporations, including commercial banks, have become net borrowers from other financial corporations and from abroad since early 2008, with total borrowing amounting to about 18 percent of their liabilities at end-2014. Non- commercial-banks, including SFIs and credit cooperatives, are borrowing from the interbank money market, with 17 percent of SFI liabilities and 23 percent of credit cooperatives liabilities being funded by other financial institutions. However, credit cooperatives are less well regulated and supervised, and in general have weaker profitability than commercial banks. Sources: Bank of Thailand; and Haver Data Analytics. Consumer credit card loans Consumer housing loans Overall corporate loans Consumer other loans Credit. As noted, total financial institution credit rose from 154 percent of GDP in 2007 to 197 percent in 2013. In the last two years, however, credit growth has slowed considerably, whole Thai corporate foreign currency borrowing has also declined since 2013. Both supply and demand factors have played a role. On the supply side, banks and SFIs have become more cautious in their lending standards to households and small and medium enterprises (SME), while the expiration of tax incentives for car purchase, lower investment and high household debt have dampened credit demand. Market observers have noted that Thai corporates have a cautious approach to borrowing due to the lessons from the Asian financial crisis. In view of the slowing credit growth, low share of real estate loans, and no apparent real estate boom, staff does not see a need to tighten macroprudential policies despite the low-interest-rate environment. Looking forward, credit is expected to provide a smaller contribution to growth given the high leverage of households. Commercial banks. Commercial banks weathered the global financial crisis and political turmoil well. Banks appear to be well capitalized, liquid, and profitable. While nonperforming loans (NPLs) are rising, they remain low, and commercial banks appear well prepared to deal with them. Banks are also expected to be able to handle well even higher NPLs if an economic downturn where to lead to debt repayment problems, including from low income households that appear to be over indebted. Basle III regulations on capital have been implemented. However, liquidity risks have risen as seen in the high loan-to-deposit ratio and higher reliance on wholesale funding. While commercial banks have become more cautious in lending to households and SMEs, they do not face capital or liquidity constraints to expand credit (Figure 7). Household debt. After rising very fast for a number of years, the growth of household debt has moderated. Thailand’s household debt-to-GDP ratio rose from 55 percent in 2007 to 84 percent in 2014. Commercial banks provided only about 40 percent of household loans, while SFIs and NBFIs supplied the rest. More than two thirds of household loans were used for consumption (including purchases of cars and other durables), farming, and business, with the remainder used to buy real estate and land. The authorities should strengthen monitoring the quality of consumption loans, Page 16 whose collateral value tends to be lower than that of housing. Mirroring the relatively low share of real estate loans, Thailand has not gone through a real estate boom in recent years, except in selected urban locations. Mitigating the risks are strong financial buffers, with household financial assets at about twice the level of household debt. Household savings increasingly go to other forms of financial instruments and vehicles, such as retail bonds and mutual funds (Figure 8). Foreign Currency Borrowings of Non-Financial Corporates (In percent of total, year-to-date) Corporate sector debt. Nonfinancial corporates appear to have reduced their bank loans in recent years, partly due to the availability of alternative financing—domestic bonds and debentures, as well as external loans and international debt securities. The currency mismatch risk has receded with the declining share of foreign currency borrowing in total debt issuance after 2012. At the same time, some Thai conglomerates have undertaken rapid debt- financed external expansions in recent years. The authorities need to remain vigilant to this trend, mindful that cross-ownership of related firms could result in opaque balance sheets. Source: Dealogic. Note: Includes both issuance of syndicated loans and bonds by non-financial corporations. Singapore Regulation of non-commercial-banks. SFIs and NBFIs represent a large and growing segment of the Thai financial sector. SFIs are interconnected with commercial banks via interbank loans and exposure to the same customers. Staff welcomes the authorities’ plan to extend the BOT’s supervisory and regulatory mandate to SFIs and encourages them to adopt an operational plan swiftly. At the same time, the authorities should undertake a strategic review of the SFIs, including their mandate, services, and financial operations with a view of clarifying their mandates and focusing their operations in areas not covered by commercial banks. Given that SFIs face different legal frameworks, a separate transitional plan is likely to be needed for each. In addition, credit cooperatives, whose role and interconnectedness within the financial system are on the rise, are regulated by the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), which appears to have insufficient supervisory resources to oversee large credit cooperatives. Therefore, supervision of credit cooperatives should be strengthened substantially, including through the technical assistance of the BOT to the MOA. Financial stability framework. Staff welcomes the steps that the BOT has taken to strengthen the financial stability framework, including the publication of Financial Stability Reports (FSRs) and the establishment of a Financial Stability Committee. In the latest FSR, the BOT’s stress test of an interest rate shock (amounting to 2 percent) suggested that Thai firms can withstand this shock, even as loan growth would slow down and banks’ nonperforming assets would increase somewhat. Staff encourages the authorities to strengthen data collection to close data gaps in non- commercial banks. In addition, staff urges vigilance regarding financial risks related to household debt and large Thai conglomerates. Finally, the authorities should review the crisis management framework including the modalities for liquidity provision and bank resolution, as well as the protocols for information sharing and policy coordination among various financial regulators. Page 17 Authorities’ views. The authorities see the main risk as over-indebtedness among low- income households that borrowed from SFIs, while they believe that middle- and upper-middle income groups may still have borrowing space. The authorities have placed high priority on strengthening the work on financial stability as a strategic objective, including monitoring, mitigating, and managing systemic risks. To this end, they have created a Financial Stability Committee within the BOT that is tasked with systemic risk monitoring and mitigation. This committee is composed of high-level executives from relevant departments such as monetary policy, financial markets operations, financial institutions policy, banking supervision, and others. In addition, the two FSRs, which were published in 2013 and 2014, identified credit risks from household and SME loans with domestic consumption-related businesses as the main risks to the financial sector. To strengthen the effectiveness of financial surveillance, the BOT encourages the savings and credit cooperatives to include their clients in the national credit bureau database. By linking with this database, the cooperatives will benefit from information supplied by other financial intermediaries.