Outlook. A moderate rebound from a low base is expected for 2015. Private consumption will be supported by pent-up demand and lower fuel prices. Investment should rebound after two years of decline as various government agencies have cleared the backlog of project approvals. Tourism is expected to continue the recovery started in recent months. However, the recovery of domestic demand is expected to be moderate since private investment is hampered by low capacity utilization, weak demand prospects, and political uncertainty, while consumption is held back by high household debt and tighter credit conditions. Moreover, ramping up public investment is taking longer than anticipated. With the economy lacking a strong engine, staff forecast growth of 3.7 percent in 2015. Inflation will largely be driven by oil price dynamics and the government’s energy price policy. In the baseline, headline inflation is expected to pick up by end 2015, but year- average is projected at 0.1 percent. Risks. Risks to the outlook are tilted somewhat to the downside (Appendix II). Domestic risks to the economy come from possible policy slippages, weaker-than-expected private demand, and political uncertainty. External risks include a surge in global financial volatility and protracted slow growth in advanced and emerging economies. On the upside, consumption, investment and exports may experience a stronger boost from lower oil prices. Authorities’ views. The authorities broadly agreed with staff on the outlook. However, they viewed risks to growth as roughly balanced, with downside risks—coming mostly from the external front, particularly from the increased economic and policy divergence across key economies—offset Thailand’s net imports of oil are around 800 thousand barrels per day. Page 8 by an upside from faster-than-expected government spending boosting confidence and low oil prices stimulating domestic demand. They also noted that Thailand has sufficient buffers to deal with any potential global financial volatility.