Current account. The current account surplus is expected to rise somewhat in 2015 due to lower oil prices, and then decline in the medium term. Export growth has slowed significantly since 2012 on account of weaker global demand, government’s intervention in the rice market, and lower commodity prices. Thailand’s export share in global markets has declined slightly since early this decade, indicating emerging competitiveness problems. These problems can be partially observed in a declining share of electronic products in total exports, which was not fully offset by an increase in automotive exports. Looking forward, exports are projected to grow only modestly on account of weak global demand. The rapid growth of tourism, in particular from China, has been the main driver of service exports, although political unrest adversely affected tourism in 2014. However, tourism Page 13 appears to be gaining momentum as shown by a strong recovery in tourist arrivals in December 2014. Imports fell sharply in 2014, due to the decline in oil prices, but more importantly to a sharp demand contraction. Going forward, a gradual recovery in imports is expected with the implementation of public infrastructure programs and recovery of oil prices. Thailand Imports Percent of GDP Oil products Other Total Capital and financial account. The capital and financial account balances have deteriorated in the last two years. Overall, the capital and financial account registered a deficit of about US$15 billion in 2014. Foreign direct investment (FDI) remains the largest form of capital inflows. Inward FDI declined from US$13 billion in 2013 to US$12 billion in 2014, while outward FDI remained at US$7 billion in 2013 and 2014. As a result, net FDI turned positive in 2013 and 2014 (from a deficit in 2012). The government has taken steps to encourage inward FDI and liberalize outward FDI. These steps may contribute to more startup of newly approved foreign investment projects and a sustained increase of Thai FDI, especially to China and neighboring countries. Recent trends in portfolio flows to Thailand have been similar to those in other industrialized ASEAN countries, driven mainly by changing risk appetite of investors. Although there were net portfolio outflows in 2014, Thailand’s bond and equity markets remained resilient. The net international investment position (NIIP) deteriorated from -2 percent of GDP in 2009 to -18 percent of GDP in 2013. Given the overall current account surplus during that period, the deterioration likely reflects valuation effects and data revision. Going forward, the NIIP is expected to remain broadly stable in the medium term. External sector assessment. Thailand’s 2014 current account (CA) and real effective exchange rate (REER) are close to levels consistent with medium-term fundamentals and appropriate policies. This assessment is based on the External Balance Assessment (EBA), a regression based model analysis, and incorporates the impact of oil price declines and delayed public investment in 2014 (Appendix VI). While the CA surplus is expected to widen in 2015 on account of lower oil prices, it is expected to narrow to balance in the medium term. The REER is within a range of ±5 percent of the equilibrium level. The international reserves stand at 213 percent of the Fund’s reserve adequacy metric. Thailand’s external debt is projected to remain relatively low over the medium term, gradually declining from 37.9 percent of GDP in 2014 to 33.6 percent of GDP in 2020 (Appendix V). Regional integration. Thailand is increasingly taking advantage of its geographic location by intensifying its integration with Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam (CLMV) and southern China (Appendix VII). Multilateral infrastructure projects are improving the mobility of goods and Page 14 labor, while rapid growth in the neighboring economies has already expanded markets for Thai goods and services. Both Thai and foreign companies have relocated some basic processing and assembly activities to Special Economic Zones (SEZs) in the neighboring countries to take advantage of lower labor cost in those countries. Some Thai conglomerates have become globally competitive, and the launch of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) in 2015 may provide new opportunities for investment and trade, including the reduction of tariffs for Thai goods in neighboring CLMV countries. Authorities’ views. The authorities project that the current account in 2015 − 20, while remaining in surplus, will decline gradually toward near-balance. They expected the financial account, especially foreign portfolio flows, to remain volatile mainly due to volatility in global financial markets. However, Thailand’s strong local investor base, both institutional and retail, should enable orderly adjustments. The flexible exchange rate provides an important first line of defense against external shocks. The authorities noted that Thailand’s competitiveness has been deteriorating and Thailand has been losing its share of FDI relative to regional peers. However, the prospects are promising as they are supported by strong fundamentals, planned public infrastructure projects, geographical advantages, and the (Thai) Board of Investment’s (BOI) new approach to investment incentives. The recently established SEZs in five border provinces facilitate regional integration.