Recent developments. In 2014, the fiscal position weakened in response to the sluggish economy, earlier-approved tax cuts and other measures. The corporate income tax was reduced from 30 to 23 percent in January 2012 and again to 20 percent in January 2013. Together with the slowdown of the economy, the general government revenue decreased from 24.1 percent of GDP in FY2012/13 to 22.5 percent in FY2013/14. At the same time, general government expenditures remained at 24.3 percent of GDP, even as infrastructure spending dropped significantly on account of political unrest. The debt-to-GDP ratio of the overall public sector, including state-owned enterprises (SOEs) reached 45.5 percent in FY2013/14, well below the government’s ceiling of 60 percent. (Figure 3). Thailand: Fiscal Developments, 2009/10 − 15/16 1/ (In percent of fiscal year GDP, unless otherwise stated) Proj. General Government Revenue Expenditure Overall balance Cyclically adjusted primary balance Debt-to-GDP ratio 2/ Public Sector Overall balance Debt-to-GDP ratio Sources: Thai authorities; and IMF staff projections. 1/ Fiscal year runs from October to September 2/ Central Government The FY2014/15 budget. The new government formulated a prudent budget, which gives priority to restoring confidence while keeping the deficit largely unchanged at 2 percent of GDP. Furthermore, with the fiscal stimulus package of about 3 percent of GDP announced in October 2014, the authorities intended to boost spending in the first half of the year, in particular on infrastructure projects, supplemented by carry-over of unspent funds from previous years. Fiscal year starts October 1. Page 9 Preliminary data suggest that budget execution in the first quarter did not meet the authorities’ expectations. Fiscal strategy. In the current juncture, fiscal policies should support the economic recovery in the context of a medium-term fiscal framework that clearly signals the commitment by the authorities to fiscal discipline. Higher public spending now, in particular on high-return infrastructure, training and other areas that will boost potential growth, should be framed in a multi- year setting that comes along with credible plans for reforms on both the revenue and expenditure side. Medium-term fiscal framework. The mission strongly supports the authorities’ plan to prepare a new fiscal responsibility law (Public Finance Act). The new law should require the formulation of a medium-term fiscal framework by the Cabinet that would show the expected path of public debt as percent of GDP—in staff’s views, the current debt ceiling of 60 percent of GDP prescribed in the Cabinet-approved fiscal Sustainability Framework is appropriate. The framework is also expected to include a fiscal policy statement with a multi-year macroeconomic outlook, fiscal objectives and targets, fiscal risk statement, debt sustainability analysis (see Appendix IV for staff’s DSA) and long-term fiscal projections. Infrastructure projects. Staff welcomes the formulation of a multi-year public investment plan for large infrastructure projects that aim at significantly enhancing connectivity with neighboring countries and reducing logistic costs. Moreover, moving the projects to the budget, both by the government and SOEs, is a welcome development that contributes to enhancing transparency and accountability. The formulation of a medium-term fiscal framework will help strengthen the link between budget and infrastructure investments, which are expected to increase only gradually in the coming years. Given past unsuccessful attempts of ramping up public investments, the authorities should consider carrying out an evaluation of the public investment process with a view to identifying bottlenecks and potential efficiency gains. Infrastructure Investment Plans for FY2015 − Projects Amount (billions of Baht) Executing Agency Roads, motorways, dredging and irrigation Railway Roads Air transport Others Total Central Government State Enterprises Private Participation (34%) (58%) (8%) Land, consultants, civil works Land, consultants Land, consultants, civil works Borrowing/ Government on-lending Civil works Civil works Civil works Own funds PPP Infrastructure funds Civil works, fee collection, maintenance Rolling stock Aircraft Airport Source: Thai authorities. The staff’s baseline fiscal projections are consistent with the budget approved for 2014/15 but assume a lower implementation rate for public investment projects (50 percent) for subsequent years. Page 10 State-owned enterprise reform. Staff welcomes the authorities’ plan to strengthen transparency and governance of SOEs, and to carry out a strategic review of all SOEs. SOEs play a large role in service delivery, in particular in the transport and energy sectors. Their debt amounts to 9 percent of GDP and 19 percent of total public debt. The authorities’ plan to restructure state enterprises such as the State Railway of Thailand and the Bangkok Mass Transit Authority are opportune, as these entities play an important role in transport infrastructure. Subsidy reform. Staff welcomes the subsidy reforms by the authorities, which have contributed to rationalizing public expenditures while enhancing fiscal transparency. Fuel subsidies . The authorities are implementing an energy pricing reform to reduce large price cross-subsidies between energy sources, while ensuring that the vulnerable population is protected through means-testing procedures (Appendix III). In addition, excises on diesel are being gradually reinstated while LPG subsidies are reduced. The retail price of gasoline has been reduced by passing through the lower international price. Staff welcomes the ongoing energy price reform. The authorities should take advantage of the lower international oil prices to fully reinstate excises, which would generate an additional 0.5 percent of GDP starting in 2015, while continuing to protect vulnerable groups with transfers that are means-tested. Rice scheme. T he authorities have abolished the rice pledging scheme that allowed farmers to sell rice at above-market prices to the government, and introduced a new scheme that provides direct cash transfers to small-scale farmers only. This is expected to result in savings of about ½ percent of GDP per year. Public obligation services . Government transfers to SOEs amount to about 0.8 percent of GDP in the FY2014/15 b udget and support the provision of public obligation services at below-cost prices. As part of an effort to enhance fiscal transparency, the authorities should improve the disclosure of public service obligations of SOEs, which could be included in an annual consolidated report that covers fiscal risks. Tax policy. Staff welcomes the authorities’ plan to introduce an inheritance tax while strengthening property taxes, with a view to enhancing the progressivity of the tax system. While these taxes and energy reform are the priorities for now, the authorities should consider, under the medium-term fiscal framework, the gradual increase of the VAT rate to 10 percent, from the current 7 percent, starting only when the economic recovery is well entrenched, while introducing programs to mitigate the impact on vulnerable groups. Higher VAT is critical to bring the fiscal balance back towards equilibrium over the next few years, by offsetting the revenue loss from the recent reduction in personal and corporate income taxes. It would also allow for higher infrastructure spending and for the needs of an aging population in the coming years. Tax administration and tax expenditures. The authorities are undertaking a strategic review of the tax administration, in particular the Revenue Department, and have initiated a technical dialogue on this issue with the Fund. In the face of a changing environment, there are Page 11 opportunities to improve the core tax administration processes, including those for registering taxpayers, filing and processing tax returns and payments, and collecting tax arrears. Authorities‘ views. The authorities broadly agreed with the staff view of the overall strategy. The authorities emphasized that the short-term priority is to stimulate the domestic economy through expansionary fiscal policy, while committing to fiscal discipline by adopting new legislation on fiscal responsibility, drawing on international best practices. They noted that the FY2015/16 budget, which is currently under consideration, envisages an increase in the allocation of funds for capital expenditures. At the same time, the authorities reiterated the importance of striking the right balance between speedy spending and the need to ensure high transparency. The review of the governance of state enterprises is also underway, with the “The State Enterprises Policy Committee ” taking the lead in proposing the restructuring of some entities. The authorities noted the sensitivity in raising the VAT rate, while recognizing the need to enhance tax revenue in a medium-term setting. They agreed that a sustained economic recovery is necessary before increasing the VAT rate.