The Bahamas’ exchange rate appears to be broadly in line with macroeconomic fundamentals. The peg to the U.S. dollar and low inflation have underpinned broad nominal (NEER) and real effective exchange rates (REER) stability in the last years (Figure 3); and a quantitative evaluation based on standard Consultative Group on Exchange Rate (CGER) methodologies reveals no significant misalignment. This result is nevertheless contingent on execution of planned fiscal adjustment and the successful implementation of ongoing efforts to expand tourism capacity, further diversify the economy, and achieve stronger growth (see below and Figure 3). The assessment based on the equilibrium real exchange rate approach (ERER) suggests that the real effective exchange rate is overvalued by about 4 percent, while the macroeconomic balance (MB) approach suggests that the rate is undervalued by 3 percent. An assessment based on the external sustainability (ES) approach was not undertaken owing to lack of official data on the country’s international investment position (IIP). In addition, the lack of official IIP data precludes estimates of imputed, but re-invested earnings on inward and outward foreign direct investment positions, with offsetting imputed financial account flows. While this does not affect the overall balance and therefore reserves, it likely results in underestimates of the current account deficit, and suggests that the undervaluation from the MB approach is biased downward. Page 14 The risks from the widened current account deficit and continuing pressures on foreign reserves are considerable (Box 2) . The financing requirements for the sizable Baha Mar tourism project are broadly met through FDI and already-secured debt flows. However, a recent weakening of tourism receipts, a diminution of previously available “one-off” capital inflows (from privatization, bank capital increases, etc.), and an increase in commercial banks’ profit remittances in light of extremely comfortable capital positions and a declining loan portfolio (about US$105 million during January-October 2013) have resulted in a steady decline in reserves. This has led the government, at Central Bank’s request, to shift the bulk of its budget deficit financing to external loans, the proceeds of which (totaling $400 million for FY2013/14) have helped to bolster reserves. The authorities recognized that the higher foreign debt increases the economy’s vulnerability to external shocks, but saw the undertaking as temporary—pending materialization of anticipated improvements in the external position in the medium term. Strong policy efforts are needed to stem a recent deterioration of the external position and replenish reserves. A larger reserve cushion would help mitigate the impact of negative shocks, provide more room for needed counter-cyclical policy responses, and enhance the credibility of the peg. The Bahamas’ growth and external sector performance is heavily dominated by developments in the US-dependent tourism sector. Although the country’s tourism market share in the region has shown resilience in recent years, the high dependence on one sector makes the economy highly vulnerable to external shocks. The authorities saw the recent and anticipated expansion of the tourism base as key to reducing their country’s traditional reliance on North American stopover tourists. They emphasized that progress on that front, together with improvements in non-price competitiveness through removal of structural impediments to growth (Figure 6), would strengthen the external position and enhance external sustainability going forward. Bahamas Tourism Receipts Bahamas: Tourism Receipts (Share among the Caribbean) Source: IMF staff estimates. Source: IMF staff estimates. The market share data covers Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Belize, Dominican Republic, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago. However, the authorities noted a wider diversity of actual competitors for Bahamian tourism services, including gambling venues (e.g., Las Vegas and Atlantic City, as well as, with the opening of Baha Mar, Asian alternatives), and family tourism (e.g., Disneyland and other Orlando sites), which complicates estimates of the relevant markets. Page 15 Box 2. Assessment of Reserve Adequacy The Bahamas’ international reserves declined by $75 million to $810 million in 2012. With external current account imbalances persisting in the first half of 2013 and higher foreign-owned banks’ profit remittances, reserves fell further to $685 million (1.6 months of imports or 2.8 months of non-FDI imports) at end-October 2013 despite a foreign loan ($100 million) contracted by the government, which added 0.4 months of non-FDI import cover. The country’s reserve adequacy profile is mixed. Reserves are projected to comfortably cover all International Reserves (US$ millions) 3 Months Imports 3 months Non-FDI related Imports 20% of Broad Money (M2) 100% of Central Bank's Demand Liabilities Short Term Debt short-term external debt over the medium term, but would continuously fall short against thresholds pertaining to broad money and total imports. However, 70–80 percent of capital goods imports are financed by FDI. Evaluated against a non-FDI imports benchmark, the reserves have been and would remain adequate throughout the baseline projection period. The Bahamas’ reserve adequacy outlook is also not clear-cut when analyzed under the broad money-based method that is used to capture the risks from currency mismatches and drains arising from possible bank runs. The country’s reserve holdings are projected to remain substantially below the broad money norm of 20 percent, but related risks would be relatively limited given the central bank’s strong restrictions on capital flows — all outward capital transfers require exchange control approval, and outflows of resident-owned capital are restricted. Finally, while reserves are expected to undershoot the broad money standard, they would be more than adequate to cover the central bank’s demand liabilities (base money plus government deposits), which the authorities use as an additional benchmark. 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 Sources: The Bahamian authorities, and IMF staff estimates The country’s reserves holdings are broadly adequate relative to the risk-weighted benchmark that is designed to reflect a broader range of sources of risk, such as external liabilities, external demand collapse, and potential capital flight. International Reserves (US$ millions) Risk-Weighted Measure SIDS Measure Reserves are however much below desirable levels when assessed against the more stringent adjusted measure for small island developing states (SIDS) that places more weight on exports and short-term debt and better reflects the high vulnerability of small islands. ––––––––––––––––––––––––– IMF, Assessing Reserve Adequacy (February 2011). The measure for fixed exchange rate regimes is 30 percent of short-term debt at remaining maturity + 15 percent of other portfolio liabilities + 10 percent of broad money + 10 percent of exports. 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 Sources: The Bahamian authorities, and IMF staff estimates. Nkunde Mwase, How much should I hold? Reserve Adequacy in Emerging Markets and Small Islands (WP/12/205). The measure for fixed exchange rate regimes is defined as 95 percent of short-term debt at remaining maturity + 10 percent of broad money + 35 percent of exports. Page 16