Economic activity stalled. Preliminary estimates suggest that real GDP contracted by 1.7 percent in 2015, as a modest increase in air tourism arrivals (see Figure 1 ) was not sufficient to offset a contraction in domestic demand and weak goods exports. Private consumption and investment were weighed down by headwinds from fiscal consolidation, as well as an end to construction and uncertainties over the opening of the Baha Mar megaresort. Growth in 2014 was revised down to -0.5 percent, from 1 percent in the preliminary release, thus pointing to two consecutive years of falling real GDP. After repeated construction delays and legal wrangling, the main creditor (China Export- Import Bank) has taken control of the close to complete Baha Mar. Inflation was moderate at 1.9 percent on average in 2015, despite a temporary increase owing to Value Added Tax (VAT) introduction in January 2015 (see Box 1). Unemployment, after a brief dip earlier in the year, rose to 14.8 percent in November, as workers hired for the planned Baha Mar opening were later dismissed. VAT introduction contributing to fiscal consolidation. Reports suggest relatively smooth implementation and an efficient VAT regime. While there are some concerns about the accuracy of the registration database, registration, filing and compliance rates appear to have been broadly comparable to regional standards. VAT revenue over the first 12 months, at $536 million (about 6 percent of GDP), has exceeded expectations (Figure 2). As a result, the FY2014/15 (ending in June 2015) deficit is estimated to have declined to 4.4 percent of GDP (down from revised 5.6 percent in FY2013/14). Data for the first seven months of FY2015/16 point to a further decline in the deficit, by about 1 percentage point, compared to the same period a year ago. The central government debt- to-GDP-ratio nevertheless reached close to 66.5 percent in December 2015, pointing to limited fiscal space. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) continue to be a significant fiscal drag, with annual transfers from the budget amounting to about 1.4 percent of GDP in 2014/15. Damage from the October Hurricane Joaquin is estimated at $100 million (about 1.1 percent of GDP). Comparative VAT C-Efficiency Ratios 1/ (In percent) Source: FundStaff calculations.1/ Countryaverages, various years. 2015 for The Bahamas Growth and Unemployment (In percent) Real GDP Growth Unemployment (RHS) Youth unemployment Sources: Department of Statistics; and Fund staff estimates. Page 10 Narrower, but still sizeable, current account deficit. The current account deficit declined significantly, to 15.3 percent of GDP in 2015 (compared to 22 percent a year earlier), driven primarily by lower imports owing to the decline in oil prices and halt to Baha Mar construction (Figure 3). International reserves, supported in part by government external borrowing, increased to $981 million at end–March 2016, equivalent to about 2.9 months of next years’ projected imports of goods and services. Reflecting a sizeable US dollar appreciation, the real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by 12 percent in 2015, thus weakening cost competitiveness of goods exporters. The impact on tourism competitiveness is mitigated somewhat by the large share of US tourists in total arrivals. Further contraction in private sector credit. Double-digit unemployment, as well as tight bank lending conditions continue to constrain private credit (which fell by 1 percent year-on-year in December 2015) (Figure 4). The share of nonperforming loans (NPLs), mostly mortgages, remains elevated (at 15.2 percent of total loans in February 2016), while provisioning has been increasing. Despite stalling economic activity, available prudential indicators continue to point to a well- capitalized, liquid and profitable domestic banking system as a whole. However, the financial position of one state-owned bank, which represents around nine percent of domestic banking system assets, remains challenged with accumulated losses that continue to erode its capital base.