Staff agreed with the authorities’ view that the Bahamas’ monetary framework continues to serve the country well. The exchange rate peg to the dollar has been in place since prior to independence 40 years ago. This stability has reflected the strong tourism and offshore financial linkages with the United States, supported by a tradition of prudent fiscal policies (notwithstanding recent developments, Bahamas still has relatively low levels of government debt). The peg has delivered inflation performance in line with that for the country’s main trading partners. The monetary framework has also helped deliver financial stability. The authorities remarked that their capital controls were quite effective in shielding domestic monetary conditions from relevant developments abroad. In their view, the eventual tapering of U.S. quantitative easing, with resulting higher foreign interest rates, would likely not exert undue pressures on external reserves. The staff and authorities concurred that the current low policy rate remains appropriate in light of weak credit demand and subdued domestic activity. The official discount rate was reduced by 75 basis points in late 2011, to 4½ percent. Given sizable excess liquidity already held by banks, the authorities were skeptical that a further cut would increase lending activity. In this regard, while banks and the authorities welcomed improved transparency as part of the soon-to-be introduced credit bureau (and argued for its wide usage — including by retailers), they worried that knowledge of the true scope of domestic indebtedness may weaken incentives to make credit more readily available and frustrate its growth. The reform was nonetheless seen as essential to ensuring that future lending decisions are adequately informed. In view of persistently high NPL rates, the staff encouraged the authorities to continue closely monitoring commercial banks’ credit risks and collateral values . NPLs remain elevated (14 percent of total bank lending), although they appear to have peaked and are provisioned at over 50 percent. While banks have aggressively written off nonperforming consumer borrowing, in light of weak real estate and labor markets, many saw little benefit from aggressively addressing non- performing mortgages — which now account for the bulk of NPLs. Most viewed their case-by-case approach to handling restructuring as sufficient, acknowledging that this would lengthen the process, but seeing benefit in not flooding the market with foreclosures. The authorities viewed the legal framework for a case-by-case approach (including the incentives) as adequate, and thus supported the case-by-case handling of the litigious mortgages. However, they agreed with staff that it would be desirable to develop more reliable house price indices to promote a more liquid and transparent real estate market and thus help refine collateral assessments and provisioning. The authorities continue to make progress in implementing recommendations of the 2012 FSAP. The authorities have established a Systemic Risk Surveillance Committee to monitor the stability of domestic banks; and, with IMF technical assistance, they are finalizing a financial crisis management and resolution plan and legal framework as they endeavor to rationalize and further strengthen the supervisory and regulatory frameworks. The insurance and securities sectors have recently adopted new legal and institutional frameworks, and ove r sight is improving. Supervisors are implementing other key recommendations from the 2012 FSAP (Box 3). The staff confirmed the authorities’ commitment to undergo an AML/CFT assessment of compliance, although the standard Page 17 18-month deadline following completion of the July 2012 FSAP was likely to slip, with the assessment expected in second half of 2014 under the aegis of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF). Box 3. Key Findings and Progress in Implementing Recommendations of the July 2012 FSAP Mission The FSAP mission found no short-term threats to financial stability. It noted that the country’s financial system had weathered the global crisis reasonably well. Tight capital and exchange controls supported The Bahamas’ U.S. dollar peg, helping to insulate the financial system from global stability threats, while providing some scope for policy independence. In addition, while the offshore financial sector is disproportionately large (with total assets about 75 times GDP), it contributes less than 3 percent to GDP as capital and exchange controls and limited exposure to the domestic real estate market provide a credible and effective firewall that separates the offshore and onshore financial systems. The mission also found that the onshore financial sector is resilient, and could withstand substantial economic, solvency, and liquidity shocks. Other financial institutions (credit unions, the insurance sector, and securities markets) have limited systemic impact. The mission concluded that the oversight of the financial system is independent and strong, particularly with respect to banking supervision, and the authorities are addressing many of its recommendations. Revisions to the Central Bank Act are in progress, while a committee for implementing Basel III is now constituted. Actions are underway on creating a credit bureau and enhancing the deposit insurance system; and a credit union act has been released for consultation with relevant stakeholders. The FSAP team encouraged the authorities to persevere with efforts to rationalize and further strengthen the supervisory and regulatory frameworks. In November 2013, a Fund technical assistance mission recommended detailed legislative reforms to strengthen the bank crisis resolution framework, including increasing deposit insurance funds, establishing recovery and resolution plans, and further strengthening the provisions on emergency liquidity assistance. ____________________________________ While offshore centers in general may face pressures in future years from shifts in the global regulatory environment, concerns of heightened financial sector risks in some advanced economies could increase the attractiveness of The Bahamas as a global hub for international financial services.